UNECE Renewable Energy Uptake 

Factsheet: Renewable Energy in Albania 

Status of Renewable Energy Deployment 

With 45% of the total primary energy supply (TPES), Albania has one of the largest shares of renewable energy in 

its energy mix in South-East Europe. The renewable energy share in Albania is predominantly hydropower of 

which accounts for 95% of all generating capacity, with the remaining divided between solar (1%) and crude oil 

(4%). The remaining share of supply comes from imports making Albania a net energy importer and thus heavily 

reliant on imports. Being also heavily reliant on hydropower also means that renewable generation is sensitive to 

rainfall, of which has seen considerable annual variations and a steady decline in recent years. This is likely to 

further decline with the effects of climate change. In addition to hydropower resources, Albania also has 

abundant solar and wind resources, which are currently almost entirely untapped. 

In order to improve energy security and climate resilience and to meet growing energy demand, it is imperative 

that Albania accelerates the transition to those abundant, available and local, renewable energy sources.  

Figure 1. Installed generation capacity by technology (source: IRENA, 2021) 

Solar PV: 10 MW / 1%

Crude oil: 98 MW / 4%

Small Hydropower (<10MW) 192 MW / 9%

Large Hydropower: 1904 MW / 86%

Renewable Energy Potential 

Within Europe, Albania has some of the highest sunshine hours per year, representing significant potential for 

solar energy development. The coastal south and far north of the country also hold immense potential for wind 

power development. Both solar and wind could effectively complement the existent hydropower fleet. 

Table 1. Renewable energy potential in Albania (source: IRENA 2017; 2020) 

Technology  Capacity 2019 [MW]  Economic Potential 2030 [MW] 

Technical Potential 2030 [MW] 

Hydropower 

2105 

PV 

Wind 

Bioenergy 

3 

0 

1 

2150 

1074 

616 

86 

4813 

2378 

7483 

1832 

UNECE Renewable Energy Uptake: Development of Renewable Energy in Albania 

1 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy Landscape and Targets 

  The current National Renewable Energy Action Plan (NREAP) sets a target of 38% for the renewable energy 

share of total final energy consumption (TFEC) by 2020. 

  The NREAP also stipulates technology-specific deployment targets to achieve this goal: 7MW hydropower, 

490MW solar PV, 50MW wind and 41MW waste-to-power by 2020, which have not yet been reached. 

  The National Energy Sector Strategy (2018) formulates a target of 42% of renewable energy in the TPES by 2030 

which has already been achieved. 

  A National Energy and Climate Plan (NECP) is under development and will set out renewable energy targets up 

until 2030. 

Support for Renewable Energy 

  Small-scale renewable assets in Albania are eligible for feed-in-tariffs guaranteed through the obligatory 

purchase of energy by the distribution system operator (DSO). 

  Utility-sale projects are auctioned and financed through a Contract for Differences (CfD) scheme. Albania was 

one of the first countries in the South-East European region to introduce auctions for renewable energy 

projects and has since successfully tendered PV projects at competitive prices. 

  Net-metering is eligible for small to medium-size solar and wind systems of up to 500 kW. 

  Certain customs duty exemptions apply for machinery and equipment used in the construction of all power 

plants, including both renewable and conventional power plants. 

Core Challenges for the integration of further renewable capacity 

Strengthening the distribution network 

Power generation from renewable energy sources fluctuates and is naturally variable. This requires more 

sophisticated network infrastructure and operation that can handle bidirectional energy flows and changing 

supply profiles. Particularly in high-demand centres such as the capital Tirana, the Albanian distribution grid 

lacks sufficient capacity and dynamic operation to handle variable electricity injection. This severely hampers 

the successful integration of renewable energy sources in the country. 

Improving support mechanisms for renewable energy  

While minimizing land use and enabling prosumer schemes, small-scale renewable energy projects such as 

rooftop PV are often less cost-effective than utility-scale wind or solar PV parks. Considering this, a revision of the 

existing support landscape for RE in Albania would foster the deployment of small-scale projects in the country. 

Ensuring bankability of project proposals 

Renewable Energy investments are relatively capital intensive and require long time frames to amortize costs,  

which are almost exclusively based on energy prices. Although the technology is well developed, long time 

frames and uncertain market conditions result in relatively high investment risks. Further de-risking of renewable 

UNECE Renewable Energy Uptake: Development of Renewable Energy in Albania 

  2 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
energy projects would entice private investment and accelerate development. Thoroughly developed planning 

and financial instruments such as Power Purchase Agreements, for example, would inspire confidence and 

stimulate international investment in renewable energy in Albania. 

Key Actors in the Albanian Energy Sector 

Institution 

Function 

Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy (MIE)  

Strategic development of energy sector, including policy development 

National Agency of Natural Resources (AKBN) 

Monitors economic activities that deal with natural resources 

Energy Efficiency Agency  

Policy development, energy auditing, implementation of energy efficiency 

programmes 

Ministry of Tourism and Environment 

Environmental protection, coordination of national climate change 

mitigation 

National Environmental Agency 

Environmental impact assessments of power projects, inter alia  

Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development 

Responsible for water use permits for hydropower projects, inter alia 

and Water Administration  

Energy Regulatory Authority (ERE)  

Regulator of electricity and gas markets 

Transmission System Operator (OST) 

Operator of the high-voltage transmission system network 

Electricity Distribution System Operator (OSHEE)  Operator of the low-medium voltage distribution system network 

Albania Power Exchange (ALPEX)  

Market operator of Day-Ahead and Intra-Day markets in Albania and Kosovo 

Albanian Power Corporation (KESH)  

Public electricity supplier (currently subject to liberalisation) 

Albania Energy Association  

Represents the interests of Albanian and international energy producers 

Albanian Renewable Energy Association (AREA) 

Represents the interests of renewable energy producers in Albania 

Upcoming Hard Talk on the uptake of renewables in Albania 

As part of the UNECE RE-Uptake Project 2021, a “Hard Talk” on the uptake, integration & harmonisation of 
renewables in Albania will be held with members of the Albanian and international energy community on July 6th 
and 7th, 2021. The “Hard Talk” is a discussion format on current topics of renewable energy with the objective to 
identify the best methods for realising the potential of renewable energy in the respective country. 

UNECE Renewable Energy Uptake: Development of Renewable Energy in Albania 

  3 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sources 

IRENA, Renewables Readiness Assessment: Albania, 2021 

IRENA, Renewable Energy Prospects for Central and South-Eastern Europe Energy Connectivity (CESEC), 2020 

IRENA, Cost-competitive renewable power generation: Potential across South East Europe, 2017 

EBRD, Albania’s solar tender generates competitive price, 2020 

IEA, Country Profile Albania, 2021 

REN21, UNECE Renewable Energy Status Report, 2017 

Dena, Status and perspectives for renewable energy development in the UNECE region, 2017  

This publication and associated works of the UNECE RE-Uptake Project was 

commissioned by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy. 

Through various projects, dena supports the German government in 

implementing energy and climate policy goals. 

In cooperation with 

UNECE: The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe is one of the 

five regional commissions under the jurisdiction of the United Nations 

Economic and Social Council. All activities relating to the Hard Talks are 

implemented in close cooperation with the UNECE Secretariat. 

REN21: REN21 is the global community of renewable energy stakeholders 

from Science, academia, governments, NGOs and industry. They provide up-

to-date facts, figures and peer-reviewed analysis on global developments in 

technology, policy and markets, to inform decision makers. 

Date: 6/2021 

All rights reserved. Any use is subject to consent by dena. 

Publisher: 
Deutsche Energie-Agentur GmbH (dena) 
German Energy Agency 
Chausseestrasse 128 a 
10115 Berlin, Germany 
Tel: +49 (0)30 66 777-0 
Fax: +49 (0)30 66 777-699 
E-mail: info@dena.de 
Internet: www.dena.de/en 

UNECE Renewable Energy Uptake: Development of Renewable Energy in Albania 

  4 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
