Table of Contents:
I. Programme rationale ..: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 8
DP/DCP/BEN/3 
 
 
I.  Programme rationale 
1.   Benin achieved strong annual economic growth of 5 per cent, on average, between 2013 and 
2017,  driven  largely  by  public  and  private  investment  and  the  agricultural  and  services  sectors.1 
Despite this progress, poverty remained high, at 40.1 per cent in 2015 compared to 36.2 per cent in 
2011.2 Growth remained unequal: a Gini index of 0.499 in 2015, with wide geographical and social 
disparities.3 Poverty affects rural areas the most (43.6 per cent, against 35.8 per cent in urban areas), 
particularly  in  the  north  and  the  southwest.  Non-monetary  poverty  affects  more  women-headed 
households (36.3 per cent) than men-headed households (27.1 per cent).4 The Human Development 
Index is low, at 0.485; Benin ranked 167th out of 188 countries in 2015. The high level of poverty 
is linked to weak competitiveness and insufficient diversification of economic growth sources. The 
agricultural sector, which concentrates 50 per cent of employment in rural areas, is poorly developed 
and under-productive. Moreover, the informal sector employs 90 per cent of the workforce.5 The 
unemployment  rate  affects  3  per  cent  of  young  men  aged  15-34,  against  4.3 per cent  of  young 
women and 16 per cent of young graduates. But the overall situation hides a high under-employment 
rate of 72 per cent among the employed population (90 per cent for women in rural areas).6 This 
reality,  if  not  properly  addressed,  could  threaten  social  cohesion  and  peace.  Gender  inequality 
results, among other factors, from low education levels, limited professional skills, and insufficient 
access  to  production  elements  (land,  financing,  technology).  Local  economic  development  is 
hampered by a lack of technical and financial support. The persistence of poverty and inequality 
result  also  from  the  poor  quality  of  governance  and  inadequate  social  protection  systems  for 
vulnerable groups and marginalized people.  
2.   Benin  is  a  member  of  the  major  economic  zones  in  the  subregion,  with  an  economy  heavily 
dependent  on  trade  with  neighbouring  Nigeria.  The  economic-commercial  relationships  with 
Nigeria have been interrupted during the last decade by shocks mainly affecting the tertiary sector. 
With regard to good governance, according to the World Bank Doing Business report, 2018,7 public 
services  face  high  operating  costs,  low-quality  services  and  limited  digitalization.  Corruption 
remains  a  major  challenge:  according  to  the  Transparency  International  corruption  index,  2017, 
Benin ranks 85th out of 180 countries. The integrated analysis8 of the planning system reveals that 
there  is  insufficient  implementation  of  reforms  for  results-based  budget  management,  and 
Sustainable  Development  Goals  targets  are  poorly  reflected  in  planning  documents.  Statistical 
capacities  are  low,  particularly  in  terms  of  analytical  data  disaggregated  by  sector,  subregion, 
gender, disability, and people’s vulnerabilities.  
3.   Benin  enjoys  peace  and  stability  at  the  political  level,  coupled  with  economic  growth. 
Nevertheless,  the  Ibrahim  Index  of  African  Governance,  2017, did  not  improve  greatly  between 
2013 and 2017 (58.7 to 59). This reflects, inter alia, the weakness of the main regulatory institutions 
– legislative and judiciary – essential to consolidating democracy and the rule of law. The partisan 
political  system  is  weak,  undermining  stability  and  peace  during  election  periods;  and  electoral 
processes need to be strengthened. With respect to the security situation, Benin has been spared the 
terrorism afflicting other countries in West Africa. However, the porous nature of its borders could 
facilitate  the  unimpeded  movement  of  people,  including  for  criminal  purposes:  drug  trafficking, 
cybercrime, armed robbery, and clashes between pastoralists and crop farmers are of concern. On 
justice and human rights, rural populations and demographics such as the poor, women, youth, and 
people with disabilities have limited access to justice due to inefficient enforcement of rules and 
                                                            
1 Average over the last five years, International Monetary Fund (IMF), February 2018 
2 Enquête modulaire intégrée sur les conditions de vie de ménages, 2015 ; National Institute of Statistics and Economic Analysis  
3 Ibid. 
4 Ibid. 
5 Ibid. 
6 State of Employment in Benin, World Bank, 2015 
7 Doing Business report, World Bank, 2013-2018 
8 Priorisation des cibles des Objectifs de développement durable au Bénin, Ministry of Planning and Development, 2017 
 
2 
 
DP/DCP/BEN/3
 
laws; around 45 per cent9 of the population do not trust the justice system. Poor prison conditions 
and long periods of pre-trial detention persist.  
4.  Women represent 51.2 per cent of the population,  with 79.3 per cent under 35.10 Despite the 
promulgation of several laws protecting and promoting women and girls’ rights,11 and the adoption 
of a national gender policy and an action plan to fight gender-based violence, the rate of gender-
based violence was at 79.5 per cent per year according to the 2014 annual report from listening and 
referral centres, and the gap between women and men persists, at 61.3 per cent in terms of living 
conditions and participation.12 Employed women are paid 19 per cent less than men. Reproductive 
health and socio-cultural issues, along with poor education, are the major causes of these gaps. In 
2015,  15.8 per cent  of  women  had  completed  secondary  education  (and  30.8  per  cent  of  men). 
Progress  made  in  women’s  representation  in  the  decision-making  bodies  is  limited;  in  2017,  the 
proportion women in the National Assembly was 8.4 per cent, versus the African Union target of 
30 per cent.13 Continuation of this trend would hinder sustainable development.  
5.  Linked to sustainable development and resilience, climate change has negative socio-economic 
effects,  leading  to  high  vulnerability  to  natural  disasters.  During  the  2005-2015  period,  about 
1,468 inhabitants per million were deprived of shelter each year due to natural disasters.14 The major 
causes are: weak ownership and implementation of national policies and legislation; low awareness 
of climate and environmental risks; and unsustainable production and consumption patterns. Low 
availability of and accessibility to diversified sources of renewable energy for households remain 
environmental risks and poverty factors. In 2015, the share of renewable energy in overall energy 
consumption was 3.4 per cent, against the 50 per cent by 2030 target. Plant cover was threatened, 
with a depletion rate of 25.2 per cent15 in 2015. Urbanization, at 44 per cent16 in 2015, has been 
accelerating,  leading  to  challenges  related  to  urban  mobility,  pollution,  housing,  and  land 
management. 
6.  Benin formulated ‘Benin Revealed, 2016-2021,’ a government action programme that aims to 
“sustainably revive the economic and social development of Benin”. It is built around three pillars: 
(a)  consolidating  democracy,  the  rule  of  law  and  good  governance;  (b)  ensuring  structural 
transformation of the economy; and (c) improving people’s living conditions. Given mixed results 
in reducing poverty and inequality, the Government developed its Sustainable Development Goals-
based national development plan, 2016-2025, to include the social, economic and environmental 
dimensions of the 2030 Agenda. The programme for growth and sustainable development, 2018-
2021, which will operationalize the national development plan, is anchored in the framework of the 
Sustainable Development Goals and Agenda 2063 of the African Union and benefits from the IMF 
Extended  Credit  Facility  arrangement,  approved  in  2017  to  address  public  finances  and  poverty 
challenges, whose first review was satisfactory. The Government is putting in place an inclusive 
coordination  and  monitoring  mechanism  to  implement  the  Goals.  This  will  include  mobilizing 
stakeholders around the priority targets, with synergetic actions between sectoral ministries at the 
central  and  local  levels,  civil  society  organizations,  and  development  partners.  As  a  critical 
multilateral agency, in complementarity with other United Nations organizations and key partners, 
UNDP  is  well  positioned  to  assist  in  implementing  the  programme  for  growth  and  sustainable 
development and the national development plan. 
7.  The midterm evaluation of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, 2014-2018 
and the evaluation of the outcomes of the previous cycle, showed that UNDP enjoyed the trust of 
partners  at  all  levels  and  highlighted  its  comparative  advantage.  UNDP,  in  partnership  with  the 
Government,  spearheaded  the  promotion  of  e-governance,  planning,  gender  mainstreaming,  and 
                                                            
9 Human Development Report, 2016  
10 Fourth Benin population census 
11 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Maputo Protocol  
12 Human Development Report, 2016  
13 Fourth Benin population census 
14 Human Development Report, 2016  
15 Ibid. 
16 African Economic Outlook, 2016 
 
3 
DP/DCP/BEN/3 
 
 
evaluation of development policies,17 as well as the conduct of other key reforms. UNDP contributed 
to  national  capacity  development  efforts  for  a  more  effective  parliament  and  peaceful  electoral 
processes.  UNDP  support  is  recognized  as  having  sustained  peace  through  the  establishment  of 
77 communal  and  six  departmental  peace  committees  and  the  elaboration  of  national  charter  for 
social dialogue, and having promoted employment by establishing three entrepreneurship centres 
and  developing  millennium  villages.  UNDP  has  been  a  key  government  partner  towards  the 
formulation of development policies, prioritization of 49 Sustainable Development Goals targets, 
two related to gender equality (Goal 5), and accelerators for Goals 5, 7, 8, and 16. That support 
contributed to the successful participation of the Government in the High-Level Political Forum on 
Sustainable  Development,  2017.  UNDP  support  also  allowed  a  better  understanding  of  climate 
challenge  issues,  development  of  national  and  local  management  tools,  and  the  nationally 
determined contribution.  
8.  The previous country programme was implemented in close partnership with national, technical 
and financial partners, civil society organizations, the private sector and South-South and triangular 
cooperation. The previous cycle revealed that the lack of  an exit  strategy for some projects, and 
mobility and insufficiently qualified human resources in public administration, can jeopardize the 
sustainability  and  ownership  of  some  interventions.  UNDP  will  consolidate  achievements  by 
ensuring a focused scale-up of results around Sustainable Development Goals accelerators at the 
local level (such as sustainable energy, youth employment, and income generating activities). Based 
on  its  comparative  advantage,  lessons  learned,  and  resources  constraints,  UNDP  will  widen  its 
partnerships,  funding  and  stakeholder  base,  and  take  advantage  of  its  Strategic  Plan  signature 
solutions and global and local platform support to the Sustainable Development Goals. 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships 
9.  UNDP will promote a more inclusive, resilient society, with sustainable and shared economic 
growth, breaking the cycle of poverty and inequality – particularly in rural and peri-urban areas – 
and following the principle of ‘leaving no one behind’. The transformational pathways are twofold: 
(a) Promoting inclusive, strong and sustainable economic growth by stimulating the local economy, 
providing services to youth, women, and people with disabilities to enhance their employability, 
and investing in sustainable livelihoods, with a focus on the vulnerable and people at risk. At-risk 
demographics  include  young  graduates,  unemployed  and  under-employed  women,  people  with 
disabilities, extremely poor populations, and those located on the borders and rural areas.18 Since 
the  population  is  highly  dependent  on  agriculture,  the  country  programme  will  invest  in  smart 
agriculture, a ‘green’ economy, and natural resources and disaster risk management, to strengthen 
resilience at the institutional and community levels. (b) Promoting good governance and the rule of 
law by building capacities of public administration and local institutions to drive reforms that enable 
economic diversification, accelerate sustainable economic growth, increase income, and improve 
delivery of basic  services, strengthening community and citizen participation in formulating and 
implementing public policies.  
10.  In  line  with  the  priorities  of  the  UNDP  Strategic  Plan,  2018-2021,  the  country  programme 
focuses on two of the three outcomes of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, 
2019-2023, as well as the pillars of the programme of government action. The country programme 
aims to support the implementation of the programme of government action, 2016-2021, the national 
development plan, 2016-2025 and the programme for growth and sustainable development, 2018-
2021.  The  country  programme  outcomes  will  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  Sustainable 
Development  Goals  1,  5,  7,  8,  10,  12,  13,  15,  16  and  17.  Considering  the  universality  and 
indivisibility  of  the  Goals,  the  country  programme  will  support  the  establishment  of  the  Goals 
acceleration  platform  to  facilitate  integrated  and  innovative  solutions  in  collaboration  with 
United Nations  country  team  planning.  It  is  based  on  the  comparative  advantage  of  UNDP  in 
monitoring  the  implementation  of  international  commitments  and  agreements,  including  Agenda 
2063,  the  2030  Agenda,  the  Sendai  Framework  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction,  and  the  Paris 
                                                            
17 National Action Plan, 2013-2015, ‘MDG Momentum: 1,000 Days of Action’ 
18 Common country assessment, 2017, United Nations country team, Benin 
 
4 
 
DP/DCP/BEN/3
 
Agreement  on  Climate  Change.  The  country  programme  will  seek  to  improve  public  policies  to 
diversify  sources  of  sustainable  growth,  particularly  social  safety  nets  targeting  marginalized 
populations.  On  agricultural  potential,  investments  will  be  directed  towards  strengthening  the 
employability  and  entrepreneurship  of  youth,  women  and  people  with  disabilities,  and  creating 
conditions  conducive  to  participation  in  wealth  creation,  redistribution,  and  decision-making 
processes.  Technical  and  operational  capacities  of  vulnerable  populations  in  rural  areas  will  be 
strengthened through sustainable production and livelihoods to increase resilience.  
Promoting inclusive, strong and sustainable economic growth 
11. This  component  of  the  country  programme  will  focus  on  capacity  building  for  inclusive 
economic growth – focusing on the private sector and professional organizations in rural areas – 
towards economic, environmental and social viability, particularly in the north and the southwest of 
the  country.  UNDP  interventions  aim  to  innovate  and  scale  up  best  practices  from  one  to  four 
municipalities by developing economic opportunities and improving market access for youth and 
women,  people  with  disabilities,  and  entrepreneurs,  and  promoting  equal  pay  for  work  of  equal 
value in small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises. In partnership with the private sector and 
development  partners  (the  Global  Environment  Facility  –  GEF;  the  West  African  Development 
Bank; the International Labour Organization – ILO; the Food and Agriculture Organization – FAO; 
the United Nations Capital Development Fund – UNCDF; the Green Climate Fund, and the German 
Agency  for  International  Cooperation),  institutional  support  will  be  provided  for  establishing 
organizations for women and youth (including people with disabilities) in rural and peri-urban areas.  
12. Technical  and  managerial  capacities  of  young  entrepreneurs  and  their  access  to  appropriate 
financing and equipment, as well as entrepreneurship promotion institutions, will be strengthened. 
Because local products contribute to poverty reduction, processing techniques and market access 
will be promoted to create value chains. At the policy level, UNDP will support the Government in 
revising  the  National  Employment  Policy  by  introducing  mechanisms  to  access  finance  and 
information. UNDP will support Benin in implementing its commitments under the Paris Agreement 
and  in  achieving  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals.  The  scaling-up  of  best  practices  from  the 
national  adaptation  programme  of  action  and  the  nationally  determined  contribution  will  be  key 
areas  for  country  office  interventions  in  designing  appropriate  laws,  regulations,  policies  and 
strategies  on  climate  change.  Innovative  approaches  will  be  used  in  formulating  policies  and 
establishing a platform for the integrated management of multilateral agreements on environment 
and  promotion  of  adaptable  climate  tools.  The  expected  results  will  be  improved  agricultural 
productivity,  acceleration  and  diversification  of  revenues,  and  improved  youth  entrepreneurship. 
UNDP  contributions  seek  to  enhance  more  sustainable  natural  resources  management  and  better 
resilience  to  climate  change.  This  will  contribute  to  implementation  of  the  2030  Agenda  and 
accelerate  the  achievement  of  Sustainable  Development  Goals  related  to  economic  growth  and 
institution-building  for  structural 
employment,  poverty  reduction,  gender  equality,  and 
transformation.  
13. UNDP  will  focus  on  three  major  service  lines:  (a)  increasing  the  well-being  and  income  of 
people, especially youth, women and persons with disabilities, by locally setting up socio-economic 
infrastructures  and  equipment  that  respond  to  basic  needs,  developing  economic  activities,  and 
promoting  self-employment,  employability  and  entrepreneurship;  (b)  conserving,  enhancing  and 
restoring  forest  ecosystems  and  natural  resources,  and  promoting  affordable  clean  energy;  and 
(c) improving  people’s  resilience  to  extreme  hydro-meteorological  and  climate  events.  These 
interventions are aligned with UNDP Strategic Plan signature solutions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6. 
14. To ensure the success of this strategic option, UNDP will focus on the most vulnerable rural and 
peri-urban communities, and the most exposed to economic, climate and environmental shocks and 
stresses.  The  country  programme  will  seek  to  reach  the  most  disadvantaged  groups  in 
28 municipalities, some of which are particularly exposed to flooding in the north and rising sea 
levels  in  the  south.  The  country  office  will  focus  on  capacity-building  and  appropriation  of 
development tools at central and local levels in response to vulnerability to climate change and rapid 
urbanization.  This  will  encompass  innovative  approaches  to  improving  livelihoods  by  accessing 
agricultural technologies adapted to climate change. The programme will ensure that (a) national 
5 
DP/DCP/BEN/3 
 
 
and  local  capacities  are  strengthened  for  effective  coordination  of  environmental  interventions, 
ecosystem protection and disaster risk management, ensuring women’s equal participation in those 
processes; and (b) national and local institutions have improved technical and financial capacities 
for the sustainable management of natural capital.  
15. In  interventions  geared  towards  resilient  and  integrated  development,  UNDP,  UNFPA,  the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the World Food Programme (WFP), the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Belgium, Japan, and the Islamic Development 
Bank  will  coordinate  efforts  according  to  their  mandates,  expertise  and  institutional  capacities. 
Communes,  local-level  state  administrations  and  civil  society  organizations  will  be  involved  in 
implementing  the  country  programme,  which  is  essentially  ‘territorialized’.  A  technical  and 
financial  partnership  with  German  Cooperation,  the  Green  Climate  Fund,  the  Netherlands,  the 
African Development Bank (AfDB) and the West African Development Bank will help achieve the 
projected results. Partnerships  with the private sector (local and national) to promote sustainable 
development will be strengthened, notably within the framework of public and private partnerships 
initiated by the Government. South-South and triangular cooperation will be a key driver. Regarding 
youth  employment  and  entrepreneurship,  agro-business  and  early  warning  systems,  the  best 
practices and lessons learned from Bhutan, Colombia, Costa Rica, and India will be expanded. The 
partnership  strategy  of  the  country  office  will  build  on  its  comparative  advantage  as  a  credible 
partner of the Government and others, based on its capacity to deliver effectively and to leverage 
vertical funds.  
Consolidating democracy and the rule of law, and promoting good governance 
16. A peaceful society with strong institutions is accountable and responsive to the voice of citizens, 
opens doors, and lays the foundations for inclusive, sustainable growth that leaves no one behind. 
The  other  component  of  the  country  programme  will  therefore  focus  on  strengthening  the 
effectiveness of the institutions in charge of the economy, good governance and human rights. In 
alignment  with  UNDP  Strategic  Plan  signature  solution  2,  UNDP  will  provide  support  to  help 
achieve Sustainable Development Goals 5, 8, 10, 12, 16 and 17, among others, by contributing to 
the  transformation  of  governance  through  advocacy,  advisory  services,  innovation  in  public 
administration, e-governance, civil society engagement mechanisms, and capacity-building. 
17. UNDP will work to consolidate achievements in the areas of democracy, governance, conflict 
prevention, prevention of violent extremism, and citizen participation in sustaining peace, and will 
focus its interventions on: (a) support to government institutional and political reforms; (b) strategic 
and technical support to the central and decentralized public administration through digitalizing and 
simplifying procedures, strengthening the National Human Rights Commission and key checks and 
balances institutions; (c) support to the electoral process; (d) strengthening the capacity of judicial 
institutions  to  consolidate  the  rule  of  law;  (e) monitoring  the  national  gender  action  plan  and 
advocacy  for  increasing  women’s  participation  in  decision-making  as  well  as  in  the  legal 
frameworks, political representation and access to justice; (f) providing technical support to public 
institutions  (parliament,  Supreme  and  constitutional  courts),  civil  society  and  the  media  to 
strengthen civic engagement and democratic oversight; and (g) supporting implementation of the 
Strategic Plan of the parliament. UNDP will support the peaceful management of conflicts as well 
as the leaders and grass-roots organizations involved in inter-religious dialogue, particularly in the 
border regions with Niger and Nigeria, as part of co-existence and promotion of tolerance to prevent 
violent  extremism  and  radicalization.  The  expected  results  will  be  an  enhanced  democratic  and 
electoral process and improved justice, gender equality, human rights, and social cohesion.  
18. UNDP will strengthen the technical and financial capacities of national and local institutions to 
carry  out  upstream  interventions  based  on  the  2030  Agenda  priorities.  UNDP  will  support 
comprehensive Sustainable Development Goals-based policies and plans, at both national and local 
levels.  As part of resources mobilization efforts for financing the Goals, UNDP  will support the 
Government  in  carrying  out  the  development  financing  assessment  and  implementing  its  action 
plan. In technical partnership with the IMF, the World Bank, Canada, and Germany, UNDP will 
continue  its  support  towards  full  implementation  of  the  West  African  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union public finance reforms, including results-based budgeting. UNDP will continue to support 
national institutions to improve coherence between planning, budget programming, and the needs 
6 
 
DP/DCP/BEN/3
 
related  to  achieving  Sustainable  Development  Goals  priority  targets.  Given  the  challenges  in 
statistics, UNDP will support strengthening national capacities to collect, analyse and disseminate 
statistical data for monitoring and evaluating development policies, including disaggregated data on 
gender and disabilities. The expected results will be improved quality of public services, results-
oriented policies, and efficient, accountable institutions. 
19. UNDP will strengthen its partnerships with Belgium, France, the European Union, Germany, 
India, Japan, Luxembourg, Spain, Switzerland, and the United States of America, as well as with 
the  World  Bank,  AfDB,  and  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  ((IDB),  particularly  within  the 
framework of the Sustaining Peace Initiative, as well as with South-South cooperation, the United 
Nations Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office, and the 
United  Nations  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs.  UNDP  is  a  trusted  partner  whose 
experience in supporting electoral processes  will  strengthen partnerships  with these  stakeholders 
and consolidate its position in e-governance, conflict prevention and social cohesion. In partnership 
with  UNFPA,  UNICEF,  and  UN-Women,  UNDP  will  operationalize  the  common  chapter  of  its 
Strategic  Plan,  2018-2021,  on  gender  equality  and  the  improvement  of  data  management  for 
sustainable development. 
III.  Programme and risk management 
20. The country programme will articulate how UNDP contributes to national priorities and reports 
to the Executive Board on the extent to which results relate to objectives and resources. The UNDP 
programme and operational policies and procedures and internal control framework articulate how 
managers are accountable at  all levels. In accordance  with Executive Board decision 2013/9, all 
direct costs associated with implementing the programme will be charged to the concerned funds 
through direct project costs. The office will adjust its structure to meet the operational requirements 
of the programme. 
21. Execution  of  the  country  programme  will  be  anchored  in  the  Ministry  of  Planning  and 
Development. National implementation will be the preferred modality, while direct implementation 
considered as needed. The use of harmonized instruments for operationalization and programming, 
such as joint programming and business operations strategies, will be promoted. 
22. The  selection  of  implementing  partners  will  consider  comparative  advantage  and  effective 
delivery  of  results.  In  coordination  with  other  United  Nations  organizations,  UNDP  will  use  the 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers to manage fiduciary risks and build capacities of executing 
partners for, inter alia, results-based management. Accelerated procedures can be adopted as needed. 
23. For ownership of the country programme and the UNDP exit strategy, national partners will be 
fully engaged in planning and management processes through steering and technical committees. 
Effective  government  leadership  will  be  an  enabling  factor  to  efficient  implementation  and 
sustainability of results.  
24. Programme implementation may be subject to the following risks: (a) insufficient qualifications 
and  high  turnover  of  public  administration  staff;  (b)  natural  disasters;  (c)  strikes  in  public 
administration; and (d) low resource mobilization, especially government cost-sharing. 
25. To mitigate those risks, UNDP will strengthen its resources mobilization strategy; diversify; and 
widen  its  funding  and  stakeholder  base  by  developing  partnerships  with  the  private  sector, 
foundations, international financial institutions, the Green Climate Fund, and non-traditional donors. 
UNDP  will  capitalize  on  the  results  of  the  development  financing  assessment  and  South-South 
cooperation. The management of security risks and those related to social conflicts will be based on 
the United Nations country team security risk assessment. UNDP will use risk monitoring as a tool 
for early warning, reporting and decision-making. Considering qualified human resources, UNDP 
will use the resources available for the two Sustainable Development Goals platforms to support 
operationalization of the Goals. UNDP will reinforce its partnerships with the ministries of planning, 
finance, and education to promote vocational training at all levels.  
7 
DP/DCP/BEN/3 
 
 
26. UNDP quality assurance and social and environmental standards will be applied to all projects, 
as  will  gender  mainstreaming;  the  country  office  will  achieve  the  ‘gold  gender  seal’  during  the 
country programme cycle.  
IV. Monitoring and evaluation 
27. Programme  monitoring  will  be  based  on  the  Strategic  Plan  Integrated  Results  and  Resources 
Framework.  Deliverables  will  be  jointly  monitored  by  implementing  institutions,  beneficiary 
representatives, and the country office through the steering and technical committees and joint field 
visits. Outputs and outcomes will be monitored through quarterly and annual reports. Indicators and 
their  rating  scales  will  be  adapted  when  country-level  indicators  become  available.  UNDP  will 
support data collection at the beginning of the programme to identify missing baselines, including 
for international multilateral agreements.  
28. Evaluations  will be conducted in accordance with the evaluation policy and plan.  A  midterm 
evaluation of the programme will be carried out to inform its implementation and provide inputs for 
the next country programme. Project evaluations will be conducted when mandatory or as needed. 
Joint reviews and evaluations will be conducted with other United Nations organizations.  
29. At least 5 per cent of programme resources will be allocated to monitoring, evaluation and data 
collection activities. The gender marker will be considered in planning, decision-making, reporting 
and investing. 
30. Programme  indicators  will  be  collected  according  to  gender,  age,  and  geographical  area,  and 
disaggregated  insofar  as  possible.  The  data  collected  will  feed  into  the  UNDP  monitoring  and 
knowledge-sharing system and communications for visibility. Together with the Government and 
other  United  Nations  organizations,  UNDP  will  mobilize  partners  to  strengthen  the  national 
statistics  system,  particularly  the  National  Institute  of  Statistics,  to  improve  the  quality  and 
availability  of  data  and  Sustainable  Development  Goals  indicators  and  better  target  programme 
beneficiaries. Research institutes and universities will collaborate in testing theories of change and 
innovative solutions throughout the country programme cycle. 
.
8 
DP/DCP/BEN/3
  
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Benin (2019-2023) 
National priority or goal: Pillar 3 of the government action programme(PAG) – Improve the living conditions of the population 
UNDAF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP No. 1. By 2023, Benin’s population, especially the most vulnerable, are more resilient and have a better quality of life 
through access to decent employment, food and nutrition security, clean energy, and the sustainable management of natural resources, the adverse effects of climate 
change, crises and disasters.  
Related strategic plan outcome (2018-2021, if known): Advance the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions 
Indicative 
resources, by 
outcome  
($ thousands) 
UNDAF outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s) 
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities 
Major partners/ 
partnerships 
frameworks 
Indicative country programme outputs  
(including indicators, baselines targets) 
Regular  
 9,688 
Indicator 1.1. Monetary 
poverty rate  
Baseline – national: 40.1% 
(Urban: 36.7%; Rural: 
44.1%) 
Target: To be determined 
(TBD) 
Enquête modulaire intégrée sur les 
conditions de vie de ménages 
(EMICoV) 
Every 3 years 
National Institute of Statistics and 
Economic Analysis (INSAE) 
Output 1.1. Marginalized groups, particularly 
underemployed youth and women are empowered to gain 
access to financial assets, benefit from sustainable jobs 
and develop entrepreneurship. 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Ministry of Environment 
Ministry of Social Affairs 
and Microfinances 
Ministry of Planning and 
Development (MPD) 
Ministry of Small and 
Medium-Sized Enterprises 
and Employment Promotion 
Ministry of Mines and 
Energy 
Ministry of 
Decentralization 
Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry (CCIB) 
Non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) 
Communes 
Maison de la société civile  
Other  
 26,137 
 
Indicator 1.1.1. Number of under-employed people 
accessing financial assets, disaggregated by target groups 
(a) women (b) youth (c) disabled19 
Baseline: (a) 140 (b) 935 (c) 0   
Target: (a) 800 (b) 2,300 (c) TBD  
Data source: Monitoring reports 
Frequency of data collection: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.2. Under-
employment rate 
Baseline: 72.9% (women: 
85.1%; men: 62.2%) 
Target: TBD 
EMICoV  
Every 3 years  
INSAE  
 
Indicator 1.1.2. Extent to which integrated and operational 
systems are in place for public information on employment20  
Baseline: 1 
Target: 4 
Data source: Monitoring reports 
Frequency of data collection: Annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.3. Per-capita 
household expenditure 
growth rate for the poorest 
40% of the population 
Baseline:  
Target: TBD  
Source: INSAE 
EMICoV, Human Development 
Report (HDR) 
Every 3 years  
INSAE 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.3. Number of under-employed people who 
found a job (including through business creation), 
disaggregated by target groups (a) women (b) youth 
(c) disabled 
Communes 
Agence nationale pour la 
promotion de l’emploi  
 
 
 
                                                            
19 Data related to disabilities were not available for baseline and will be collected during programme implementation. 
20 1=Not adequately; 2=Very partially; 3=Partially; 4=Largely 
 
9 
DP/DCP/BEN/3 
 
 
Agence nationale des 
petites et moyennes 
entreprises 
National Employment 
Promotion Office 
Centre de partenariat et 
d’expertise pour le 
développement 
Baseline: (a) 140 (b) 935 (c) 0  
Target: (a) 750 (b) 1,950 (c) TBD   
Data source: Monitoring reports 
Frequency of data collection: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.4. Index of food 
insecurity 
 
 
 
  
Output 1.2. Marginalized groups, particularly 
underemployed youth and women, have improved 
technical capacity to access agricultural technologies 
adapted to climate change to improve their livelihoods 
and productivity. 
Comprehensive food security and 
vulnerability analysis report 
Every 3 years 
INSAE 
 
Baseline: 9.6% (2017 global); 
7% (2017 urban); 12% (2017 
rural) 
Target: 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
UNDP, UNFPA, UNCDF, 
UNOPS, UNICEF, FAO, 
WFP, International Fund 
for Agricultural 
Development, United 
Nations Environment 
Programme, United Nations 
Industrial Development 
Organization, ILO, 
International Organization 
for Migration 
Indicator 1.2.1. Number of beneficiaries of the programme 
using agricultural technologies adapted to climate change, 
disaggregated by target groups (a) women (b) youth 
(c) disabled 
Baseline: (a) 720 (b) 2,210 (c) 0  
Target: (a) 1,500 (b) 3,500 (c) TBD  
  (a) 1,500 (b) 5,000 (c) TBD 
Data source: Monitoring reports  
Frequency of data collection: Annual 
 
Source: INSAE 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.5.  
Proportion of land that is 
degraded over total land area  
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline: 62% (2017) 
 
 
 
Annual national report on climate 
change  
Every year  
Environment and Climate Office 
(DGEC) 
Target: TBD 
Output 1.3. Solutions adopted for rural and urban 
populations to achieve access to clean, affordable and 
sustainable energy. 
 
GEF, World Bank, IDB, 
Colombia, India, Japan  
 
 
Indicator  1.3.1.  Renewable  energy  penetration  rate  in  the 
energy mix 
Baseline: 3.4%  
Target: 7%  
Data source: Système d’information de l’énergie 
Frequency: Annual (monitoring reports) 
 
Indicator  1.3.2.  Proportion  of  households  benefiting  from 
clean, affordable and sustainable energy access: (a)  women-
headed (b) in rural areas (c) in urban and peri-urban areas  
Baseline: (a) 4.1% (b) 1.14% (c) 6.99%  
Target: (a) 7% (b) 3% (c) 10%  
Data source: EMICoV/Demographic and health survey/ 
Multiple indicator cluster survey 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Output 1.4. National and local institutions have improved 
technical and financial capacities for effective 
10 
DP/DCP/BEN/3
  
 
coordination of environmental interventions, ecosystem 
protection and disaster risk management. 
 
Indicator  1.4.1.  Extent  to  which  early  warning  system  is 
maintained and effective.21 
Baseline: 1 
Target:  4 
Data source: Monitoring reports 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 1.4.2. Extent to which a multisector mechanism for 
sustainable land management is in place and effective 22 
Baseline: 1 
Target:  4 
Data source: Monitoring reports 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 1.4.3. Percentage of assets lost due to climate 
change, disaggregated by target groups (a) women (b) youth 
Baseline: (a) 5.0% (b) 10%) 
Target: ((a) 2.5% (b) 3%) 
Data source: Monitoring reports and HDRs 
Frequency: Annual 
National priority or goal: Pillar 1 of the PAG – Consolidate democracy, the rule of law and good governance 
UNDAF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP No. 2. By 2023, Benin’s population have equal and inclusive access to effective, transparent and accountable 
institutions and modern public administration, at all levels, in a climate of peace and security, particularly related to access to justice respectful of human rights.   
Related Strategic Plan outcome (2018-2021, if known): Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development 
Indicator 2.1. Share of 
population whose most recent 
experience with public 
services has been satisfactory 
EMICoV 
Every 3 years 
INSAE 
Output 2.1. The Government, Parliament and the 
National Electoral Commission (CENA) have improved 
technical and operational capacities to promote inclusion, 
transparency and accountability. 
MJL 
Ministry of Public Service 
MPD, Ministry of Economy 
and Finance 
The Supreme Court 
The Constitutional Court 
National Assembly 
CENA 
 
Regular  
11,416 
 
Other 
2,817 
 
 
 
Baseline: 
Target (by sex and residential 
environment): 
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of electoral management bodies with 
strengthened  capacity  to  conduct  inclusive  and  credible 
elections 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
21 1=Not adequately; 2=Very partially; 3=Partially; 4=Largely 
22 1=Not adequately; 2=Very Partially; 3=Partially; 4=Largely 
11 
DP/DCP/BEN/3 
 
 
Baseline:   0 
Target:  3 
Data source: CENA  
Frequency: Annual 
Nutrition and Food Council 
(CAN)  
NGOs 
Communes 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.  
Share of inmate population 
awaiting trial 
Baseline: 2.1% (2014)  
Target (by sex and age): 
Administrative/Tribunal de 
première instance 
Annual 
Direction de la programmation et 
de la prospective (DPP)/MJL 
 
 
Indicator  2.1.2.  Proportion  of  women  (a)  candidates  in 
parliamentary  and  communal  elections  (b)  in  managerial 
positions in public administration  
Baseline: (a) 10% (2015) (b) 22% (2016)  
Target: (a) 20% (b) 30 % 
Data source: CENA, Report of PAG implementation 
Frequency: Annual 
Social Watch 
Maison de la Société Civile  
CCIB 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.3. Share of 
victims of violence in 
previous 12 months who 
reported the facts to 
competent authorities or other 
officially recognized dispute 
resolution mechanisms 
Percentage of adult 
population aged 18 and older 
subjected to violence within 
the last 12 months, by type 
(physical, psychological 
and/or sexual) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Governance, peace and security 
report 
Annual 
Direction générale de la police 
républicaine, Ministère de 
l’intérieur et de la sécurité 
publique, DPP/MJL, INSAE  
 
Indicator 2.1.3. Parliament has improved capacities to 
undertake inclusive, effective and accountable law-making, 
oversight and representation 
Baseline: No 
Target: Yes 
Data source: Parliament 
Frequency: Annual  
UNHCR, UNICEF, 
UNCDF, ILO, IOM 
 
World Bank, IMF, AfDB, 
European Union, Canada, 
German Cooperation, 
United States of America, 
Hanns Seidel Foundation 
 
 
 
Output 2.2. Ministry of Justice (MJL), the Supreme 
Court, and national human rights institutions and 
systems strengthened to expand access to justice and 
combat discrimination, with a focus on women and 
marginalized groups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline: No data 
Target (by sex, department 
and disability): 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.1. Existence of strengthened institutions and 
systems supporting fulfilment of nationally and 
internationally ratified human rights obligations: (a) rule of 
law and justice (b) human rights 
Baseline: (a): No (b): No  
Target: (a): Yes (b) Yes 
Data source: MJL  
Frequency: Annual  
Ibrahim Index of African 
Governance  
Annual 
UNDP 
 
 
Indicator 2.4: Ibrahim 
Accountability Index  
Baseline: 36.1/100 (2017) 
Target:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ibrahim Index of African 
Governance 
Annual 
UNDP 
 
Indicator 2.2.2. Number of people who have access to 
justice, disaggregated by sex: 
(a1) Total 
(a2) Male 
(a3) Female 
Baseline: (a1) 1,473,804 
 
Indicator 2.5: Ibrahim 
Participation and Human 
Rights Index 
 
Baseline: 70.8/100 (2017) 
Target: 
(a2) 719,739 
12 
DP/DCP/BEN/3
  
 
(a3) 754,065 
Target: (a1)  2,000,000 
(a2)  976,709 
(a3)  1,023291 
Data source: MJL 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Output 2.3. Ministries in charge of public services and 
national institutions are strengthened to use digital 
technologies and big data for improved public services 
and other government functions. 
 
Indicator 2.3.1. Existence of frameworks that leverage 
digital technologies and big data for: (a) delivery and 
monitoring of services (b) public engagement (c) legal 
identity and civil registration 
Baseline:(a): No (b): No (c) No  
Target: (a) Yes (b) Yes (c) Yes   
Data source: Ministry of public services  
Frequency: Annually 
 
Output 2.4. Capacities developed across the whole of 
government, including local government, to integrate the 
2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement into development 
plans and budgets, and to analyse progress towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), using innovative 
and data-driven solutions. 
 
Indicator 2.4.1. Existence of development plans and budgets 
that integrate international agreements across the whole of 
government, including the local government: (a) 2030 
Agenda (b) Paris Agreement  
Baseline: (a) No (b) No   Target: (a) Yes (b) Yes   
Data source: Ministry of planning  
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 2.4.2. Existence of data collection/analysis 
mechanisms providing disaggregated data to monitor 
progress towards the SDGs: 
Baseline: No 
Target: Yes 
Data source: MPD 
13 
DP/DCP/BEN/3 
 
 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 2.4.3. Level of implementation of West African 
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) harmonized 
public finance framework reforms 
Baseline: 52.9%   
Target: 100% 
Data source: WAEMU assessment reports  
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 2.4.4. Existence of an SDG acceleration 
platform to facilitate integrated and innovative solutions  
Baseline: No   Target: Yes   
Data source: Ministry of Planning  
Frequency: Annually 
 
Output 2.5. National capacities strengthened for peaceful 
management of conflict and prevention of violent 
extremism in response to national policies and priorities 
Indicator 2.5.1. National infrastructures for peace 
established or strengthened, with UNDP support, upon 
request 
Baseline: No 
Target: Yes 
Data source: MJL 
Frequency: Annual 
 
14 
