Clean cooking access may stall under slow post-pandemic recovery and ambitious
climate mitigation without explicit focus | Nature Energy Skip to main content
Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited
support for CSS. To obtain             the best experience, we recommend you use
a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are
displaying the site without styles             and JavaScript. Advertisement
View all journals Search Log in Explore  content About  the journal Publish
with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature energy policy brief article
Clean cooking access may stall under slow post-pandemic recovery and ambitious
climate mitigation without explicit focus                      Download PDF
Download PDF Policy Brief Published:  15 November 2021 ENERGY SCENARIOS Clean
cooking access may stall under slow post-pandemic recovery and ambitious climate
mitigation without explicit focus Shonali Pachauri                ORCID:
orcid.org/0000-0001-8138-3178 1 ,  Miguel Poblete-Cazenave                ORCID:
orcid.org/0000-0001-8280-910X 1 ,  Arda Aktas 2  &  … Matthew J. Gidden 1 , 3  
Show authors Nature Energy volume  6 ,  pages  1009–1010 ( 2021 ) Cite this
article 1866  Accesses 3  Citations 10  Altmetric Metrics  details Subjects
Climate-change mitigation Energy supply and demand Without additional support
policies, clean cooking could become unaffordable for about 470 million people
by 2030 if a post-pandemic recovery is slow, and about 200 million people by
2030 under ambitious climate mitigation action. Acceleration of clean cooking
transitions by tapping into pandemic recovery and climate funds to target the
poorest people and regions globally is urgently needed. Recommendations for
policy The world is off track with SDG7. A slow pandemic recovery and ambitious
climate mitigation may slow down efforts to extend clean cooking access and make
universal access by 2030 more challenging Populations in sub-Saharan Africa,
developing Asia and Latin America (the regions with the biggest access gaps
today) are most vulnerable to being unable to transition to clean cooking in the
future There is an urgent need to prioritize commitments, investments and
coordinated policies to make clean cooking more accessible and affordable in the
poorest regions and for the poorest populations Transitioning away from solid
biomass cooking can reduce growth in future cooking energy demand, with
subsequent benefits for air quality, climate and health Pledges to COVID-19
recovery funds, international climate finance and the value of losses suffered
by those lacking access all dwarf estimates of investment needs for universal
clean cooking access BASED ON S. Pachauri, M., Poblete-Cazenave, A. Aktas & M.
Gidden  Nature Energy   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-021-00911-9  (2021). The
policy problem At the current rate, the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG7)
target of universal access to clean cooking services by 2030 is unachievable and
may remain unattainable for some countries even by 2050. This can also hinder
progress on other SDGs, including those on health, gender, inequality, climate
and land. Financial strain following the COVID-19 pandemic is pushing people
further down the energy ladder and deepening inequities. Emerging evidence also
suggests that exposure to household air pollution from dirty cooking can
exacerbate public health issues. Understanding how access to clean cooking may
change under alternative future scenarios is important to inform strategies for
achieving health and climate goals. Although there are several climate
mitigation scenarios in the literature, it is not clear how the world might
develop in the absence of climate policy and how climate change mitigation might
interact with clean cooking access goals. As a result, decision makers do not
have clear guidance on integrated policy for climate mitigation, development and
clean cooking access. The findings We explore clean cooking access until 2050
under alternative future scenarios of socioeconomic and demographic change,
COVID-19 recovery and ambitious climate mitigation. We find that the population
share with access to clean cooking improves in all scenarios relative to today,
but the target of universal access by 2030 is not reached even in our most
optimistic growth and low inequality scenario. About 470 million more people
could be pushed into cooking-fuel poverty by 2030, exacerbating global
inequities, in a slow pandemic recovery scenario that accounts for 2020 and 2021
GDP estimates and assumes a 20-year recovery period, relative to a pessimistic
growth scenario that assumes no pandemic shock (Fig.  1 ). We find that
populations in sub-Saharan Africa, developing Asia and Latin America are the
worst affected. Cooking poverty strongly correlates with income poverty,
particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Ambitious climate mitigation, without
additional policies and financial support, could also make clean cooking
unaffordable for about 200 million people by 2030. A transition to clean cooking
can reduce future demand for cooking energy, specifically in regions that
currently rely heavily on biomass. Fig. 1: Cooking-poor populations predicted
under two different scenarios. Percentages of population who are cooking-poor
are shown (colour scale) for model regions under the Shared Socioeconomic
Pathway 3 (SSP3), a pessimistic reference growth scenario, with bars depicting
additional cooking-poor in millions under the slow COVID-19 pandemic recovery
scenario relative to SSP3. Regions depicted are sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia,
Middle East and North Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, other Pacific
Asia, centrally planned Asia and China, former Soviet Union, North America,
Central and Eastern Europe, and Western Europe. Full size image The study We
apply existing models of household cooking choice and demand to assess future
transitions worldwide. We account for multiple fuel use (fuel stacking),
population heterogeneity, inter- and intraregional income distributions, and
affordability of clean cooking options. In the models, we use data from
nationally representative household surveys of select countries for global
coverage. We then simulate behaviour, preferences and choices of individual
households representing entire distributions of household characteristics and
income into the future, by region, to analyse access to clean cooking, and
subsequent changes in final cooking energy demand until 2050 under alternative
scenarios. We assess how cooking fuel transitions vary by income and urban or
rural location across scenarios. We also identify populations most vulnerable to
falling into cooking poverty following a slow pandemic recovery or fuel price
changes under ambitious climate mitigation policy. References Further Reading
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP).  The State of Access to
Modern Energy Cooking Services  (World Bank, 2020).  A global assessment of
recent progress, the current state of access to clean cooking services, and
valuation of losses suffered by those lacking access . Dagnachew, A. G., Hof, A.
F., Lucas, P. L. & van Vuuren, D. P. Scenario analysis for promoting clean
cooking in sub-Saharan Africa: costs and benefits.  Energy   192 ,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116641  (2020).  Scenario analysis of
clean cooking transitions in sub-Saharan Africa with a quantification of
potential costs and benefits . Bensch, G., Jeuland, M. & Peters, P. Efficient
biomass cooking in Africa for climate change mitigation and development.  One
Earth   4 ,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.05.015  (2021).  Potential of
fuel-efficient biomass stoves in contributing to clean cooking and climate
mitigation in sub-Saharan Africa . Cameron, C. et al. Policy trade-offs between
climate mitigation and clean cook-stove access in South Asia.  Nat. Energy   1 ,
15010 (2016).  Assessment for South Asia of the distributional implications of
ambitious climate mitigation policy for clean cooking access in the region .
Article                            Google Scholar                    Das, I. et
al. The benefits of action to reduce household air pollution (BAR-HAP) model: a
new decision support tool.  PLoS ONE   16 , e0245729 (2021).  A new decision-
support model aimed at guiding planning of policy interventions to accelerate
transitions towards cleaner cooking fuels and technologies, accounting for a
wide range of costs and benefits . Article                            Google
Scholar                    Download references Acknowledgements M.P.-C. received
funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant agreement no. 821124 (NAVIGATE). This work was partially funded by
the contributions of the National Member Organizations of IIASA. Author
information Authors and Affiliations Energy, Climate, and Environment Program,
International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), Laxenburg, Austria
Shonali Pachauri, Miguel Poblete-Cazenave & Matthew J. Gidden Population and
Just Societies Program, International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA), Laxenburg, Austria Arda Aktas Climate Analytics, Berlin, Germany
Matthew J. Gidden Authors Shonali Pachauri View author publications You can also
search for this author in                          PubMed   Google Scholar
Miguel Poblete-Cazenave View author publications You can also search for this
author in                          PubMed   Google Scholar Arda Aktas View
author publications You can also search for this author in
PubMed   Google Scholar Matthew J. Gidden View author publications You can also
search for this author in                          PubMed   Google Scholar
Corresponding author Correspondence to                  Shonali Pachauri .
Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing
interests. Rights and permissions Reprints and permissions About this article
Cite this article Pachauri, S., Poblete-Cazenave, M., Aktas, A.  et al.  Clean
cooking access may stall under slow post-pandemic recovery and ambitious climate
mitigation without explicit focus.                      Nat Energy   6 ,
1009–1010 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-021-00939-x Download citation
Published :  15 November 2021 Issue Date :  November 2021 DOI :
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-021-00939-x Share this article Anyone you share
the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link
Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy to
clipboard                             Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt
content-sharing initiative                          Download PDF Associated
content Access to clean cooking services in energy and emission scenarios after
COVID-19 Shonali Pachauri Miguel Poblete-Cazenave Matthew J. Gidden Nature
Energy Analysis 28 Oct 2021 Advertisement Explore content
Research articles
Reviews & Analysis
News & Comment
Current issue
Collections                                  Follow us on Twitter
Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal
Aims & Scope
Journal Information
Journal Metrics
About the Editors
Our publishing models
Editorial Values Statement
Editorial Policies
Content Types
Contact
Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team
Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team                                  Publish
with us                                     Submission Guidelines
For Reviewers
Language editing services                                  Submit manuscript
Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All
journals This journal Search                 Advanced search              Quick
links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies
Nature Energy ( Nat Energy )                  ISSN   2058-7546  (online)
nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office
Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject Protocol Exchange
Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author &
Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing
Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries &
institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend
to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media
kits Branded                         content Professional development Nature
Careers Nature                           Conferences Regional websites Nature
Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Korea Nature
Middle East Privacy                 Policy Use                 of cookies Your
privacy choices/Manage cookies                  Legal                 notice
Accessibility                 statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy
rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the  Nature
Briefing  newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email
address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the
Nature  and Springer Nature Limited  Privacy Policy . Close banner Close Get the
most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for
Nature Briefing