Frontiers | The justice and policy implications of clean energy transition in
Africa Skip to main content Download Article
Download Article
Download PDF
ReadCube
EPUB
XML (NLM)
Share on                                                         Export citation
EndNote
Reference Manager
Simple TEXT file
BibTex                                       Total views Downloads Citations
Citation numbers are available from Dimensions
View article impact View altmetric score SHARE ON Edited by Maria Alzira Pimenta
Dinis Fernando Pessoa University, Portugal  Reviewed by Diogo G. Vidal Center
for Functional Ecology, Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Sciences and
Technology, University of Coimbra, Portugal Hamisai Hamandawana Risk and
Vulnerability Science Centre, University of Free State, South Africa TABLE OF
CONTENTS Abstract 1 Introduction 2 Just and policy implications of clean energy
transition 3 Synergies between clean energy and sustainable development goals 4
Conclusion Author contributions Funding Conflict of interest Publisher’s note
Footnotes References   Export citation
EndNote
Reference Manager
Simple TEXT file
BibTex                                           Check for updates People also
looked at                                   POLICY AND PRACTICE REVIEWS article
Front. Environ. Sci., 19 January 2023 Sec. Environmental Economics and
Management                                  Volume 11 - 2023 |
https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2023.1089391 The justice and policy implications
of clean energy transition in Africa Benyoh Emmanuel Kigha Nsafon 1,2 *   Noel
Ngando Same 1,3   Abdulfatai Olatunji Yakub 1,3   Deepak Chaulagain 1,3
Nallapaneni Manoj Kumar 4,5   Jeung-Soo Huh 1,2,3 * 1 Institute for Global
Climate Change and Energy, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea 2
Department of Energy Convergence and Climate Change, Graduate School, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu, South Korea 3 Department of Convergence and Fusion
System Engineering, Graduate School, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South
Korea 4 School of Energy and Environment, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon,
Hong Kong SAR, China 5 Center for Circular Supplies, HICCER—Hariterde
International Council of Circular Economy Research, Palakkad, Kerala, India
Despite the low local energy access rates, Africa is considered a key player in
the global energy transition due to its large supply of fossil fuels and a large
reserve of critical minerals essential for manufacturing renewable energy
components in the energy sector and storage devices in the transportation and
electronics sectors. But building a sustainable society at all levels across
nations would only come when there exists a just and inclusive energy transition
based on the idea of “leave no one behind”. While many African countries have
embarked on ambitious and transformative transition strategies, and many energy
projects classified as “clean” have economic, environmental, and social
implications that jeopardize the wellbeing of those already vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change. This paper explores the policy implications of the
just transition to ensure that efforts to steer Africa towards a lower carbon
future are supported by fair, equity, and justice considerations. Our analyses
provide valuable evidence for considering a just transition in Africa that will
not exacerbate the current socio-economic challenges the region is facing but
will support sustained poverty reduction and the achievement of faster economic
growth. Our findings show that the African continent’s multiple challenges of
energy security, economic growth, and affordable access must feature in its
clean energy transition. We draw conclusions that an incremental transition
emphasizing low-carbon development is the most feasible and pragmatic approach
to transform the region’s economy and address climate change challenges. 1
Introduction The Global North, notably the European Union (EU), has been at the
forefront of developing technologies and implementing policies to generate
energy from renewable sources and mitigate climate change ( Okpanachi et al.,
102934 ), even though this transition has been progressing at varying rates
among EU member states ( Müller et al., 2021 ). But when we see the Global
South, the actions on clean energy transitions vary highly from country to
country, especially in Asia and Africa. Looking at Africa, although there is
less information on “clean” energy transitions as well as actions than there is
in the EU, the interest in this subject is developing both in academic and
policy circles ( Castán Broto et al., 2018 ), ( International Renewable Energy
Agency, 2019a ). Initiatives for renewable energy policy have gotten a boost
from pressure to promote technological innovation, competitiveness, and economic
growth in Africa concerns over greenhouse gas emissions, idealistic expectations
of a post-fossil fuel future, and growing economic unpredictability in a post-
COVID era. Similar to the EU, growth in Africa has been uneven, with different
nations taking different political pathways and certain regions of the continent
receiving less research attention than others. Although Africa’s share of global
investments in renewable energy development and installed capacity remains
relatively small, the continent’s recent robust economic growth and rapid
population growth will require more energy resources to drive future
development. In contrast to a projected 10% growth in worldwide energy
consumption, it is predicted that by 2040, energy demand in Africa might be
almost 30% more than it is today ( Johnston, 2020 ). During the COVID-19
pandemic lockdowns, energy demand in most African countries declined because of
significantly reduced commercial and industrial electricity use ( Johnston, 2020
). However, while the economic impact of the pandemic was severe, the experience
offers an opportunity for countries in Africa to make transformational changes
and structural adjustments in how energy is generated and stored. The
exacerbating impacts of climate change across the continent emphasize the need
to transition from a fossil fuel-based, regional economy to one powered by clean
energy. Africa is extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change because
of its low adaptive capacity. Moreover, the continent is highly dependent on
shrinking natural resources. Therefore, investing in clean energy will help
African economies address the immediate consequences and long-term socio-
economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing climate crisis.
Despite a historical and present contribution to carbon emissions below 3%, the
continent’s commitment to cutting emissions is admirable. However, Africa still
confronts a unique challenge in gaining access to modern energy to meet its
development objectives, including enhancing climate resilience ( Renewable
Energy Agency et al., 2021 ). Despite the fact that Africa is highly endowed
with energy resources to supply both present and future demand, approximately
600 million people live without access to power on the continent. While several
nations, notably Burundi and Chad, still only have access rates of 10% or less,
South Africa and the nations that makeup Northern Africa have almost universal
access to electricity ( African Development Bank, 2022 ), ( Carley and Konisky,
2020 ). This unequivocally underscores the need to focus on and customize
initiatives to raise access rates in Africa. Additionally, the availability of
power should not be seen as a stand-alone, binary signal because a poor,
constrained, or expensive electrical supply may restrict its value. In order to
meet its climate pledges, Africa must significantly increase its contemporary
power generation and consumption in light of the continent’s population,
urbanization, and economic growth patterns. Socio-cultural specificity that may
undermine efforts regarding energy transition in Africa is the lack of awareness
and understanding about the benefits of renewable energy sources. This is
because many Africans still use traditional energy sources like wood, charcoal,
and kerosene since they are both affordable and easily available ( Simelane and
Abdel-Rahman, 1243 ). As a result, people might not be willing to pay more for
renewable energy options that are better for the environment. Furthermore, the
lack of political will and leadership to promote and invest in renewable energy
is another culturally distinctive aspect of this society. Meeting the short-term
energy demands of their populations, many African governments care less about
long-term sustainability ( Simelane and Abdel-Rahman, 1243 ). Without strong
leadership, getting financial and political backing for renewable energy
initiatives can be challenging. Additionally, some African cultures may
prioritize traditional energy production and consumption forms, such as using
wood as a primary cooking fuel ( Simelane and Abdel-Rahman, 1243 ). These
cultural practices may be difficult to change, especially if they are deeply
ingrained in the community. Transforming Africa’s energy sector will require
technological advancements to reconcile economic growth with the conservation of
natural resources. However, technical progress alone will not be sufficient to
transition away from a conventional energy system; a strong political will,
strategic planning, and a comprehensive policy fully utilizing renewable energy
are also needed. Although the specific paths to a clean energy transition may
differ, depending on the particular requirements of various nations and regions,
all paths must be equitable and inclusive to help achieve the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (S&P Global), ( Hafner and Tagliapietra,
2020 ). A just and inclusive energy transition based on the idea of “leave no
one behind” would improve individuals’ wellbeing and health, boost resilience,
and inspire innovation to achieve a sustainable society at all levels while
spurring massive investment ( Ceres Roadmap, 2030 ). This argument is based on
the premise that proactively identifying and confronting obstacles can result in
far better outcomes than those that can be resulted from doing nothing or
waiting too long to act. Changing behaviors and a fair and just energy
transition will require a negotiated vision and process centered on discussion
and backed by a set of guiding principles ( Eskom, 2022 ). The main objective of
this work is to inform policymakers on the impacts of strategic decision-making
in clean energy development. In this work, we analyze the just and policy
implications of the clean energy transition in Africa, emphasizing the
challenges hindering this transition, policy recommendations, and finally, the
linkage between SDG and energy transition in Africa. Our analysis provides
valuable evidence for considering a variety of policy interventions for a just
energy transition in Africa. 2 Just and policy implications of clean energy
transition The transition to clean energy in Africa has important justice and
policy implications that should be carefully considered to ensure that this
transition’s benefits and burdens are distributed fairly. Environmental justice
is a key aspect of this transition, as it involves ensuring that all people,
regardless of their socioeconomic status, race, or ethnicity, have the right to
live in a healthy and safe environment ( U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
2021 ). Africa requires a just and equitable energy transition that enhances
inclusion and synergies while reducing inequality and empowering people through
modern energy access. A cost-effective, dependable, and sustainable energy
system is crucial not only for lifting millions of Africans out of poverty; the
transition must create new opportunities and strengthen the rights of the poor
but also for enhancing climate resilience, enhancing climate preparedness, and
minimizing climate vulnerability ( African Development Bank, 2022 ), ( García-
García et al., 2020 ). The equity ramifications and difficulties brought on by
energy poverty, low consumption, and the unmet energy demand for economic growth
and transformation in Africa must be carefully considered for a just energy
transition. In the context of the transition to clean energy in Africa, this
means ensuring that marginalized groups and vulnerable individuals are not
disproportionately impacted by the transition and that their needs and
perspectives are taken into account in the planning and implementation of clean
energy projects. There are a number of marginalized groups and vulnerable
individuals in Africa who may be disproportionately impacted by the transition
to clean energy. These groups include but are not limited to, indigenous
communities, rural communities, and low-income households (United nations
development). These groups may be particularly vulnerable to the impacts of
climate change, as they often rely on natural resources for their livelihoods
and may have limited capacity to adapt to changing conditions ( World Bank
Group, 2021 ). Additionally, these groups may face barriers to accessing clean
energy technologies and may be less able to afford the upfront costs of
transitioning to clean energy. As more countries in Africa formulate and
implement clean energy policies, failing to integrate justice into the process
often leads to inequalities, uneven cost-sharing, and negative impacts
associated with clean energy projects ( Carley and Konisky, 2020 ). Recent
debates have focused on the adverse impact of the energy transition on
individuals, communities, and countries across Africa. The impacts often take
the form of an excessive burden or a lack of access to possibilities for the
energy transition in terms of affordability and access and inequalities that
arise despite the benefits of clean energy projects. This section provides a
comprehensive overview of the status of the clean energy transition in Africa,
indicating the challenges which hinder a just energy transition and, in
addition, a plea for striking a balance between Africa’s energy needs and
international climate obligations and gives practical strategy and policy
suggestions. 2.1 Russia–Ukraine war and energy security: A lesson for Africa
What is seen as just in one situation might be considered unfair in another?
According to Hirsch et al. ( Hirsch et al., 2017 ), it is more challenging to
implement a just transition in countries that have weak social support systems
and heavy reliance on fossil fuel production than it is in countries that have
robust social support systems and diverse industrial bases ( Zinecker et al.,
2018 ). African clean energy transition should not only entail replacing fossil
fuels with renewables but also developing new, efficient, and flexible power
systems fed by renewable energy sources and decentralized (including off-grid)
facilities to minimize conditions wherein high demand must be satisfied by
fossil fuels. While Africa’s energy investment needs are significant, the
additional demands connected with a shift to low-carbon energy may be viewed as
realistic and pragmatic. The Russia–Ukraine conflict has caused energy prices to
skyrocket in the European Union (EU), which is heavily reliant on Russian oil,
gas, and coal ( Besson, 2022 ). Despite decarbonization regulations, fossil
fuels still account for a significant portion of the EU’s energy mix. Leaders in
the clean energy transition now face a dilemma; for example, Germany relies on
Russia for roughly half of its natural gas and coal and more than one-third of
its oil. Germany’s near-term action is to increase the use of coal-fired power
plants. This shows that in Africa, which faces problems of economic development
and growth, energy security and affordable access must feature in its clean
energy transition. The most feasible and pragmatic solution for Africa will be
an incremental transition emphasizing low-carbon development rather than net-
zero pathways. 2.2 Oil and gas  versus  economic development Africa’s energy
transition must be predicated on leveraging the enormous prospects for energy
access, employment, and industrialization based on the continent’s tremendous
renewable energy resources ( Songwe et al., 2022 ). With appropriate
technological and financial assistance, Africa can revolutionize its economies
and become a global leader in inclusive green energy growth using its abundant
energy resources.  Figure 1  compares Africa with the rest of the world in terms
of fossil fuel consumption and the GDP of the world. This shows that higher
fossil fuel use is associated with a higher GDP, implying that countries require
greater energy use to industrialize. Hence, for a country to attain a certain
level of industrial growth, some amount of dependence on oil and gas is
currently required. However, the societal and economic damages caused by climate
change mean that dependence on greenhouse gas-emitting energy sources must be
strongly discouraged globally. North America and Europe, having attained the
highest level of industrialization, must work to significantly reduce their
dependence on fossil fuels. The clean energy revolution cannot be restricted to
small, incremental changes; to create a livable future, these efforts must be
transformational, involving a system redesign based on the swift upscaling and
use of all available clean and carbon-reducing technologies ( United Nation
Organization, 2021 ). FIGURE 1 FIGURE 1 . Fossil fuels  per capita  against GDP
of the world ( World Bank, 2022a ), ( Our World in Data, 2020 ). For continents
with lower rates of economic development, less energy security, less affordable
access, and poorer environmental sustainability, a different approach is needed.
For Africa, a step-by-step transition must involve adjustments to an energy
system that will not disrupt how established social, political, and economic
systems coexist. 2.3 Evidence-based decision-making While many African countries
have embarked on ambitious and transformative transition strategies targeting
underserved communities, many energy projects classified as “clean” have
economic, environmental, and social implications that jeopardize the wellbeing
of groups most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. 2.3.1 Gender-
inclusive policies Gender inequality in many communities in Africa limits
opportunities for women to participate in policy- and decision-making, affecting
clean energy development. The 2019 Africa Gender Index Report ( Gender, 2020 )
says that senior decision-makers in African firms are primarily male, with an
Africa Gender Index score of just 22.9 percent. Women are underrepresented in
parliament (25.3 percent). Very few managers, professionals, and technicians in
Africa are women (41.4 percent) ( Gender, 2020 ). A just transition should
address the inequalities between men and women, as well as indigenous and
minority groups, in decision-making processes. Marginalized or minority groups
should be included in different stages of clean energy transition projects by
including them in decision-making bodies. 2.3.2 Human rights in the mining
industry Critical materials used in manufacturing batteries and solar energy
technology, such as cobalt and copper, are mined in Africa. More than 70 percent
of the world’s cobalt is produced in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC),
and 15–30 percent of Congolese cobalt is produced by artisanal and small-scale
mining operations ( Baumann-Pauly, 2022 ). A 2016 report from Amnesty
International ( Amnesty International, 2016 ) states that thousands of children
mine cobalt in the DRC under hazardous conditions, and the DRC government and
mining companies fail to protect mine workers from human rights abuses. A just
energy transition requires a sustainable supply of critical materials produced
in such a way that it respects the fundamental rights of miners and other
workers. 2.3.3 Women, farmland, and energy transition Women laborers are of
vital importance to rural economies in Africa, providing 60–80 percent of the
labor that supports African agriculture ( Palacios-Lopez et al., 2017 ), ( The
World Bank, 2022 ). African women are known to live in poverty. According to (
UN Women Data Hub, 2022 ), roughly 63 percent of the world’s extremely poor
women live in sub-Saharan Africa. While rural women play a critical role in
Africa’s economy, there have been multiple claims of women losing agricultural
land to energy projects. For example, in Tanzania, there are claims that
farmland was taken from a farmer in the coastal region to be used for a biofuel
project ( Makoye, 2013 ). If not managed well, these actions may increase the
risk of food insecurity on the continent. Therefore, a just transition to clean
energy must recognize the critical role rural women play and minimize their risk
of losing access to agricultural land. 2.4 Strategies and policy Approaches for
inclusive benefits The transition to clean energy has the potential to bring
numerous benefits to Africa, including improved access to electricity, increased
economic opportunities, and reduced greenhouse gas emissions ( International
Renewable Energy Agency, 2019a ). However, it is important to ensure that these
benefits are distributed fairly, and that marginalized groups and vulnerable
individuals are not left behind. In order to achieve this, a just and inclusive
policy approach is needed. There are several key strategies that can be pursued
to transition to clean energy in Africa. • One of these is increasing the
deployment of renewable energy technologies, such as solar panels and wind
turbines, which can provide a source of electricity to communities that are not
connected to the grid ( International Renewable Energy Agency, 2019b ).
Renewable energy technologies can also create jobs and economic opportunities,
particularly in rural areas, which can help to improve the livelihoods of
marginalized communities. • Promoting energy efficiency: Energy efficiency
measures can help to reduce the overall demand for energy, which can in turn,
reduce the need for fossil fuel generation. This can be achieved through a
variety of means, such as implementing building codes and standards that require
the use of energy-efficient appliances and equipment, providing incentives for
the use of energy-efficient technologies, and promoting the adoption of energy-
efficient behaviors. • In addition to these strategies, it is also important to
promote the use of clean cooking solutions in Africa. Traditional cooking
methods, such as open fires and inefficient stoves, are a major source of air
pollution and greenhouse gas emissions on the continent. Promoting the use of
clean cooking solutions, such as improved stoves and clean fuels, can help to
reduce these emissions and improve public health. • Finally, it is important to
support capacity building and technology transfer in Africa in order to fully
transition to clean energy. Many countries on the continent lack the technical
expertise and infrastructure needed to embrace clean energy technologies fully.
Supporting capacity building and technology transfer can help build the
necessary skills and infrastructure needed to support the clean energy sector’s
growth. In order to effectively transition to clean energy and ensure that the
benefits are distributed fairly, it is essential to adopt a just and inclusive
policy approach. This may involve implementing policies that support the
deployment of clean energy technologies, such as feed-in tariffs or renewable
energy targets, and implementing policies that support the needs of marginalized
groups and vulnerable individuals, such as targeted support for low-income
households to access clean energy technologies or training programs to help
indigenous communities develop the skills needed to participate in the clean
energy sector. By pursuing these strategies and adopting a just and inclusive
policy approach, Africa can transition to clean energy and reap its numerous
benefits. 3 Synergies between clean energy and sustainable development goals The
United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, also known as the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), is a global framework for achieving a
better and more sustainable future for all. It aims to end poverty, protect the
planet, and ensure peace and prosperity for all people, particularly those in
developing countries ( International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis,
2018 ). While the SDGs have the potential to address some of Africa’s needs,
they also have some limitations and challenges when it comes to fulfilling
Africa’s needs. One of the main criticisms of the SDGs is that they have an
ethnocentric approach, projected by western countries, and do not adequately
consider the specific needs and context of different regions and cultures (
Cheever and Dernbach, 2015 ), ( Matikainen, 2019 ). The goals and targets are
often based on the values and priorities of the global north, rather than the
realities and priorities of the global south. This can lead to a one-size-fits-
all approach that does not adequately address the complex and diverse challenges
facing Africa. For example, the goal of universal access to electricity and
modern energy sources is important for Africa, where many people still live
without access to electricity. However, the goal does not adequately consider
the specific energy needs and contexts of different countries in Africa (
Matikainen, 2019 ). It does not consider the fact that some countries may have
abundant renewable energy resources, such as solar or wind power, while others
may rely more on fossil fuels or other non-renewable sources. The goal also does
not consider the fact that some countries may have more developed infrastructure
and capacity to implement renewable energy projects, while others may lack the
necessary resources and capacity. Another example is the goal of achieving
gender equality and empowering all women and girls. While this goal is important
for Africa, where women and girls face numerous barriers to equality and
empowerment, it does not adequately consider the specific cultural and social
context of different countries in Africa ( Security and Human Rights, 2017 ). It
does not consider the fact that some cultures may have more traditional gender
roles and expectations, which can be a barrier to women’s empowerment. It also
does not consider the fact that some countries may have more developed
infrastructure and capacity to implement gender equality initiatives, while
others may lack the necessary resources and capacity. Despite these limitations,
the SDGs can still be a useful framework for addressing Africa’s needs, if they
are implemented in a way that is sensitive to the specific context and needs of
different countries in Africa. For example, the SDGs can be used as a roadmap
for prioritizing and investing in key areas such as education, health,
agriculture, and infrastructure ( International Renewable Energy Agency, 2019a
). These sectors are critical for Africa’s development and have the potential to
make a significant impact on people’s lives and wellbeing. One way to ensure
that the SDGs are more effective in addressing Africa’s needs is to involve
African stakeholders in the implementation process ( International Renewable
Energy Agency, 2019a ), ( International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis,
2018 ). This includes local communities, civil society organizations,
governments, and the private sector. By involving these stakeholders in the
planning and implementation of the SDGs, it is more likely that the goals and
targets will be relevant and achievable in the African context. Another way to
make the SDGs more effective in addressing Africa’s needs is to ensure that they
are aligned with other regional and national development frameworks and
initiatives. For example, the African Union’s Agenda 2063 ( African Union
Commission, 2022 ), which is a vision for Africa’s development over the next 50
years, can be used to complement and support the implementation of the SDGs in
Africa. By aligning the SDGs with Agenda 2063 and other regional and national
development frameworks, it is more likely that the goals and targets will be
relevant and achievable in the African context. We discuss eight of them in the
context of a just transition to clean energy in Africa. 3.1 SDG #1: End poverty
in all its forms everywhere Increased power generation capacity can help
eliminate poverty through many channels, and it is important to distinguish its
macro- and micro-impacts ( Lockwood and Pueyo, 20132013 ). Increased electric
power capacity can indirectly reduce poverty at a macro level by promoting
economic growth, as shown in  Figure 2 . The energy industry boosts economic
growth in two ways. First, energy is a vital economic sector that provides jobs
and creates value by producing, transmitting, and distributing energy across an
economy ( Alam et al., 2018 ). Second, the energy industry’s effects spread
throughout the economy. Energy is a necessary component in producing almost all
goods and services in an economy and supports economic activity in all sectors.
Electricity alone cannot provide all the conditions needed for economic growth;
however, it is vital to meeting households‘ basic demands and supporting
economic activity ( Oda and Tsujita, 2011 ). Several factors, such as employment
and productivity, health, and education, can explain the relationship between
access to electricity and poverty alleviation. The most recent research on
energy and poverty emphasizes the connection between the two ( Khandker et al.,
2012 ). Poverty limits access to power and energy consumption, restricting
opportunities for education and economic growth; for example, often-prohibitive
connection fees can prevent homes from connecting to the electricity grid (
Golumbeanu and Barnes, 2013 ). FIGURE 2 FIGURE 2 . Access to Energy and GDP,
Africa’s context ( The World Bank, 2021a ), ( The World Bank, 2021b ). Of the
approximately 39 percent of Cameroon’s population living below the poverty line
of $1.90 per day ( Food and Agriculture Organization, 2019 ), most do not have
access to clean, affordable energy; thus, people are forced to spend many hours
covering big distances to gather firewood for cooking. Although access to
electricity has gradually increased over the years, in 2016 only 60 percent of
Cameroon’s population had access to electricity, comprising only 21.3 percent in
rural areas when compared with 92.0 percent in urban areas ( The World Bank,
2020a ). Reliability issues in Cameroon’s electricity sector are severe. Thus,
businesses and homes are without electricity for several hours each day and
occasionally for several days. Access to electricity is essential for basic
services, such as hospitals and schools, and the growth of small businesses at
the household level ( Alam et al., 2018 ). Improving Cameroon’s energy
infrastructure will require proportionate expenditures as energy demand rises.
Investments in the energy sector will increasingly need to focus on renewable
energy so that the country can avoid being locked into unsustainable energy
systems in the face of climate change and realize the potential benefits clean
energy offers. According to Qudrat-Ullah et al. ( Qudrat-Ullah and Nevo, 2021 ),
a 1 percent increase in renewable energy consumption is predicted to result in
short-term growth of 0.7 percent and strong long-term growth of 1.9 percent in
Africa ( Qudrat-Ullah and Nevo, 2021 ). Cameroon has abundant renewable energy
resources, and deploying renewable energy systems through microgrids could
significantly increase household incomes  via  job creation. According to ( Wei
et al., 2010 ), expanding a renewable energy infrastructure can create many
jobs, including construction, installation, and operations, and supports other
economic activities that produce job opportunities. For example, during the
construction phase of the Memve’ele and Nachtigal hydropower plants, 10,000 and
1,500 jobs were created, respectively ( Nachtigal Hydro Power Company, 2017 ), (
Wikipedia, 2022 ). This increased the wealth of households in those communities.
In addition, people may increase their working hours, diversify their sources of
income, and even switch to jobs that are more productive. This is because of the
increased amount of time they can spend with the lights on. Furthermore (
Dinkelman, 2011 ), discovered many benefits of electricity availability on
women’s employment, likely because of a reduction in time spent performing
housekeeping chores, freeing women to pursue paying jobs. Energy is a crucial
input in producing goods and services across the agricultural, industrial, and
service sectors. It is needed to improve irrigation systems and mechanize farms,
which increases agricultural output, which, in turn, provides more income and
food security for millions of households and increases agricultural exports,
thereby reducing poverty. Growth in these industries requires a greater supply
of energy, which can be achieved through the deployment of renewable
technologies. 3.2 SDG #2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved
nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture Climate change and expanding
populations may significantly affect agricultural output and the agriculture
sector’s environmental impact, particularly concerning irrigated agriculture,
which produces nearly 40 percent of the world’s food on just 18 percent of its
cropland. Because of changes in rainfall patterns, hydrological regimes, and
weather patterns, as well as an increased reliance on land and water resources,
rain-fed food production systems will also experience significant strain,
further degrading available resources and reducing productivity. According to (
Schwerhoff and Sy, 2017 ), food production is most vulnerable in Africa. One
reason is that much of Africa’s crop production depends on rain, and changes in
climate and precipitation have a direct impact on crop output. Long-lasting
droughts and intense rainstorms can drastically alter water supplies and
exacerbate risks already present in agriculture. Crop production relies on
energy inputs to provide even the most basic food output. Depending on a
country’s degree of development, on-farm food production consumes two to five
percent of commercial energy ( Khan and Hanjra, 2009 ). Similarly, a good deal
of energy is used to transport raw materials to processing facilities where they
are frozen, canned, dried, ground, baked, and undergo other processes. The
dependence of the world’s food systems on energy is further highlighted by the
food processing and agricultural support businesses probably already requiring
more energy than farming itself. According to ( Food and Agriculture
Organization, 2013 ), total food losses in sub-Saharan Africa are estimated at
$4 billion annually, an amount that could feed 48 million people. Hunger is
predicted to increase due to adverse effects of climate change, such as drought,
high temperatures, and increased pest attacks, on crops. This is likely to
reduce agricultural productivity, increase food prices, and severely increase
famine among vulnerable groups, especially in rural areas. According to Morel et
al. (Morel, Mungai), the agriculture sector employs approximately 28 percent of
Gambia’s working population, and approximately 80 percent of the country’s rural
households are, in one way or another, employed in the agricultural sector.
Unfortunately, Gambia’s agriculture is threatened by climate change, the
agriculture sector has been underperforming compared to the rest of the economy,
and its contribution to the country’s GDP has been decreasing. Specifically, the
agricultural sector’s share of GDP decreased from 29% in 2010% to 16.9% in 2017.
This will, in turn, increase the country’s undernourished population. Increased
usage of renewable energy technology and customized energy systems reduces the
percentage of the population that is undernourished by improving agricultural
production, helping to ensure food security and end hunger ( The World Bank,
2020b ). Most farmers in sub-Saharan Africa still water their gardens and farms
using labor-intensive bucket-lifting techniques, which is particularly hard for
women, who do most of the labor (Morel, Mungai). Solar-powered irrigation
systems and water pumps would help farmers maintain and increase their yields in
areas affected by drought. Some irrigation and water pumping technologies have
significant potential to ensure food supplies throughout the year and generate
additional household income ( Karekezi et al., 2005 ). An increase in household
income helps ensure regular access to food. In addition, solar-powered
meteorological stations could be built in rural areas to provide data that can
guide farmers on planting and irrigation dates. Customized energy systems can
also help combat hunger by reducing post-harvest losses, Gambia wastes a lot of
food due to a lack of transport and storage facilities. According to ( Jallow et
al., 2020 ), more than 45 percent of composted waste in Gambia comes from food
waste. Losses of cereals due to poor handling are high and are likely greater
for perishable products. The impact of high post-harvest losses on the poor is
twofold. First, it implies that available food is less nutritious than the
perishables that are wasted, leaving the poor undernourished. Second, post-
harvest losses equate to lost potential income. Therefore, developing solar-
powered grain silos and ovens to store excess food produced during farming
seasons could reduce food waste and increase food security. Furthermore, the
need for energy to process food would add value and thus increase household
incomes. 3.3 U.N. SDG #3: Ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all
Living without stable energy reduces options for education and employment,
compromising health and overall wellbeing. The lack of energy impacts the
ability of healthcare facilities to serve patients, affecting lighting, heating,
ventilation, and cooling systems, blood banking, storage of vaccines and other
medications, and information and communication technology (ICT) services,
limiting the availability of life-saving care. Businesses cannot operate,
transportation networks cannot run, and homes and workplaces cannot be heated
and cooled to comfortable temperatures without reliable electricity. Around 2.4
billion people, the majority of whom reside in low- and middle-income countries,
still cook over open fires and inefficient stoves that burn solid fuels
(including wood, crop wastes, charcoal, coal, and dung) and kerosene ( World
Health Organization, 1748 ). These inefficient cooking methods contribute
significantly to indoor air pollution, including tiny soot particles that can
get deep into the lungs. Indoor smoke in poorly ventilated homes can produce
levels of fine particles that can be 100 times greater than what is considered
safe. Women and young children spend the most time close to a domestic stove or
fireplace and are therefore at the greatest risk for exposure. Each year,
respiratory illnesses, such as pneumonia, linked to exposure to indoor and
outdoor air pollution kill almost 600,000 children under the age of five ( World
Health Organization, 2016 ). Most of these households’ energy services are
purchased and utilized by women and girls, who suffer the brunt of the health
hazards and other costs associated with the usage of unclean and inefficient
home energy systems. Nigeria’s industrial sector is still growing, and ambient
air pollution has not yet reached harmful levels; however, household air
pollution (HAP) is the highest contributor to ambient air pollution. According
to Ifegbesan et al. ( Ifegbesan et al., 2016 ), nearly 81 percent of homes in
rural regions rely on solid fuel—primarily firewood—kerosene, and liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG) for cooking. Biomass fuel (BMF) used for cooking and space
heating is one of Nigeria’s biggest sources of ambient air pollution and has
contributed to an estimated 114,100 early deaths in the country  1 . Several
studies ( Ifegbesan et al., 2016 ) show that people who use biomass fuels are
more likely to develop respiratory morbidity and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disorders. Providing access to high-quality healthcare and fulfilling the SDGs
requires consistent access to reliable electricity. In most African countries,
more than half of all healthcare institutions lack access to reliable
electricity or do not have any electricity at all. Reliable energy is essential
for healthcare institutions to operate at night, pump water, store vaccines and
other medicines, and manage hazardous waste. The health of hundreds of millions
of people, particularly women and children who frequently suffer from inadequate
primary healthcare, is at risk due to the lack of sufficient and dependable
power. More than 289,000 women worldwide die each year due to difficulties
associated with pregnancy and childbirth; many of these deaths could be avoided
with improved lighting and other electricity-dependent medical services (
Porcaro, 2019 ). Therefore, access to dependable electricity can greatly impact
people’s health and wellbeing, especially in terms of reproductive and
children’s health. Increasing access to reliable electric power through
renewable energy technologies could increase access to safe drinking water,
provide clean power for heating and cooking that would reduce indoor pollution,
and provide a variety of communication tools (such as radio, television, and the
Internet) that can significantly impact efforts to provide healthcare and combat
diseases. Without a reliable source of light and power, doctors are unable to
perform medical procedures or assess patients at night. Access to reliable power
would improve the ability to provide labor and delivery services—thereby
reducing deaths associated with childbirth—make vaccines more widely available
through refrigeration; and support critical medical equipment in health clinics.
3.4 SDG #4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote
lifelong learning for all Energy poverty is a challenge faced by both students
and teachers across sub-Saharan Africa, at home and in school. According to (
United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2022 ), more
than 25 percent of schools in rural areas have access to electricity in India,
while approximately 90 percent of pupils in sub-Saharan Africa attend
educational institutions that lack electricity. Approximately 190 million
students in Cameroon, Nigeria, Liberia, South Sudan, Central African Republic,
Chad, Sierra Leone, and Malawi ( Lindeman, 2022 ) combined attend schools that
do not have electricity. The inability to access reliable electricity severely
limits teachers’ and students’ ability to access and use instructional supplies
and classroom materials, directly contributing to significant barriers that
prevent people from achieving escape velocity from the clutches of poverty.
Access to electricity supports education by improving household incomes, which
directly affects a family’s ability to afford tuition. In 2010, 11.4 million
pupils repeated a primary grade in sub-Saharan Africa, representing more than
one-third of the global total ( United Nations Educational Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 2022 ). In Rwanda, for example, a lack of reliable
electricity has been a major barrier to education. Many schools in rural areas
do not have access to electricity, which limits the ability of teachers to use
instructional materials and technology. This has led to lower enrollment and
retention rates, as students may be unable to afford tuition or may be
discouraged from attending school due to a lack of resources. In addition, the
lack of electricity can make it difficult for schools to offer vocational
training and other specialized classes that require lab equipment or other
resources. The government of Rwanda has enforced regulatory and legal reforms to
attract private investors and operators into isolated or standalone grid
facilities like isolated grids operated by Virunga SARL, which was founded by
the Virunga National park’s Virunga Foundation, and received donor funding to
build and operate mini-grids Mutwanga powered by two HPPs of 0.38 and 1.35 MW
respectively, and a 13.1 MW HPP at Matebe serving 5,520 customers ( World Bank
Group, 2022 ). This has greatly increased access to electricity in various
regions and has also encouraged school enrollment for youngsters as ICT and
other lab equipment are being introduced in education. The benefits of
increasing access to electricity in schools also include the ability to use a
variety of ICT technologies, such as computers and the Internet, which are
critical to fully participating in modern society. It also provides better staff
retention and teacher training and generally increases school performance as
students are more motivated to learn, which reduces truancy and absenteeism. 3.5
SDG #6: Access to clean water and sustainable sanitation practices Access to
clean water and sustainable sanitation practices is a critical development
challenge in many African countries, as a lack of access to these basic services
can have serious consequences for public health, economic development, and food
security. Coupled with the impact of climate change, this means that roughly 771
million people in the world lack access to clean water ( Project World Impact,
2022 ). Particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, access to clean water requires
financing, transportation, and even physical labor. The inability to efficiently
meet the growing water demand can lead to food insecurity ( Mehta et al., 2015
). Mitigating the global challenge of providing access to clean water requires a
sustainable energy approach, particularly in rural areas of the country where
most households lack access to clean water. According to ( Food and Agriculture
Organization, 2017 ), agricultural production will increase by 60 percent,
causing the demand for water for irrigation to increase to about 11 percent. In
this context, it is important to consider the role of renewable energy
technologies and sustainable sanitation practices in addressing these challenges
and in improving access to clean water and sanitation for all. One example of a
country in Africa that is addressing the challenge of water access and
management through the use of renewable energy technologies is Senegal.
According to the African Ministers’ Council on Water (AMCOW), approximately 84%
of the Senegalese population has access to improved drinking water sources, but
access is still limited in some rural areas ( Weltbank, 2011 ). To address this
challenge, the Senegalese government has implemented a number of initiatives to
increase access to clean water, including the deployment of solar-powered water
pumping systems in rural areas ( International Renewable Energy Agency, 2019b ).
These systems can help to increase the availability of water for agricultural
and domestic use and can help to reduce the reliance on fossil fuels, which can
be expensive and environmentally damaging. Another example can be seen in
Tanzania, where the Tanzanian government has implemented water conservation and
management strategies to conserve and manage water resources more effectively,
including through the use of rainwater harvesting and efficient irrigation
systems ( Bank, 2017 ). These systems can help to increase the availability of
water for agricultural and domestic use and can help to reduce the reliance on
fossil fuels, which can be expensive and environmentally damaging. Addressing
the challenge of providing access to clean water and sustainable sanitation
practices in Africa requires a holistic and integrated approach that considers
the role of clean energy, sustainable sanitation practices, and community
engagement and education. By addressing these issues together, it is possible to
improve water quality and availability and reduce food insecurity and other
development challenges. 3.6 SDG #8: Promote inclusive and sustainable economic
growth, employment, and decent work for all Energy is an indispensable force
driving all economic activity ( Alam, 2006 ). Reliable energy could increase
production capacity globally, fostering greater economic growth. Although there
is no one way “when energy is scarce, it imposes a strong constraint on the
growth of the economy, but when energy is abundant, its effect on economic
growth is much reduced” ( Stern, 2011 ). The lack of reliable electricity makes
it impossible for many industries to reach production capacity. Almost 80
percent of industrial enterprises in Cameroon face output losses ranging from 16
to 50 percent due to power outages. It was reported in ( Tei Mensah, 2016 ) that
a 1-percent increase in power outage reduces production in Cameroon by 0.6–1.1
percent. According to the country’s national electricity demand forecast (
MINEE, 2030 ), electricity consumption in Cameroon will double by 2030, and the
Ministry of Economy, Planning, and Regional Development reports that power
outages would reduce Cameroon’s GDP by 5 percent. Therefore, responding to the
urgent need for energy is a sustainable way to stimulate economic growth through
industrial production. Since energy is needed across all sectors of an economy
to support growth, its productive use is a critical facilitator of income-
generating activities. While access to electricity is not the only factor
affecting economic growth, studies suggest that power usage and GDP tend to be
related, as shown in  Figure 2 , and access to electricity is expected to be a
major facilitator of economic growth. Similarly, in Burundi, access to
electricity has also been a major challenge for economic development. According
to International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) (“ENERGY PROFILEa), only about
11.7% of the population had access to electricity in 2020. This has had a
significant impact on the country’s economic growth, as many businesses and
industries are unable to operate at full capacity due to the lack of reliable
power. The government of Burundi has made efforts to increase access to
electricity through initiatives such as the Decentralized Rural Electrification
Strategy (2015–2017) ( The World Bank, 2019 ), which aims to optimize the social
effect of distributed renewable energy while addressing issues at the
individual, institutional, and policy levels. One major goal is to facilitate
the transfer of knowledge, expertise, and techniques from academic and research
institutions to businesses and community organizations, allowing their members
to better serve the needs of rural youth and families. The energy value chain is
a significant source of job opportunities. A just energy transition would use
people with various skill sets, degrees of expertise, and backgrounds. Africa’s
economic development rate in 2013 was insufficient to guarantee sufficient job
opportunities for its fast-growing population ( International Labour
Organization, 2013 ). However, the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
shows that the renewable energy sector might provide up to 30 million jobs by
2030 (up from 11 million in 2018) and up to 42 million jobs by 2050. 3.7 SDG #9:
Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable
industrialization, and foster innovation Over the past 2 decades, electricity
has been crucial to industrial expansion, gaining priority for economic
development among academic researchers and decision-makers ( Abbasi et al., 2022
). To prosper economically, a country needs a strong industrial base, and
countries with a strong industrial sector have experienced relatively high
economic growth in the past. Encouraging sustainable and effective use of
natural assets can be greatly aided by creating new, greener facilities,
retrofitting or reconfiguring existing infrastructure systems, and making good
use of smart technologies. Effective, sustainable industrial and innovation
strategies must be accompanied by reliable energy policies and planning ( United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, 1984 ). Indeed, a country’s
industrialization is determined by its rational and efficient use of energy (
Armel et al., 2015 ). In 2010, 43.5 percent of the electricity produced in
Cameroon was consumed in the industrial sector when compared with 23 percent and
19 percent in the residential and public sectors, respectively ( Modeste et al.,
2015 ). This indicates that energy is a key input to industrialization.
Furthermore, energy is needed to foster innovation as testing and scaling new
technology requires energy. A system to regulate energy use is needed in order
to allow technology start-ups to test concepts, models, and theories that help
promote innovation. Energy’s key role in industrialization is the basis for the
highest projection of energy consumption in Africa, as shown in  Figure 3 .
FIGURE 3 FIGURE 3 . Projection of energy consumption in Africa—highest scenario
( Pappis et al., 2019 ). An example of the importance of energy access in
fostering industrialization in Africa can be seen in Ethiopia, which has made
significant progress in expanding its electricity generation capacity in recent
years. In 2015, the country launched its Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP),
which included a goal of increasing electricity generation capacity from 2.8 to
4.9 GW by 2020 (“ENERGY PROFILEb). To achieve this goal, the government
implemented a number of initiatives, including the construction of large
hydroelectric dams, the expansion of solar and wind power generation, and the
development of geothermal energy sources. The results of these efforts have been
impressive. By 2019, Ethiopia had exceeded its GTP target, reaching a generation
capacity of over 4.6 GW (“ENERGY PROFILEb). This expansion of electricity access
has had a significant impact on the country’s industrial sector, with a number
of new factories and industrial parks being established in areas that previously
had limited or no access to electricity. One such example is the Hawassa
Industrial Park, which was established in 2016 with the support of the Ethiopian
government and international investors ( World Bank, 2022b ). Located in the
southern region of the country, the park has attracted a number of major
international companies, including H&M, PVH, and the Chinese textile firm
Zhongtai. These companies have been attracted to the park due to its low-cost
labor, favorable investment climate, and access to reliable electricity. As a
result, the park has become a major contributor to Ethiopia’s economic growth
and development, generating over $500 million in exports in its first 3 years of
operation. Similarly, in Ghana, access to electricity has been a key factor in
the country’s industrialization efforts. The government has implemented a number
of initiatives to increase access to electricity, including the construction
17 MW solar farm. Because of this initiative, more Ghanaians now have access to
power, which has spawned the establishment of Meridian Industrial Park, which is
home to around 68 businesses and directly supports the employment of 7,000
people in Ghana ( BFT Online, 2021 ). In conclusion, the relationship between
energy access and industrialization in Africa is clear. Access to reliable,
renewable energy is an important factor in enabling industrialization and
fostering innovation in African countries. Through the implementation of
initiatives to increase access to electricity and the promotion of renewable
energy sources, African countries can create the conditions necessary for
economic growth and prosperity. Countries that have made significant progress in
expanding their electricity generation capacity often experience significant
economic growth and development. Furthermore, access to reliable, renewable
electricity helps to build a healthier, better-educated population that can
support various industries and innovate. By promoting access to education and
better healthcare, countries can build a more resilient infrastructure that is
better equipped to support industrialization and innovation. Overall, it is
important for African countries to prioritize the expansion of their energy
generation capacity and the promotion of renewable energy sources in order to
create the conditions necessary for economic growth and prosperity. 3.8 SDG #13:
Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts Rapid temperature
increases in Europe, the United States, and other regions of the world are
evidence that the consequences of climate change are being felt all across the
globe. As a result, reducing emissions of greenhouse gases has become an urgent
global concern. In order to reduce emissions, electrification is recommended by
IRENA ( Simelane and Abdel-Rahman, 1243 ); however, this strategy cannot stand
alone and must be linked with renewable energy production. It is critical for
African nations to translate RE policy into implementation change in light of
the fact that many industrialized nations have set objectives for the total
integration of renewable energy systems into their respective grid networks.
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is essential to decreasing the rate of global
warming, which makes combating climate change and its effects an important
worldwide concern. Many developed countries have set targets for fully
incorporating renewable energy systems into their grid networks; for Africa to
make a meaningful contribution to international efforts to mitigate climate
change, it must do the same. Morocco is an example of an African country that is
working to cut emissions and expand its usage of renewable energy. Morocco plans
to generate 52% of its power from renewable sources by 2030 ( Simelane and
Abdel-Rahman, 1243 ), as stated by the International Renewable Energy Agency
(IRENA). The government of Morocco has undertaken a variety of programs to this
end, such as the construction of large-scale solar and wind projects and the
installation of decentralized renewable energy systems in rural communities (
Simelane and Abdel-Rahman, 1243 ). In addition to lowering its carbon footprint,
Morocco is strengthening its energy independence and decreasing its dependence
on fossil fuels by boosting the use of renewable energy sources. Similarly,
Nigeria relies on fossil fuels for its electricity needs. To a large extent,
Nigeria did not begin tapping its renewable resource potentials until quite
recently. As a result, Nigeria would have a more difficult time meeting its 2020
and 2030 renewable energy targets than will several other ECOWAS Member States.
One-sixth of Nigeria’s electricity supply is expected to come from renewables by
2030, under the country’s National Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Policy
2015 ( ICREEE, 2015 ). Although there has been a rise in the use of renewable
energy in recent years, significant increases in deployment over the next decade
will be necessary to reach the target. The Energy Commission of Nigeria (ECN)
released a draft analysis and modeling in 2012 demonstrating how to achieve the
16% renewables aim by 2030 as part of the Nigerian Renewable Energy Roadmap (
ICREEE, 2015 ). Insight into the document’s meaning is provided by these
findings. Small hydropower (7.07%), solar (5.90%), biomass (2.78%), and wind
(0.25%) all make up less than 5% of total electricity consumption. Hence it is
possible to meet the goal of delivering 16% renewable energy by 2030 with
domestic activity. These percentages are not a limit on Nigeria’s ambition but
rather a depiction of how the country may achieve its 16% renewable energy goal.
Changes in the energy industry and advances in technology mean that the relative
importance of different industries may shift over time. Nigeria is committed to
meeting its renewable energy goals, and the federal government is putting in
place the framework and launching the necessary programs to make that happen.
Another example is Egypt as it plans to use renewable energy sources more
extensively and lessen its dependency on fossil fuels. Hydropower accounted for
2.8 GW of the country’s built renewable energy capacity in 2020, while solar and
wind energy each accounted for around 0.9 GW ( Renewable Energy Agency, 2018 ).
The ISES to 2035 reports that Egypt’s government has set lofty goals to expand
the share of renewable energy in the country’s electrical mix, with the
objective of 20% by 2022% and 42% by 2035 ( Renewable Energy Agency, 2018 ). The
Egyptian government has established a feed-in tariff program, established a
national renewable energy fund, and developed large-scale renewable energy
projects like solar and wind farms in order to meet these objectives. 4
Conclusion This study highlighted the importance of a just and inclusive
transition in the move towards clean energy in Africa. Achieving a just energy
transition in Africa requires a comprehensive policy framework that ensures that
the most vulnerable and marginalized groups are not left behind. This includes
considering the needs and perspectives of countries that currently rely heavily
on fossil fuels, as a complete transformation from fossil-based energy
production and consumption systems to renewable energy sources could create
economic hardship. To overcome the multiple challenges faced by Africa and
create economic, environmental, and social benefits for marginalized groups and
vulnerable individuals, it is essential that the global and local challenges of
energy security, economic growth, and affordable access are considered in the
clean energy transition. This includes addressing the issue of climate change
and formulating and implementing inclusive policies that do not jeopardize the
wellbeing of groups most vulnerable to its impacts. To ensure that efforts to
transition to clean energy are effective and sustainable, it is important for
policymakers to base their decisions on evidence and the experiences of
individuals and communities. This requires a thorough understanding of the
socio-economic conditions of the African continent and the specific needs and
challenges faced by different countries and regions. In order to effectively
address the global issue of climate change and the local environmental problems
faced by Africa, a planned energy transition strategy must take into account the
current socio-economic conditions of the continent and the specific needs and
perspectives of countries that depend mainly on fossil fuels. This will ensure
that the transition to clean energy is equitable and inclusive, and that it
benefits all members of society. In summary, it is clear that the transition to
clean energy in Africa requires a comprehensive and inclusive approach that
considers the needs and perspectives of all stakeholders, including marginalized
groups and vulnerable individuals. By ensuring that this transition is just and
equitable, it is possible to create economic, environmental, and social benefits
for all members of society. Author contributions Conceptualization was by BK and
data collection was done by NS, AY, DC, and NK. Writing of original draft was
done by all the authors. Supervision and review was done by J-SH. All the
authors have read the final version of the manuscript submitted to the journal.
Funding This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF), a grant funded by the Korean government Ministry of Science and ICT
(MSIT) (No. NRF-2021R1A5A8033165); the Korea Institute of Energy Technology
Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy
(MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No. 20224000000150). Conflict of interest The
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest. Publisher’s note All claims expressed in this article are solely those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any
product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Footnotes 1
“2019_nigeria”. State of Global air 2019. Health Effects Institute. References
Abbasi, K. R., Hussain, K., Radulescu, M., and Ozturk, I. (2022). Asymmetric
impact of renewable and non-renewable energy on the industrial sector in
Pakistan: Fresh evidence from Bayesian and non-linear ARDL.  Renew. Energy  187,
944–957. doi:10.1016/J.RENENE.2022.02.012 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar
African Development Bank, Climate resilience and a just energy TRANSITION in
AFRICA.
https://www.afdb.org/sites/default/files/2022/05/25/aeo22_chapter2_eng.pdf .
Google Scholar African Union Commission, . Second continental report ON the
implementation of agenda 2063, Accessed: Dec. 22, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://au.int/en/documents/20220210/second-continental-report-implementation-ag
enda-2063#:∼:text=Second%20Continental%20Report%20on%20The%20Implementation%20of
%20Agenda%202063,-Share%3A&text=Agenda%202063%20is%20Africa’s%20development,five
%20ten%2Dyear%20implementation%20plans .  Google Scholar Alam, M. S. (2006).
Economic growth with energy.  Munich Personal. RePEc Arch. (MPRA)  1260, 1–25.,
no.  Google Scholar Alam, M. S., Miah, M. D., Hammoudeh, S., and Tiwari, A. K.
(2018). The nexus between access to electricity and labour productivity in
developing countries.  Energy Policy  122, 715–726.
doi:10.1016/J.ENPOL.2018.08.009 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Amnesty
International (2016). Democratic Republic of Congo: ‘This is what we die for’:
Human rights abuses in the Democratic Republic of the Congo power the global
trade in cobalt,  https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/afr62/3183/2016/en/
(accessed Aug 17, 2022).  Google Scholar Armel, T. K. F., Vidal, A. K. C., and
René, T. (2015). Energy analysis and Exergy Utilization in the residential
sector of Cameroon.  Energy Power Eng.  7 (3), 93–104.
doi:10.4236/epe.2015.73009 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Bank, W.
(2017). Reaching for the SDGs,
https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/28435 . doi:10.1596/28435
CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Baumann-Pauly, D., Why cobalt mining in
the DRC needs urgent attention,  Counc. Foreign Relat. , 29, (accessed Aug. 26,
2022).  Google Scholar Besson, V., The Ukraine/Russia conflict: An accelerator
to the energy crisis, 2022,
https://home.kpmg/fr/fr/blogs/home/posts/2022/03/how-the-russia-ukraine-crisis-
impacts-energy-industry.html  (accessed Aug. 17, 2022).  Google Scholar Bft
Online, , Meridian industrial park: Ghana South Africa business Chamber visits
park, 2021,  https://thebftonline.com/2021/09/17/ghana-south-africa-business-
chamber-visits-meridian-industrial-park / (accessed Dec. 23, 2022).  Google
Scholar Carley, S., and Konisky, D. M. (2020). The justice and equity
implications of the clean energy transition.  Nat. Energy  5 (8), 8569–8577.
doi:10.1038/s41560-020-0641-6 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Castán
Broto, V., Baptista, I., Kirshner, J., Smith, S., and Neves Alves, S. (2018).
Energy justice and sustainability transitions in Mozambique.  Appl. Energy  228,
645–655. doi:10.1016/J.APENERGY.2018.06.057 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google
Scholar Ceres Roadmap, A just and inclusive transition | Ceres roadmap, 2030.”
https://roadmap2030.ceres.org/ai-expectation/just-and-inclusive-transition
(accessed Aug. 10, 2022).  Google Scholar Cheever, F., and Dernbach, J. C.
(2015). Sustainable development and its Discontents.  Transnatl. Environ. Law  4
(2). CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Dinkelman, T. (2011). The effects of
rural electrification on employment: New evidence from South Africa.  Am. Econ.
Rev.  101 (7), 3078–3108, Dec. doi:10.1257/AER.101.7.3078 CrossRef Full Text  |
Google Scholar “Energy PROFILEa”.  IRENA energy profile for Burundi .
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) . “Energy PROFILEb”.  IRENA energy
profile for Ethiopia .  International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) . Eskom, A
just energy transition for South Africa”, Accessed: Aug. 10, 2022. [Online].
Available:  https://www.eskom.co.za/about-eskom/just-energy-transition-jet/#:∼:t
ext=Eskom’s%20Just%20Energy%20Transition%20(JET,an%20increase%20in%20sustainable
%20jobs .  Google Scholar Food and Agriculture Organization, (2019). Cameroon -
Response overview - October 2019.
https://reliefweb.int/report/cameroon/cameroon-response-overview-october-2019 .
Google Scholar Food and Agriculture Organization, (2013). Food balance Sheet
data.  http://faostat.fao.org/site/354/default.aspx  (accessed Mar. 12, 2020).
Google Scholar Food and Agriculture Organization, , Water for sustainable food
and agriculture A report produced for the G20 Presidency of Germany. 2017,
[Online]. Available:  https://www.fao.org/3/i7959e/i7959e.pdf .  Google Scholar
García-García, P., Carpintero, Ó., and Buendía, L. (2020). Just energy
transitions to low carbon economies: A review of the concept and its effects on
labour and income.  Energy Res. Soc. Sci.  70 (Dec), 101664.
doi:10.1016/j.erss.2020.101664 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Gender, A.
(2020). Africa gender INDEX report.  https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/africa-
gender-index-report-2019-analytical-report .  Google Scholar Golumbeanu, R., and
Barnes, D. (2013). Connection Charges and electricity access in sub-Saharan
africa.  https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/1813-9450-6511 .
CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Hafner, M., and Tagliapietra, S. (2020).
The global energy transition: A review of the existing literature . Berlin,
Germany:  Springer , 1–24. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-39066-2_1 CrossRef Full Text  |
Google Scholar Hirsch, T., Matthess, M., and Fünfgelt, J. (2017). Guiding
principles and Lessons Learnt for a just energy transition in the Global South.
Geneva, Switzerland .  https://library.fes.de/pdf-files/iez/13955.pdf .  Google
Scholar Icreee, , Nigeria NATIONAL renewable energy ACTION plans. 2015,
(NREAP)-1.docx.”  https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/view.aspx?src=https%3A%2F%
2Frise.esmap.org%2Fdata%2Ffiles%2Flibrary%2Fnigeria%2FRenewable%2520Energy%2FSup
porting%2520Documentation%2FNigeria_NATIONAL%2520RENEWABLE%2520ENERGY%2520ACTION
%2520PLANS%2520(NREAP)-1.docx&wdOrigin=BROWSELINK  (accessed Dec. 23, 2022).
Google Scholar Ifegbesan, A. P., Rampedi, I. T., and Annegarn, H. J. (2016).
Nigerian households’ cooking energy use, determinants of choice, and some
implications for human health and environmental sustainability.  Habitat Int.
55, 17–24. doi:10.1016/J.HABITATINT.2016.02.001 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google
Scholar International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, (2018).
Transformations to achieve the sustainable development goals report prepared by
the world in 2050 initiative.
https://previous.iiasa.ac.at/web/home/research/twi/TWI2050_Report_web-
small-071018.pdf .doi:10.22022/TNT/07-2018.15347 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google
Scholar International Labour Organization,  Recovering from a second jobs dip
Global Employment Trends 2013 Recovering from a second jobs dip ,  INTERNATIONAL
LABOUR OFFICE GENEVA  Contents Contents,” 2013,  Genève, Switzerland , Accessed:
Aug. 10, 2022. [Online]. Available: www.ilo.org/publns  Google Scholar
International Renewable Energy Agency, (2019). Off-grid renewable energy
solutions to expand electricity access: An opportunity not to be missed.
https://www.irena.org/publications/2019/Jan/Off-grid-renewable-energy-solutions-
to-expand-electricity-to-access-An-opportunity-not-to-be-missed .  Google
Scholar International Renewable Energy Agency, (2019). Scaling up renewable
energy deployment in Africa.  https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/P
ublication/2020/Feb/IRENA_Africa_Impact_Report_2020.pdf?la=en&hash=B1AD828DFD77D
6430B93185EC90A0D1B72D452CC .  Google Scholar Jallow, A. A. K., Karcher, S.,
Atwa, A., Soezer, A., Sanyang, F., and Jallow, B. (2020). Circular GHG
mitigation opportunities the Gambia.  www.shiftingparadigms.nl/projects .
Google Scholar Johnston, A., (2020). The impacts of the Covid-19 crisis on
global energy demand and CO2 emissions.  https://www.iea.org/reports/global-
energy-review-2020  (accessed Jul 28, 2022).  Google Scholar Karekezi, S.,
Kimani, J., Wambille, A., Balla, P., Magessa, F., Kithyoma, W., et al. (2005).
The potential contribution of non-electrical renewable Energy technologies
(RETs) to poverty reduction in East Africa.  https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/docum
ent?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=207a61e22961c8a1a415c50f23e60b4e11dd6c9e .  Google
Scholar Khan, S., and Hanjra, M. A. (2009). Footprints of water and energy
inputs in food production – global perspectives.  Food Policy  34 (2), 130–140.
doi:10.1016/J.FOODPOL.2008.09.001 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar
Khandker, S. R., Samad, H. A., Ali, R., and Barnes, D. F. (2012). Who benefits
most from rural electrification? Evidence in India.  https://www.iaee.org/ej/eje
xec/EJ%2035-2_04%20S.R.%20Khandker%20ExecSummary%2012-060%20Templated.pdf .
CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Lindeman, T., Without electricity, 1.3
billion are living in the dark - Washington Post. 2022,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/world/world-without-power/  (accessed
Sep. 06, 2022).  Google Scholar Lockwood, M., and Pueyo, A. (2013). The evidence
of benefits for poor people of electricity Provision: Scoping Note and review
Protocol.  https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/20.500.12413/2894 .
Google Scholar Makoye, K., Tanzania farmers accuse biofuel investors of land
grab. 2013,
https://landmatrix.org/media/uploads/trustorgitem20130718134927-q50zx.pdf
(accessed Aug. 26, 2022).  Google Scholar Matikainen, O. A. (2019). Sustaining
the one-Dimensional: An Ideology Critique of Agenda 2030 and the SDGs.
https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?dswid=30&pid=diva2%3A1326645 .
Google Scholar Mehta, L., Cordeiro-Netto, O., Oweis, T., Ringler, C., Schreiner,
B., and Varghese, S., Water for food security and nutrition A report by the high
level panel of Experts on food security and nutrition,” 2015, Accessed: Aug. 10,
2022. [Online]. Available:  https://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/hlpe/hlpe_
documents/PT_Water/Docs/HLPE_Water_Project-Team_24_February-2014.pdf .  Google
Scholar Minee, , “Assistance au Ministère de l ’ Energie et de l ’ Eau dans l ’
élaboration du Plan de Développement à long terme du Secteur de l ’ Électricité
Horizon 2030 (  PDSE 2030 ) ,” vol. 2, no.  Pdse  2030, 2006. Modeste, K. N.,
Mempouo, B., René, T., Costa, Á. M., Orosa, J. A., Raminosoa, C. R. R., et al.
(2015). Resource potential and energy efficiency in the buildings of Cameroon: A
review.  Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.  50, 835–846.
doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.05.052 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Morel, G.,
and Mungai, R.  The Gambia: A look at agriculture . Washington, DC, USA:  World
Bank . Müller, F., Neumann, M., Elsner, C., and Claar, S. (2021). Assessing
African energy transitions: Renewable energy policies, energy justice, and SDG
7.  Assess. Afr. energy transitions Renew. energy policies, energy justice, SDG
7, ” Polit. Gov.  9 (1), 119–130. doi:10.17645/PAG.V9I1.3615 CrossRef Full Text
|  Google Scholar Nachtigal Hydro Power Company, (2017). Nachtigal Hydro power
plant.  https://www.nsenergybusiness.com/projects/nachtigal-hydro-power-plant/ .
Google Scholar Oda, H., and Tsujita, Y. (2011). The determinants of rural
electrification: The case of Bihar, India.  Energy Policy  39 (6), 3086–3095.
doi:10.1016/J.ENPOL.2011.02.014 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Okpanachi,
E., Ambe-Uva, T., and Fassih, A. (2022). Energy regime reconfiguration and just
transitions in the Global South: Lessons for West Africa from Morocco’s
comparative experience.  Futures  139, 102934. doi:10.1016/J.FUTURES.2022.102934
CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Our World in Data, , Per capita fossil
energy consumption vs. GDP per capita, 2020.”
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/per-capita-fossil-energy-vs-gdp  (accessed
Aug. 22, 2022).  Google Scholar Palacios-Lopez, A., Christiaensen, L., and
Kilic, T. (2017). How much of the labor in African agriculture is provided by
women?  Food Policy  67, 52–63. doi:10.1016/j.foodpol.2016.09.017 PubMed
Abstract  |  CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Pappis, I., Howells, M.,
Sridharan, V., Usher, W., Shivakumar, A., and Gardumi, F. (2019). Energy
projections for African countries.
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Ioannis-Pappis/publication/337154878_Energy
_projections_for_African_countries/links/5dc847e3a6fdcc57503dd5c1/Energy-
projections-for-African-countries.pdf .  Google Scholar Porcaro, J., Energy and
health: Making the connection. 2019,  https://www.seforall.org/news/energy-and-
health-making-the-connection  (accessed Aug10, 2022).  Google Scholar Project
World Impact, , Water Scarcity | Nonprofits that help water Scarcity | PWI.
https://projectworldimpact.com/cause/Water-Scarcity  (accessed Aug. 10, 2022).
Google Scholar Qudrat-Ullah, H., and Nevo, C. M. (2021). The impact of renewable
energy consumption and environmental sustainability on economic growth in
Africa.  Energy Rep.  7, 3877–3886, Nov. doi:10.1016/J.EGYR.2021.05.083 CrossRef
Full Text  |  Google Scholar Renewable Energy Agency, I., Development Bank, K.,
and Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, D., The renewable energy
transition in africa powering access, resilience and prosperity,  https://www.ir
ena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2021/March/Renewable_Energy_Trans
ition_Africa_2021.pdf , On behalf of the”.  Google Scholar Renewable Energy
Agency, I. (2018). Renewable energy outlook: Egypt (executive summary).  https:/
/www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2018/Oct/IRENA_Outlook_Egy
pt_2018_En.pdf .  Google Scholar Security and Human Rights, (2017). Feminist
Critiques of the sustainable development goals analysis and Bibliography 2017.  
https://genderandsecurity.org/sites/default/files/Feminist_Critiques_of_the_SDGs
_-_Analysis_and_Bibliography_-_CGSHR.pdf .  Google Scholar S&P Global,  S&P
global .  https://www.spglobal.com/en/research-insights/articles/what-is-energy-
transition .What is energy transition?  Google Scholar Schwerhoff, G., and Sy,
M. (Aug. 2017). Financing renewable energy in Africa – key challenge of the
sustainable development goals.  Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.  75, 393–401.
doi:10.1016/J.RSER.2016.11.004 CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Simelane,
T., and Abdel-Rahman, M. The renewable energy transition in africa.
https://policycommons.net/artifacts/1243341/energy-transition-in-africa/1796410/
.  Google Scholar Songwe, V., Ogunbiyi, D., and Abou-Zeid, A., Africa’s energy
transition calls for pragmatic measures to keep the continent competitive |
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa.”
https://www.uneca.org/stories/africa%E2%80%99s-energy-transition-calls-for-
pragmatic-measures-to-keep-the-continent-competitive  (accessed Aug. 26, 2022).
Google Scholar Stern, D. I. (2011). The role of energy in economic growth.  Ann.
N. Y. Acad. Sci.  1219 (1), 26–51. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05921.x PubMed
Abstract  |  CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar Tei Mensah, J. (2016). Bring
Back Our light: Power outages and industrial performance in sub-Saharan africa.
Accessed: Sep. 07, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://ideas.repec.org/p/fae/wpaper/2016.20.html .  Google Scholar The World
Bank, (2021). Access to electricity (% of population) | Data.
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS .  Google Scholar The World
Bank, (2020). Access to electricity (% of population)-Cameroon.
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?locations=CM .  Google
Scholar The World Bank, (2021). GDP (current US$) | Data.
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD .  Google Scholar The World
Bank, (2019), Population density (people per sq. km of land area). Accessed:
Dec. 23, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.POP.DNST .  Google Scholar The World
Bank, (2020). Prevalence of undernourishment (% of population) - Gambia, the |
Data.  https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SN.ITK.DEFC.ZS?locations=GM .
Google Scholar The World Bank, , Women, agriculture and work in africa.
https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/africa-myths-and-facts/publication/women-
agriculture-and-work-in-africa  (accessed Aug. 26, 2022).  Google Scholar Un
Women Data Hub, , Poverty deepens for women and girls, according to latest
projections, .”  https://data.unwomen.org/features/poverty-deepens-women-and-
girls-according-latest-projections , 2022, (accessed Aug. 26, 2022).  Google
Scholar United Nation Organization, (2021). Theme report on energy transition
towards the achievement of sdg 7 and net-zero emissions.
https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/2021-twg_2-062321.pdf .  Google
Scholar United Nations Development, , United NATIONS development PROGRAMME,
https://www.undp.org/ , 2 Did you know?”  Google Scholar United Nations
Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization, (2022). According to United
Nation 42% of African school children will drop out before the end of primary
education.  https://www.developafrica.org/providing-comprehensive-educational-
support-africa#:∼:text=According%20to%20the%20United%20Nations,activities%20with
%20their%20potential%20wasted . (accessed Mar. 13, 2020).  Google Scholar United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, (1984). Energy and
industrialization.  OPEC Rev.  8 (4), 409–433.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-0076.1984.tb00287.x CrossRef Full Text  |  Google Scholar
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, (2021). Climate Adaptation action plan.
https://www.epa.gov/climate-adaptation/climate-adaptation-plans .  Google
Scholar Wikipedia, , Memve’ele hydropower station in Cameroon, 2022,  https://en
.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memve%27ele_Hydroelectric_Power_Station#:∼:text=Memve’ele%20
Hydroelectric%20Power%20Station%20is%20a%20211%20megawatt%20hydroelectric,80%20m
egawatts%20in%20April%202019  (accessed Jul. 07, 2022).  Google Scholar Wei, M.,
Patadia, S., and Kammen, D. M. (2010). Putting renewables and energy efficiency
to work: How many jobs can the clean energy industry generate in the US?  Energy
Policy  38 (2), 919–931. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2009.10.044 CrossRef Full Text  |
Google Scholar Weltbank,  Water supply and sanitation in Senegal turning finance
into services for 2015 and beyond ,” 2011,  weltbank ,  Washington, DC, USA .
Google Scholar World Bank, GDP per capita (current US$) | Data.”
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD  (accessed Aug. 22, 2022).
Google Scholar World Bank Group, Increasing access to electricity in the
Democratic Republic of Congo: Opportunities and challenges, Accessed: Dec. 22,
2022. [Online]. Available:
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33593 .  Google Scholar World
Bank Group, Vanuatu climate risk country PROFILE,” 2021, Accessed: Dec. 22,
2022. [Online]. Available:
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/country-
profiles/15825-WB_Vanuatu%20Country%20Profile-WEB.pdf .  Google Scholar World
Bank, Hawassa industrial park community impact evaluation Ethiopia context”,
Accessed: Dec. 23, 2022. [Online]. Available:  https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/
doc/434121573654466886-0050022019/original/15073PolicyBriefEthiopiaHawassa.pdf .
Google Scholar World Health Organization Accelerating SDG 7 achievement policy
BRIEF 10 health and energy LINKAGES-MAXIMIZING health benefits from the
sustainable energy TRANSITION.
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/17486PB10.pdf .  Google
Scholar World Health Organization (2016). Burning opportunity: Clean household
energy for health, sustainable development, and wellbeing of women and children.
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/204717/9789241565233_eng.pdf .
Google Scholar Zinecker, A., Gass, P., Gerasimchuk, I., Jain, P., Moerenhout,
T., Oharenko, Y., et al. (2018). Real people, real change strategies for just
energy transitions.  https://policycommons.net/artifacts/614301/real-people-
real-change/1594547/ .  Google Scholar Keywords:  clean energy, just transition,
energy justice, policy implications, economic development Citation:  Nsafon BEK,
Same NN, Yakub AO, Chaulagain D, Kumar NM and Huh J-S (2023) The justice and
policy implications of clean energy transition in Africa.  Front. Environ. Sci.
11:1089391. doi: 10.3389/fenvs.2023.1089391 Received:  04 November 2022;
Accepted:  09 January 2023; Published:  19 January 2023. Edited by:   Maria
Alzira Pimenta Dinis , Fernando Pessoa University, Portugal Reviewed by:   Diogo
Guedes Vidal , University of Coimbra, Portugal Hamisai Hamandawana , National
Research Council (CNR), Italy Copyright  © 2023 Nsafon, Same, Yakub, Chaulagain,
Kumar and Huh. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).  The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms. *Correspondence:  Jeung-Soo Huh,  jshuh@knu.ac.kr ; Benyoh Emmanuel Kigha
Nsafon,  luxnsafon@yahoo.ca   This article is part of the Research Topic
Sustainability Challenges Around Energy Poverty in an Era of Global
Environmental and Economic Crisis
View all  5                        Articles  People also looked at Download