Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 3
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 7
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
 
I.   UNDP  within  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development 
Cooperation Framework 
1.  The  Lao  People's  Democratic  Republic  is  a  landlocked  country  with  a  population  of 
7.1 million  and  has  been  among  the  fastest  growing  economies  in  Southeast  Asia  with  an 
average growth rate of 7.8 per cent between 2006-2016.1 Poverty rates have fallen from 46 per 
cent (2007-2008) to 18.3 per cent (2018-2019).2 However, income inequality has risen, with 
the  Gini index  increasing  from  36.6 to  38.8 between  2012 and  2019.3 While the country’s 
population  of  is  young,  youth  unemployment  is  high  and  increasing  as  the  COVID-19 
pandemic has affected the service sectors in which they are employed. The country remains 
vulnerable  to  climate  change,  environmental  shocks  and  natural  disasters.  Frequent  floods, 
landslides and droughts impact crop production and increase the risk of food insecurity and 
agriculture losses. Resilience  in communities  is  low due  to the  prevalence of  monoculture, 
lack of diversity in livelihoods, limited infrastructure and connectivity of human settlements. 
Moreover,  the  presence  of  unexploded  ordnance  from  the  Indochina  conflict  (1964-1973) 
continues  to  destroy  lives  and  limit  agricultural  production.  There  is  a  strong  correlation 
between unexploded ordnance contamination and the prevalence of poverty, with 42 of the 46 
poorest districts affected by unexploded ordnance. Over the last 20 years, UNDP has been the 
main international organization in the country developing and supporting national capacity on 
mine action and it continues to play a key role in the unexploded ordnance sector. 
2.  The  Lao  People’s  Democratic  Republic  faces  challenges  in  improving  governance  to 
ensure effective service delivery to its population, and inclusive and accountable processes, 
and  to  foster  a  stable,  transparent,  predictable  environment  for  investment.  The  National 
Assembly  and  the  Provincial  People’s  Assemblies  need  increased  support  to  fulfil  their 
oversight function and improve engagement with citizens. Access to justice for ethnic groups, 
women  and  children  at  risk,  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender/transsexual,  intersex  and 
questioning/queer (LGBTIQ), persons with disabilities, among others, remains a challenge. 
The capacity of key justice agencies remains low, creating challenges to fully translate legal 
policies,  international  commitments  and  reforms  into  concrete  results.  Gender  inequality 
remains  high, especially  in rural  areas  and  among ethnic  groups.  Many  women  lack equal 
access to economic opportunities, resources and decision-making institutions.  
3.  The Ninth National Socioeconomic Development Plan (NSEDP, 2021-2025) is central to 
the country’s economic restructuring and places greater emphasis on economic diversification, 
innovation,  skills  and  knowledge,  the  green  economy  and  resilience.  Current  development 
finance situation is challenging. The country is experiencing a severe debt crisis that threatens 
to  leave  a  vastly  shrunken  resource  base  to  achieve  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals 
(SDGs)  and  the  Ninth  NSEDP.  High  levels  of  external  debt  and  low  domestic  revenues 
continue to limit investments in human capital. The lack of disaggregated data by province, 
ethnicity,  age,  gender  and  disability  status  hampers  evidence-based  policy-making  and  the 
ability of government policies and programmes to assess different groups. It also runs contrary 
to the principle of leaving no one behind. The COVID-19 pandemic caused economic growth 
to  decline  by  2.5  per  cent  in  2020 4  and  has  exacerbated  existing  macroeconomic 
vulnerabilities.  In  February  2021,  the  United  Nations  Committee  for  Development  Policy 
recommended that the Lao People’s Democratic Republic be granted an extended five-year 
preparatory  period,  effectively  setting  least  developed  country  (LDC)  graduation  for  2026 
(assuming a positive and continued trajectory).  
4.  UNDP  has  a  long  history  working  in  Lao  People’s  Democratic  Republic.  The  UNDP 
comparative  advantage  has  been  its  ability  to  work  closely  with  a  very  broad  range  of 
government and local-level institutions at all levels. UNDP was at the forefront of support to 
the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) and Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) to 
integrate  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs),  the  SDGs  and  other  international 
development aspirations (such as LDC graduation) into the national planning process. UNDP 
has acted as a critical integrator by assisting the  Government in enhancing partnerships for 
 
1   Eighth NSEDP mid-term review 2018, 
2   World Bank, Lao People’s Democratic Republic poverty profile and poverty assessment 2020. 
3   Ibid. 
4   World Bank economic monitoring report, 2020. 
2/14 
21-09148 
 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
effective development cooperation through the round table process, including sector working 
groups,  collaborating  with  development  partners  and  other  stakeholders  in  civil  society, 
private sector and academia.  
5.  A  critical  lesson  from  the  last  country  programme  document  (CPD)  evaluation  is  the 
challenging  development  financing  landscape  for  the  country  in  general  and  UNDP 
specifically.  Linkages  between  interventions  were  not  as  strong  as  they  should  have  been, 
resulting  in  missed  opportunities  for  synergies  and  greater  overall  impact.  Focus  was 
sometimes  too  much  on  developing  new  laws  and  policies  at  the  central  level,  while 
insufficient attention was paid to implementation on the ground and impact on people’s lives. 
In the new CPD, UNDP will focus on a limited number of critical and targeted interventions, 
based  on  a  theory  of  change  grounded  in  the  need  to  ensure  policies  and  legislation  are 
supported with local financing and clear follow through and implementation. In a change from 
the previous cycle, the  new  CPD  will  be  implemented  through  fewer  but larger individual 
projects targeting the same groups and the same areas, where possible. 
6.  Moving  forward,  UNDP  will  support  key  areas  of  the  United  Nations  Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) such as inclusive prosperity, governance 
and environment. UNDP will build on its comparative advantage, for instance, in governance 
where  UNDP  remains  a  key  partner  of  the  Government  which  relies  on  UNDP  thematic 
expertise and convening power to engage with a broad range of stakeholders. The CPD will 
support United Nations system-wide efforts led by the Resident Coordinator. In line with its 
integrator role, UNDP will contribute to a consolidated United Nations response by promoting 
and  contributing  to  joint  analysis  to  complex  development  challenges  which  require 
coordinated interventions from several United Nations organizations, in areas such as youth, 
gender-based  violence  and  disaster-risk  response.  UNDP  will  continue  to  leverage  its 
innovation expertise through its accelerator lab and explore innovative solutions to local issues 
to  introduce  more  experimentation,  accelerate  learning,  adapt  programming  and  adopt  a 
portfolio approach to system change. UNDP will invest in developing its capabilities for this 
transition, including on foresight.  
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships 
7. 
In line with the Ninth NSEDP and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the 
new  UNDP  CPD  will  focus  on  ensuring  that  by  2026  people  living  in  the  Lao  People’s 
Democratic  Republic  benefit  from  sustainable  and  inclusive  growth  and  are  increasingly 
resilient to the risks of climate change, natural disasters and unexploded ordnance while state 
institutions are more transparent, inclusive and accountable to the people. The programme is 
anchored in the long-term UNDP partnership with the Government spanning more than three 
decades.  The  new  CPD  builds  on  the  achievements  of  the  previous  CPD  that  saw  the 
incorporation of the SDGs into the national planning architecture. It will aim to support the 
country as it recovers from the economic and social impacts of COVID-19 and continues its 
transition  from  LDC  status,  with  particular  emphasis  on  supporting  inclusive  growth  and 
reducing inequality. The CPD is aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, and the 
new UNSDCF, and UNDP will contribute to three of the four outcome areas. The CPD was 
developed  in  consultation  with  national  partners  through  a  series  of  workshops  on  the 
UNSDCF and the CPD between January and May 2021.  
8. 
In additional to local expertise, the new CPD is supported by a regional and international 
network of experience and expertise. UNDP will build on a wide range of partnerships with 
government, civil society, private sector, academia and development partners. Emphasis will 
be placed on policy coherence and subnational implementation, especially in the post-COVID 
era where financing will be uncertain, requiring careful management of the resource envelope. 
This will include supporting the Government to ensure effective use of development finance 
and  new  funding  sources,  especially  for  environment  and  climate  change,  and  to  reap  the 
benefits from regional integration which remains a government priority. UNDP will partner 
with United Nations organizations and international financial institutions such as the World 
Bank and the  Asian  Development  Bank.  In particular,  UNDP  will  work  with  UNFPA,  the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the International Labour Organization (ILO) and 
the World Food Programme (WFP) on social protection, justice and gender-based violence; 
with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations 
21-09148 
3/14 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
 
Environment Programme (UNEP) and the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction 
(UNDRR)  on  environment,  climate  change  and  resilience;  and  with  United  Nations 
Volunteers (UNV) to tap into a global community and grassroots volunteer expertise. UNDP 
will continue to explore opportunities for South-South cooperation, including on digitalization 
and the COVID-19 response. 
9.  The programme will consist of three interrelated pillars brought together by focusing on 
the most vulnerable in society, including women, young people, ethnic groups and persons 
with disabilities, and through an area-based integrated approach focused on a select number 
of  provinces/districts.  Particular  emphasis  has  been  given to  the  adoption  of  human  rights-
based approach principles across all three  pillars, with results focused on strengthening the 
enabling  environment  and  developing  the  capacities  of  duty  bearers  and  rights  holders  to 
promote greater synergies and economies of scale across the programme. 
Inclusive prosperity 
10.  The  focus  of  UNDP  work  under this  pillar  has  evolved  to better  reflect  the  significant 
economic progress in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic over the last twenty years. While 
poverty rates have fallen, there are still significant pockets of deprivation across population 
groups and geographies that speaks to the need to develop policies that increasingly promote 
inclusive growth. UNDP work is informed by the need to ensure a mutually reinforcing link 
between policies and programmes based on concrete evidence of what works at scale. If there 
is improved macro-fiscal management, evidence-based and territorial development planning 
and prioritization of public investments in social and green sectors, the country will shift to a 
more  inclusive  and  more  environmentally  responsible,  climate-resilient  development 
pathway. Resilient and gender-responsive social protection systems will protect people from 
falling back into poverty and ensure development progress, even if disasters and shocks hit. 
This translates into the CPD outcome: By 2026, people, especially the most vulnerable and 
marginalized,  will  benefit  from  more  inclusive,  resilient,  transformative,  and  sustainable 
socioeconomic and demographic opportunities to reduce poverty and inequalities. 
11.  UNDP  will  strengthen  national  capacities  for  the  development,  financing  and 
implementation  of  pro-poor/green  growth  policies,  including  a  comprehensive  social 
protection system, thereby contributing to COVID-19 recovery. UNDP will build on capacity 
development  of  MOFA  and  MPI  to  incorporate  the  SDGs  into  the  NSEDP.  UNDP  will 
leverage  its  signature  solutions  on  keeping people  out  of  poverty,  environment  and  gender 
equality to ensure pro-poor and inclusive growth strategies, including in COVID-19 recovery 
plans. The focus of support will shift to critical technical policy advice on strengthening the 
links  between  planning  and  budgetary  processes  and  developing  an  integrated  national 
financing framework to achieve NSEDP goals and inclusive recovery, in cooperation with the 
United  Nations  Capital  Development  Fund  (UNCDF)  and  others.  UNDP  will  continue  to 
promote  green  growth  policies  that  encourage  shifts  towards  sustainable  consumption  and 
integrate  circular  economy  principles.  UNDP  will  continue  support  to  the  unexploded 
ordnance  sector,  especially  the  National  Regulatory  Agency  (NRA),  and  help  increase  the 
sector’s  contribution  to  a  broader  inclusive  growth  strategy  with  a  particular  focus  on  the 
country’s poorest districts.  
12.  UNDP  will  support  select  ministries  and  local  authorities  in  targeted  provinces  to 
develop,  implement  and  report  on  sectoral  and  local  development  plans  that  integrate  the 
SDGs,  including  Goal  18  on  mine  action.  UNDP  will  complement  its  support  to  national 
policy  development  and  evidence-based  planning  by  leveraging  relationships  with  sectoral 
ministries  and  provincial  authorities  to  address  planning  and  implementation  bottlenecks. 
UNDP  will  help  select  ministries  establish  regular  and  quality  reporting  on  SDG 
implementation,  including  on  SDG  indicators.  UNDP  will  explore  innovative  solutions, 
including digital, to rally different actors to improve synergies in sectoral and local plans. It 
gives  particular  attention  to ensuring that  Goal  18 targets are  fully  reflected and tracked  in 
local plans and reports.  
13.  UNDP will support vulnerable groups – women, young people, persons with disabilities, 
ethnic groups and those impacted by unexploded ordnance – in the poorest districts to gain 
increased access to vocational training (TVET), jobs and entrepreneurship opportunities, with 
a particular focus on innovation and technology. UNDP will work with mass organizations, 
4/13 
21-09148 
 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
including  the  Lao  Front  for  National  Development,  the  Lao  Women’s  Union  and  the  Lao 
Youth Union. This will be complemented by support to the Government to continue to clear 
unexploded ordnance from agricultural lands and other areas for productive use, following a 
more  thorough  prioritization  exercise.  UNDP  will  work  closely  with  the  private  sector, 
including  start-ups,  employers  in  key  sectors,  including  tourism,  and  civil  society 
organizations to reflect on the future of work and identify which skills are needed. 
Environment, climate change and resilience 
14.  The country’s  environment and  climate change  programme  leverages  UNDP  signature 
solutions  on  building  resilience  and  a  sustainable  planet  and  directly  supports  the 
complementary  UNSDCF  pillars  on  environment  and  prosperity.  UNDP  will  support  the 
Government  to  implement  and  conduct  a  successful,  low-carbon,  socially  inclusive  green 
growth  strategy  in  urban  and  rural  areas.  It  aims  to  place  the  Lao  People’s  Democratic 
Republic on a trajectory that will reduce current and future environmental damage and losses 
and shift the growth path to more sustainable use and management of natural resources for 
future  generations.  Resilient  communities  and  strengthened  institutions  are  critical  to  cope 
with and recover from climate change and disaster impacts. Therefore, if there is improved 
sustainable use of ecosystems and biodiversity resources, greater community engagement in 
use  of  common  property  resources,  and  increased  resilience  to  natural  hazards-induced 
disasters and climate change and reduced damage and losses, then by 2026, people, especially 
the most vulnerable and marginalized, and institutions will be better able to sustainably access, 
manage, preserve and benefit from natural resources and promote green growth that is risk-
informed, disaster and climate-resilient. 
15.  UNDP  will  focus  on  capacity  development  of  State  authorities  at  the  central  level  to 
develop  policies  and  guidelines  that  improve  national  resources  management,  disaster  risk 
management  and  resilience  to  climate  change.  UNDP  will  leverage  partnerships  with  the 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE), the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry (MAF), the Ministry of Mines and Energy, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry 
of Labour and Social Welfare and MPI to strengthen the overall policy environment and the 
critical  interlinkages  between  natural  resource  management,  disaster  risk  reduction  and 
sustainable development.  
16.  In line with the UNDP commitment to sustainable management and financing for natural 
resources, the CPD will work with the Government and international and regional experts on 
innovative  approaches  to  financing  interventions  for  natural  resources  management  and 
climate change mitigation and adaptation. This will include payment for ecosystem services, 
debt swap, and use of carbon credits while continuing to engage with multilateral financing 
mechanisms such as the Green Climate Fund and the Global Environment Facility.  
17.  UNDP  will  leverage  its  work  with  a  broad  range  of  local  authorities  to  enhance  their 
capacities to implement integrated natural resources management systems, focused on forest 
and water resources, and establish early warning systems and climate change mitigation and 
anticipatory  measures  for  emergencies.  UNDP  will  seek  to  improve  coordination  and 
implementation of strategies with an emphasis on innovation and replication. The programme 
will promote enhanced risk informed information for decision-makers by institutionalizing a 
damage-and-loss database (LaoDi) to track disaster and climate risks and help improve flood 
and weather forecasting and early warning systems. UNDP will work with local partners to 
identify alternative livelihood and community-managed solutions (such as ecotourism) in the 
provinces, which are most vulnerable to flooding and drought, and support local governments 
to adopt, finance and implement sustainable natural resource and waste management strategies 
in line with national priorities. 
18.  UNDP will work with vulnerable rural communities to further create opportunities and 
incentives  for  their  greater  participation  in  protected  area  management  and conservation  of 
ecosystems and wildlife and increase their resilience to natural hazards-induced disasters and 
climate  change.  This  will  enable  communities  to  benefit  more  from  sustainable  natural 
resource management practices and programmes, including integrated resource management, 
ecosystem-based adaptation, climate resilient food systems and local infrastructure.  
21-09148 
5/14 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
 
Governance and rule of law 
19.  The  Ninth  NSEDP  underscores  the  critical  importance  of  governance  reform  to  the 
achievement  of the  SDGs.  State  institutions  struggle to  deliver  public  services to the  most 
vulnerable and mitigate the impact of climate change while economic growth is not inclusive. 
Government agencies  have  limited capacities,  data  and information  for long-term  planning 
and  decision-making.  Moreover,  they  are  faced  with  overlapping  mandates,  inadequate 
resources, and lack of effective follow through at all levels. The programme is predicated on 
the  belief  that  public  institutions  that  are  responsive  and  accountable  to  the  public  are  a 
necessary precondition for progress. It argues that the best means to reinforce accountability 
is  to  strengthen  local-level  institutions  by  creating  systems  that  capture  the  experiences  of 
citizens  and  translate  them  into  local  government  reform(s)  and  capacity  building. 
Accountability will be advanced through strengthened rule of law, focusing on building the 
capacity  of  key  judicial  bodies  and  ensuring  the  justice  system  is  inclusive  by  increasing 
access to justice for marginalized and vulnerable groups. This is captured in the CPD outcome: 
By 2026, people, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized, will be better served by 
public  institutions  at  all  levels  in a  transparent  and  inclusive manner, able  to exercise  their 
rights and obligations, and the institutions shall be strengthened and more accountable while 
the  rule  of  law  and  international  human  rights  commitments  made  by  the  Lao  People’s 
Democratic Republic are upheld. 
20.  UNDP will develop the capacity of State and non-state actors to put in place transparent 
and participatory evidence-based policy and decision-making processes to further strengthen 
human rights protection and accountability. The lack of data and information has been one of 
the  country’s  major  governance  bottlenecks.  UNDP  will  work  with  relevant  ministries  to 
support efforts to promote digital governance at national and local levels and enhance data 
collection and management and user-centred e-services. As civil society continues to develop, 
UNDP will support the development of platforms for engagement on governance and justice-
related  issues  between  government  and  non-profit  associations/civil  society  organizations. 
Efforts will be made to support the Government to build trust and accountability, including 
strengthening anti-corruption efforts and increased policy coherence. Equally crucial will be 
creating  a  business  environment  that  promotes  responsible  practices,  transparency  and 
sustainability, including support for direct private investment in the SDGs. 
21.  UNDP will support efforts to enhance the capacities, including digital, of ministries (in 
particular the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Supreme People’s Court, 
the Office of the Supreme People’s Prosecutor, the Lao Bar Association, legal aid providers 
and  universities,  National  Assembly  and  Provincial  People’s  Assemblies,  courts  and  local 
government bodies) for more transparent and effective law and policy design, implementation 
and  monitoring.  UNDP  will  continue  to  work  with  authorities  at  all  levels  to  clarify 
responsibilities,  strengthen  capacities  to  implement  decentralization  policies,  and  ensure 
better inter-sectoral coordination  and policy coherence.  Efforts to  improve  service  delivery 
will focus on the operations of one-door service centres and by using data collected through 
citizens surveys, in partnership with MOHA. This will complement support to the Ministry of 
Technologies  and  Communications  to  increase  the  proportion  of  essential  public  services 
provided online. UNDP will help build the capacity of the National Assembly and Provincial 
People’s  Assemblies  delegates  to  effectively  represent  constituents,  engaging  citizens 
(building on UNDP community radios) and using evidence to fulfil oversight responsibilities. 
Reform of the justice sector will focus on building the capacity of key institutions in advancing 
the rule of law and ensuring access to justice for marginalized and vulnerable groups.  
22.  UNDP will support people, including vulnerable groups, to have greater awareness and 
opportunities  to  exercise  their  rights,  provide  feedback  and  participate  in  decision-making 
processes  that  affect  them,  and  secure  remedies  when their  rights are  violated.  UNDP  will 
continue  to  work  with  MOHA  on  strengthening  and  deploying  the  citizens’  accountability 
framework as a vehicle for citizens’ feedback on provision of basic services. Efforts will be 
made to make legal aid services more accessible to vulnerable groups through increased legal 
dissemination,  digital  platforms,  and  services  more  adapted  to  people’s  needs.  UNDP  will 
work with local organizations, including organizations for people with disabilities. UNDP will 
support elected female delegates to effectively represent the interests of their constituents and 
ensure increased  women’s participation  in  political  processes.  In  partnership  with  UNFPA, 
6/13 
21-09148 
 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
UNDP  will  implement  a  joint  initiative  that  brings  together  the  social,  justice  and  police 
sectors in a systems approach to preventing and responding to gender-based violence. 
III. 
Programme and risk management 
23.  This CPD outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit 
of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the 
country programme. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarters 
levels with respect to the country programme is prescribed in the organization’s programme 
and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework. 
24.  The programme will be nationally executed. Where necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme.  The harmonized approach to 
cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations organizations 
to manage financial, operational and programmatic risks. Cost definitions and classifications 
for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. 
25.  The  CPD  was  developed  based  a  theory  of  change  process  that  identified  several 
important  risks  to  successful  programme  delivery.  The  most  significant  is  an  uncertain 
development financing landscape in Lao People’s Democratic Republic that has both direct 
and  indirect  consequences  for  UNDP.  The  continued  impact  of  COVID-19  on  national 
finances  will  limit  the  Government’s  ability  to  fully  meet  its  obligations  under  the  Ninth 
NSEDP and in support of the SDGs, let alone take on new obligations. UNDP will attempt to 
mitigate these risks by supporting government planning and budgeting to better target the poor 
and vulnerable and explore a diverse range of partners.  
26.  Two trends – the increased use of bilateral cooperation by development partners and the 
emergence  of  the  private  sector  and  NGOs  as  service  providers  –  will  require  close 
coordination  based  on  clearly  understood  comparative  advantages  to  ensure  synergies  in 
approaches and  efforts  with  national counterparts.  This  suggests a need to  improve  UNDP 
positioning among development actors to become a partner of choice. UNDP will focus on 
high-level technical and policy advice that leverages its international network of expertise and 
regional specialists to develop innovative solutions to emerging challenges. 
27.  The  challenge  posed  by  capacity  shortfalls  among  implementing  partners  remains  a 
significant risk. This will be mitigated by an overall reduction in the number of projects in the 
new  portfolio  and  an  emphasis  on  depth  over  breadth.  This  will  enable  UNDP  to  provide 
timely and meaningful technical support and promote long-term training and implementation 
capacities.  As  recommended  in  the  CPD  evaluation,  a  robust  mechanism  for  measuring 
changes in partner capacities will be set up with clear baselines and targets. Periodic portfolio 
‘sense making’ will be undertaken to ensure alignment of projects and programmes with stated 
CPD objectives and priorities and to adapt to emerging development challenges. 
28.  UNDP  will  ensure  that  risks  are  identified  for  each  project  at  the  design  stage  and 
reviewed throughout the project life cycle in line with the UNDP social and environmental 
standards and accountability mechanism. On a regular basis, UNDP will undertake monitoring 
activities, including monitoring visits, project monthly meetings, project board meetings and 
grievance mechanisms, to identify any significant change in circumstances that may require 
intervention.   
IV.   Monitoring and evaluation 
29.  Together with UNICEF and other United Nations organizations, UNDP is supporting the 
Government to develop the results and resources framework for the Ninth NSEDP, including 
robust monitoring, financing and costing frameworks. CPD indicators at both outcome and 
output levels have been aligned with existing SDG and national indicators and data sources. 
UNDP will continue to advocate for the strengthening of the Lao Statistics Bureau (LSB) and 
other government institutions and their ability to track progress against the 238 national SDG 
indicators endorsed by the Government in June 2019. UNDP is supporting the Government to 
monitor,  mainstream, coordinate and report  on  the  SDGs,  including the  voluntary  national 
review process. In particular, UNDP will work with specific government agencies responsible 
for specific SDGs, for instance the NRA for Goal 18 on mine action, to improve their system 
21-09148 
7/14 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
 
to collect and analyse data through their information management system and field surveys.  
30.  The new programme builds on a robust theory of change and individual problem trees to 
allow  for  a  clear  line  of  accountability.  Programmes  will  be  tracked  at  both  outcome  and 
output  levels  in  parallel  to  activity  monitoring  and  spot  checks  for  individual  projects.  As 
recommended by the CPD evaluation, UNDP will invest in monitoring capacities and systems 
to ensure adaptive evidence-based management of projects. The office will allocate 1 to 3 per 
cent of its budget for monitoring activities. The UNDP gender marker will be used to monitor 
programme  expenditures  and  improve  planning  and  decision-making  to  ensure  gender 
equality is well integrated into programmes. 
31.  UNDP will synchronize its reporting to the UNSDCF cycle and aim to embed programme 
reviews  within the overall monitoring  architecture of  the  Government. UNDP  will explore 
tools  and  mobile 
innovative  monitoring  methods, 
applications, to allow for  more  regular and  even  real-time  tracking  of  progress. UNDP  will 
seek  to  engage  with  Government,  vulnerable  groups  and  other  relevant  stakeholders  on  a 
regular basis, including through consultations, to ensure the programme remains relevant to 
their needs.  
including  use  of  digital 
32.  UNDP will utilize recommendations and lessons learned from independent evaluations to 
strengthen  the  project  design  and  make  course  corrections.  UNDP  will  work  closely  with 
government  partners to collect high-quality  data  disaggregated by  province, ethnicity, age, 
gender and disability status. UNDP will ensure the CPD evaluation plan follows Independent 
Evaluation  Office  guidelines  (in  terms  of  project  budget  and  duration)  and  ensure  each 
evaluation is funded.  
 
8/13 
21-09148 
 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (2022-2026) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Ninth NSEDP outcomes 1 (economic growth), 3 (people’s well-being) and 5 (regional and international integration)  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1:  
By 2026, people, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized, will benefit from more inclusive, resilient, transformative and sustainable socioeconomic and demographic opportunities to reduce poverty and inequalities 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions 
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME 
(United States 
dollars) 
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S) 
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY 
OF DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including 
indicators, baselines targets) 
MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS 
FRAMEWORKS 
Regular: 
$2,864,000 
Other: 
$22,960,000 
Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI), 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MoFA) 
MoLSW/National Regulatory Authority 
(NRA),  
ILO, UNICEF and 
Ministry of Information, Culture and Tourism 
(MICT) 
Proportion of population living 
below national poverty line  
Baseline: 18.60% (2020) 
Target: 13.90% (2026) 
Data source: Lao Consumption and 
Expenditure Survey  
Frequency: Lao Statistics Bureau (LSB)  
Frequency: Every five years 
Output 1.1. Development, financing and implementation of pro-poor/ 
green growth (COVID-19 recovery) policies, including a 
comprehensive social protection system, is strengthened 
 
1.1.1. Ninth and Tenth NSEDP with monitoring and evaluation 
framework and fully costed with financing strategy prepared 
Baseline: 0 (2020) Target: 2 (2026)  
Source: MPI/Project report 
Frequency: Annual 
 
  
Share of population covered by 
the National Social Security 
System 
Baseline: 4.4% (2019) 
Target: 7% (2025) 
 
Data source: MoLSW 
Frequency: Every five years 
Responsibility: MoLSW 
 
Other partners: 
World Bank 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
United Nations organizations and the private 
sector 
 
 
1.1.2. Ten-year fully costed strategy plan and monitoring and 
evaluation framework developed for unexploded ordnance sector 
Baseline: 0 (2021) Target: 1 (2026) 
Source: NRA  
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
Youth unemployment 
Baseline: Female: 20.8% (2017) 
Male: 15.5% 
Target: 15% (2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 1.2. Select ministries and local authorities in targeted 
provinces develop, implement and report on sectoral and local 
development plans that integrate SDGs (including Goal 18) 
MPI, MOFA, Sectoral ministries, 
MLSW/NRA, Lao National Unexploded 
Ordnance Programme (UXO Lao) 
Number of reported 
unexploded ordnance 
casualties (link to 18.1.1) 
Baseline: 33 (2020) 
Target: less than 15 (2026) 
  Data Source: NRA 
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: NRA 
 
 
1.2.1. Number of provincial plans that integrate SDGs  
Baseline: 0 (2021) Target: 5 (2026) 
Source: MPI/Project report  
Frequency: Annual 
 
1.2.2. Number of annual SDG reports produced by sectoral ministries  
Baseline: 0 (2021) Target: 50 (2026) 
Source: MPI/ Project report 
Frequency: Annual 
  
1.2.3. Number of NRA central and provincial offices that integrate 
Goal 18 targets into local development plan 
Baseline: 0 (2021) Target: 6 (2026) 
Source: NRA/Project report 
21-09148 
9/13 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
 
Frequency: Annual 
NRA 
UXO Lao 
Lao Women’s Union (LWU)  
Lao Youth Union (LYU) 
MICT 
Private sector 
Output 1.3. Vulnerable groups, especially women, young people, 
persons with disabilities, ethnic groups and those impacted by 
unexploded ordnance, have increased access to vocational training 
(TVET), employment and entrepreneurship opportunities 
 
1.3.1. Percentage of trainees with increased income six months after 
training (disaggregated by sex, age and ethnicity)  
Baseline: 0% (2021) Target: 30% (2026) 
Source: LWU and LYU/ Project reports 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
1.3.2. Number of people living in areas cleared of unexploded 
ordnance with UNDP support (disaggregated by sex, age and 
ethnicity)  
Baseline: 9,537 (2020) Target: 20,000 (2026) 
Source: NRA 
Frequency: Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Ninth NSEDP outcome 4 (Environmental protection and natural disaster risk reduction) 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 2:  
By 2026, people, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized, and institutions will be better able to sustainably access, manage, preserve and benefit from natural resources and promote green growth that is risk-
informed and disaster and climate-resilient 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development 
Data source: Ministry of Natural 
Resource and Environment (MONRE)  
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: MONRE 
Output 2.1. State authorities develop policies and guidelines that 
improve natural resources management, disaster risk management 
and resilience to climate change  
MONRE, MAF, MPI, Ministry of Finance 
(MOF) and MLSW (Department of Social 
Welfare – National Disaster Management 
Office)  
Regular: 
$2,700,000 
Other: 
$37,765,000 
Number of local governments 
that adopt and implement local 
disaster risk reduction (DRR) 
strategies disaggregated by (a) 
province, (b) district and (c) 
village 
Baseline: 2 provinces 0 district 0 
village (2020) 
Target: 10 provinces, 15 districts 
50 villages (2026) (link to 
11.6.1.a) 
  
2.1.1. Number of financing solutions for conservation implemented 
Percentage increase in financing amount for conservation 
Baseline: 0 (2020) Target: 3 (2026)  
Source: MONRE and MLSW/Project reports 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
UNEP, FAO, UNDRR, UNCDF 
International Union for Conservation of 
Nature (IUCN)  
ADB, World Bank  
  
 
 
 
 
  
2.1.2. Number of functioning and linked early warning systems at 
national and provincial level in target provinces. 
Baseline: 0 (2021) Target: 10 (2026)  
Source: MONRE and MLSW/Project reports 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
Number of weather stations 
Baseline: 51 (TBC) 
Target: 101 (2026) 
Data Source: MONRE  
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: MONRE 
 
 
 
PM2.5 air pollution, mean 
annual exposure (micrograms 
per cubic meter) 
Baseline: 25.11 micrograms per 
cm (2017) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10/13 
21-09148 
 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
Target: 10 micrograms per cm 
(2026) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental performance 
index (EPI) 
Baseline: 34.8 (2020) 
Target: TBC (2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Forest area as percentage of 
total land area 
Baseline: 57.5% (2020) 
Target: 70% (2025) 
Data Source: Ministry of Agriculture 
and Forestry (MAF) 
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: MAF  
Output 2.2. Local authorities have enhanced capacities to 
implement integrated natural resources management and DRR 
systems 
MLSW 
MAF 
MONRE 
Local government 
UNDRR 
FAO 
UNEP 
 
 
 
 
2.2.1. Disaster loss database established and operational  
Baseline: 0 (2021) Target: 1 (2026) 
Source: MLSW  
Frequency: Annual 
 
2.2.2. Number of local governments that adopt and implement local 
natural resource management strategies, disaggregated by (a) province, 
(b) district, and (c) village 
Baseline 2: (2021) Target: (2026) (a) province =5, (b) district 15 and 
(c) village 50 
Source: UNDP/MAF/ MONRE 
Frequency: Annual 
Output 2.3. Vulnerable rural communities participate in protected 
area management and conservation of ecosystems and wildlife and 
increase resilience to natural hazards-induced disasters and 
climate change 
MAF  
MONRE 
CSOs 
UNDRR 
UNEP 
FAO 
 
 
 
2.3.1. Number of vulnerable communities in selected provinces 
participating in protected area management and conservation of 
ecosystem and wildlife  
Baseline: 16 (2021) Target: 32 (2026)  
Source: UNDP, MAF and MONRE 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
2.3.2. Percentage of women in vulnerable communities benefiting 
from assisted sustainable management of natural resources, forests, 
ecosystem services  
Baseline: 15% (2021) Target: 33% women (2026)  
Source: UNDP, MAF and MONRE/Project report  
Frequency: Annual 
21-09148 
11/13 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
 
2.3.3. Percentage of women in vulnerable communities benefiting 
from disaster resilience initiatives  
Baseline: 15% (2021) Target: 33% women (2026)  
Source: UNDP, MAF and MONRE/Project report  
Frequency: Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Ninth NSEDP outcome 6 (Governance and the rule of law) 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1:  
By 2026, people, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized, will be better served by public institutions at all levels in a transparent and inclusive manner, able to exercise their rights and obligations, and the 
institutions shall be strengthened and more accountable while the rule of law and international human rights commitments made by the Lao People’s Democratic Republic are upheld 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development 
Corruption perception index 
Baseline: Index 29 (2019) 
Target: more than 40 (2026) 
 Data source: Transparency International 
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: Transparency 
International 
Output 3.1. Transparent and participatory evidence-based policy 
and decision-making processes further strengthen human rights 
protection and accountability 
GSWG, Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MOHA), MoJ  
MTC 
Regular: 
$2,700,000 
Other: 
$18,570,000 
 
 
 
3.1.1. Proportion of public sector entities using digital data at central 
and subnational level  
Baseline: TBD (2022) Target: 80% (2026)  
Source: Ministry of Technologies and Communications (MTC) and 
NSEDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
Number of people using legal 
aid services (link to 16.3.4) 
Baseline: 1059 (2019) 
Target: 35,000 (2026) 
Data source: Ministry of Justice 
(MOJ) 
Frequency: Annual 
 Responsibility: MOJ 
 
 
effectiveness 
Government 
index 
Baseline: Index -0.78 (2019) 
Target: <-0.5 (2026) 
Data Source: World Bank 
Frequency: Annual 
 Responsibility: World Bank  
 
3.1.2. Multi-stakeholder engagement platform established (number of 
institutions using platform disaggregated by type) 
Baseline: 0 (2021) Target: 1 (2026)  
Source: Governance Sector Working Group (GSWG) 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
Voice and accountability index 
Baseline: Index -1.8 (2019) 
Target: <-0.9 (2026) 
 
 
 
3.1.3. Number of women running for National Assembly and 
Provincial People’s Assemblies seats.  
Baseline: 22% (2021) Target: 30% (2026) 
Source: United States Agency for International Development (USAID) 
STEPS project 
Frequency: Annually  
 
Data Source: United Nations 
Department for Economic and Social 
Affairs (UNDESA) 
Frequency: Annual 
 
E-government index 
Baseline: Index 0.3288 (2020) 
Target: >0.55 (2026) 
  Responsibility: UNDESA 
 
Output 3.2. Government bodies have enhanced capacities for more 
transparent and effective law design, implementation and 
monitoring 
MOPT, MOJ, MOHA, National Assembly 
and Provincial People's Assemblies, 
Supreme People’s Court, Office of 
Supreme People’s Prosecutor, courts, local 
government 
 
 
3.2.1. Number of people accessing essential public services online (e-
service).  
Baseline: TBD (2022) Target: 50% of all government services (2026)  
Source: MCT and NSEDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
12/13 
21-09148 
 
DP/DCP/LAO/4 
 
3.2.2. Number of citizen-engagement and outreach mechanisms 
conducted by delegates 
Baseline: 0% (TBC) Target: 80% (2026) 
Source: USAID STEPS project 
Frequency: Annual 
 
3.2.3. Number and utilization rates of one-stop service centres by 
women and ethnic groups at: (a) district level, and (b) province level  
Baseline: 44 (TBC) Target: 74 (50% of public services provided at 
ODSC) 
Source: MOHA and NSEDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
3.2.4. Number of justice and police officials trained on gender- 
sensitive legal aid service provisions and policing 
Baseline: 0 Target: 250 (2026) (50 legal aid service providers/200 
police officers) 
Source: MOJ and Ministry of Public Security 
Frequency: Annual 
Output 3.3. People, including vulnerable groups, have greater 
access to basic and accountable services 
MOHA, MOJ 
CSOs 
Academia 
 
 
3.3.1. Number of target districts that adopt accountability framework  
Baseline: 4 (2020) Target: 40 Districts (2026) 
Source: MOHA and NSEDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
3.3.2. Percentage of citizens who attended the survey satisfied with 
public services received  
Baseline: 17 (2019) Target: 80% (2026)  
Source: MOHA/SUFS 
Frequency: Annual 
Regular: $8,264,000 
Other: $79,295,000 
Total: $87,559,000 
Total 
 
13/13 
21-09148 
