 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 
OF 
BANGLADESH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
POWER DIVISION 
MINISTRY OF POWER, ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES 
GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH 
 
 
18 DECEMBER 2008 
 
DHAKA 
 
 
 
 
 
-1-
Table of Contents:
7. RIGHT TO INTERPRETATION..: Page: 8
1 
Introduction 
 
1.1 
Energy is one of the basic ingredients required to alleviate poverty and socio-economic 
development.  GOB  has  issued  its  Vision  and  Policy  Statement  in  February  2000,  to 
bring the entire country under electricity service by the year 2020 in phases, in line with 
the  direction  of  the  Article  16  of  ‘The  Constitution  of  the  People’s  Republic  of 
Bangladesh,’ to remove the disparity in the standards of living between the urban and 
rural  areas  through  rural  electrification  and  development.  The  energy  prospect  is 
generally  assessed  on  the  basis  of  available  commercial  sources  of  energy  i.e.,  fossil 
fuel  like  gas,  coal,  oil  etc.  Worldwide,  there  is  a  major  transition  underway  in  the 
energy sector. It is happening due to  the following three major reasons: 
 
(i) 
   A decline in fossil fuel availability, their predicted gradual extinction in the next 
few decades and the resultant price volatility due to demand-supply gap. 
The need to drastically cut global emissions for mitigating climate  change (80% 
reduction by 2050). 
The need for energy security. 
 (ii) 
 
(iii) 
 
In  Bangladesh  efficient  utilization  of  renewable  energy  resources  is  yet  to  assume 
commercial  dimensions  and  hence  rational  policy  dissemination  on  renewable  energy 
usage  is  essential.  The  renewable  energy  includes  solar,  wind,  biomass,  hydro,  geo-
thermal, tidal wave etc.  
 
Renewable  energy  in  the  form  of  traditional  biomass  is  the  main  source  of  primary 
energy  in  the  country  comprising  some  35-60%  percent  of  total  primary  energy  use. 
The  size  and  economic  potential  of  the  renewable  energy  resources  (e.g.,  solar 
photovoltaic, solar thermal power, wind power, biogas, etc.) in Bangladesh are yet to be 
determined  and  the  capacity  of  renewable  energy  development  is  presently  low. 
Although investment costs of renewables are generally higher compared to fossil fuel 
alternatives,  this  option  becomes  economically  viable  when  all  externalities  (e.g. 
environmental  cost,  health  hazards  etc.)  and  lower  operating  cost  are  taken  into 
consideration.  
1.2 
1.3 
The major sources of renewable energy are: 
 
1.3.1 Solar 
 
1.3.1.1  Solar  photovoltaic:  Solar  photovoltaic  (PV)  systems  are  in  use 
throughout  the  country  with  over  300,000  household-level  installations  having 
capacity  of  about  15  MW  (November  2008).  Scaling-up  of  solar  PV  systems 
assisted  by 
through 
Infrastructure  Development  Company  Limited  (IDCOL),  Rural  Electrification 
Board (REB), Local Government Engineering Department (LGED), Bangladesh 
Power  Development  Board  (BPDB),  NGOs  and  Private  Organizations 
implementing solar energy program. There is a strong potential for solar energy 
within the country. 
the  development  partners  are  being 
implemented 
 
1.3.1.2 
technology involves harnessing solar radiation for generation of electricity  
  Solar  Thermal  Power/Concentrating  Solar  Power  (CSP):  The 
-3- 
 
through  a  number  of  steps  finally  generating  mechanical  energy  to  run  a 
generator.  This  technology  needs  to  be  disseminated  in  the  country  to 
supplement the power supply. 
 
1.3.2  Wind  Energy:  Wind  Energy  has  also  made  some  inroads  but  its  potential  is 
mainly in  coastal areas,  and  offshore  islands  with  strong  wind  regimes.  These  coastal 
settings afford good opportunities for wind-powered pumping and electricity generation. 
Presently there are 2 MW of installed wind turbines at Feni and Kutubdia.  
 
1.3.3  Biomass:  Bangladesh  has  strong  potential  for  biomass  gasification  based 
electricity.  More  common  biomass  resources  available  in  the  country  are  rice  husk, 
crop  residue,  wood,  jute  stick,  animal  waste,  municipal  waste,  sugarcane  bagasse  etc. 
This technology can be disseminated on a larger scale for electricity generation.  
 
1.3.4  Biogas:  Biogas  mainly  from  animal  and  municipal  wastes  may  be  one  of  the 
promising  renewable  energy  resources  for  Bangladesh.  Presently  there  are  tens  of 
thousands  of  households  and  village-level  biogas  plants  in  place  throughout  the 
country.  It  is  a  potential  source  to  harness  basic  biogas  technology  for  cooking,  and 
rural  and  peri-urban  electrification  to  provide  electricity  during  periods  of  power 
shortfalls. 
 
1.3.5 Hydro: Microhydro and minihydro have limited potential in Bangladesh, with the 
exception of Chittagong and the Chittagong Hill tracts. Hydropower assessments have 
identified some possible sites from 10 kW to 5 MW but no appreciable capacity has yet 
been installed. There is one hydro power plant at Kaptai established in the 1960s with 
present installed capacity of 230 MW.  
 
1.3.6    Other  renewable  energy  sources  include  bio-fuels,  gasohol,  geothermal,  river 
current, wave and tidal energy. Potentialities of these sources are yet to be explored.  
 
2 
Objectives 
 
The objectives of renewable energy policy are to: 
(i) 
Harness  the  potential  of  renewable  energy  resources  and  dissemination  of 
renewable energy technologies in rural, peri-urban and urban areas;  
(ii) 
Enable,  encourage  and  facilitate  both  public  and  private  sector  investment  in 
renewable energy projects;  
(iii)  Develop  sustainable  energy  supplies  to  substitute  indigenous  non-renewable 
energy supplies;  
(iv) 
Scale up contributions of renewable energy to electricity production; 
(v) 
Scale  up  contributions  of  renewable  energy  both  to  electricity  and  to  heat 
energy; 
-4- 
 
 
(vi) 
 Promote  appropriate,  efficient  and  environment  friendly  use  of  renewable 
energy; 
(vii)  Train; facilitate the use of renewable energy at every level of energy usage. 
(viii)  Create  enabling  environment  and  legal  support  to  encourage  the  use  of 
renewable energy. 
(ix) 
Promote development of local technology in the field of renewable energy. 
(x) 
Promote clean energy for CDM; and 
 
(xi)  Achieve  the  targets  for  developing  renewable  energy  resources  to  meet  five 
percent of the total power demand by 2015 and ten percent by 2020. 
 
The policy will become effective from the date of publication in the official gazette. 
  
3 
Institutional Arrangements 
 
  3.1  An institution, Sustainable Energy Development Agency (SEDA), shall be established 
under  the  Companies  Act,  1994,  as  a  focal  point  for  sustainable  energy  development 
and  promotion,  ‘sustainable  energy’  comprising  renewable  energy  and  energy 
efficiency.  SEDA  Board  will  comprise  of  representatives  of  stakeholders  including 
business  community,  academics  and/or  representative  from  Bangladesh  Solar  Energy 
Society, NGOs, financial institutions and implementing agencies.  
The responsibilities of SEDA as a company shall be to:  
(i) 
Provide  coordination  of  sustainable  energy  planning,  including  action  plans 
linking together the activities of several agencies or organizations;   
(ii) 
Promote  awareness  of  renewable  energy  and  other  clean  energy  technologies 
and  integrate  their  development  within  overall  national  energy  policy  and 
development;  
(iii) 
Support  demonstration  of  new  technologies  and  new  business  models  for 
renewable energy and other clean energy technologies;  
(iv) 
Support  establishment  of  small  and  medium  renewable  energy  enterprises  and 
providers;  
(v) 
Enable systematic development of renewable energy projects and opportunities 
through energy audits;  
(vi)  Create market opportunities and start-up business models for sustainable energy 
technologies in Bangladesh, such as energy services companies and rural energy 
providers;  
(vii)  Develop  financing  mechanisms  and  facilities  by  using  grant,  subsidy  and/or 
carbon/CDM  fund  for  public  and  private  sector  investments  in  all  forms  of 
sustainable energy;  
-5- 
 
 
(viii)  Collect  data  and  assess  the  renewable  energy  resource  base,  especially  in  the 
context of rural energy master plan; 
(ix) 
Provide  fund  for 
the  development  of  standardized  renewable  energy 
configurations  to  meet  common  energy  and  power  applications,  such  as  solar, 
biogas  and  bio-diesel  for  mechanical  irrigation  and  improved  community 
practices for forest management and conversion and use of fuel wood by using 
grant, subsidy and/or carbon/CDM fund;  
(x) 
Stimulate  market  development  for  sustainable  energy  technologies,  such  as 
improved cook stoves and household biogas digesters;  
(xi) 
Provide financial support in the research and development of renewable energy 
technology; 
(xii) 
Implement policies for mitigation of environmental issues arising out of use of 
Renewable Energy; and  
(xiii)  Solicit and processing of grid connected renewable energy projects. 
 
   3.2  Power  Division  of  the  MPEMR  or  its  assignee  will  facilitate  the  development  of 
renewable energy until SEDA is formed. 
                     3.3  Overall  policy  formulation  and  development  functions  of  renewable  energy  shall  lie 
with the Power Division of the MPEMR. 
 
4 
Resource, Technology and Program Development 
 
4.1 
SEDA in conjunction with the Power Division of the MPEMR shall be responsible for 
determining  the  priorities  for  renewable energy  technology  development  and  program 
implementation. 
4.2 
SEDA  shall  support  capacity  building, 
technology  development,  and  market 
development  sufficient  to  boost  the  share  of  electricity  generated  from  renewable 
energy technologies.   
4.3 
All  power  utilities,  Local  Government  Engineering  Department(LGED),  other 
interested  government  departments,  private  agencies  and  NGOs  are  to  develop 
renewable energy development program for implementation throughout the country. 
4.4  
Electricity generated from renewable energy projects, both in public and private sectors 
may be purchased by power utilities or any consumer through mutual agreement (less 
than 5 MW). 
4.5   Renewable  energy  project  sponsors  may  use  existing  electricity  transmission  and 
distribution systems, if there is adequate capacity, to supply electricity to its customers 
through  mutual  agreement  between 
the  owner  of 
transmission/distribution facilities. The sponsor will require to pay a wheeling charge to 
the  owner  of  transmission/distribution  facilities.  The  wheeling  charges  shall  be 
determined by BERC in consultation with the Power Division of MPEMR.    
the  project  sponsor  and 
-6- 
 
4.6 
In addition to electricity generation, renewable energy for solar heating and biogas or 
other means like cooking etc shall be developed.  
4.7 
SEDA will encourage human resource development and local production of renewable 
energy  equipment,  facilitate  and  monitor  quality  of  renewable  energy  equipment,  and 
will assist to setup quality control laboratory to test the renewable energy equipment. 
 
4.8 
For  large  biomass  electricity  projects  (i.e.  greater  than  1  MW)  the  project  developer 
must demonstrate that the  biomass  is being sustainably harvested and that no adverse 
social impact will result from that development. 
 
4.9 
Production  and  use  of  bio-fuels  may  be  encouraged  in  limited  scale  without 
jeopardizing the existing crops.   
 
5 
Investment and Fiscal Incentives 
 
5.1 
Existing  renewable  energy  financing  facility  shall  be  expanded  that  is  capable  of 
accessing public, private, donor, carbon emission trading (CDM) and carbon funds and 
providing financing for renewable energy investments. 
5.2 
To  prompt  renewable  energy  in  power  sector,    all  renewable  energy  equipments  and 
related raw materials in producing renewable energy equipments will be exempted from 
charging  15%  VAT.  SEDA  or  power  division  of  the  MPEMR  or  its  assignee  until 
SEDA  is  formed,  will  fix  up  the  acceptable  mechanism  to  reach  the  benefits  of  tax 
exemption to end users in consultation with NBR. 
5.3 
In  addition  to  commercial  lending,  a  network  of  micro-credit  support  system  will  be 
established  especially  in  rural  and  remote  areas  to  provide  financial  support  for 
purchases of renewable energy equipment. 
5.4 
 Power Division of MPEMR will facilitate investment in renewable energy and energy 
efficiency projects. SEDA, in co-operation with local government offices, will set up an 
outreach program to develop renewable energy programs. 
5.5 
SEDA  will  consider  providing  subsidies  to  utilities  for  installation  of  solar,  wind, 
biomass or any other renewable/clean energy projects.  
5.6 
Private  sector  participation  including  joint  venture  initiatives  in  renewable  energy 
development  will  be  encouraged  and  promoted.  Power  Division  of  MPEMR/SEDA 
may  assist  in  locating  the  project(s)  and  also  assist  in  acquiring  land  for  renewable 
energy project(s).  
5.7 
Renewable  energy  project  investors  both  in  public  and  private  sectors  shall  be 
exempted  from  corporate  income  tax  for  a  period  of  5  years  from  the  date  of 
notification  of  this  policy  in  the  official  gazette  and  it  will  be  extended  periodically 
following impact assessment of tax exemption on renewable energy. 
5.8 
An incentive tariff may be considered for electricity generated from renewable energy 
sources which may be 10% higher than the highest purchase price of electricity by the 
utility from private generators. 
 
-7- 
 
5.9 
To  promote  solar  water  heaters,  use  of  electricity  and  gas  for  water  heating  will  be 
discouraged. In this regard necessary steps will be considered accordingly. 
5.10  For  successful  implementation  of  renewable  energy  projects  and  initiatives  lending 
procedure will be simplified and strengthened.  
 
6. 
Regulatory Policy 
 
6.1 
Renewable  energy  project(s),  to  sale  electricity  from  plants  shall  be  required  to  get 
power  generation  license  from  BERC  if  the  capacity  of  the  project(s)  is  5  MW  or 
more. 
6.2   
Power  Division  of  MPEMR  and  SEDA,  in  consultation  with  BERC  will  create  a 
regulatory  framework  encouraging  generation  of  electricity  from  renewable  energy 
sources.  
6.3  
BERC  shall  approve  the  energy  tariff  in  consultation  with  Power  Division  of 
MPEMR/SEDA  as  per  the  provision  of  the  BERC  Act  2003  if  the  capacity  of 
renewable  energy  project(s)  is  5  MW  or  more.  Electricity  distributors  may  offer 
“green energy” tariffs, which provide consumers an opportunity to co-finance through 
their electricity bills the development of new renewable energy sources. 
7. 
Right to Interpretation 
(a) Section headings are for convenience only and shall not affect interpretation 
of any section. 
 
(b) In case of ambiguity with regard to interpretation of any provision of these 
Guidelines, GOB interpretation shall be final. 
 
 
8. 
Glossary of Abbreviations/ Acronyms/ Terms 
 
BERC 
BPDB 
CDM 
GOB 
IDCOL 
LGED 
MOF 
MPEMR 
NEP 
RE 
REB 
SEDA 
RETs 
VAT 
Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Commission 
Bangladesh Power Development Board  
Clean Development Mechanism 
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 
Infrastructure Development Company Limited 
Local Government Engineering Department  
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources 
National Energy Policy 
Renewable Energy 
Rural Electrification Board 
Sustainable Energy Development Agency 
Renewable Energy Technologies 
Value Added Tax 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-8- 
 
