Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ..: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 9
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
 
I.  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework 
1.  This country programme document is  aligned with the general government policy for 
the  period  2020-2024,  and  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation 
Framework,  2020-2025  agreed  with  the  Government  of  Guatemala.  The  country 
programme  document  contributes  to  the  K’atun  National  Development  Plan:  Our 
Guatemala 2032 national priorities, which also integrates national commitments to achieve 
the Sustainable Development Goals.  
2.  The  general  government  policy1  asserts  that  the  State  must  ensure  institutional 
strengthening,  through  a  continuous  modernization  process  that  reviews  and  redefines 
public duties. It recognizes the need for a robust institutional framework to address pressing 
challenges  and  generate  growth  opportunities  for  vulnerable  groups  that  have  historically 
been left behind.  
3.  Despite  efforts  to  fight  corruption,  the  Corruption  Perceptions  Index2  shows  that 
Guatemala  dropped  eight  points  between  2012  and  2020,  when  it  ranked  149th  out  of 
180 countries.   
4.  An  analysis  by  the  former  Presidential  Commission  on  Human  Rights  showed  that 
conflicts  increased  from  1,704  in  2015  to  2,431  in  2018.  Land  and  natural  resource 
exploitation are the main sources of conflict. 
5.  According to the National Population Census XII and the National Housing Census VII 
(2018),  51.5  per  cent  of  the  population  are  women.  However,  only  11.9  per  cent  of 
Congressmen  are  women  (among  whom  only  1.88  per  cent  are  indigenous  women)  and 
2.94 per cent of all mayors in the country are women (with no indigenous women). Forty-
six per cent of the people live in rural areas. 
6.  Access to efficient and transparent justice is one challenge the country faces, with the 
Global Impunity Index3 ranking Guatemala 59th out of 69 countries and rating the justice 
system category with the lowest score.  
7.  Despite the downward trend in the rate of homicides of women (2010: 9.6; 2020: 4.24), 
levels of violence against women are alarming: the Public Prosecutor’s Office reported an 
increase  in  violence  against  women  (from  57,741  cases  in  2019  to  60,199  in  2020)  and 
acknowledged  136  femicides  in  2020.  The  justice  system  has  received  an  average  of 
231 complaints daily in 2021. 
8.  The  World  Bank  characterizes  the  economy  of  Guatemala  as  stable,  with  an  average 
growth of 3.5 per cent in the last five years. However, this stability has not translated into 
progress in human development or in reducing inequality, as 59 per cent of the people live 
in poverty and 23 per cent  in extreme poverty. Those figures might rise as a result of  the 
COVID-19 pandemic. The ranking of Guatemala on the  2020 Human Development Index 
is  0.663  (127th  out  of  189  countries),  and  its  Gender  Inequality  Index  ranking  is  0.479, 
indicating some of the highest inequalities in Latin America and the Caribbean. According 
to  official  records,  64.7  per  cent  of  the  population  lives  in  multidimensional  poverty. 
However,  for  indigenous  people  (41  per  cent of  the  population)  the  figure  rises  to 80 per 
cent. 
9.  The  Gini  coefficient,  calculated  by  UNDP  and  the  World  Bank,  shows  that  income 
inequality stands at 0.483. The Bank points out that Guatemala has the sixth-highest rate of 
chronic malnutrition in the world and the highest in the region. Furthermore, chronic child 
 
1 General government policy for the period 2020-2024, Government of Guatemala, 2020 
2 Transparency International, 2021 
3 University of the Americas, Puebla, 2020 
4 Civil National Police 
2 
21-08847 
 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
malnutrition  affects  47  per  cent  of  all  children  under  five,  and  58  per  cent  of  indigenous 
children.  The  Guatemalan  government  has  low  revenues,  with  10.1  per  cent  of  gross 
domestic  product  collected  in  2020,  according  to  the  Bank  of  Guatemala.  This  limits 
capacities  for  public  and  social  investments.  The  Core  Diagnostic  Instrument5  of  2019 
found  that  only  16.9 per  cent  of  the  population  was  covered  by  social  protection 
programmes. Nevertheless, in 2020 the Government implemented major social programmes 
that reached more than 2.6 million families. 
10.  Guatemala has the second-highest entrepreneurship rate in the world (27.5 per cent in 
2019), according the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor. According to the National Statistics 
Institute, 65.3 per cent of employed people work in informal activities (that figure rises to 
75.3 per cent in rural areas, and 82.6 per cent for indigenous people). In 2018, 66 per cent 
of  men  were  economically  active  and  34 per  cent  of  women.  On  average  men  received  a 
monthly income 12 per cent higher than women.6 Thirteen per cent of economically active 
women are employed as domestic workers7.  
11.  Guatemala has one of the highest rates of non-internet users in the region, with only 
43 per cent mobile internet subscribers. 
12. 
In recent years, migration by the elderly, young people, and unaccompanied children 
has increased, including 22.5 per cent of women (2018 census). Remittances have played a 
dominant role in the national economy, benefiting approximately 6.2 million people.8 
13.  Guatemala  is  located  in  a  geographical  area  with  high  vulnerability  to  natural 
phenomena, being one of the 15 countries most affected by climate change9 worldwide and 
the seventh in terms of risks associated with natural disasters.10 It belongs to the group of 
mega-diverse  countries.  The  main  challenges  are:  the  expansion  of  unsustainable 
agriculture; soil erosion caused by logging and forest fires; and contaminated water. These 
result in great human and material costs, particularly for women and people who depend on 
traditional production systems.11,12 
14.  The  independent  country  programme  evaluation,  2019,  shows  that  UNDP  played  an 
integrating and facilitating role in inter-agency collaboration and in building synergies with 
for 
development  partners.  During 
multidimensional  analysis  of  information  was  key  to  leading  the  United  Nations  socio-
economic response framework from a technical perspective.  
the  COVID-19  crisis, 
technical  capacity 
its 
15.  The  experience of UNDP,  and  its capacities to address conflict at national and local 
levels,  were  highlighted  in  the  evaluation  as  key  to  ensuring  the  sustainability  of 
development results.  
16.  The  consultation  workshops  on  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development 
Cooperation  Framework  recognized  that  one  added  value  brought  by  UNDP  was  its 
programmatic  and  operational  capacity  to  systematically  manage  a  range  of  projects 
addressing  a  variety  of  development  challenges  and  funded  by  different  donors  with  high 
quality and transparency standards.  
17.  The  country  programme  evaluation  found  that  UNDP  responded  successfully  to 
national  development  priorities  and  was  an  impartial  and  trusted  partner  whose  technical 
 
5 Inter-agency social protection assessment, 2019 
6 United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), 2019) 
7 National Statistics Institute, 2018 
8 Common country assessment for Guatemala, United Nations in Guatemala, 2019 
9 Global Climate Risk Index 2020, Germanwatch 
10 Risk index of most disaster-prone countries in the world, United Nations University in Tokyo, Japan 
11 Strategy for gender mainstreaming and climate change to support the nationally determined contribution, Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources, 2020  
12Analysis of the socio-economic effects and impacts of COVID-19 in Guatemala, United Nations in Guatemala, 2020 
3 
21-08847 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
 
capacities  allowed  the  creation  of  spaces  for  dialogue  across  sectors  and  with  multiple 
stakeholders.  
18.  The  evaluation recognized  the  work  of  UNDP  in  municipal  strengthening  and  inter-
sectoral  collaboration,  under  the  principles  of  sustainable  resource  management,  disaster 
risk reduction, and resilience in local development processes.   
19.  Finally, the evaluation noted that UNDP should promote more strategic and inclusive 
interventions  to  strengthen  comprehensive  security  and  justice  systems  for  peacebuilding 
and reconciliation. 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
20.  The  theory  of  change  reflected  in  the  Cooperation  Framework  and  the  country 
programme document considers that institutional effectiveness is a necessary condition for 
achieving  transformative  and  innovative  development  results  at  national  and  local  levels. 
This  programme  will  contribute  to  tackling  key  development  challenges  affecting  the 
country  and  especially  vulnerable  populations,  particularly  indigenous  people,  women, 
youth, and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, leaving no one behind. 
21.  Consultations  with  more  than  500  stakeholders,  including  women  and  indigenous 
people, were taken into account. The proposed country programme, which is aligned with 
the  UNDP  Strategic  Plan,  2018-2021,  implements  the  signature  solution  of  strengthening 
accountable and inclusive good governance and uses the regional approach to productivity, 
inclusiveness,  and  resilience.  The  vision  of  UNDP  is  to  contribute  to  national  efforts 
towards  sustainable,  resilient,  equitable  and  inclusive  development,  using  a  participatory 
and innovative approach. It contributes  directly  to four of the  12 Cooperation Framework 
outcomes,  but  given  the  inclusive  and  multidimensional  approach  to  development,  it  will 
contribute  significantly  to  other  outcomes.  It  will  promote  gender  equality  and  women’s 
empowerment and will prioritize local-level interventions.   
22.  UNDP,  UNFPA,  the  United  Nations  Children’s  Fund  (UNICEF)  and  UN-Women, 
given their interest in working in an integrated and coherent manner and building on their 
collaborative advantages, have agreed to promote, through their respective programmes, the 
coordination mechanisms needed to leave no one behind and to accelerate achievement of 
the  objectives  of  the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development,  strengthening  the  nexus 
between peace, development, and humanitarian action.   
Strong institutions 
23.  The theory of change behind this priority is: if State institutions are strengthened and 
transformed  with  innovation  at  national  and  local  levels,  and  if  greater  levels  of 
transparency  and  inclusiveness  are  generated,  then  the  response  to  the  needs  of  the 
population will be efficient, effective, and sustainable. 
24.  UNDP  will  support  the  Presidential  Secretariat  for  Planning  and  Programming  in 
building  capacities  to  tailor  national  and  sectoral  plans  at  local  levels,  and  in  developing 
participatory  local  development  plans.  In  coordination  with  the  Executive  Coordination 
Secretariat of the Presidency and the Secretariat for Planning and Programming, municipal 
governments  will  strengthen  their  leadership,  management,  and  strategic  planning 
capacities for local development and governance, implementing innovative solutions within 
the  framework  of  deconcentration  and  decentralization  of  efficient,  user-oriented  public 
services,  with  cultural  relevance,  transparency,  and  a  gender  approach,  thus  achieving 
integrated Sustainable Development Goal 16. 
25.  UNDP  will  promote  innovation  in  technology  use,  data  generation,  information 
systems development, and gender analysis to strengthen evidence-based decision-making at 
the  national  and  local  levels. These  efforts,  undertaken  in collaboration  with  the  National 
Statistics  Institute  and  the  Ministry  of  Interior,  will  strengthen  the  development  of  public 
4 
21-08847 
 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
policies emphasizing citizen security. With the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural  Organization  and  UNICEF,  UNDP  will  support  national  efforts  to  reduce  the 
existing digital divide in access to information and communications technologies.  
26.  UNDP  will  provide  technical  support  to  inter-institutional  coordination  mechanisms 
led by national institutions  in social and economic  cabinets, integrated rural development, 
and science and technology alliances amongst others.  
27.  To  fight  corruption,  UNDP  will  support  the  State  Attorney’s  Office,  the  General 
Comptroller’s Office, and the Ombudsman’s Office, as well as the Superintendency of Tax 
interinstitutional  coordination 
Administration, 
capacities.   
in  strengthening 
technical  and 
their 
28.  Under  the  leadership  of  national  or  local  State  institutions,  UNDP,  with  other 
United Nations  agencies  and civil  society  organizations,  will  promote  the  development of 
capacities  and  mechanisms  for  citizen  participation  by  building  consensus  strategies  and 
inclusive social auditing using a human rights, gender, and cultural relevance approach.  
29.  UNDP will collaborate with the Supreme Electoral Tribunal in developing strategies 
to  prevent  and  mitigate  potential  conflicts  arising  from  electoral  processes,  and  in 
increasing  citizen  participation  in  the  2023  elections,  particularly  that  of  women  and 
indigenous  people  in  coordination  with  UN-Women  and  the  Office  of  the  High 
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR).  
30.  With  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees  and  the  International 
Organization  for  Migration,  UNDP  will  cooperate  with  national  institutions  to  integrate  a 
human  mobility  perspective  into  national  and  local-level  plans,  policies,  and  programmes 
through a participatory process with returnee populations, using a gender approach. 
31.  UNDP  will  promote  the  creation  and  dissemination  of  global,  regional  and  national 
knowledge  to  contribute  to  strategic  and  inclusive  post-COVID-19  decision-making 
processes on human development and democratic governance, including fiscal policies and 
budget allocation, with a focus on social inclusion and care work. 
Peace, security and justice 
32.  The  theory  of  change  for  this  priority  states  that  if  security  and  justice  institutions 
have innovative tools and technologies to generate and analyse data, and if State institutions 
and  citizens  are  strengthened  to  address  conflict  causes,  then  they  will  contribute  to  the 
design, implementation and evaluation of public policies that offer transparent, innovative, 
efficient  and  culturally  sensitive  justice,  diminishing  social  conflicts  and  guaranteeing 
inclusive participation. 
33.  With  the  justice  system,  UNDP  will  use  an  inclusive,  people-centred  approach  to 
support  the  Constitutional  Court,  the  Judiciary,  and  the  Ombudsman’s  Office  in 
strengthening  their  institutional  capacities  to  enable  access  to  justice  in  a  transparent, 
innovative and efficient manner.  
34.  UNDP  will  support  the  fight  against  impunity  by  strengthening  the  management 
capacities  of  the  Special  Prosecutor’s  Office  against  Impunity  and  the  technical  support 
units  for  prosecutors  in  the  Public  Prosecutor’s  Office,  among  others.  South-South 
cooperation – mainly with Honduras and El Salvador – and triangular cooperation will be 
facilitated.  
35.  UNDP  will  continue  to  support  collaboration,  coordination,  and  dialogue  efforts 
between  justice  institutions  and  civil  society  organizations  for  access  to  restorative  and 
transformative justice with a development approach. 
36.  With  the  legislative  body,  support  and  access  to  international  best  practices  will  be 
provided  to  legislative  commissions  upon  request  to  enrich  the  discussions  surrounding 
legal frameworks for structural issues and sustainable development.   
5 
21-08847 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
 
37.  UNDP  will  support  the  national  and  local  architectures  for  dialogue  and  peace. 
Comprehensive and inclusive dialogue  and mediation capacities  of public institutions  will 
be strengthened through expertise and innovative tools. The capacities of civil society for a 
comprehensive  and  constructive  approach 
to  development  dialogue  and  conflict 
management will also be strengthened. 
38.  UNDP will support the State in strengthening the technical, political, and operational 
capacities of public institutions for women, with special emphasis on  those responsible for 
preventing  violence  against  women.  It  will  promote  the  development  of  protocols  to 
address sexual harassment in the workplace. 
Building resilience for adaptation to climate change 
39.  The theory of change for this priority states that: if technical, financial and operational 
capacities for a coordinated response to the impacts of climate change are strengthened, and 
if  resilient  recovery  processes,  conservation  and  sustainable  use  of  biodiversity  are 
promoted, then natural resources management and human development will be effectively 
and sustainably achieved. 
40.  UNDP  will  strengthen  inter-institutional  and  intersectoral coordination platforms  for 
development planning, climate change adaptation and mitigation, biodiversity and protected 
areas management, food security, and disaster risk reduction management. 
41.  UNDP  will  support 
institutions  and 
for 
municipalities 
environmental  and  natural  resources  planning.  UNDP  will  promote  inclusive  and 
participatory  municipal  development  planning  processes  and  encourage  economic  and 
socially  sustainable 
land-use  practices,  climate  change  adaptation  measures,  risk 
management,  and  green  economy,  with  a  special  emphasis  on  their  impact  on  women’s 
livelihoods. UNDP will promote  (a)  strategic alliances with national and local institutions 
to  advance  green  financing  strategies  and  mechanisms;  and  (b)  sustainable  productive 
chains  based  on  agricultural  good  practices  and  international  high  quality  standards  for 
national and international markets. 
the  capacities  of  national  government 
to 
regulations  and  protocols 
implement  policies,  strategies, 
42.  UNDP  will  promote  local  multidimensional  development with  a  gender  perspective, 
emphasizing  the  provision  of  basic  services,  access  to  decent  housing,  social  protection, 
natural resources, environment and low-emission renewable energy management, and local 
economic  development,  including  wood-saving  stoves.  UNDP  will  strengthen  municipal 
financial  management  capacities  to  enhance gender-  and  results-based  budgets  to respond 
to local sustainable development priorities. UNDP will promote strategic alliances to design 
and  implement  innovative  nature-based  financial  solutions  that  foster  the  adoption  of 
adaptation  and  mitigation  measures,  considering  social  roles  and  gender  inequalities,  to 
facilitate a greener and more resilient economy.  
43.  UNDP  will  enhance  integrated  territorial  management,  promoting  the  sustainable 
development  of  cities  and  creating  conditions  for  joint  public  and  private  investment  to 
support  and  expand  the  accessibility  of  services,  technology,  innovation  and  production 
infrastructure.  
44.  UNDP will enhance inter-institutional capacities and coordination mechanisms for the 
sustainable management of natural resources, protected areas, agricultural practices adapted 
to  the  effects  of  climate  change;  and  –  with  national  institutions  and  the  Food  and 
Agriculture  Organization  –  the  integrated  management  of  water  and  coastal  marine 
resources, in coordination with municipalities. 
45.  With  Chile,  Colombia, Costa Rica, the  Dominican  Republic,  Honduras and Mexico, 
UNDP  will  promote  South-South  cooperation  on  biodiversity  in  coffee  production  areas, 
governance  and  water  management  basin  levels,  reviewing  and  implementing  nationally 
determined  contributions,  integrated  solid  waste  management,  and  financial  solutions  for 
biodiversity and climate change.  
6 
21-08847 
 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
46.  UNDP will support the Executive Secretariat of the National Coordinator for Disaster 
Reduction,  strengthening  its  capacities  to  promote  integration  and  inter-institutional 
coordination  of  the  disaster  risk  reduction  coordination  system  at  the  national,  regional, 
departmental,  municipal  and  local  levels.  Likewise,  UNDP  will  enhance  disaster  risk 
prevention,  preparedness,  response  and  recovery,  promoting  women’s  participation  in 
leadership  roles  in  those  processes.  UNDP  will  support  the  Executive  Secretariat  in 
designing and implementing communication and public awareness strategies that promote a 
culture  of  disaster  reduction  and  provide  timely,  relevant  information  on  the  effects  of 
disasters.  Under  this  approach  UNDP,  with  Colombia  and  Ecuador,  will  promote  South-
South  cooperation  with  respect  to  post-disaster  damage,  needs  assessment  and  the  use  of 
assessment tools. 
Sustainable and inclusive socioeconomic development 
47.  The  theory  of  change  states  that,  if  the  public  institutions  are  strengthened  for 
implementing an effective social protection system with gender perspective, if citizens are 
informed  about  social  programmes,  if  financial  inclusion  of  vulnerable  populations  is 
achieved  and  if  capacities  for  the  competitiveness  of  entrepreneurs  and  micro,  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises are strengthened, then there will be significant progress in human 
development and the root causes of migration will be addressed.  
48. 
In  coordination  with  UNFPA,  UNICEF,  OHCHR  and  the  World  Food  Programme, 
UNDP will deepen its alliance with the  Ministry of Social Development to strengthen the 
national social protection system, using a gender perspective and prioritizing vulnerabilities 
faced  by  people  in  crisis  and  shocks.  Coordination,  collaboration,  and  partnerships  with 
other public institutions, private sector and civil society organizations will be promoted for 
effective territorial coordination and regional exchange of best practices.   
49.  Using  a  multidimensional  and  life-cycle  approach,  UNDP  will  support  the 
implementation  of  a  gender-sensitive  household  social  registry  to  identify  and  select 
households  living  in  poverty,  also  promoting  women’s  leadership  and  empowerment. 
UNDP  will  also  support  implementation  of  the  Multidimensional  Poverty  Index,  using  a 
territorial approach to measure the main deprivations faced by people living in poverty and 
extreme poverty, and to target social assistance and protection. 
50. 
In collaboration with UNICEF, and within the framework of the government priority 
‘Great National Crusade for Nutrition’, UNDP will support the capacity-building efforts of 
the Ministry of Public Finance and the Secretariat of Food Security and Nutrition to identify 
multiyear budget financial gaps and determine costing and funding sources, using a results-
based management approach.  These efforts will be coordinated with the Ministry of Health 
and  Social  Assistance,  the  Ministry  of  Social  Development,  and  the  Ministry  of 
Agriculture, Livestock and Food. 
51.  UNDP  will  support  the  efforts  of  the  Ministry  of Economy,  the  Bank  of  Guatemala 
and  the  Superintendency  of  Banks  to  consolidate  the  national  strategy  for  financial 
inclusion,  2019-2023,  to  help  households  engaged  in  informal  economic  activities  gain 
access to financial services and improve their standard of living and well-being, considering 
gender inequalities. In alliance with other institutions, UNDP will identify catalytic actions 
to promote the productive use of remittances. 
52. 
In support to the implementation of the national policy for decent employment, 2017-
2032,  and  in  partnership  with  other  United  Nations  organizations,  national  entities, 
municipalities  and  the  private  sector,  UNDP  will  develop  technical  training  and  labour 
market  insertion  processes  –  mainly  for  youth,  women,  and  persons  with  disabilities  –  to 
contribute  to  employment  access  opportunities  and  income-generating  activities  and  to 
promote labour and tax formalization.   
53.  UNDP will promote the development of strategic alliances between the private sector 
at  national  and  local  levels,  municipal  entrepreneurship  centres,  agricultural  producers’ 
7 
21-08847 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
 
associations,  industries,  the  banking  sector,  and  national  institutions,  to  promote  financial 
education  training  processes,  with  a  gender,  green  economy,  human  rights  and  business 
approach 
the 
competitiveness  of  micro,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  and  their  insertion  into  the 
formal market. 
innovative  alternative  mechanisms 
strengthening 
to  enhance 
to 
54.  UNDP will collaborate with the Government in developing and implementing gender-
sensitive  strategies  towards  the  recovery  of  the  informal  sector,  which  was  impacted  by 
COVID-19  and/or  by  natural  disasters,  and  which  lacks  access  to  the  labour  and  social 
protection systems. 
III.  Programme and risk management  
55.  Guatemala  is  vulnerable  to  the  effects  of  climate  change  and  natural disasters,  which 
generate  substantial  development  setbacks.  UNDP  will  collaborate  with  the  Executive 
Secretariat  of  the  National  Coordinator  for  Disaster  Reduction  to  develop  disaster  risk 
prevention and management strategies and will support early recovery solutions. 
56.  Guatemala  has  high  levels  of  social  conflict.  This  programme  will  address  the 
structural causes of conflict and will strengthen dialogue and peace capacities. Due to high 
levels of gender violence, UNDP will implement a programmatic prevention line of action. 
57.  Guatemala  faces  significant  innovation  and  development  challenges.  The  UNDP 
Acceleration  Lab  will  contribute  to  addressing  these.  COVID-19  has  highlighted  the 
importance  of  technological  modernization  in  public  institutions  to  guarantee  adequate 
services to citizens. UNDP will coordinate efforts with the National Secretariat of Science 
and  Technology  and  other  public  institutions  to  stimulate  the  generation,  dissemination, 
transfer and use of technological modernization. COVID-19 has also highlighted challenges 
to  governance,  including  gender-based  violence  and  inequality.  As  a  mitigation  measure, 
UNDP  will  promote  a  comprehensive  cross-cutting  approach  to  address  COVID-19  in  all 
its projects. With UNDP technical leadership, the United Nations has prepared the COVID-
19 socioeconomic impact assessment and response plan in support of government actions to 
mitigate the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19.  
58.  The limited scope for national and local budget allocation to sustain and scale up the 
development results achieved by the projects poses a challenge. The management capacities 
of municipal governments will be strengthened and capacities for social budgeting will be 
supported. 
59.  The  findings  and  recommendations  of  the  Independent  Country  Evaluation  and  other 
evaluations will be used as references for this cycle. Risks will be monitored through close 
compliance with institutional requirements. 
60.  The  programme  will  apply  UNDP  social  and  environmental  standards  and 
accountability and grievance redress mechanisms. All projects will include gender analysis 
and a plan to achieve gender equality, and will prioritize local-level interventions. 
61.  This  country  programme  document  outlines  UNDP  contributions  to  national  results 
and  serves  as  the  primary  unit  of  accountability  to  the  Executive  Board  for  results 
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of 
managers  at  the  country,  regional  and  headquarters  levels  with  respect  to  country 
programmes are prescribed in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and 
Internal Control Framework. 
62.  The  programme  will  be  nationally  executed.  If  necessary,  national  execution  may  be 
replaced with direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to  force 
majeure.  The  Harmonized  Approach  to  Cash  Transfers  will  be  used  in  a  coordinated 
fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions 
8 
21-08847 
 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
and  classifications  for  programme  and  development  effectiveness  will  be  charged  to  the 
concerned projects.   
63.  The  country  office  stands  out  for  its  administrative  management  and  will  aim  to 
continue  responding  with  high-quality  standards  to  implement  the  programme  effectively 
and  efficiently,  seeking  continuous  improvement  in  process  flows  and  maintaining 
satisfactory  audit  results,  green  dashboards,  and  accountability.  The  programme  will  be 
implemented based on the diversification of strategic alliances and funding sources. 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
64.  Regional best practices, results achieved and lessons learned identified in programme 
and project evaluations will contribute to the national priorities  enumerated in the general 
government policy, and to the Sustainable Development Goals.  
65.  The  country  programme  will  be  monitored  in  line  with  the  Cooperation  Framework, 
and UNDP will contribute to prepare United Nations country team annual reports through 
the  ‘UN  INFO’  platform.  The  platform  seeks  to  support  public  institutions  in  generating 
and  analysing  statistical  data  on  sustainable  development,  for  evidence-based  policy 
decision-making  and  to  measure  progress  on  the  results  obtained.  UNDP  will  collaborate 
with the National Statistics Institute on citizen security and social protection;  the Ministry 
of Interior on citizen security; and the Ministry of Social Development on the targeting and 
prioritization of social programmes. 
66.  Alliances with academia and research institutions will be strengthened to produce and 
analyse information using a multidimensional approach.  
67.  The indicators, with their respective baselines and targets, are disaggregated according 
to the groups identified in this programme, and each project will assure the monitoring of 
gender gaps, including the gender marker and budget.  
68.  Available  resources  will  be  tapped  to  improve  capacity  in  the  data  collection  and 
gender-disaggregated  analysis  of  the  progress  of  programme  results,  drawing  on  strategic 
alliances with research institutes and collaboration with the UNDP Global Policy Network 
and the regional  centre, as well as the inter-agency efforts of the  statistics cluster and  the 
monitoring and evaluation sub-cluster.   
69.  Capacities of the Acceleration Lab will be embedded in the programme, including the 
identification  of  local  solutions,  exploration  of  new  data  sources  and  learning  through 
experimentation,  to  allow  the  application  of  innovative  tools  for  participatory  monitoring 
and  evaluation  processes,  with  gender-disaggregated  visual  representations  data  and  geo-
referencing. 
 
9 
21-08847 
 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Guatemala (2022-2025) 
National priority or goal: Institutional Strengthening, Security and Justice (Sustainable Development Goals 1, 10, 11 and 16). General government policy (GGP): Responsible, transparent and effective 
government  
Cooperation Framework (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP No. 1. (Strong institutions, outcome No. 1): By 2025, State institutions improve democratic governance, efficient and transparent 
management of resources, and evidence-based decision-making, including the use of information and communication technologies.  
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development. 
Estimated cost 
by outcome 
(in $ thousands) 
Cooperation Framework outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, target(s) 
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities 
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines, targets) 
Major partners / partnerships /  
frameworks 
Number of municipalities in middle 
category (with population over 5,500) of 
General Municipal Management Index   
Baseline 2018: 1 
Target 2025: 23 
Presidential Secretariat for Planning and 
Programming (SEGEPLAN), biannually  
Government institutions 
Regular 0 
1.1. Increased capacities of State institutions for 
efficient and innovative public management and 
the implementation of evidence-based policies.  
 
Other: 43,377 
Autonomous institutions and control 
bodies 
 
 
Number of institutions and departmental 
technical units with tools and methodologies for 
efficient public management, including digital 
technologies and big data. 
 
 
Municipalities 
 
 
Guatemalan Corruption Perception Index  
Baseline 2020: 25 
Target 2025: 29 
Transparency International, annually.  
 
Civil society organizations (CSOs) 
Baseline 2021: 1 
Target 2025: 5 
Source: UNDP, annually 
 
Women, indigenous people and youth 
organizations; society organizations 
working for transparency,  
 
Number of new institutionalized public 
information access tools for evidence-based 
decision-making.  
 
Private sector:  
Chambers of commerce  
Baseline 2021: 1 
Target 2025: 3 
Source: UNDP, annually 
 
Donors: United States Agency for 
International Development  
Government of Guatemala 
Norway, 
 
1.2. Increased capacities of State institutions and 
citizens for awareness, prevention, and 
compliance with anti-corruption measures.  
Number of institutions at national and local level 
with tools for the quality of spending and a 
greater culture of accountability and 
transparency.  
Baseline 2021: 2 
Target 2025: 11 
Source: UNDP, annually 
 
Number of institutions and civil society 
organizations that create local audit and 
accountability tools.  
Baseline 2021: 10 
Target 2025: 22 
Source: UNDP, annually 
10 
21-08847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
 
1.3. Increased decision-making spaces where 
women, youth, indigenous peoples, people with 
disabilities and returnees participate  
Number of development plans that include 
proposals from youth, women, returnees and 
indigenous people 
Baseline 2021: 4 
Target 2025: 13 
Source: SEGEPLAN, annually 
 
1.4. Knowledge products available for State 
institutions and citizens, which contribute to 
strategic decision-making about the integral 
development of the country 
Number of sustainable development knowledge 
products produced  
Baseline 2021: 11 
Target 2025: 22 
Source: UNDP, annually 
Number of development solutions, mapped, 
experimented and explored for learning and 
potential scaling 
Baseline 2021: 0 
Target 2025: 10 
Source: UNDP, annually 
National priority or goal: Institutional strengthening, security and justice (Sustainable Development Goals 1, 10, 11 and 16). GGP: Responsible, transparent and effective government 
Cooperation Framework (or equivalent) outcome involving  UNDP No. 2. (Peace, security and  justice, outcome No. 1) By 2025, strengthened State institutions increase citizen security, access to 
justice and the transformation of conflicts, seeking greater coordination at the national and local levels. 
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development. 
Number of homicides per 100,000 
population, by sex 
Baseline 2019: 21.5 
Men: 37.0 
Women: 6.5  
Target 2025: 10.5 
Men: 17.9 
Women: 3.2  
Ministry of Interior, annually 
2.1. Security, justice and peace institutions have 
the capacities, tools and innovative technologies 
to offer transparent, transformative and efficient 
justice  
Government institutions. 
Regular: 1,436 
 
 
Other: 35,183 
Autonomous institutions and control 
bodies. 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of innovative tools implemented by 
justice institutions to reduce impunity and 
support institutional modernization  
Municipalities, 
 
 
 
Civil Society: 
Indigenous and ancestral authorities 
 
Baseline 2021: 17 
Target 2025: 35 
Source: Judicial System, annually 
The Global American, annually 
 
Global Impunity Index 
Baseline 2020: 49.66 
Target 2025: 44.87 
 
 
Private sector: 
Number of normative frameworks, protocols and 
11 
21-08847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
 
College of Engineers of Guatemala 
tools developed for the effective access of women 
and indigenous peoples to justice, and 
transformative reparations 
 
 
Donors:  
Peacebuilding Fund UNDP 
Norway 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
European Union 
USAID 
Baseline 2021: 3 
Target 2025: 12 
Source: UNDP, annually 
 
2.2. Increased inter-institutional spaces of State 
and citizen institutions to address the structural 
causes of conflict, at national and local levels 
  
Number of inter-institutional coordination 
mechanisms established at central and local levels 
with a gender perspective to deal with conflict  
Baseline 2021:1 
Target 2025: 3 
Source: Presidential Commission for Peace and 
Human Rights, annually 
Number of institutions, CSOs and private sector 
entities with strengthened capacities to deal with 
conflict  
Baseline 2021:5 
Target 2025: 12 
Source: UNDP, annually 
 
2.3. Increased capacities and tools of State 
institutions for data creation and analysis for the 
prevention of and comprehensive approach to 
violence against women, girls and adolescents at 
national and local levels  
Number of institutional protocols for the 
prevention of sexual and workplace harassment  
Baseline 2021:3 
Target 2025: 5 
Source: UNDP, annually 
Number of municipalities with strengthened 
Women’s Directorates for the prevention of 
violence against women, girls and adolescents 
Baseline 2021:0 
Target 2025: 7 
Source: Executive Coordination Secretariat of the 
Presidency, annually 
 
 
12 
21-08847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
National priority or goal: Access to water and natural resources management and land-use planning (Sustainable Development Goals 9, 10, 11 and 12) 
Cooperation Framework (or equivalent) outcome involving  UNDP No. 3. (Environment, outcome No. 1) By 2025, the State of Guatemala strengthens its policies, strategies and programmes that 
promote  mitigation  and  adaptation  to  climate  change,  the  governance  of  territories,  natural  resources  and  ecosystems,  improving  the  comprehensive  management  of  environmental,  climatic,  health, 
hydrological and geodynamic risks, with an integrated approach, and guaranteeing the sustainable use of management of natural resources, with an emphasis on the most vulnerable population groups and 
territories.  
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 3. Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises 
Strategic Plan indicator 3.3.1.1. 
Number of municipalities with sub-
national mechanisms for mitigating risks 
to urban centres 
Baseline: 14 
Target:36  
Government institutions. 
Regular: 0 
3.1. Government institutions have increased 
capacities to respond to the effects of climate 
change 
 
Municipal management ranking 
SEGEPLAN, biannually 
 
Other: 138,968 
Autonomous institutions and control 
bodies 
  
 
Existence of approved strategic action plan for the 
Motagua Basin, shared with Honduras  
 
 
Municipalities 
 
Baseline 2021: No 
Target 2025: Yes 
Source: Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources (MARN), annually 
 
 
 
Strategic Plan indicator 1.4.1.1. 
Number of hectares under sustainable 
forest or land management 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 78,000 
National Council for Protected Areas 
(CONAP) and National Forestry 
Institute, annually 
Civil society: 
Local and national CSOs, think tanks 
and academia 
 
 
3.2. Local governments with greater capacities and 
innovative tools for the efficient and differentiated 
provision of basic services, biodiversity, basins 
management and access to decent housing.  
Private sector: 
Palm oil sector  
Banking sector 
Coffee sector 
 
 
Number of categorized and re-categorized 
protected areas for biodiversity management that 
include a municipal approach.  
 
Donors:  
Adaptation Fund 
Global Environment Facility  
European Union 
German Agency for International 
Cooperation  
Baseline 2021: Categorized: 0; re-categorized: 0 
Target 2025: Categorized: 6; re-categorized: 2 
Source: CONAP, annual 
Number of municipalities with the capacity to 
manage and increase financial resources.  
 
 
Baseline 2021: 5 
Target 2025: 15 
Source: SEGEPLAN, annually 
Number of municipal services provided with 
efficiency and innovation criteria.  
Baseline 2021: 5 
Target 2025: 14 
Source: SEGEPLAN, annually 
 
3.3. Government institutions and municipalities 
with greater capacities for preparedness, response 
and post-crisis recovery 
Number of government institutions and 
municipalities with tools for preparedness, 
13 
21-08847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
 
response and recovery 
Baseline 2021: 5 
Target 2025: 10 
Source: UNDP, annually 
Number of implemented actions on risk 
management awareness 
Baseline 2021: 1 
Target 2025: 8 
Source: UNDP, annually 
 
3.4. Networks of local producers (men and women) 
with greater capacities for resilience, adaptation to 
climate change, landscape conservation, 
sustainable use of natural resources in production 
processes, with cultural relevance.  
Number of production chains or producer networks 
with sustainable practices implemented.  
Baseline 2021: 0 
Target 2025: 28 
Source: MARN, annually 
National priority or goal: Poverty reduction and social protection, (Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 10 and 16); employment and investment, (Sustainable Development Goals 8, 9 and 16); 
GGP: Social development  
Cooperation Framework (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP No. 4. (Social development, outcome No. 2) By 2025 State institutions are making progress in the design and implementation of a 
comprehensive social protection system, contributory and non-contributory, seeking greater coverage and quality with equity. 
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions. 
Strategic plan indicator 2.1.2.1.  
Number of policy measures in place to 
increase access to social protection 
schemes 
Baseline: 1 
Target: 3 
Ministry of Social Development, 
annually. 
4.1. The State has greater capacities for 
implementation of the national social protection 
system at national and local levels, prioritizing 
women, youth and indigenous people.  
Government institutions. 
Regular: 200 
 
Other 11,880 
Autonomous institutions and control 
bodies 
 
 
Number of households included in pilot exercise of 
a social household register.  
Municipalities 
 
 
Baseline 2021: 0 
Target 2025: 20,000 
Source: MIDES, annually 
Civil society: 
Local and national CSOs 
academia 
 
Diagnosis of bottlenecks for the sustainability of 
the Grand National Crusade for Nutrition.  
 
Private sector 
Chambers and trade associations 
Technical Training Institute 
Global Compact Guatemala Network 
Baseline 2021: No 
Target 2025: Yes 
Source: Secretariat of Food and Nutritional 
Security, annually 
 
 
 
4.2. Entrepreneurs, micro, small and medium-sized 
enterprises have greater capabilities, including 
digital ones, to develop their competitiveness and 
Donors: 
Multi-Partner Trust Fund 
14 
21-08847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GTM/4 
 
Government of Guatemala 
labour formalization, according to the needs of 
women, youth, indigenous people and people with 
disabilities.  
Number of partnerships that strengthen the 
entrepreneurship ecosystem and contribute to 
economic reactivation  
Baseline 2021: 1 
Target 2025: 5 
Source: UNDP, annually 
Number of community development and 
entrepreneurial ventures that enhance the 
livelihoods of women, youth and indigenous 
peoples.  
Baseline 2021: 0 
Target 2025: 8 
Source: UNDP, annually 
 
15 
21-08847 
 
 
 
 
 
 
