E
N
I
P
S
FIJI
RENEWABLES READINESS 
ASSESSMENT
R
e
n
e
w
a
b
l
e
s
 
R
e
a
d
i
n
e
s
s
 
A
s
s
e
s
s
m
e
n
t
:
 
F
I
J
I
June 2015
Please adjust the spine base on the 
E
N
thickness of the inside pages.
I
P
S
Copyright © IRENA 2015
Unless otherwise stated, this publication and material featured herein are the property of the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and are subject to copyright by IRENA. 
Material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that 
all such material is clearly attributed to IRENA and bears a notation that it is subject to copyright (© IRENA 2015).
Material contained in this publication attributed to third parties may be subject to third-party copyright and 
separate terms of use and restrictions, including restrictions in relation to any commercial use.
About IRENA 
The  International  Renewable  Energy  Agency  (IRENA)  is  an  intergovernmental  organisation  that  supports 
countries in their transition to a sustainable energy future, and serves as the principal platform for international 
cooperation, a centre of excellence, and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge 
on renewable energy. IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable 
energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable 
development, energy access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity.
Acknowledgements
This is a joint publication of the Fiji Department of Energy (DoE), Ministry of Infrastructure & Transport and the 
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). It was prepared by IRENA with the assistance of a principal 
consultant,  Gerhard  Zieroth,  in  coordination  with  the  ministry  and  the  DoE.  The  report  incorporates  views 
submitted by national stakeholders in Fiji via an open, transparent and participatory consultation process, in 
which all were given the opportunity to make their contributions.
The following agencies in Fiji also provided valuable comments on the draft:
• Clay Engineering
• Fiji Electricity Authority (FEA)
• Fiji Sugar Corporation (FSC)
• Department of Forests
• Ministry of Industry and Trade
The  Government  of  Fiji  acknowledges  the  support  provided  by  IRENA,  including  funding  and  technical 
assistance for this important work, which involves identifying pathways towards further utilisation of renewable 
energy resources in Fiji.
Authors: Yong Chen (IRENA), Gürbüz Gönül (IRENA), Gerhard Zieroth (consultant)
Disclaimer
This publication and the material featured herein are provided “as is”, for informational purposes. 
All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the material featured in this publication. 
Neither IRENA nor any of its officials, agents, data or other third-party content providers or licensors provides any warranty, 
including as to the accuracy, completeness, or fitness for a particular purpose or use of such material, or regarding the non-
infringement of third-party rights, and they accept no responsibility or liability with regard to the use of this publication and 
the material featured therein. 
The information contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA, nor is it an endorsement 
of any project, product or service provider. The designations employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply 
the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region, country, territory, city or area 
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries
 
FIJI 
RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT
IIII
Ghana
FOREWORD
from the Minister       
for Infrastructure     
and Transport 
The Fijian Government remains committed to providing all Fijians with access to modern energy services which 
are also clean, affordable and reliable. Fiji has fully embraced the Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All) initiative 
and is pursuing a ‘Green Growth’ development pathway for the nation. As such the Renewable Energy Readiness 
Assessment (RRA) is indeed timely and complements our collective efforts towards greater utilization of our local 
and renewable energy resources. 
The RRA process in Fiji has been an open and participatory process which undoubtedly has not only catalysed 
much more interests in the energy sector but subsequently identified renewable energy investment opportunities 
as well. The active involvement of all stakeholders has enabled the RRA report to be a detailed assessment of Fiji’s 
domestic conditions for the development and deployment of renewable energy and identified some key issues 
that need to be addressed for further development of renewable energy resources. Moreover, the identification of 
specific areas of actions and implementable renewable energy projects that can help address the issues identified 
is commendable. 
Furthermore, the RRA report offers a renewed platform for action to all stakeholders in the form of five service-
resource pairs:
•  Grid electricity supply- geothermal energy
•  Grid supply- solar PV electric generation
•  Grid supply – biomass-fuelled electricity generation
•  Off-grid Rural Energy Supply - Solar
•  National and Regional Maritime Transport – more efficient vessels.
As such, continued partnerships and concerted efforts for advancing actions on developing each service-resource 
pair is critical to achieving Fiji’s SE4All goals; 80 % share of renewable energy in the electricity generation mix by 
2020 and 25 % share of renewable energy in the overall energy mix by 2030. 
Finally,  the  completion  of  the  RRA  report  is  yet  another  indication  of  Fiji’s  readiness  to  work  closely  with  all 
stakeholders including development partners in further greening the energy sector in Fiji. In particular, I extend 
my sincerest appreciation to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) secretariat for its continued 
support and also for funding and providing technical assistance towards the successful completion of this report.  
I commend every effort towards securing a sustainable energy future for Fiji. 
Honourable Pio Tikoduadua 
Minister for Infrastructure and Transport 
III
IVIV
Ghana
FOREWORD
from the IRENA
Director-General
Across the Pacific, small island states face daunting costs for fuel imports and recurrent risk from global oil price 
volatility. Fiji has resolved to improve its energy security and contribute to combatting climate change based on a 
balanced portfolio of indigenous renewable energy resources. 
The  country’s  Renewables  Readiness  Assessment  (RRA),  undertaken  in  co-operation  with  the  International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), has produced a holistic evaluation of current conditions in the sector and 
identified key actions that can be taken to overcome barriers to increased renewable energy deployment. This is 
a country-led process, with IRENA primarily providing technical support and expertise to facilitate consultations 
among different national stakeholders. 
Since 2011, more than 20 countries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Asia-Pacific 
region have undertaken the RRA process, which generates knowledge of best practices and supports international 
co-operation around the accelerated deployment of renewable energy technologies. Fiji, a strong and consistent 
supporter of IRENA’s mission, is one of those countries. 
As the costs of renewable energy technologies continue to decline, Fiji is increasingly able to make use of its full 
range of renewable energy resources. These include large and small hydropower resources, as well as biomass, 
geothermal, solar and wind energy. All of these can help to ensure a reliable, affordable energy supply. This, in turn, 
will support economic growth, particularly in rural communities.
The National Energy Plan tabled in 2014 offers a promising path that would lower the risks, both real and perceived, 
for  renewable  energy  investments.    Reducing  investment  uncertainty  is  crucial  for  Fiji  to  create  an  enabling 
environment in which renewable energy flourishes. The co-ordination of different government ministries, as well 
as  international  donors,  will  be  essential  in  order  to  meet  the  targets  set  out  in  the  2014  action  plan  for  rural 
electrification. 
IRENA wishes to thank Minister Pio Tikoduadua and his team at the Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport for 
their generosity in hosting this study, along with their valuable perspective on the energy challenge for small island 
developing states. The Fiji Department of Energy provided solid support, while other governmental agencies also 
participated actively. Their insights are much appreciated as we facilitate further RRAs in the Pacific region and 
beyond.
I  sincerely  hope  that  the  outcomes  of  the  consultations  will  strengthen  Fiji’s  pursuit  of  accelerated  renewable 
energy deployment. IRENA stands ready to provide continuing support in implementing the actions identified, as 
the country strives to show the way forward to a sustainable energy future.
 
Adnan Z. Amin
Director-General, IRENA 
V
VIVI
Ghana
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF FIGURES 
LIST OF TABLES 
ABBREVIATIONS 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
VIII
VIII
IX
XI
I 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1  Country Background: Economy and Energy 
1.2  Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA)
1
1
 
 
Process in Fiji 
4
 
 
II  ENERGY SECTOR AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
5
5
6
7
8
9
11
2.1  Fiji’s Key Energy Challenges 
2.2  Final Energy Consumption 
2.3  Energy Demand Outlook 
2.4  Energy Supply 
2.5  Supply of Electric Power 
2.6  Renewable Electricity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III  ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR RENEWABLE
ENERGY DEVELOPMENT 
3.1  Fiji’s Renewable Energy Targets 
3.2  Power Sector Development Plan 
3.3  Enablers for Investments in Renewable Energy 
3.4  Financing and Investment 
19
20
21
21
26
  
 
 
 
 
IV  OPPORTUNITIES FOR DEPLOYMENT
OF RENEWABLE ENERGY 
27
 
V  RECOMMENDATIONS 
33
VI  REFERENCES 
37
ANNEX   
39
VII
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Population Density by Province 
1
Figure 2 Fiji’s GDP Annual Growth Rates (1988-2013) 
2
Figure 3 Comparison of Annual Growth Rates 
3
Figure 4 Ratio of Fuel Imports to Total Merchandise Imports (2004-2012) 
5
Figure 5 Fiji’s Final Energy Consumption by Sector (1990-2010) 
6
Figure 6 FEA’s Projection for Supply-Demand Balance (new solar unit excluded) 
7
Figure 7 Electricity Tariff Rates, 2010 
8
Figure 8 Fiji’s Total Energy Consumption (1990-2010) 
9
Figure 9 FEA Service Supply Areas in Fiji 
10
Figure 10 Global Living Biomass Carbon Density Map, 2000 
13
Figure 11 Solar Energy Resource in Fiji 
14
Figure 12 Hot Springs Locations in Fiji 
16
Figure 13 Schematic Illustration of the Correlation of Policy Objectives 
19
Figure 14 Institutional Structure for Energy Sector Management in Fiji 
25
Figure 15 Investment Cost for Geothermal Power 
41
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 FEA’s Installed Electricity Generation Capacity 
11
Table 2 Fiji’s Geothermal Energy Potential 
16
Table 3 Current Status in Geothermal Licensing 
17
Table 4 Energy Policy Targets 
20 
Table 5 Maximum Retail Prices for Fuels April 2013 
25
VIII
VIII
Ghana
ABBREVIATIONS
Asian Development Bank
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
Department of Energy
Fiji Electricity Authority
Fiji Dollar
Fiji Sugar Corporation
Gross domestic product
Government of Fiji
Gigawatt-hour
Independent Power Producer 
International Renewable Energy Agency
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Thousand tonne of oil equivalent 
Kilovolt-amp
Kilowatt-hour
Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
Megajoule
Megawatt electricity
National Energy Policy
Operations and Maintenance
Photovoltaic
Reserve Bank of Fiji
Renewables Readiness Assessment
Sustainable Energy for ALL 
South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission
Secretariat of the Pacific Community
Unleaded Petroleum
United Nations Development Programme
United States Dollar
University of the South Pacific
Terawatt-hour
Terajoule
World Bank Group
ADB
APEC
DoE
FEA
FJD
FSC
GDP
GoF
GWh
IPP
IRENA
JBIC
ktoe
kVA
kWh
LPG
MJ
MWe
NEP
O&M
PV
RBF
RRA
SE4ALL
SOPAC
SPC
ULP
UNDP
USD
USP
TWh
TJ
WBG
Exchange Rate: USD 1 = FJD 2.08 (Fijian Dollar) on 
13 June 2015.
IX
Biomass Feedstock
 Photo: Government of Fiji
X
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Like  other  Pacific  Island  Countries,  Fiji  depends 
heavily  on  imported  petroleum-based  fuels.  The 
fluctuation  of  global  oil  supply  affects  not  only 
energy  security,  but  also  energy  prices.  Over 
2004-2008, international oil prices rose, drastically 
increasing  Fiji’s  energy  expenditure.  In  2008,  the 
country spent as much as 17% of its gross domestic 
product (GDP) on energy, up from 7% in 2003 (Fiji 
Islands Bureau of Statistics, various years; Reserve 
Bank  of  Fiji,  various  years).  With  a  comparatively 
large economy, Fiji spends even more on oil imports 
than other Pacific Island countries do.  
Scaling  up  non-hydro  renewables,  such  as  solar, 
wind  and  geothermal  energy,  would  diversify  the 
energy  mix  and  improve  Fiji’s  energy  security. 
Taking  into  account  high  import  costs  for  fossil 
fuels  and  the  continued  reduction  of  renewable 
electricity  generation  costs,  this  ought  to  be  an 
economically attractive option (IRENA, 2013).
A higher share of renewables in the power system 
is achievable from a technical perspective. Supply-
demand  modelling  during  the  drafting  of  the 
National  Energy  Policy  (NEP)  2014  indicated  the 
feasibility of obtaining more than 80% of electricity 
from  renewable  sources  by  2020  and  100%  by 
2030.  Achieving  these  targets  would  require: 
1)  a  strong  enabling  environment,  including  for 
the private sectors; and 2) risk-sharing/mitigation 
mechanisms for geothermal energy, which entails 
high costs and risks during exploratory drilling.
Interestingly, spending on imported fuels remained 
as high as FJD 550 million (around USD 310 million) 
or more annually in 2008-2011, even as international 
oil prices declined by about a third. The extent to 
which the country can benefit from further oil price 
decreases remains to be seen.  
Furthermore  Fiji’s  emerging  industries,  including 
manufacturing, mining and construction, are energy- 
intensive. At the same time, 4% of urban residents 
and nearly 20% of rural dwellers still lack electricity 
access, with remote locations and prohibitive costs 
for grid extension posing a challenge.
Fiji is well endowed with a broad mix of renewable 
energy  resources,  including  hydropower,  solar, 
biomass,  wind  and  geothermal  energy.  However, 
the full potential remains to be fully assessed and 
made public. 
Scaling  up  both  hydropower  and  non-hydro 
renewables  would  contribute  significantly  to  the 
development of sustainable, reliable and affordable 
energy  that  would  support  economic  growth  and 
enhance energy security, particularly in rural areas. 
installed  power  generation  capacity 
Total 
is 
269 megawatts (MW), of which the Fiji Electricity 
(FEA)  operates  94%,  delivering 
Authority 
857 gigawatt-hour (GWh) in 2013. Most of this was 
FEA grid-connected capacity, which accounted for 
254 MW by 2013, some 30% higher than projected 
in  the  2010  FEA  Power  Development  Plan  for  Fiji 
(for  2011-2020).  FEA’s  current  generation  fleet 
comprises  about  55%  hydro,  40%  diesel  and 
heavy  fuel  oil  and  1%  wind,  with  the  remaining 
4% provided by two co-generators, Tropik Woods 
Limited  and  Fiji  Sugar  Corporation  (FSC).  To 
reduce environmental impact, FEA aims to replace 
retired diesel gensets with renewable energy and 
is looking for independent power producers (IPPs) 
to  provide  additional  hydro,  geothermal,  wind, 
biomass or solar.
Fiji’s  Renewables  Readiness  Assessment  (RRA) 
took  place  against  this  backdrop,  building  on  the 
discussions  around  renewables-related 
issues, 
as  highlighted  in  Fiji’s  energy  policy  review.  This 
RRA  identifies  key  actions  to  mobilise  resources 
and  offers  guidance  for  fine-tuning  Fiji’s  future 
renewable energy policy.
The government’s vision for Fiji’s energy future in 
Fiji  became  clearer  in  the  draft  NEP  2014,  which 
emphasises  sustainable  “resource  efficient”,  “cost 
effective” and “environmentally sustainable” energy 
development.  The  draft  NEP  2014  set  out  policy 
objectives  in  two  tiers:  first,  affordability  for  all 
Fijians; and second, sustainable energy supply with 
less expenditure on imported fuels. 
Hydropower  accounts  for  the  largest  share  of 
electricity  supply.  This  makes  the  power  system 
more  vulnerable  to  seasonable  variation,  extreme 
weather  events  or  severe  drought.  In  the  Pacific 
environment, hydropower often faces a challenge 
in  providing  reliable  power  supply  (South  Pacific 
Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC), n.d.).
Replacing  imported  fossil  fuels  with  indigenous 
renewables  has  been  identified  as  one  of  the  key 
instruments  to  achieve  these  policy  objectives. 
XI
Doing so cost-effectively depends on establishing 
the  enabling  environment  for  renewable  energy 
development.  For Fiji to attract private investments 
in  the  power  sector,  all  stakeholders  must  be 
actively engaged. 
the  Department  of  Energy  (DoE),  FEA  and 
the  Department  of  Mineral  Resources  all 
lack  personnel  with  specific  knowledge  and 
experience in geothermal power development. 
Capacity  building  is  needed  for  the  public 
sector to oversee geothermal development.
The  RRA  team  examined  the  general  enabling 
environment,  as  well  as  energy  resources  and 
conversion  technologies,  described  in  this  report 
as 
service-resource  pairs.  Renewable-based 
options  are  largely  undeveloped  or  have  yet  to 
be  promoted  or  in  Fiji.  In  some  cases,  renewable 
energy  options  could  complement  “conventional” 
service-resource pairs.
2.  Grid-based  power/solar  photovoltaic  (PV): 
On-grid  PV  installations  are  slowly  gaining 
popularity  in  Fiji,  given  distributed  solar  PV’s 
positive impact through reducing transmission 
and  distribution  losses,  lowering  the  need  for 
fossil fuel in power generation, enhancing energy 
security  and  leveraging  significant  investment 
from  the  private  sector.  Distributed  solar  PV 
systems work well with pumped storage. 
The  following  service-resource  pairs  have  been 
identified  as  consistent  with  the  draft  NEP  2014 
under consideration by Government of Fiji.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grid-connected  solar  power  has  considerable 
potential.  Mobilising  this,  however,  require 
enabling  conditions.  For 
instance,  a  net 
metering arrangement or viable feed-in tariffs 
could  unleash  a  boom  in  privately  financed 
solar  generation,  with  private  households  to 
participating in roof- mounted PV generation. 
1.  Grid-based 
power/geothermal 
energy: 
Geothermal  energy  could  reduce  electricity 
supply  costs  on  FEA’s  grids.  The  World  Bank 
has  agreed  to  provide  technical  assistance  to 
identify  2-3  major  sites  for  geothermal-based 
power generation in Fiji.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  favourable  generation  cost  of  solar  PV 
has  allowed  commercial  investors,  mainly  in 
the  tourism  industry,  to  install  roof-mounted 
solar to partially generate their own electricity. 
Without a net metering framework or a viable 
feed-in  tariff,  only  those  FEA  clients  with  a 
high  and  stable  daytime  load  can  achieve 
commercial viability with such investments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Given Fiji’s great potential for geothermal energy 
development, the private sector has expressed 
strong interest. However, barriers to investment 
need to be effectively addressed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Firstly, the independent power producers (IPP )
framework is insufficient. Uncertainties about to 
tariffs and other conditions of power purchase 
agreements  weigh  heavily  given  significant 
exploration  risks.  Geothermal  power’s  high 
investment  costs  and  associated  exploration 
risks  pose  a  persistent  challenge  from  the 
perspective  of  both  developers  and  financers. 
In  many  markets,  drilling  costs  are  offset  with 
public resources, either through government or 
multilateral development banks.  
3.  Grid-based power/biomass-fuelled generation: 
Fiji  has  a  wide  range  of  feedstock,  including 
bagasse  from  the  sugar  industry  and  forestry 
residues  such  as  sawdust  and  wood  chips, 
which  have  been  already  been  used  for 
generating power and heat.  
 
 
 
Fiji  is  also  looking  into  other  biomass  resources, 
including  waste-to-energy  in  particular.  A  study 
for  waste-to-energy  by  the  United  Nations 
Development  Programme  (UNDP) 
in  2014, 
conducted  assessed  the  amount  and  type  of 
resources available, covering municipal solid waste, 
wastewater, 
livestock  waste,  non-hazardous 
industrial organic waste, and agricultural residues. 
Scaling  up  such  applications  would  also  help 
to  address  the  environmental  challenges  of 
population  growth, 
rapid  urbanisation  and 
changing consumption patterns.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uncertainty  also  remains  with  regard  to 
licensing. Four special prospector licences from 
the  Department  of  Mineral  Resources  were 
pending while two others had lapsed. Licensing 
has been under discussion in the review of the 
Mining Act initiated in 2014. Stricter background 
checks of companies that apply for prospector 
licences  may  help  to  ensure  that  licensees 
actually  carry  out  the  work  after  a  licence  is 
issued. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in 
Lastly,  technical  capacity 
both  the  private  and  public  sectors  in  Fiji; 
insufficient 
is 
4.  Off-grid  rural  power  supply  /  solar  energy: 
Off-grid  solar  PV  systems  have  been  installed 
XII
in  Fiji  since  the  1980s.  Given  the  significant 
decline  of  system  costs  and  the  continued 
advancement  of  the  technology,  solar  PV  has 
become the DoE’s preferred rural electrification 
option for areas without grid access. The Fiji DoE 
has supported the installation of approximately 
600 mini-grids  powered  by  diesel  engines  in 
the  power  range  of  5-35 kilovolt-amps  (kVA). 
Most of the existing mini-grid diesel generation 
capacity is non-operational or underperforming, 
partly because of poor maintenance.  
should start with the removal of uncertainty for 
prospective investors and their lenders.
•  Key 
legislation  should  be 
reviewed  and 
harmonised  in  order  to  improve  the  legal 
framework for renewable energy development. 
Changes  could  include  removing  conflicts  of 
interest in regulation. 
•  As  suggested  by  prospective 
investors,  a 
Renewable Energy Investors Association should 
be  formed,  as  private  sector  participation  in 
renewable  energy  development  requires  a 
stronger voice.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hybridisation  could  relieve  villagers  from  the 
burden  of  high  operation  and  maintenance 
(O&M) and volatile fuel costs. Existing mini-grids 
could  be  made  more  environmentally  and 
economically sustainable through hybridisation 
with  solar  PV  systems  with  battery  storage.  
•  Coordination 
among 
Fijian  government 
ministries  on  rural  electrification  should  be 
facilitated  through  the  establishment  of  a 
National  Energy  Coordination  Committee  and 
the  restructuring  of  roles  and  responsibilities, 
as suggested by the draft NEP, 2014. Effective 
is  crucial  to 
inter-ministerial  coordination 
meet targets set out in the draft NEP 2014 and 
associated  Strategic  Action  Plan.  Additionally, 
there  is  a  need  for  inter-donor  coordination. 
Donors interested in active engagement could 
formulate  a  consortium  to  support  the  Fijian 
DoE 
in  developing  the  rural  electrification 
master plan.
 
 
 
 
 
Solar  hybridisation  of  diesel  grids  should  be 
undertaken  in  the  framework  of  the  rural 
electrification  master  plan,  with  analysis  to 
determine the optimal ratios of diesel to solar 
PV generation in various settings. 
5.  More  efficient  vessels/renewable  power 
for  maritime  transport:  Maritime  transport, 
accounting  for  about  22%  of  fossil-fuel  use  in 
Fiji,  has  attracted  attention  as  a  sector  where 
significant quantities of fuels could be conserved 
through  new  technologies  and  processes. 
Regional organisations such as the Secretariat 
of  the  Pacific  Community  (SPC)  and  research 
institutes such as University of the South Pacific 
(USP)  are  looking  into  different  options  for 
fuelling  maritime  transport  with  renewables. 
However,  USP  and  SPC  hold  different  views 
with  regard  to  renewable-assisted  maritime 
transport.  A  common  strategy  is  needed  for 
investments  in  renewables  in  the  maritime 
sector.
•  The potential for renewable-powered maritime 
transport  requires  further  study.  Knowledge- 
sharing  with 
islands,  such  as 
Tonga,  should  be  encouraged.  About  20% 
of  Fiji’s  imported  fuel  is  used  for  maritime 
transportation.    Widespread  biofuel  adoption 
would  depend  upon  feedstock  availability, 
management  and  production  in  comparison 
with the cost of imported fuels. 
like-minded 
•  Geothermal  energy  development,  deserves 
its  own  regulatory  framework.  This  could 
include more detailed and specific regulations 
highlighting  benefits  as  well  as  risks  for  such 
investments.
Recommendations
Based on the service-resource pairs identified, the 
following are recommended as priority actions: 
•  The  Government  of  Fiji  is  urged  to  endorse 
and  implement  the  draft  NEP  2014  as  quickly 
as  possible.  Endorsement  would 
reduce 
uncertainty and risk in the eyes of prospective 
energy sector investors and lenders.
•  Drilling  risks  for  geothermal  energy  projects 
need  to  be  minimised.  Some  risk  mitigation 
mechanisms  are  available.  A  geothermal 
development  risk  mitigation  fund  ought  to 
be  developed  with  support  from  multilateral 
development  banks,  such  as  the  World  Bank 
and ADB. A local fund management unit/office 
should be established to ensure that the fund is 
properly managed.
•  Efforts  should  be  focused  on  creating  an 
enabling environment to attract private sector 
investment to the renewable energy sector. This 
XIII
GCPV and solar water heater
 Photo: Government of Fiji
XIV
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 COUNTRY BACKGROUND: ECONOMY AND ENERGY
Fiji is a large tropical island country in the South Pacific Ocean, with a population 
of 881,000 and a land area of more than 18,000 square kilometres (UNdata, n.d.). 
Amongst 332 islands, nearly one-third are inhabitable, but the two largest islands 
– Viti Levu and Vanua Levu – accommodate about 70% of Fiji’s total population 
and account for 87% of the total area (Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), 
2008), as shown in Figure 1. 
Figure 1: Population Density by Province
Source: www.spc.int/prism/fiji/index.php/1996-pop-gis-maps/47-census-and-surveys/population-census 
The boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any official endorsement or acceptance 
by IRENA.
Fiji  is  classified  as  an  upper  middle  income  country1  by  the  World  Bank  (n.d.)  and 
represents  one  of  the  most  developed  economies  in  the  Pacific  Island  region.  As 
shown in Figure 2, Fiji has recorded an average annual gross domestic product (GDP) 
growth rate of about 2% over the past 25 years, despite volatile economic performance. 
Although Fiji’s GDP growth rates over the period 2006 - 2012 have been well below 
the government’s target of 5% (Asian Development Bank (ADB), 2013), the trend since 
2010 has been upward, thanks to the effective reform measures taken between 2006 
and 2014, which included introducing competition to the telecommunications market 
and customary land-leasing business. These reforms, along with substantial tax cuts 
and  other  fiscal  stimuli,  offered  a  much-needed  driving  force  to  economic  growth 
(The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2012). In addition, ongoing structural changes in the 
economy indicate a shift of economic drivers from the conventional sectors, such as 
agriculture, forestry and fisheries, towards manufacturing, mining,2 construction and 
tourism, thereby driving up investments in these sectors. For example, new lending 
for investments doubled in 2013 to meet the demand for capital in the developing 
construction and real estate sectors, and the government invested 30% more than the 
previous year in upgrading the road systems.
1  Per capita GDP in 2013 was USD 4,572, while the GDP amounted to just above USD 4 billion for the same year.     
2  Such as bauxite mining in Nawailevu in Bua, the Namosi copper mine project, and other smaller gold 
  mining projects, in Mount Kasi, Wainivesi and Tuvatu.
 
1
Figure 2: Fiji’s GDP Annual Growth Rates (1988-2013)
Source: based on World Bank data; http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.KD.ZG?page=5
The  Government  of  Fiji  raised  its  projection  for 
GDP  growth  rate  in  2014  to  3.8%,  an  increase  of 
nearly 1% from previous estimates, and set 2.4% as 
a target growth rate for 2015 (Reserve Bank of Fiji 
(RBF), 2014). Asian Development Bank (ADB) and 
World Bank projections remain unchanged, at 2.8% 
and 3% for 2014 and 2015 (ADB) and 2.4% for both 
2014 and 2015 (ADB, 2014; World Bank, n.d.).
sectors and the growing levels of economic activity 
from, for example, the growing number of tourists 
in Fiji. Therefore, the employment opportunities are 
concentrated  in  the  public  sector  or  subsistence 
activities, mostly in urban areas. 
However,  over  the  past  15  years,  urbanisation  has 
been slow, showing only 8% increase over that time 
span, from 47% living in urban areas in 1998 to 53% 
in  2013  (FAOSTAT,  n.d.;  UNdata,  n.d.).  From  1998 
to 2008, Fiji’s population has grown at an average 
annual rate of 0.5%, while from 2008 to 2013 the 
rate was close to 1%. The labour force experienced 
a  much  higher  growth  rate,  comparatively,  as 
shown in Figure 3. According to the latest findings 
from  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and 
the data from the World Bank, the unemployment 
rate has remained steady at around 8-9% (Trading 
Economics,  2015).4  ADB 
the 
economic  growth  has  to  be  strong  enough  to 
absorb  about  20,000  new  entrants  annually  into 
the  labour  market  (ADB,  2014).  Given  this  reality, 
job  creation  remains  an  important  task  on  the 
governmental agenda.
On the other hand, the emerging industrial sectors 
mentioned  above,  such  as  manufacturing,  mining 
and construction, are energy-intensive. Should the 
pipeline  projects  in  those  sectors  be  developed 
and  come  to  operation,  it  would  have  significant 
implication for Fiji’s energy sector. However, Fiji has 
underperformed in attracting private investments,3 
particularly  in  the  energy  sector,  where  private 
sector  investment  could  not  be  easily  mobilised. 
Although  private  investment  overall  started  to 
pick up in 2013, private investment in utility-scale 
projects  remained  minimal.  There  was  no  private 
investment  in  large-scale  power  projects  feeding 
into  the  national  electricity  grid.  Private  investors 
were involved in projects to create: grid-connected 
solar  photovoltaic  (PV)  systems  up  to  200 kW; 
the Fiji Sugar Corporation’s (FSC) 10 MW biomass 
plant; and another 10 MW biomass plan. However, 
the investment framework for private participation 
in  renewable  energy  projects  clearly  needs 
improvement. 
reckoned 
that 
Poverty  is  still  considered  a  serious  development 
issue  in  Fiji;  31%  of  the  population  was  under  the 
poverty line in 2011 (World Bank, 2011), compared 
with  35%  in  2003.  Reductions  in  poverty  took 
place  mostly  in  urban  areas  (declining  from  28% 
to  19%),  while  rural  areas  showed  an  increase  in 
poverty, from 40% to 43%, during the same period 
(Fiji  Bureau  of  Statistics,  2012a).  The  imbalance 
As described above, the economic growth has been 
fuelled  largely  by  public  investment  in  industrial 
3  Total investment as a percentage of GDP was 15.6% over the period 2006 - 2012, 10% lower than the government target of 25% (ADB, 2013).
4 The unemployment rate measures the number of people actively looking for a job as a percentage of the labour force.
2
Figure 3: Comparison of Annual Growth Rates
is  attributed 
between  urban  and  rural  areas 
in  agricultural  activities  and  to 
to  a  decline 
underdeveloped 
infrastructure  (Government  of 
Fiji, 2014). It is also reflected in marked differences 
in  access  to  electricity  and  modern  fuels.  The 
electrification rate has continued to improve over 
the years, however, due to the Rural Electrification 
Programme  of  the  Government  of  Fiji.  Currently, 
the electrification rate is around 96% in urban and 
82%  in  rural  areas,  according  to  the  2007  Census 
(Fiji Bureau of Statistics, 2012b).
policy  objectives,  but  also  set  specific  targets 
for  2015,  2020  and  2030,  respectively,  which  are 
closely  aligned  with  the  Sustainable  Energy  for 
All  (SE4ALL)  initiative  of  the  United  Nations.  In 
tandem with development of the draft NEP 2014, 
a Strategic Action Plan was drafted, in which five 
strategic policy interventions for renewable energy 
development were identified. 
Achieving  these  energy  targets  requires  not  only 
identifying  strategic  areas  but,  more  importantly, 
a  list  of  articulated  key  actions  and  a  portfolio  of 
renewable energy projects that can be successfully 
implemented.  To  make  these  goals  attainable,  a 
comprehensive assessment of the current status of 
renewable energy development and the key issues 
that need to be addressed is essential. 
In this context, there is clearly an urgent need for 
creating  more  opportunities  for  private  sector 
engagements and for the rural population, in order 
to help the country continue its economic growth, 
reduce  poverty  and  promote  more 
inclusive 
growth. Towards this end, developing a sustainable, 
reliable and affordable energy sector will allow for 
economic  growth  and  enhanced  energy  security, 
particularly within rural regions of the country. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  Renewables  Readiness 
Assessment  (RRA)  was  launched  and  implemented 
by  the  Fiji  Department  of  Energy  (DoE)  and  the 
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). As 
part of the RRA study, consultancy work was carried 
out by an independent consultant and facilitated by the 
DoE to collect data and conduct interviews. This was 
followed  by  an  RRA  multi-stakeholder  consultation 
workshop,  at  which  the  pre-identified  issues  were 
discussed and the key findings were verified. 
Over the years since the first National Energy Policy 
(NEP) was established in 2006, Fiji’s energy sector 
has  developed  significantly  but  also  encountered 
new  challenges, 
including  rising  expenditures 
on  fuel  imports  when  global  oil  prices  surged,  as 
well  as  the  continued  risk  of  volatility,  entailing 
a  policy  challenge  even  as  oil  prices  receded  in 
2014-2015  The  dependency  on  imported  fuel  has 
been  identified  as  one  of  the  key  challenges  that 
Fiji  has  to  address  to  ensure  continued  social 
development  and  economic  growth.  In  2013,  the 
government commissioned the draft of an updated 
energy policy (NEP, 2014), along with its associated 
Strategic  Action  Plan.  In  comparison  to  the  NEP 
2006,  the  draft  NEP  2014,  not  only  includes 
The  remainder  of  this  report  describes  the  RRA 
process, presents the current development status of 
the renewable energy sector, highlights the key issues 
to be addressed in order for the country to scale up 
the  deployment  of  renewable  energy  in  the  future 
and  provides  a  list  of  recommended  actions  that 
could be undertaken in close collaboration with other 
stakeholders, including the relevant donor agencies. 
3
1.2 RENEWABLES READINESS 
ASSESSMENT (RRA) PROCESS IN FIJI
In Fiji, the RRA process was led by the Fiji DoE, in close 
collaboration  with  the  IRENA  RRA  team.  Building 
on  key  findings  of  the  Fiji  energy  policy  review,  a 
background  paper  was  developed  and  circulated 
amongst  the  most  relevant  stakeholders  for  an 
effective multi-stakeholder consultation process.
The RRA for Fiji furthers the discussion around the 
renewables-related issues highlighted in Fiji’s energy 
policy review, and thereby contributes to fine-tuning 
Fiji’s  future  renewable  energy  policy  and  identifies 
key actions to mobilise necessary resources.
Interviews  were  conducted  before  and  during 
the  RRA  workshop  to  gain  different  perspectives 
on  the  pre-identified  issues  and  seek  the  advice 
and  thoughts  of  stakeholders  on  how  to  tackle 
those issues. This is an important complementary 
function  in  the  methodology,  to  gain  in-depth 
insight, particularly from those at the frontlines who 
were unable to participate in the RRA workshop. 
More specifically, the RRA aims to:
• 
Improve the understanding on the current status of 
renewable energy development in Fiji by conducting 
a comprehensive review of the sub-sector;
• 
Identify  and  analyse  the  critical  and  emerging 
issues  associated  with  and  arising  from  the 
development  of  Fiji’s  energy  sector  in  general 
the  utilisation  of  renewable  energy 
and 
resources in particular;
An  RRA  consultation  workshop  was  organised 
in  March  2014  in  Suva,  Fiji.  It  was  based  on 
a  broad, 
inclusive  consultation  process  that 
involved  all  key  stakeholders  –  public  institutions 
(including  key  ministries  and  national  energy 
authorities  and  agencies),  the  private  sector,  
non-governmental  organisations,  multilateral  and 
bilateral  funding  agencies,  development  partners, 
civil  society  representatives  and  members  of 
academia,  as  well  as  senior  representatives  of 
IRENA. This not only ensured synergies, but, more  
significantly,  facilitated  harmonisation  among  the 
stakeholders involved in order to help deliver Fiji’s 
goals.
•  Present  the  various  opportunities  for  scaling 
renewable  energy  development  and 
up 
deployment  in  Fiji  while  at  the  same  time 
discussing  the  main  barriers  to  developing  an 
enabling environment to allow implementation 
for  those 
of  draft  NEP  2014, 
opportunities to be realised; 
in  order 
•  Put  forth  a  portfolio  of  articulated  actionable 
initiatives  –  developed  jointly  by  participating 
stakeholders  –  that  can  capitalise  on  the 
renewable  energy  development  opportunities 
revealed through examination of Fiji’s renewable 
energy  sub-sector  and  extensive  discussions 
with multiple stakeholders;
The  RRA  outcome  presented  here  draws  on  the 
development process for the draft NEP 2014 and 
the associated analytical work for the SE4ALL and 
Legislative  Gap  Analysis  reports.  Although  the 
RRA  ensures  that  its  analysis  is  consistent  with 
these  documents,  it  aims  to  provide  guidance 
to the Government of Fiji for concrete actions in 
selected priority areas.
•  Outline  the  follow-up  steps  to  ensure  the 
actions identified can be carried out within the 
near- and mid-term timeframe.
4
II. ENERGY SECTOR AND  
   RENEWABLE ENERGY 
2.1 FIJI’S KEY ENERGY CHALLENGES
Like other Pacific Island countries, Fiji is substantially dependent upon imported 
petroleum-based  fuels.  The  fluctuation  of  the  global  oil  supply  affects  not  only 
the country’s energy security but also energy prices. Fiji was historically hit twice 
by  the  shortage  of  oil  supply  caused  by  two  energy  crises  in  the  1970s  –  the 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) embargo and 
the Iranian revolution, which accounted for an average 8% increase in the price of 
energy – and the Iraq war in 2003, which caused an average 6.6% increase over 
2001-2005 prices (Kumar, 2011).
Global  oil  prices  have  been  volatile  and  rose  substantially  in  2004-2008, 
resulting in a drastic increase of Fiji’s energy expenditures. Fiji spent as much as  
FJD 744 million  on  fuel  importation  in  2008,5  accounting  for  34%  of  total 
merchandise imports (Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology — United 
Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific (APCTT-UNESCAP), 
2010; World Bank data — fuel imports, especially the percentage of merchandise 
imports)  or  17%  of  its  GDP,  compared  with  7%  in  2003  (Fiji  Islands  Bureau  of 
Statistics, various years; RBF, various years). Fiji’s total US dollar expenditures on 
imported fuels has been far above that of other Pacific Island countries, given the 
scale of its economy and, consequently, greater reliance on imported oils. 
Interestingly,  spending  on  imported  fuels  did  not  decline  significantly,  but 
remained  as  high  as  FJD 550 million  or  more  annually  in  2008-2011,  despite  the 
drop in oil price by about one-third from the record high (Saula, 2012). The ratio of 
fuel imports to total merchandise imports since 2006 has remained close to 30%,6 
except for a slight dip in 2009, as illustrated in Figure 4. 
Figure 4: Ratio of Fuel Imports to Total Merchandise Imports (2004-2012) 
Source: World Bank Data, accessible at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/TM.VAL.FUEL.ZS.UN
The  challenges  arising  from  volatile  and  comparatively  high  oil  prices  will  remain 
huge if business continues as usual. The country’s specific challenges would become 
even more pronounced if economic growth accelerates faster than expected.
5  Equivalent to FJD 1.2 billion at the currency exchange rate of USD 0.62/1 FJD (2008). 
6  Putting it into perspective, it was close to that range during the period when Fiji was hit by the first 
  global oil crisis, in 1973, i.e. 28% at annual cost of FJD 10 million (World Bank, 1978).
5
2.2 FINAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION
1990-2010.  This  sector  is  starting  to  become  a 
key  driver  for  energy  demand  due  to  growing 
electricity consumption by households. 
In  Fiji,  the  transport  and  industrial  sectors  have 
dominated  the  country’s  energy  usage.  The 
transport  sector7  had  been  the  largest  energy 
consumer,  accounting  for  more  than  half  of  the 
total  consumption,  until  1999,  when  final  energy 
consumption  by 
industrial  sector  grew 
by  more  than  50%,  mainly  due  to  the  strong 
growth  in  such  major  industries  as  agriculture, 
tourism,  manufacturing,  construction,  and  mining 
and  quarrying.  However,  the  transport  sector 
consumes 64% (land 16%, air 26% and marine 22% 
respectively)  of  the  total  of  imported  petroleum, 
thus  remaining  the  top  consumer  of  petroleum 
products, according to Fiji Bureau of Statistics. 
Figure  5  illustrates  the  strong  growth  in  energy 
consumption  from  2001  to  2005,  which  showed 
a  3%  annual  growth  rate,  tripling  the  average 
rate over the period 1991-2000. This means these 
five  years  have  been,  on  average,  the  highest  in 
energy  elasticity8  since  1970.  The  same  period 
also  experienced  the  second  highest  annual 
increase  in  energy  prices,  at  6.6%,  owing  partly 
to  the  oil  supply  disruption  caused  by  the  Iraq 
war  in  2003.  Consequently  given  the  increase  in 
oil prices starting in 2004, keeping GDP growing 
with  the  same  level  of  energy  elasticity  was  not 
only  difficult  but  irrational.  This  could  partially  
turned 
explain  why  energy 
downwards in 2005. 
the 
consumption 
The energy consumption by the residential sector 
has  been  growing  slowly  over  the  30  years  from 
Figure 5: Fiji’s Final Energy Consumption by Sector (1990-2010)
Based on: United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), 2011.
Submission of transparent and systematic energy 
consumption  data  has  yet  to  be  established. 
The  SPC, 
like-
minded  partners,  such  as  the  Fiji  DoE,  has  been 
endeavouring  to  develop  a  Pacific  Regional 
Data  Repository  aimed  at  “supporting  Pacific 
governments  and  their  development  partners 
working in the energy sector by facilitating access 
to  up-to-date,  reliable  energy  data  and  project 
information.”9  Before  that  Data  Repository 
is 
fully  established  and  functional,  estimation 
is 
one  common  approach  applied  in  most  Pacific 
countries  when  actual  statistical  data  cannot  be 
made available, as is the case in Fiji. 
As  economic  activity  has  picked  up  considerably 
over  the  last  two  years  and  is  likely  to  continue 
the  upward  trend,  energy  demand  is  likely  to 
increase  for  both  petroleum-based  fossil  fuels 
and  electricity.  Furthermore,  it  has  been  widely 
acknowledged that the mining industry could be a 
key driver for Fiji’s future energy demand, although 
recent  energy  consumption  from  the  mining 
industry has remained largely unchanged. 
in  collaboration  with  other 
However,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  current 
understanding  of  final  energy  consumption 
was  based  on  data  that  might  not  be  accurate 
and  verifiable.  Acquiring  reliable  disaggregated 
energy  consumption  data  has  been  a  challenge, 
as  described 
in  the  report  entitled  SE4ALL 
Rapid  Assessment  and  Gap  Analysis,  which  was 
published in 2014 by the Government of Fiji. 
it  comes  to  rural  off-grid  electricity, 
When 
low,  mainly  due  to 
consumption  has  been 
constraints  presented  by  the  combined  lack  of 
7  The coverage includes road, marine and aviation users.
8  It is usually considered to be high when it exceeds 1. It was 1.26 over the period 2001-2005 (Kumar, 2011).
9  Quote from website, Pacific Regional Data Repository (PRDR) for SE4ALL (http://prdrse4all.spc.int/prdrse4all/).
6
implications  for  forecasting  energy  demand.13 
Based  on  the  analysis  of  relevant  data  from  1970 
to 2005, Kumar (2011) concluded that for Fiji “….in 
the  short-run,  there  is  causality  running  from 
GDP  to  energy  consumption….”  suggesting  that 
GDP growth causes the increase of future energy 
demand. This result is in line with findings of Huang, 
Hwang and Yang (2008),14 showing that economic 
growth  leads  to  greater  energy  consumption  for 
lower and upper middle income countries.15
availability of technologies, demand and affordability. 
In rural Vanua Levu and Ovalau, average annual per 
capita  electricity  consumption  has  been  as  low  as  
290 kilowatt-hours (kWh) and 260 kWh, respectively. 
The  solar  home  systems  that  were  installed  under 
DoE’s rural electrification scheme were in the range 
of  100,135 watts  (W)  until  2010,  while  more  recent 
ones  had  capacity  of  270 W,  enough  to  satisfy  an 
average demand of approximately 1 kWh per day. 
Electricity  consumption  in  the  areas  that  are 
covered  by  diesel-powered  mini-grids  has  also 
been constrained, primarily by limited supply hours. 
Such schemes typically operate for only about 4-6 
hours a day due to the high fuel costs,10 and are used 
mostly  to  provide  lighting  in  the  evening  hours. 
These  restrictions  severely  constrain  productive 
use  of  electricity,  as  commercial  demand  (e.g. 
workshops,  retail)  typically  occurs  during  the 
daytime. For most of the more than 600 mini-grids 
in Fiji, there is very little operational data available. 
The  study  on  the  rural  diesel  mini-grid  schemes 
on  Rotuma  Island  undertaken  by  South  Pacific 
Applied  Geoscience  Commission  (SOPAC),  part 
of  the  Secretariat  of  Pacific  Community  in  2007 
revealed that the average electricity consumption 
in  rural  mini-grids  is  below  1  kWh  per  day  per 
household.11
As  predicted  by  ADB,  the  World  Bank  and 
growth 
RBF, 
for  electricity 
looks  positive.  Future  demand 
in 
Authority 
(FEA)  grids  was  predicted  to  grow,  according  to 
FEA’s Power Development Plan of 2011, for both peak 
demand and energy. For the period between 2011 and 
2014, an annual growth rate of 7% was forecast, based 
on 100% electrification in 2015. Growth by 3% annually 
was  estimated  between  2015  and  2020,  based  on 
annual  population  growth  of  0.8%  and  accelerated 
economic  growth  (FEA,  2011).  Accordingly,  total 
electricity  and  peak  load  demand  are  expected 
to  reach  1,352 gigawatt-hour  (GWh)  and  256 MW, 
respectively, in 2020. 
the 
economic 
short-term 
Fiji 
Electricity 
the  main 
FEA has recently revised these forecasts in light of 
the flat demands observed in the past years. In the 
revised forecast, demand remains flat, reaching just 
850 GWh in 2015, shown in Figure 6, which is 26% 
lower  than  projected  in  the  Power  Development 
Plan of 2011. The significant discrepancy between 
the two forecasts underlines the great uncertainties 
2.3 ENERGY DEMAND OUTLOOK12
The  extent  to  which  future  energy  demand 
is  correlated  to  GDP  growth  has  significant 
Figure 6: FEA’s Projection for Supply-Demand Balance (new solar units excluded) 
Source: SE4ALL Rapid Assessment and Gap Analysis Report, 2014
10 The cost of generating electricity is approximately USD 1.13/kWh.
11  With an average total daily demand of 450 kWh per day, a total island population of 2,400 and average household size of 5, average 
  household demand on this island — which is served by 20 isolated mini-  grids  for  a  total  installed  capacity  of  472.5 kilovolt-amps  
  (kVA) — has been found to be 0.95 kWh per day (SOPAC, 2007)
12 The  outlooks  of  Fiji’s  future  energy  demand  presented  in  this  section  were  charted  by  APEC  and  ADB,  and  FEA,  respectively,  in  
independent studies.
 
13 Although the  IEA mentioned in its World Energy Outlook, 2013 that the relationship between these two variables was observed to 
  be weakening in many countries and regions (IEA, 2013), many studies in the literature revealed the causality was dependent upon 
  such factors as the methodologies and approaches used for analysis, the level of income of the studied nation, and the time horizon – 
i.e. a short or long term (Campo and Sarmiento, 2013).
 
14 The study results were based on analysis of GDP and energy consumption data from 82 countries over 1972-2008.
15 Based on World Bank categorisation.
7
in  energy  demand  projections  for  Fiji.  The  lack  of 
accurate  energy-related  data  that  are  required  for 
developing an energy demand outlook is one critical 
contributor  to  the  problem.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
small scale of the energy system operated by FEA can 
easily be affected by a single event such as a cyclone 
or a large- scale industrial investment and this can lead 
to overestimating or underestimating future demand.
Figure 7: Electricity Tariff Rates (2010)
Source: Final Determination on Electricity Tariff Rates, FEA, 2012.
Continued  efforts  in  demand-side  management, 
along with consumer reactions to tariff increases, 
may  also  exert  significant 
impact  on  energy 
demand  trends.  The  electricity  tariff  in  Fiji  is 
relatively low compared to the other Pacific Island 
countries, including Australia and New Zealand, as 
shown in Figure 7. According to Kumar (2011), the 
energy  price  elasticity  in  Fiji  over  1990-2005  was 
around  -0.3%,  implying  0.3%  decrease  in  energy 
in  energy 
consumption  for  each  1% 
prices.  In  addition  to  the  low  electricity  tariff,  the 
Government of Fiji has also announced an increase 
in  the 
level  of  subsidised  household  annual 
electricity consumption from 75 kWh to 85 kWh as 
part  of  the  President’s  address  at  the  recent  new 
Parliament Sitting.
be  1.4%,  about  half  of  the  3%  estimated  by  FEA, 
and population growth rate to be 0.5%, also much 
slower than FEA’s estimates. 
In the Business-as-Usual case, the primary energy 
demand  of  Fiji  was  projected  to  increase  from  
600 ktoe16 in 2010 to 900 ktoe in 2035, growing at 
an annual rate of 1.3%. In the alternative case, Fiji’s 
primary energy demand was estimated to increase 
at an annual rate of 1.2% through 2035. According 
to  this  growth  projection,  Fiji’s  primary  energy 
demand would reach 870 ktoe in 2035, 3.3% lower 
than in the Business-as-Usual case. Details can be 
found in the above-mentioned report. 
increase 
The  eventual  trajectory  of  the  energy  demand 
will  depend  on  many  factors,  including  the  GDP 
growth rates and the policy choices made by the 
Government of Fiji over the coming years. 
Fiji’s longer-term (to 2035) energy demand outlook 
was presented in the Energy Outlook for Asia and 
the  Pacific  published  by  Asia  Pacific  Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) and ADB in 2013. The Outlook 
stressed  the  challenge  of  meeting  the  growing 
energy demand while at the same time reducing the 
reliance on imported fuels. Effectiveness of measures 
taken  to  address  these  challenges  depends  upon 
the  scale  of  development  of  indigenous  energy 
resources — i.e. renewable energies — and also upon 
the measures taken to improve energy savings. 
2.4 ENERGY SUPPLY
In Fiji, there was a small amount of coal in the energy 
mix until 2005. Today, the primary energy supply 
in  Fiji  is  dominated  by  petroleum,  biomass  and 
hydrological  energy  resources.  Petroleum-based 
fuels are imported, while biomass and hydrological 
energy  are  indigenous.  There  are  two  categories 
of imported petroleum-based fuels — re-exported 
fuel and fuel used by international bunkers — that 
fall  beyond  the  coverage  of  total  primary  energy 
supply  and  are  therefore  not  shown  in  Figure  8. 
Two cases were developed, using the same set of 
basic  assumptions  for  the  growth  of  population 
and  GDP  through  2035,  from  the  reference  year 
of 2010. Annual GDP growth rate was assumed to 
16 ktoe: thousand tonne of oil equivalent
8
In  2010,  Fiji  imported  a  total  of  approximately  
860 million litres of petroleum-based fuels; about 
40% of this was consumed by international bunkers 
and re-exported to smaller Pacific Island states. 
in Fiji’s total primary energy mix. This indicates that 
cooking  fuels  were  being  modernised,  given  that 
the  majority  of  biomass  was  used  as  firewood  for 
cooking in rural areas. However, some 70% of rural 
households  were  still  relying  on  firewood  as  the 
main  cooking  fuel,  according  to  the  2007  Census 
conducted by Fiji’s Bureau of Statistics (2012b).
Figure 8 illustrates a trend that, over the time span of 
20 years, biomass has been giving way to petroleum 
Figure 8: Fiji’s Total Energy Consumption (1990-2010)
Source: UNSD (2011); IRENA based on UNSD
Petroleum-based  fuels  in  Fiji  cover  motor  spirits 
(gasoline),  aviation  diesel  and  industrial  diesel  oil17 
for  electricity  generation.  However,  breakdown 
data are difficult to obtain and verification of data 
accuracy is challenging. 
installed 
FEA’s  grids  accommodated  a  total 
generation capacity of 254 MW by 2013, which is 
30%  higher  than  had  been  projected  in  the  2010 
FEA Power Development Plan for Fiji (2011-2020). 
FEA’s  current  generation  fleet  is  composed  of 
about  55%  hydro,  40%  diesel  and  heavy  fuel  oil, 
and 1% wind, with the remaining 4% supplied by the 
co-generators,  Tropik  Woods  and  FSC.  To  further 
reduce  the  environmental  impact    of  its  energy 
generation  portfolio,  FEA  would  like  to  replace 
retired  diesel  gensets  with  renewable  energy 
options, if available; for this reason, FEA is looking 
for potential independent power producers (IPPs) 
that  can  provide  alternative  options  including 
hydro, geothermal, wind, biomass and solar farm. 
2.5 SUPPLY OF ELECTRIC POWER
Electricity  is  provided  through  two  means  –  the 
electric power grids (including local community-run 
micro-grids in rural areas and micro-grids installed at 
the governmental facilities) and stand-alone power 
generation systems, such as diesel gensets and solar 
home  systems  providing  basic  electrification.  Four 
independent grid systems on three islands, depicted 
in  Figure  9,  are  operated  by  FEA,  while  Fiji  DoE  is 
responsible for rural electrification. 
On  the  main  island  of  Viti  Levu,  as  presented 
in  the  breakdown  in  Table  1  and  Figure  9,  FEA’s 
power  infrastructure  is  essentially  characterised 
by the larger hydropower plants, whose generated 
electricity  is  transmitted  via  two  major  132-kV 
lines, connecting Wailoa with Vuda in the Western 
The  total  installed  power  generation  capacity  is  
269 MW, 94% of which was run by FEA, delivering 
857 GWh in 201318 (FEA, 2014).
17  Interchangeable with diesel in this report, unless otherwise specified. 
18  Financial year ending on 31 December, 2013.
9
Figure 9: FEA Service Supply Areas in Fiji
Source: FEA
The boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any official endorsement or acceptance by IRENA.
interconnected  in  the  near  future  to  provide  more 
flexibility and reliability of supply. The power development 
plan  even  considers  an  interconnection  between  the 
two major islands via a 132-kV undersea cable, which 
would only be justified if a major geothermal capacity  
(on  the  order  of  50-100  MW) 
in 
Vanua  Levu.  The  small  system  of  Ovalau  uses 
11-kV 
Interconnecting  
Ovalau  with  the  main  system  on  Viti  Levu  has 
also  been  considered,  although  no  concrete  plans  
exist yet.
region  and  Wailoa  with  Cunningham  Road  in  the 
Central region, feeding 33-kV and 11-kV distribution 
networks. The 33-kV lines are still feeder lines into 
the  individual  supply  areas  in  the  Western  and 
Central  regions  and  do  not  yet  form  a  circular 
system around the coast of the main island. 
is  developed 
as  distribution 
voltage. 
The  smaller  systems  in  Vanua  Levu  are  33-kV 
transmission  systems  that  cover  only  the  most  
densely  populated  areas  around  the  towns  of 
Labasa  and  Savusavu,  which  are  planned  to  be  
10
Table 1: FEA’s Installed Electricity Generation Capacity
Installed Capacity 
(MW)
Energy
Source
Nameplate
Output
Year of 
Commission 
Location/site
Viti Levu Island
60% of the 
electricity in 
Viti Levu
Monasavu Wailoa
83
1983
Hydro
101 GWh19
Nadarivatu
42
2012
Wainikasou
6.6
18 GWh
2004
Nagado/Vaturu
2.3
10 GWh
2006
Buton
10
Wind
-
2007 
Multi-locations 
72 (total)
Industrial Diesel Oil
-
Kinoya
20.6
Heavy Fuel Oil
-
2007
Vanua Levu Island
Labasa
13.5
-
-
Industrial Diesel Oil
Savusavu
5.2
-
-
Wainiqeu
0.8
Micro-hydro
-
-
Ovalau Island
Distribution 
network 11 kV
and below 
Levuka
2.9
Industrial Diesel Oil
-
Total Installed Generation Capacity 
258.9 MW
Source: FEA Power Development Plan, FEA Presentation Energy Forum 2013
Hydropower accounts for the biggest share of Fiji’s 
electricity supply mix. On one hand, this enhances 
the security of energy supply. On the other hand, it 
exposes the power system to seasonable variation 
of annual hydrological cycles and extreme weather 
events, such as El Niño, El Niño Southern Oscillation 
or  severe  drought,  and  thus  hydropower  faces 
a  challenge  to  provide  reliable  power.20  More 
specifically,  Fiji  has  distinct  wet  and  dry  seasons, 
and eight months of the year (May to December) 
are  often  deficient  in  precipitation,  particularly  in 
the  dry  zone  on  the  north  western  sides  of  the 
main islands. For instance, the poor rainfall in the 
Monasavu catchment in 2013 and 2014 resulted in 
critically low water levels at the Monasavu dam. 
From  a  technical  perspective,  having  more 
renewable  sources  in  the  power  system  can 
be  achieved.  The  results  of  supply-demand 
modelling  that  was  run  for  the  development  of 
the draft NEP 2014, have shown that it is feasible 
to  have  more  than  80%  of  electricity  supplied 
through  renewable  energy  sources  by  2020  and 
100%  by  2030.  Achieving  these  targets  would 
require: 1) a strong enabling environment for the 
key stakeholders, including private sectors, to be 
actively  engaged;  and  2)  risk-sharing/mitigation 
mechanisms  for  geothermal  energy,  due  to  the 
high  costs  and  risks  associated  with  geothermal 
exploratory drilling. 
2.6 RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY
To this end, if non-hydro renewable energy sources, 
such as solar, wind and geothermal energy can be 
scaled up, it would effectively expand the portfolio 
of  Fiji’s  electricity  generation  capacity  and  thus 
enhance its energy security. Given the high costs of 
fossil fuel and continued reduction in the costs of 
renewable electricity generation, this ought to be 
an economically attractive option (IRENA, 2013).
Fiji is well endowed with a broad mix of renewable 
energy 
solar,  
biomass, wind and geothermal energy. However, 
the  exact  potential  of  renewable  energy  has  
yet  to  be  fully  assessed  and  made  publicly 
available. 
resources, 
including  hydro, 
19  98.6 GWh in 2013 (FEA, 2014)
20 www.pacificwater.org__resources_article_files_Fiji
11
Grid-connected renewable electricity development 
is generally under the jurisdiction of FEA, while the 
Fiji DoE is responsible for off-grid systems, although 
the DoE has also piloted 60 grid-connected solar 
PV  systems  of  1.2 kW  and  2.4 kW  capacity  in 
government quarters around the country. FEA has 
embraced  the  strategy  of  developing  renewables 
to replace diesel in its generation capacity portfolio. 
After  FEA  failed  to  achieve  its  original  target  — 
90%  of  the  electricity  generated  from  renewable 
energy sources by 2011 (FEA, 2007) — it endorsed 
the target of 81% by 2020 that was recently set in 
SE4ALL and proposed in the draft NEP 2014. While 
traditionally hydro resources have been the focus 
for  power  generation,  other  non-hydro  resources 
for renewable electricity need to be capitalised. 
institutional/government  and  most  commercial 
and industrial businesses are located – suggesting 
a potential growth of load demand. Amongst the 
supply  areas,  Central  Viti  Levu  was  ranked  at  the 
top in terms of per capita electricity consumption, 
at the level of 1,170 kWh/year, followed by Western 
Viti Levu, with 800 kWh/year. 
Given  that  the  generation  cost  of  electricity  from 
hydropower  is  in  most  cases  cheaper  than  diesel-
generated  electricity,  FEA  is  motivated  to  look  into 
other potential areas, including lower Ba, lower Wailoa 
and  Navua,  to  find  suitable  sites  for  hydropower 
generation. IPPs are encouraged to submit business 
proposals 
large 
hydropower schemes under certain arrangements. 
investing  and  developing 
for 
Small hydro22 
Although  Fiji’s  first  small  hydropower  plant  was 
built  as  early  as  the  1920s  (UNIDO  and  ICSHP, 
2013), there is no comprehensive survey of small-
scale hydropower (<1,000 kW) in Fiji. Seven small 
hydro  systems  have  been  installed  in  the  1980s 
and 1990s to supply village mini-grids with a total 
generation  capacity  of  957 kW.  The  Wainiqeu 
(Vanua Levu) and Bukuya (Viti Levu) took the vast 
share with 800 kW and 100 kW, respectively. More 
recent  rural  installations  include  a  25 kW  hydro 
power facility at Buca Village, Cakaudrove.
Grid-connected hydropower
During  the  wet  season  from  November  to  April, 
which  also  happens  to  coincide  with  the  tropical 
cyclone season, the level of precipitation is usually 
high,  especially  over  the  larger  islands  in  Fiji, 
where  the  level  of  rainfall  can  reach  as  high  as 
6,000 millimetres (mm), accounting for up to 80% 
of  the  annual  total  rainfall  (Global  Environmental 
Facility  (GEF),  2009).    This  provides  Fiji  with  an 
estimated  technical  hydropower  potential  of 
1 terawatt-hour  per year (TWh/year), of which only 
a bit more than one-third (36%) has been developed 
(International  Journal  on  Hydropower  and  Dams, 
2011;  United  Nations 
Industrial  Development 
Organization (UNIDO) and International Centre on 
Small Hydro Power (ICSHP), 2013). 
The  experience  of  hydropower  plant  operations 
presented  a  mixed  picture.  The  DoE  reports 
that 
the  operations  are  encumbered  with 
technical  problems  (equipment  break  downs, 
sedimentation), which are exacerbated by difficult 
site access and lack of technical expertise amongst 
the villagers who are in charge of plant operation. 
The challenges also include poor management and 
inadequate community leadership. 
The  exploitable  hydropower  potential  in  Fiji’s  main 
islands is estimated at around 220 MW,21  out of which 
62%  has  been  materialised  by  four  hydropower 
schemes identified by FEA in the long-term strategy 
developed in the early 1970s, including the recently 
commissioned  40 MW  Nadarivatu  hydropower 
scheme  —  the  2nd  largest  in  Fiji  —  which  was 
operating in full swing in 2013, delivering 98% of its 
designed electricity production output (FEA, 2014). 
Currently,  the  DoE  monitors  the  hydrology  of 
several sites as part of the hydro survey that is being 
conducted across the country. Of the sites, Kadavu, 
Taveuni,  Serua  and  Vanua  Levu  could  support 
village  electrification  schemes  totalling  about  
300 kW,  accounting  for  60%  of  the  combined  
500 kW potential estimated by Fiji DoE. There are 
several sites already surveyed, which are awaiting 
detailed  design,  and  others  currently  undergoing 
monitoring. 
The  rest  of  hydropower’s  exploitable  potential  is 
on track for being developed, along with projects 
already in the pipeline that are being implemented. 
Around 80 MW of exploitable hydropower potential 
is  located  in  Viti  Levu  Island.  This  is  where  the 
largest portion of the population resides and where 
21  Calculation  based  on  the  Pilot  Study  for  Comprehensive  Renewable  Energy  Power  Development,  Tokyo  Electric  Power  Company 
for Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC), 2010; and FEA Power Development Plan. This range would be likely expanded as 
investigation progresses on new sites. 
 
 
22 There is no specific definition of “small hydro,” although an installed capacity of 10 MW and above is usually considered large-scale 
  hydro. For Fiji, micro-hydro refers to schemes with capacities of up to 100 kW, while mini-hydropower has capacities of up to 1,500 kW 
(Gonelevu, 2002).
 
12
Biomass energy
Similar  to  energy  from  a  hydropower  plant  with  a 
reservoir,  biomass,  as  stored  energy  resource,  can 
be used for meeting base load electricity demand. 
As with many developing countries, biomass in Fiji 
is used mostly in a traditional way – i.e. as firewood 
for  cooking  –  and  data  on  the  potential  and 
traditional  uses  of  biomass  are  either  unavailable 
or unreliable. It seems to be the case that the vast 
majority of biomass is used in rural areas, although 
urban  households  occasionally  use  wood  to 
prepare traditional (lovo23) meals. The best available 
estimates have shown that more than 70% of rural 
households use wood for cooking purposes. 
in  Fiji.  Both  FSC  (which  is  majority  state-owned) 
and  Tropik  Woods26  (a  state-owned  enterprise) 
operate  conventional  steam  boilers  to  generate 
and  process  steam  and  electricity  for  their  own 
consumption.  Excess  power  is  sold  to  FEA  at  the 
recently  increased  rate  of  FJD 0.3308  kWh,  more 
than double the previous rate of 0.15/kWh. In 2012, 
4% of FEA’s electricity was provided by these two 
generators.27
Since 2006, the amount of bagasse has decreased, 
following  the  decline  of  sugar  cane  production 
in  Fiji  from  3.2 million tonnes  to  an  estimated 
2 million tonnes in 2014 (ADB, 2013). Thanks to the 
recent efforts by the Government of Fiji to revitalise 
the  sugar  industry,  which  are  expected  to  lead  to 
significantly higher raw sugar production, bagasse-
based  power  generation  may  be  more  promising 
now  than  it  was  over  the  past  years.  For  instance, 
development of another 40 MW facility at Rarawai 
sugar mill in Ba is underway, alongside an ethanol 
production  facility  with  a  capacity  of  60,000 litres 
per day.28
The  Forestry  Department  of  Fiji24 
is  currently 
piloting a programme to assess biomass potential in 
order to improve the quality of resource data, which 
would help develop a strategy for modernised use 
of biomass-based energy resources in Fiji. From the 
global  biomass  carbon  map,  shown  in  Figure 10,  it 
can be seen that Fiji is very rich in biomass resources. 
This is largely because of the more than 50% forest 
coverage  rate  and  the  fact  that  about  15%  of  the 
total  land  area  is  used  for  agricultural  purposes 
(FAOSTAT, n.d.; UNdata, n.d.).
Biogas development29
As  early  as  the  mid-1970s,  Fijians  began  to  apply 
biogas  technologies;  initially,  these  technologies 
were  dominated  by  a  fixed  dome  biogas  digester, 
designed as a means to manage animal manure  in 
remote rural areas (APCTT-UNESCAP, 2010; Tukana, 
2005). However, in terms of biogas production, the 
results  from  these  early  biogas  technologies  were 
mixed.  Their  failures  were  caused  mainly  by  poor 
design and construction and by lack of knowledge 
on  operation  and  maintenance,  as  pointed  out  by 
Apart  from  the  traditional  use  for  energy  purposes, 
biomass  has  also  been  utilised  in  a  modern  way  in 
Fiji, including direct combustion for steam and power 
generation, as well as production of biogas and biofuels. 
Combustion  for  steam  and  power  generation. 
Agricultural and forestry waste have been used for 
steam  and  power  generation  for  quite  some  time 
Figure 10: Global Living Biomass Carbon Density Map, 2000
Source: Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center25
23 Traditional earth oven cooking. 
24 Fiji has a large forest coverage, accounting for more than 50% of the total land area. 
25 At http://cdiac.ornl.gov/epubs/ndp/global_carbon/carbon_documentation.html 
26 Bagasse and wood residues. 
27 The share was low due to the fact that the 9.3 MW wood-fired co-generation plant of Tropik Woods produced only 13% of its contracted 
  supply value in 2012 because of a major technical issue (FEA, 2012). 
28 Limited to the biochemical conversion process (often referring to anaerobic digestion) in this report. 
29 This refers to Strengthening the Fiji Biogas Programme – a study for the Department of Energy, Government of Fiji.
13
Tukana  (2005).  In  early  2000s,  Fiji’s  Department 
of  Agriculture  and  DoE  have  installed  a  few  bio-
digesters  with  the  Carmatec  design  made  by  Mr. 
Raedler  for  dairy  and  pig  farmers  in  the  Central, 
Northern  and  Western  divisions.  As  with  earlier 
attempts, these yielded mixed results. The positive 
element  was  that  the  design  seemed  robust, 
although knowledge on how to build, operate and 
manage  the  facilities  was  clearly  lacking,  which 
contributed to the failure of some units.
Naboro, which has already been connected to the 
FEA grid. It is estimated that the supply of landfill 
gas could be sufficient for a generation capacity of 
5 MW.
Biofuels
The  DoE  supports  several  biofuel  projects  as 
part  of  its  electrification  programme  for  remote 
island  communities,  which  include  encouraging 
production and blending of coconut oil with diesel. 
In  addition,  potential  use  of  local  molasses  to 
produce ethanol for transport is being investigated 
in  the  biofuel  sector 
by  FSC.  DoE’s  policy 
emphasises  that  further  development  of  biofuels 
in Fiji should be based on technical and economic 
feasibility, with proper assessment of the associated 
risks and a special focus on the trade-offs between 
production  of  crops  suitable  for  conversion  to 
biofuels  and  production  of  food  and  cash  crops. 
Although the government has granted significant 
tax incentives to private biofuel producers, the only 
private  company  producing  biodiesel  in  Suva  has 
given up such production to focus on higher-value 
coconut oil-based cosmetics.
In fact, these challenges are experienced typically 
in countries that are just beginning to apply biogas 
technologies. This is because the technologies and 
designs must not only be adapted to local contexts 
and  conditions,  but  also  well  understood  by  the 
users,  particularly  when  households  and  semi-
commercial  livestock  farms  are  the  end-users, 
and thus play a critical role in making the installed 
biogas facility a success or a failure.
This suggests that Fiji needs to find ways to make 
biogas  technologies  work  within  Fiji’s  particular 
context,  and  not  necessarily  by  reinventing  the 
wheel, nor with off-the-shelf solutions that can be 
used  immediately.  The  assessment  of  the  market 
potential to strengthen the Fiji biogas programme 
was  first  reported  by  a  DoE  consultant  in  2006 
and  needs  to  be  updated  comprehensively.  The 
Fiji Renewable Energy Power Project is advertising 
a  consultancy  to  further  study  the  potential 
development  of  appropriate  waste-to-energy 
technologies.  The  focus  will  also  be  on  biogas 
technologies  at  the  household  and  commercial 
scales.  Toward  this  end,  Fiji  Department  of 
Environment and FEA plan to undertake a feasibility 
study  for  methane  extract  from  the  landfill  in 
Solar energy
Fiji’s  solar  potential  varies  considerably  with 
location.  While  outer  islands  and  coastal  areas 
in  the  western  parts  of  the  larger  islands  show 
good  solar  potential,  as  illustrated  in  Figure  11, 
irradiation  levels  are  seriously  reduced  by  long 
periods of cloud cover in the mountain regions of 
the  larger  islands.  Measurements  at  Nadi  airport 
on Viti Levu’s west coast show a long-term annual 
average solar potential of 5.1 kWh/m2/day, peaking 
between  November  and  February.  In  contrast, 
long-term  records  in  the  Monasavu  catchment  in 
Figure 11: Solar Energy Resource in Fiji
Source: Final Determination on Electricity Tariff Rates, FEA, 2012.
14
Viti Levu’s interior suggest average solar potential 
of 3.7 kWh/m2/day. These values require oversizing 
solar installations to meet a given demand (in the 
mountainous interior, PV solutions tend to be more 
costly per kWh output than at coastal areas and on 
outer islands).
FEA, pulled out in 2003 over its concerns about the 
commercial  viability  of  the  project.  The  wind  farm 
was then built by FEA alone. It consists of 37 Vergnet 
275 kW  turbines  that  can  be  tilted  down  to  avoid 
damage  from  cyclones.  Still,  in  2012,  Cyclone  Evan 
caused  damage to the blades of some  of the  wind 
turbines,  even  though  the  wind  turbines  had  been 
lowered to the ground in anticipation of the cyclone. 
At present, there are only a few small grid-connected 
solar PV installations. But off-grid solar PV systems 
have been used in rural areas to provide basic energy 
services, such as lighting, mobile phone charging, use 
of electric appliances such as refrigerators, and water 
pumps for irrigation. In some cases, solar/pico-hydro 
formed  a  hybrid  system  that  can  deliver  relatively 
more reliable energy services.
Average output of the wind farm since commissioning, 
has only been some 6 GWh per annum, approximately 
half of the output predicted by FEA and the supplier 
of the turbines during the design phase, resulting in 
a much lower than average level of capacity factor. 
Key reason for the failure of the Butoni project was 
believed  to  be  the  lack  of  a  solid  wind  resource 
assessment in the project preparation phase.31
Wind energy
To date, detailed and comprehensive assessment of 
Fiji’s  wind  resources  is  largely  unavailable.  In  2013, 
the DoE commissioned a mesoscale wind mapping 
for the two main islands. The assessment was based 
on the Mesoscale Compressible Community model 
developed  by  Environment  Canada,  with  sets  of 
recorded  data  from  four  sites  used  to  calibrate 
modelling. Wind data at these sites were standard 
meteorological  data  recorded  at  10 metres  (m), 
significantly lower than the typical 80 m hub height 
for a wind generator. The model generated a wind 
map  for  the  two  main  islands.  While  the  data 
recorded  for  10 m  provide  a  first  indication,  the 
derived hub-height data are certainly not investment 
grade quality and further on-site measurements at 
50 m or higher will be required.
Against the background of the Butoni experience, 
it  would  be  advisable  to  perform  a  full-scale 
evaluation  of  the  factors  that  caused  its  poor 
performance  (e.g.  resource  assessment,  design, 
technology  selected,  procurement, 
life 
cycle 
and  operational  performance) 
before  additional  investment  in  wind  projects  is 
considered.
total 
cost 
Geothermal energy
Unlike  most  of  the  renewable  energy  sources, 
whose energy is essentially from the sun, the heat 
embedded in geothermal energy comes from the 
earth.  This  suggests  that  geothermal  resources 
can  provide  energy 
in  a  more  reliable,  and 
probably cheaper, way compared with solar-based 
renewable energy sources. 
Another  source  indicating  wind  potential  in  Fiji 
is  NASA’s  Solar  System  Exploration.  The  data, 
presenting monthly distribution of wind speeds (at 
50 m  above  the  earth’s  surface)  over  1993-2005 
in  seven  locations,30  have  shown  that  the  annual 
average  wind  speed  was  at  6.5 metres/ second 
(m/s).  More  importantly,  the  high-end  range  of 
wind  speeds  (6.5-7.2 m/s)  for  almost  all  the  sites 
was  during  the  dry  season,  from  May  to  October. 
(Kumar  and  Prasad,  2010)  This  suggests  an 
opportunity  to  develop  a  hybrid  system  in  which 
wind and hydropower can complement each other 
for enhanced energy security. 
Fiji is part of the “Ring of Fire”32 – a fertile ground 
for  geothermal  energy  production.  A  Geothermal 
Energy Association report identified Fiji as one of 
the total 39 countries in the world whose electricity 
demand  can  be  supplied  solely  by  geothermal 
energy (Holm, et al., 2010).
Fiji’s  geothermal  resources  were  first  studied 
in  the  1960s,  followed  by  further  investigations 
triggered by the global energy crisis of the 1980s. 
The  report  (Asmundsson,  2008)  entitled  South 
Pacific  Islands  Geothermal  Energy  for  Electricity 
Production,  issued  by  the  Icelandic  International 
Development  Agency  (IIDA),  highlighted  that  no 
volcanic  activity  is  found  on  Fiji  but  there  are  40 
thermal  springs,  which  originated  from  extinct 
volcanoes and are up to five million years old (from 
the Plio-Pleistocene epoch), as shown in Figure 12. 
Fiji’s  only  significant  wind  project  is  located  in 
Sigatoka  on  the  southeast  coast  of  Viti  Levu.  The 
10 MW project, known as Butoni and commissioned 
in  2007  by  FEA,  has  shown  rather  disappointing 
results.  A  private  sector  partner  (Pacific  Hydro), 
who  initially  developed  the  project  together  with 
30 Suva, Labasa, Monsasavu, Savusavu, Udu, Nabouwalu, Rakiraki and Lautoka
31 www.fijitimes.com/story.aspx?id=127996 
32 The horseshoe-shaped volcanic belt that stretches from the southern tip of South America, along the coast of North America, across 
  the Bering Strait, down through Japan and into New Zealand, around the edge of the Pacific Ocean 
  (source: http://education.nationalgeographic.com/education/encyclopedia/ring-fire/?ar_a=1 )
15
Figure 12: Hot Springs Locations in Fiji
Source: Government of Fiji, 2014
Government of Fiji, 2014. SE4All: Rapid Assessment and Gap Analysis, February, 2014.
Table 2: Fiji’s Geothermal Energy Potential 
High Case
Low Case
Location/ 
Capacity & Output
Generation 
Capacity (MW)
Elec. Prod. Output 
(GWh)
Generation 
Capacity (MW)
Elec. Prod. 
Output (GWh)
Viti Levu
28
196 
15
105 
Vanua Levu
42
294
23
161
Total
70
491
38
266
Source: JBIC, 2009
Much of the geothermal resource is located in two 
sites,  Savusavu  (at  approx.  170°C)  and  Labasa 
(at  approx.  120°C)  on  Vanua  Levu  Island,  where 
hydropower  is  marginal  and  projected  energy 
demand  is  increasing,  partly  due  to  the  growing 
energy demand from the local sugar cane industry 
(specifically FSC).
However, even with available geothermal resources, 
upfront costs and investment risks remain very high in 
most cases. Investment costs for a geothermal project 
fall  into  four  different  categories:  1)  exploration  to 
confirm availability of geothermal resources, including 
exploratory drilling; 2) drilling of wells for production 
and injection; 3) auxiliary facilities  and infrastructure 
(access  roads,  buildings);  and  4)  the  actual  power 
plant  (Goldstein,    et al.,  2011).  Drilling  costs  vary 
according to type of borehole, characteristics of the 
respective  geological  formation,  and  mobilisation 
cost  for  drilling  rigs.  As  there  are  no  suitable  rigs 
available in Fiji, the cost associated with first drilling 
would be relatively high due to the mobilisation cost. 
Relevant  literature  quotes  typical  drilling  cost  at 
USD 1,200/m. Given a drilling depth of 500-1,000 m, 
an  exploration  well  would  typically  cost  around 
USD 1 million.  Overall,  geothermal  investment  costs 
are typically below USD 4,000 per kW but may reach 
The  most  recent  report  from  the  Japan  Bank  for 
International  Cooperation  (JBIC,  2009)  revealed 
the existence of exploitable geothermal resources 
in Viti Levu in addition to what is found in Vanua 
Levu,  and  also  presented  two  potential  cases  for 
development in terms of generation capacities and 
outputs, as presented in Table 2. The big discrepancy 
between the high case and the low case indicates 
that  further  investigation  (exploratory  drilling)  is 
required  to  confirm  the  size  and  performance  of 
each identified geothermal reserve/site.
16
Table 3: Current Status in Geothermal Licensing
Location
Remarks
Labasa
Active Licence 
Savusavu
Active Licence
Sabeto
Lapsed Licence
Tavua
Lapsed Licence
Ba, Tavua and Rakiraki
Pending Application
Ba, Nawaka and Vuda
Pending Application
Namosi and Waimaro
Pending Application
Wailevu and Vaturova
Pending Application
Source: Department of Mineral Affairs
USD 6,000/kW for the smaller plants that are likely 
to be relevant for Fiji. These costs have been a major 
barrier for the development of geothermal resources 
in Fiji. 
Beyond  previous  studies  and    endeavour,  there 
is  a  need  for  conducting  a  more  comprehensive 
resource  assessments  which  can  used  to  assist 
with developing policy proposals. Other needs may 
include enhancing capacities for geothermal plant 
design, configuration, operation and maintenance 
in Fiji. Cooperation with regard to an exchange of 
resources,  technology,  and  knowledge  amongst 
the key players in the space of geothermal energy 
could  culminate  in  technology  transfer,  capacity 
building, and eventually investment in geothermal 
power generation.
At present, there are two active “Special Prospective 
Licences”  issued  under  the  Mining  Act  (1978),  in 
which geothermal resources are classified as mineral. 
These  licences  are  held  by  a  small  local  company, 
which planned to do exploratory drilling. Two other 
licences have lapsed and four other applications are 
on hold due to pending legal matters (Table 3).
17
Solar Panels on House/Shutterstock
18
III. ENABLING   
  ENVIRONMENT FOR    
  RENEWABLE ENERGY   
  DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
Government vision regarding the energy future in Fiji became clearer in the draft 
NEP  2014  in  comparison  with  the  NEP  2006.  The  current  vision  addresses  the 
sustainability  of  energy  sector  development,  with  the  goals  of  being  “resource 
efficient”,  “cost  effective”  and  “environmentally  sustainable”.  Following  this 
guiding vision, policy objectives in draft NEP 2014 were defined in two tiers: the 
primary objective, aimed at achieving affordability for all Fijians; and the secondary 
objectives,  focused  on  sustainable  energy  production  and  reducing  energy 
expenditure on imported fuels. As illustrated in Figure 13, it is crucial to find ways 
to reduce the costs of imported fuels and at the same time enhance sustainable 
energy supply in a cost-effective manner.
Figure 13: Schematic Illustration of the Correlation of Policy Objectives
In  this  context,  replacing  imported  fossil  fuels  with  indigenous  renewables  has  been 
identified  as  one  of  the  key  instruments  to  use  in  achieving  the  policy  objectives. 
However, the extent to which this strategy can be employed cost-effectively depends 
upon how well the enabling environment is established. By removing the key barriers, 
favourable conditions for renewable energy development could be provided; thus all the 
key players, particularly in the private sector, can be actively engaged and consequently 
bring in the private investments that Fiji requires for its power sector development.
Without  clear  and  achievable  renewable  energy  targets,  it  would  be  less  effective 
to define the necessary components that need to be put in place and elaborate on 
the relationship between them. By the same token, a comprehensive power sector 
development  plan  needs  to  be  developed  to  present  an  overall  picture  of  how  the 
Fijian power sector ought to evolve, where investment opportunities would present 
themselves  and  what  risks  and  uncertainties  prospective  investments  could  be 
exposed to. Renewable energy targets and a power sector development plan are two 
prerequisites for devising and implementing an enabling environment for renewable 
energy development.
19
3.1 FIJI’S RENEWABLE ENERGY 
TARGETS
The  draft  NEP  2014  proposed  the  renewable 
energy  targets,  along  with  targets  for  electricity 
access  and  energy  efficiency,  as  presented  in  
Table  4.  The  same  targets  were  proposed  in  Fiji’s 
SE4ALL  report,  which  was  officially  approved 
and endorsed by the Government of Fiji. Hence, it 
would  be  expected  that  the  targets  in  draft  NEP 
2014 will likely be adopted by the Cabinet. 
Table 4: Energy Policy Targets 2014 
Targets
Indicator
Baseline
2015
2020
2030
Access to modern energy services
Percentage of population with 
electricity access
89%a (2007)
90%
100%
100%
Percentage of population with primary 
reliance on wood fuels for cooking
20%b (2004) 
18%
12%
<1%
Improving energy efficiencyc
Energy intensity (consumption of 
imported fuel per unit of GDP in 
megajoules (MJ)/FJD)
28.9d (2011)
2.89 (-0%)
2.86 (-1%)
2.73 (-5.5%)
Energy intensity (power consumption 
per unit of GDP in kWh/FJD)
0.23d (2011)
0.219 (-4.7%) 
0.215 (-6.5%)
0.209 (-9.1%) 
Share of renewable energy
Renewable energy share in electricity 
generation
56%e (2011) 
67%
81%
99%
Renewable energy share in total 
energy consumption
13%f (2011) 
25%g
15%
18%
a  Preliminary data from 2007 Census, Fiji Islands Bureau of Statistics 2012b
b  2002-2003  Household  Income  and  Expenditure  Survey,  Fiji  Islands  Bureau  of  Statistics,(2004).  Reliance  on  wood  fuels  alone  for 
  cooking. 
c  Based on 15% fuel substitution to local fuels and a 3% annual efficiency improvement.
d  Fiji Islands Bureau of Statistics based on average 36 MJ per litre of fuel.
e  Annual report 2011, FEA
f  Based  on  total  energy  consumption  of  16,500 terajoules  (TJ)  (Fiji  Islands  Bureau  of  Statistics,  2011)  and  55%  power  generation  from 
  renewables (FEA).
g  Based on 99% renewable power and 25,000 kL of biofuel.
Source: SE4ALL Rapid Assessment and Gap Analysis Report, 2014
in  the  National  Energy  Forum33 
Interestingly, 
that  was  conducted  in  July  2013  by  Economic 
Consulting  Associates  and  SMEC  (New  Zealand), 
to  evaluate  policy  proposals  regarding  petroleum 
and  substitute  fuels,  “mandating  oil  companies 
to  blend  biofuels”  did  not  appear  to  be  a 
priority.  On  the  other  hand,  “subsidising  biofuel 
production  at  village  level”  was  identified  as 
one  of  the  areas  that  should  be  prioritised. 
This  disparity 
in  priority  seems  to  suggest 
preference for use of biofuels at a rural level over  
large-scale usage.
It is worth mentioning that the target for biofuel as 
substitute for petroleum has also been proposed. The 
draft NEP 2014 aimed at biofuel providing 2.37% of the 
total liquid fuel supply by 2030. The linkage between 
the biofuel target and the above-mentioned energy 
targets 
is  the  estimated  25,000 thousand litres 
of  biofuel  production  by  2030.  The  assumption  is 
that  the  sugar  industry  would  be  able  to  provide 
100,000 tonnes of molasses as feedstock for biofuel 
production in order to achieve this target. Given that 
the policy goal is to improve the affordability of energy 
services partly through reduced energy import costs, 
it  is  important  to  reduce  the  consumption  of  fossil 
fuels in other sectors than just the power sector. 
33 Annex 1 in the Draft National Energy Policy, pp. 28-34.
20
In  terms  of  investment  needed  to  achieve  the 
proposed targets, it was estimated in the proposed 
draft  NEP  (2014)  that  annual 
investment  of 
FJD 50 million34  in  electrification  and  renewables 
would be required over the period 2014-2030. This 
would aggregate, over that time span, to one-third 
of  the  total  estimate  that  has  been  suggested  in 
the Strategic Action Plan, i.e. FJD 1.5 billion.35 Thus 
an  articulated  investment  plan  might  assist  in 
coordinating  development of generation capacity 
(100%  renewable-based  by  2030)  with  grid 
development (expansion and enhancement). 
“  …if  the  implementation  of  the  policy  encourages 
even larger increase in investment then the dates for 
achieving targets can be advanced over the life of 
the  policy.”36  To  attract  much-needed  investments 
from private sectors, the enabling environment must 
be  established,  including  the  overall  investment 
climate,  sound  regulatory  frameworks  (for  both 
technical  and  economic 
regulations),  policy 
frameworks  with  associated  supportive  schemes, 
financing instruments, risk mitigation mechanisms, 
and  sufficient  levels  of  human  and  institutional 
capacities  that  are  required  for  implementation  of 
various measures and actions. 
3.2  POWER SECTOR 
DEVELOPMENT PLAN
As for all investments elsewhere, it is necessary to 
provide an overall healthy investment climate, which 
encompasses wider framework conditions such as 
political  stability,  infrastructure  development  and 
educational level, among others. 
To meet the targets proposed, the physical power 
system  should  be  developed  and  enhanced.  A 
power  sector  development  plan  is  useful  not 
only  for  investors  who  could  identify  investment 
opportunities but also for energy planners who are 
striving  to  find  the  least-cost  options  to  achieve 
the targets set by policy-makers. 
New national energy policy
Priorities  in  the  draft  NEP  2014  are  identified  in 
seven  individual  areas,  namely:  grid-based  power 
supply;  rural  electrification;  renewable  energy; 
energy  efficiency;  transport;  petroleum  products 
and  biofuels;  and  implementation  arrangements. 
In addition to a dedicated section on renewables, 
renewable  energy  appears  in  different  sections 
of  the  Policy,  including  grid-based  power,  rural 
is 
electrification,  transport  and  biofuels,  and 
therefore one of the leading themes of the draft NEP 
2014.37 The draft NEP 2014 recommendations in six 
priority  areas  for  renewable  energy  development 
are summarised below:
the  site-constrained  nature  of  many 
Given 
renewables,  in  cases  where  the  renewable  energy 
resources are not close to the load centre or to users, 
it is necessary to extend transmission or distribution 
lines,  or  use  interconnections  to  expand  the  grid 
networks to reach the sites, provided that tapping 
into  these  renewables  at  such  sites  is  considered 
to  be  economically  viable.  In  other  cases,  where 
renewable energy sources are close to the locations 
of  demand,  decentralised  power  systems  such  as 
stand-alone  or  mini-grid  systems  can  be  set  up 
relatively  more  easily;  the  grid  issues  are  less  of  a 
concern  in  these  cases.  Nevertheless,  developing 
a rural master plan, as suggested in the draft NEP 
2014 and SE4ALL report, would be advisable. 
Grid-based power
• 
Increase  private  sector  investment  in  large-
scale  electricity  generation  by  establishing  a 
transparent  process  for  procurement  of  new 
large-scale capacity from IPPs. 
In  addition,  in  such  a  power  development  plan,  it 
would  be  easier  to  lay  out  the  areas  of  priority  – 
such as geothermal and solar energy – as evidenced 
by  detailed  studies  of  renewable  energy  sources 
availability and associated economic considerations. 
• 
Increase  private  sector  investment  in  small-
scale,  grid-connected  renewable  generation 
by  establishing  economically  justified  feed-
in  tariffs  or  similar  mechanisms  to  provide 
incentives  and  reduce  the  risks  for  electricity 
production from small-scale renewable sources 
that are connected to the grid. 
3.3   ENABLERS FOR INVESTMENTS 
IN RENEWABLE ENERGY
•  Strengthen  transparency  and  effectiveness  of 
the regulation of the electricity industry, including 
establishing  a 
regulatory  contract 
with  FEA  and  making  all  forms  of  electricity 
functions, 
transparent.  Regulatory 
subsidy 
targets, 
To  achieve 
investments 
are 
instrumental, as spelled out in the draft NEP 2014: 
renewable  energy 
the 
and 
formal 
financing 
schemes 
34 Seen on page 17 in the draft NEP 2014
35 Seen on page 3 in the Strategic Action Plan
36 Quoted from page 17 in the draft NEP 2014.
37 While the Policy revolves around the priority policies described for seven main draft NEP 2014 areas, under each theme there are also 
  secondary priority policies. For details, refer to the final version of the draft NEP 2014 and the SE4ALL report
21
including licensing and defining frameworks for 
encouraging IPPs, should be carried out by the 
DoE and the Fiji Commerce Commission. 
In policy discussions on renewable energy, lack of 
renewable  energy  resource  assessment  has  been 
identified  as  one  of  the  strong  impediments  to 
private  project  development.  Therefore  an  overall 
renewable  energy  resource  assessment  should 
be  performed  and  the  data  should  be  made 
publically available. However, from an operational 
perspective,  it  may  be  necessary  to  define  the 
range of quality of resource data, as each individual 
project requires different quality and sets of data. 
It may be possible to make a project development 
level of data available on a commercial basis, while 
the public data providers could limit themselves to 
provision of data considered sufficient for investors 
to  identify  the  zones  that  are  worth  further 
investigation.
Rural electrification
•  Develop  a  national  electrification  master  plan 
based  on  least-cost  solutions,  which  could 
include grid extension, diesel and hybrid mini-
grids and stand-alone PV systems. 
Renewable energy
•  Establish  a  comprehensive  assessment  of 
Fiji’s  renewable  energy  resources,  including 
geothermal resources. Assessment will include 
an inventory of suitable sites and technologies 
together  with  an  evaluation  of  their  technical 
and  economic  viability,  and  their  associated 
social and environmental impacts. 
Legislative and regulatory frameworks
Legislative  and  regulatory  environments  affect 
businesses  through  the  costs  of  compliance, 
including  the  costs  and  risks  associated  with 
important 
transparency 
to  establish  sound 
legislative  and  regulatory 
frameworks  under  which  business  operation  can 
be ensured. 
•  Establish a data repository on renewable energy 
resources  that  is  accessible  to  the  public  and 
prospective  investors  in  order  to  remove  the 
information barrier to private sector and other 
relevant  project  developers.  Resource  data 
could also be shared globally on platforms such 
as the global renewable energy atlas managed 
by IRENA or the Pacific Regional Energy Data 
Repository hosted by SPC.
in  enforcement. 
is 
It 
The  2013  policy  review  performed  by  the  DoE 
included a legislative gap analysis with the aim to 
identify  areas  where  changes  in  legislation  might 
improve energy sector coordination, trigger more 
effective  management  of  the  energy  sector  and 
assist effective implementation of the NEP and its 
associated Strategic Action Plan. 
•  Conduct 
investigations 
into  geothermal 
energy  with  public  sector  funding,  possibly 
in  cooperation  with  development  partners 
supporting geothermal development. 
Transport
•  Further  investigate  the  potential  and  cost-
effectiveness  of  sustainable  solutions 
for 
maritime transport, including renewable energy 
solutions  as  well  as  efficient  motors,  better 
vessel design and improved maintenance. 
Under the Electricity Act (currently under a detailed 
review), FEA was established as a corporate entity 
in charge of electricity supply in Fiji. FEA provides 
advisory  services  to  a  the  Energy  Minister  on 
all  issues  around  the  generation,  transmission, 
distribution and use of electricity.
Biofuels
•  Continue  research  to  explore  the  potential  for 
increased  production  and  use  of  vegetable  oil 
and  ethanol-based  biofuels  while  remaining 
mindful  of  the  risks,  in  particular  the  trade-
offs  between  production  of  crops  suitable  for 
conversion to biofuels and production of food 
and cash crops.
The Public Enterprise Act
is  a  Government  Statutory  Authority, 
FEA 
governed by the Public Enterprise Act enacted in 
1996 and revised in 2002. A core provision of the 
Act  is  the  establishment  of  a  Public  Enterprises 
Reform  Program,  aimed  at  improving  the  overall 
efficiency of the public enterprises. This entails the 
restructuring of commercial sections of Government 
Statutory Authorities and Government Commercial 
Companies.  Government  entities,  including  the 
FEA, are committed to operate in a competitive and 
fair trading environment, as successful businesses 
with clear objectives, management autonomy and 
strict accountability. Under the Act, FEA is required 
to pay at least 50% of net earnings (after tax) to 
the government as dividends.
Implementation arrangements
•  Develop an IPP framework (responsibility of the 
DoE)  that  will  include  procurement  processes 
and  power  purchase  agreement  principles  for 
large-scale capacity, and feed-in tariffs and net-
metering  arrangements  for  grid-connected, 
small-scale renewables. 
22
•  Exploration  licence  to  explore  the  specified 
area and mark out and apply for a development 
licence or mining lease; 
Land Transport Act 
established  a  Land  Transport  Authority,  which  is 
responsible for  regulating the registration and use 
of  vehicles,  issuing  drivers  licences  and  enforcing 
laws.  The  Act  empowers  the  Minister 
traffic 
responsible  for  transport  to  establish  emission 
and  fuel  consumption  standards  and  allows  the 
Land  Transport  Authority  to  collect  information 
on  registered  vehicles,  such  as  fuel  type,  year  of 
manufacture  and  other  information  that  can  be 
used  to  determine  and  improve  vehicle  energy 
efficiency. 
•  Development  licence  to  develop  the  specified 
area  and  apply  for  a  mining  lease  or  to  retain 
the mineral resources within the specified area; 
•  Mining lease to perform mining activities within 
the area specified in the lease. 
For  each  type  of  licence,  the  Mineral  Bill  outlines 
the  application  process,  criteria  for  granting  the 
licence,  and  the  terms,  conditions  and  statutory 
requirements attached to the licence. The Bill also 
includes  provisions  for  compensations  paid  for 
land, cultural and external disruptions, and royalty 
payments  to  the  government  from  development 
licence  holders  and  mining  leaseholders,  as  well 
as health and safety requirements for any mining 
activities.
Environmental Management Act
was  enacted  to  protect  natural  resources  and  to 
promote waste management and general pollution 
control.  It  established  the  National  Environment 
Council, which approves the National Environment 
Report  and  the  National  Environmental  Strategy, 
monitors  implementation of the Strategy, advises 
the  government  on  international  and  regional 
environmental  commitments  and  treaties,  and 
facilitates  discussion  of  environmental  matters. 
The  Department  of  Environment,  among  others, 
coordinates and implements environmental impact 
assessment  procedures  for  all  energy  projects  as 
well  as  waste  management  and  pollution  control, 
including emissions from power plants. 
Key Energy Stakeholders 
Fiji’s  energy  sector  management  suggests  a 
complex 
framework 
institutional  and  policy 
with  responsibilities  allocated  among  various 
institutions, 
including  the  Ministry  of  Works, 
Transport  and  Public  Utilities,  the  Ministry  of 
Tourism  and  Public  Enterprises,  the  Ministry  of 
Finance  and  National  Planning,  the  Ministry  of 
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, the 
Fiji Commerce Commission, the FEA, and the Land 
Transport Authority (see Figure 14). 
Commerce Commission Decree
provides  comprehensive  guidelines  concerning 
regulated  industries  and  consumer  protection, 
and  establishes  a  Commerce  Commission.  The 
Commission advises the Minister for Industry and 
Trade  regarding  proposed  access  agreements 
(including  access  to  the  FEA  grid),  facilitates 
negotiations  about  access  to  infrastructure  or 
services  under  access  regimes  and  arbitrates 
disputes  over  access-related  matters.  The 
Commission  regulates  the  prices  for  electricity 
and  related  services,  including  price  control  for 
the  electricity  supply.  This  also  empowers  the 
Commission  to  set  the  minimum  tariff  level  that 
FEA  may  offer  to  IPPs.  The  Commission  also 
determines the maximum prices for the sale of all 
petroleum products.
The  current  institutional  and  policy  framework 
involves  overlapping 
for 
responsibilities  and  gaps 
the  areas  of 
coordination,  regulation  and  oversight,  as  well 
as  the  lack  of  a  single  institution  with  overall 
responsibility for planning and policy development. 
One case in point concerns the roles of FEA.
the  energy  sector 
in 
The functions and duties of FEA are as follows: 
•  Generate, transmit and distribute electricity at 
reasonable cost, and operate and manage the 
related assets;
Mineral (Exploration and Exploitation) Bill
states 
including 
geothermal  resources,  in  or  under  any  land  in 
Fiji are the property of the State, and no persons 
are  allowed  to  carry  out  any  activities  involving 
the  prospecting,  exploration  and  development 
of  minerals  without  a  relevant  licence.  There  are 
different types of licences prescribed by the Bill: 
resources, 
that  all  mineral 
•  Supply electricity to retail consumers based on sale 
contracts concluded with individuals or companies; 
• 
Issue  and  grant  licences  for  the  supply  and 
operation  of  an  electrical  installation.  FEA  is 
empowered  to  determine  the  amount  of  the 
licence  fee,  the  licence  conditions,  and  licence 
term, to cancel licences if any of the conditions 
are  breached,  to  make  regulations  on  the 
conditions  to  be  met  by  licence  applicants  and 
•  Prospector’s rights to prospect for minerals and 
mark out areas for a proposed mining lease; 
23
the  conditions  for  suspension,  extension  and 
revocation of licences, and to grant certificates of 
registration to all new electrical installations; and 
•  The Fiji Commerce Commission is empowered 
to  determine  price  adjustments  for  regulated 
goods  and  services,  including  electricity  and 
fossil fuels. 
•  Develop  technical  standards  and  specifications, 
determine  duties  of  inspectors  and  procedures 
for  inspections,  develop  and  determine  public 
enquiries and notice procedures, and develop and 
determine payments and collection methods. 
•  The Ministry of Public Enterprise and Tourism 
institutional 
is  empowered 
efficiency and commercial viability of FEA. 
to  scrutinise 
•  The  Fiji  Electricity  Authority 
is  responsible 
for  conducting 
load  forecasting,  developing 
expansion  options  through  simulations  and 
power  system  planning,  developing  investment 
plans,  setting  the  rules  for  IPP’s  and  licensing 
other  enterprises  that  operate  in  the  electricity 
sector. 
The current institutional set-up has placed FEA in a 
situation where the potential conflict of interest is 
almost inevitable. On one hand, as a state-owned 
power utility, FEA has the duty to provide electricity 
to users and keep itself commercially viable, while 
on the other hand, it has to take a regulatory role 
in developing the framework guiding private sector 
participation in the power sector.
Significant  changes  are  proposed  under  the 
proposed  draft  NEP  2014  to  remove  regulatory 
functions from FEA and strengthen the regulatory 
mandate  and  capacity  of  DoE.  In  the  meantime, 
the  ADB  has  allocated  significant  technical  
assistance  to  strengthen  the  capacities  of  DoE,  a 
project that is expected to start in the first half of 
2015.
Although  the  NEP  2006  foresaw  significant 
restructuring  of  the  responsibilities  for  planning 
and  regulation,  this  did  not  materialise  and 
instead  of  becoming  a  planning  and  regulatory 
unit, the DoE remained largely confined to project 
implementation  in  specific  areas  such  as  energy 
efficiency  and  rural  electrification.  Given  the 
challenges regarding the structure of organisations 
that  play  a  role  in  the  energy  sector  of  the 
country, the recent draft NEP 2014 has suggested 
establishing  a  new  National  Energy  Coordination 
Committee to be responsible for coordinating and 
overseeing implementation of energy policies. 
The  Fiji  Commerce  Commission  also  regulates 
retail  prices  for  petroleum  products  based  on 
submissions made by the private sector suppliers 
regular  adjustments  of  maximum  
through 
retail prices in response to market developments.38
Unlike power tariffs, which are uniform throughout 
the country, the price regulation for fossil fuels takes 
supply cost at a given location into consideration. 
identified  serious 
The  draft  NEP  2014  also 
constraints 
in 
particular,  the  poor  quality  or  complete  lack  of 
national  and  regional  energy  sector  data  –  as 
a  major  obstacle  for  policy,  planning,  rational 
decision-making,  private  investment  and  future 
performance improvement.
in  knowledge  management  – 
For  example,  in  remote  rural  areas  these  fuels 
are  more  expensive,  as  the  long  supply  chain 
increases  transport  cost  to  these  locations.  The 
issue  of  reducing  the  cost  of  fuel  imports  by 
changing  the  current  procurement  model  to  
competitive tendering has been repeatedly raised 
in Fiji. 
With respect to creating an enabling environment 
for  renewables,  a  number  of  institutions  in  Fiji 
have mandates to adjust the legal and regulatory 
frameworks  toward  being  attractive  to  potential 
investors. These include the following: 
As  seen  in  Table  5  below,  Liquefied  Petroleum 
Gas (LPG) is the most expensive fuel, considering 
energy  content.  While  the  price  regulation  based 
on  location  sends  the  right  signal  to  the  markets 
(higher  supply  costs  leads  to  higher  prices)  it 
disadvantages  more  remote 
locations,  which 
are  typically  poorer  than  the  urban  areas  on  the  
main islands. 
•	 The  Ministry  of  Works,  Transport  and  Public 
Utilities is empowered to give policy directives 
to FEA and set targets that FEA is required to 
meet in performing its functions and duties. 
38 The price determination by the Fiji Commerce Commission can be accessed at: www.commcomm.gov.fj
24
Table 5: Maximum Retail Prices for Fuels, April 2013
Product
FJD/litre
FJD/tonne
FJD/MJ
MJ/litre
LPG
2.14
3,820
0.084
25.5
Unleaded Petroleum
2.58
3,510
0.076
34
Diesel
2.29
2,726
0.059
38.6
Kerosene
2.54
3,215
0.069
36.6
Premix
1.86
2,548
0.055
34
Source: Fiji Commerce Commission
Figure 14: Institutional Structure for Energy Sector Management in Fiji
Source: Mainstreaming Report 2013
25
3.4 FINANCING AND INVESTMENT
electricity-sector investments since 1995.39 The lack of 
private investment in the energy sector is attributable 
to many causes. Two key factors include the overall 
unfavourable  climate  of 
investment  for  private 
investors and the inadequacy of the IPP tariffs offered 
by FEA, according to the Strategic Action Plan.40 The 
Fiji  Government  has  taken  steps  to  address  these 
two barriers that have hampered private investments 
in renewables. In May 2014, a major step was taken 
to  improve  the  general  business  environment  for 
private  sector  participation  by  increasing  the  IPP 
rates initiated by the Fiji Commerce Commission for 
encouraging  third  party  electricity  generation  and 
addressing the issue of the lack of public information 
about renewable energy.41
Given  the  high  costs  of  imported  fuel,  it  would 
be  economically  sensible  to  develop  renewable 
energy projects in Fiji. In order to boost renewable 
energy investment, the RBF has introduced a loan 
guarantee  scheme  and  established  mandatory 
lending  ratios  that  are  applicable  to  renewable 
energy. RBF is calling for commercial banks to lend 
2% of their combined loan portfolio to renewable 
energy projects. 
In addition, the World Bank supports the Sustainable 
Energy  Financing  Project,  an  initiative  designed 
to provide an incentive package for local banks to 
increase  lending  for renewable energy and energy 
efficiency  projects.  The  project  does  not  subsidise 
investments but facilitates financing of sustainable 
energy through partial risk guarantees, which allows 
participating  financing  institutions  to  cover  up  to 
50% of their renewable energy lending through the 
World  Bank’s  risk-mitigation  facility  and  provides 
communication and technical assistance to financial 
institutions. The technical assistance component of 
the project includes training for loan officers and solar 
installers in renewable energy and energy efficiency 
workshops.  By  2014,  a  total  of  44  loans  had  been 
approved (30 businesses and 14 individuals), which 
were mainly invested in energy efficiency, solar PV, 
solar water heating, and biofuel production projects. 
As  of  September  2014,  the  total  value  of  the  loan 
portfolio  under  the  Sustainable  Energy  Financing 
Project came to FJD 15 million from ANZ Bank and 
FJD 5.3 million from the Fiji Development Bank. Up 
to  now,  more  than  15,000  installations  have  been 
financed under the ESFP. 
In response to the emphasis on renewable energy 
development  through  IPP  in  the  draft  NEP  2014, 
the  Fiji  Commerce  Commission  made  a  ground-
breaking  ruling  on  minimum  tariff  rates  that  FEA 
must  offer  to  IPPs.  The  Commerce  Commission 
argued  that  by  not  attracting  IPPs,  FEA  was 
foregoing  cost  savings  in  terms  of  fossil  fuel-
based  generation,  with  avoidable  cost  calculated 
at  0.46 FJD/kWh.  Based  on  this  figure,  the  Fuji 
increased  minimum 
Commerce  Commission 
IPP  tariffs  by  17%,  from  0.2565  FJD/kWh  to 
0.3308 FJD/ kWh.42
In  the  past,  FEA  has  successfully  argued  that  the 
avoided  cost  (of  thermal  generation)  cannot  be 
used as a benchmark for determining IPP or feed-
in  tariffs.  FEA  sees  the  need  to  cap  IPP  tariffs 
at  their  average  retail  tariff  minus  a  “network” 
charge,  which  also  includes  a  profit  for  FEA.  This 
neglects  the  simple  commercial  reality  that  any 
kWh not supplied from thermal generation means 
an  improvement  of  FEA’s  bottom  line  as  average 
tariffs  are  significantly 
lower  than  electricity 
production cost from thermal generation. 
By  comparison,  the  investment  from  private  sector 
lags  behind,  even  though  the  Government  of  Fiji 
has  contemplated  mobilising  private  capital  for 
39 In 1995, the Forum Secretariat (Pacific Energy Program) supported the Fiji DoE in a call for expressions of interest of IPP investors.
40 Seen on pages 32 and 35. 
41  Fiji was ranked 60th in the 2013 Doing Business report by the World Bank. Fiji is well below the regional average in some categories,  
including starting a business. Similar conclusions are drawn in the ADB’s 2013 Private Sector Assessment, which states “The general 
  business  climate  in  Fiji  is  not  conducive  to  attract  sufficient  private  capital  and  investment  levels  have  never  been  lower  since 
 
independence.”
 
42 According to Final Authorisation, Independent Power Producer Rates, Fiji Commerce Commission 16 May 2014
26
IV. OPPORTUNITIES   
  FOR DEPLOYMENT OF  
  RENEWABLE ENERGY
 
 
The  National  RRA  Consultation  Workshop  attracted  representatives  from 
a  considerable  variety  of  public,  private  and  civil  society  organisations.  Key 
government  agencies  were  represented  together  with  senior  officials  from 
state-owned enterprises such as FEA and FSC. Representatives of development 
partners  also  participated,  demonstrating  the  importance  these  development 
partners give to energy policy and energy sector development in Fiji. Considering 
this  broad  participation  the  workshop  was  a  key  event  in  Fiji’s  energy  policy 
development  process.  In  total,  83  individuals  attended  the  workshop,  including 
high-level representatives of both public and private sector entities. In addition, 
representatives of regional and international organisations with interests in Fiji’s 
energy sector development also attended the workshop, such as the International 
Union  for  Conservation  of  Nature  (IUCN),  and  United  Nations  Development 
Programme (UNDP). 
Four break-out working groups then worked on details of the four service-resource 
pairs and reported back to the plenary after of intense discussion. Although varying 
in detail, the results of the work group sessions provide an excellent guideline for 
the status of the service–resource pairs under consideration. The summary actions 
provided in the main body of the text take into account not only the workshop 
results but also further discussions with DoE and other stakeholders. 
Service-Resource Pairs
Fiji needs a diversified portfolio of energy sources for enhanced security of supply. 
The  process  of  identifying  priority  areas  in  “service-resources”  is  focused  on 
options that have not yet been promoted or developed in Fiji but would potentially 
lead  to  innovation  and  new  applications  due  to  their  cost  advantage  and  their 
possible  role  in  enhancing  energy  security,  sustainability  and  diversified  supply. 
They would not prevent the development of “conventional” service-resource pairs 
but instead provide a perspective for complementary new actions. The following 
four service-resource pairs have been identified that are consistent with the draft 
NEP 2014 under consideration by the Government of Fiji. 
Grid electricity supply – Geothermal energy 
Geothermal  energy  has  the  potential  to  reduce  electricity  supply  cost  in  FEA’s 
grids.  More  importantly,  it  could  provide  base  load  electricity  and  protect  the 
utility  against  price  fluctuations  for  fossil  fuels  as  well  as  against  fluctuations 
in  the  hydrological  cycle  and  droughts.  It  is  expected  that  levelised  generation 
cost  for  medium-size  geothermal  power  (5-10 MW)  would  be  competitive  with 
all  other  sources  and  technologies.  Even  at  the  higher  end  of  generation  cost 
reported  from  international  experience  (0.12-0.15 USD/kWh),  geothermal  would 
be  competitive  with  wind  and  new  hydro  while  providing  firm  power  without 
fluctuations. Providing firm capacity for meeting the base load demand is not only 
technically important for the utility due to less variation in outputs but is culturally 
very familiar to the utility’s managers and engineers/operators and thus, as with 
hydropower, more easily accepted in contrast to variable renewables such as solar 
PV or wind. 
As of 2011, there was no geothermal-based electricity generation in Fiji. However, 
four  sites  have  been  identified  with  potential  geothermal  resource  activity: 
27
Savusavu,  Labasa,  Sabeto  and  Vatukoula.  A 
preliminary  study  by  the  Japanese  Ministry  of 
Economy, Trade and Industry in March 2009 found 
that there is a “potential for 23 MW of geothermal-
based  electricity  generation  in  Vanua  Levu,  at 
least 20 MW of which is near to the urban centres 
of  Savusavu  and  Labasa  (10  MW  is  near  to  each 
grid)”. Two companies have applied for licences to 
commence  geothermal  projects  in  Fiji;  there  are 
no  pending  licences  as  of  2015.  These  companies 
include  Geothermal  Electric  Ltd  and  Australian 
KUTh  Energy  (now  taken  over  by  GeoDynamics 
Ltd).  Geothermal  Electric  Ltd.  is  interested  in 
Savusavu  and  has  a  target  capacity  of  200  MWe 
or  more;  however,  the  total  energy  output  could 
be as low as 3 MWe due to the uncertainty about 
the  temperature  and  volume  of  hot  water  within 
geothermal reserves in the region.
•  Contingent  resource  insurance  is  of  particular 
relevance  to  geothermal  projects,  given  that 
they require drilling of costly exploration wells 
to assess the existence of adequate resources. 
This  instrument  pays  part  of  the  costs  of 
geothermal wells that prove to be unsuccessful. 
An  example  case  study  for  Fiji  geothermal 
exploratory  activities  could  be  taken  from  the 
Hungary  Case  GeoFund  in  2012.  This  project 
comprised three components: a direct investment 
funding  mechanism  aimed  at  reducing  capital 
costs  for  project  developers;  risk  mitigation  to 
reduce  the  exploration  and  operation  risks  by 
providing an partial insurance to project investors 
and  developers;  technical  assistance  to  provide 
information and knowledge needed for geothermal 
project development. With a total final pay-out of 
USD 3.3  million  by  WBG,  the  GeoFund  project  in 
Hungary  offered  a  guarantee  to  pay  85%  of  the 
costs of unsuccessful geothermal exploration wells. 
Financing  for  geothermal  development  from  the 
World  Bank  Group  (WBG)  has  increased  from 
USD 73 million in 2007 to USD 336 million in 2012, 
which represents around 10% of its total renewable 
energy  lending.  One  of  the  main  barriers  to 
accelerating 
the  deployment  of  geothermal 
energy  projects  is  the  high  risk  associated  with 
exploratory  activities  due  to  their  high  level  of 
uncertainty.  In  an  effort  to  further  enhance  the 
financing  for  global  geothermal  activities,  WBG 
has initiated a USD 500 million project, called the 
Global  Geothermal  Development  Plan,  which  was 
launched in Reykjavik, Iceland, in 2013. The project 
serves to “better manage and reduce the risks of 
exploratory  drilling  to  bring  geothermal  energy 
into  mainstream.”  A  study  on  surface  exploration 
among  other  technical  support  has  been  carried 
out  under  a  Geothermal  Compact  formed  by  the 
World bank in cooperation with Iceland. In addition 
to  these  initiatives,  there  are  also  some  existing 
instruments within the World Bank, which could be 
used for risk reduction: 
To further support geothermal energy development 
in  Fiji,  the  World  Bank  has  decided  to  provide 
technical assistance to identify 2-3 major sites for 
geothermal-based  power  generation.  The  study 
will begin soon.
Beyond  previous  studies  and  endeavour,  there  is 
a  need  for  conducting  a  comprehensive  resource 
assessments  which  can  be  used  to  assist  with 
developing  policy  proposals  support  geothermal 
energy  among  other  efforts  including  building 
capacity  to  design,  build,  operate  and  maintain 
geothermal plants in Fiji, along the lines that other 
countries, such as New Zealand, Kenya or Indonesia, 
have  developed  for  using  this  technology.  South-
South  cooperation  with  regard  to  sharing  of 
resources, technology and knowledge should lead 
to  effective  technology  transfer,  in  addition  to 
enhancing capacity and technical skills.
•  Portfolio guarantees cover a proportion of the 
losses on the package of loans (or projects) as 
a  whole.  This  type  of  instrument  was  used  in 
Thailand as part of the Clean Technology Fund, 
Sustainable  Energy  Finance  Programme.  To 
counter the major barrier of lack of long-term 
financing,  as  well  as  financiers’  perceptions 
of  high  risk,  the  Clean  Technology  Fund 
offered  a  guarantee,  with  a  total  amount  of 
USD 70 million,  to  cover  part  of  the  potential 
losses  for  an  energy-efficient  or  renewable 
energy portfolio. 
Given  the  great  potential  for  geothermal  energy 
in  Fiji,  the  private  sector  has 
development 
expressed  strong 
in  developing  this 
interest 
resource.  However,  to  facilitate  the  investment 
process, a number of barriers have been identified 
that currently seem to stifle progress and therefore 
need to be effectively addressed.
Firstly, there is the general uncertainty with regards 
to the IPP framework. The uncertainties relating to 
tariff as well as other conditions of power purchase 
agreements  weigh  heavily  on  a  technology  that 
involves  significant  exploration  risks.  The  high 
costs  coupled  with  the  failure  risk  associated 
with  exploration  pose  a  persistent  challenge  to 
geothermal development from the perspective of 
both  developers  and  financers.  Therefore,  it  is  a 
•  Loss reserves operate in a similar manner, except 
in  this  case  the  actual  sums  required  to  cover 
the guarantees are set aside rather than simply 
being a promise to pay if the guarantee is called.
28
common  practice  to  reduce  the  drilling  costs  by 
using public resources either through government 
or multilateral development banks. 
in  Western  Viti  Levu,  where  solar  irradiation  is 
high.  Sunergise  suggests  that  capacity  factors 
around  17%  are  achievable  in  this  part  of  Fiji. 
Apart  from  the  private  sector  installations,  there 
is also a donor-funded, on-grid project: the Korea 
International  Cooperation  Agency  has  funded  a 
54 kWp installation at the University of the South 
Pacific in Suva.
Secondly,  there  is  uncertainty  with  regard  to 
licensing.  The  issuance  of  four  special  prospector 
licences is pending and two licences that had been 
issued  by  the  Department  of  Mineral  Resources 
have  already  lapsed.  Licensing  has  been  under 
discussion in the ongoing review of the Mining Act 
that was undertaken in 2014. Stricter background 
checks  of  companies  that  apply  for  prospector 
licences may help to ensure that licensees actually 
carry out the work after the licence is issued.
Grid-connected solar has a considerable potential 
in  Fiji  when  benchmarked  against  avoided  cost 
of  diesel  generation  of  0.46 FJD/kWh.  However, 
mobilising this potential would require substantial 
changes  in  the  enabling  environment.  Currently, 
privately  financed  on-grid  solar  PV  projects  are 
only  viable  for  those  investors  whose  daily  load 
curve allows direct consumption of the generated 
electricity  on  the  premises.  Roof-  mounted  PV 
installations cost approximately FJD 3,000/kWp in 
2014, which translated into a levelised production 
cost of FJD 0.25/kWh. This is significantly lower than 
FEA’s  current  commercial  tariff  (FJD 0.399/ kWh) 
and is thus an attractive investment as long as no 
excess  power  has  to  be  exported  into  the  grid. 
However, FEA only offers FJD 0.15/kWh as tariff for 
intermittent  power,  which  is  too  low  to  generate 
any  interest  from  developers  in  developing  solar 
energy  projects.  To  enable  private  households 
to  participate  in  roof-mounted  PV  generation, 
a  net  metering  arrangement  or  viable  feed-in 
tariffs could unleash a boom in privately financed 
solar  generation,  although  the  current  domestic 
FEA  tariff  (FJD 0.3308/kWh)  is  lower  than  the 
commercial tariff. 
Lastly,  there  is  a  significant  lack  of  technical 
capacity in both the private and public sectors in 
Fiji;  neither  DoE,  nor  FEA  nor  the  Department  of 
Mineral  Resources  have  personnel  with  specific 
knowledge  and  experience  in  geothermal  power 
development. This suggests that capacity building 
is  needed  for  the  public  sector  in  charge  of  the 
development  of  the  geothermal  energy.  More 
about geothermal can be found in Annex 1. 
Grid supply – Solar PV electric generation
On-grid  PV 
installations  are  slowly  gaining 
popularity  in  Fiji,  given  distributed  solar  PV’s 
positive impact through reducing transmission and 
distribution losses, lowering the need for fossil fuel 
in  power  generation,  enhancing  energy  security 
and  leveraging  significant  investment  from  the 
private  sector.  Distributed  solar  PV  systems  work 
very well in the presence of storage hydro and thus 
would  be  an  effective  addition  to  the  supply  mix 
in Fiji.
The  Fiji  Commerce  Commission  has  ruled  in  May 
2014  that  FEA  must  offer  FJD 0.3308/kWh  to  all 
IPPs.  However,  FEA  argues  that  these  tariffs  only 
apply to firm power and not to intermittent power 
such as roof-mounted solar PV. 
Development  of  the  on-grid  PV  sector  in  Fiji  is 
led  by  the  private  sector,  with  investments  in 
small  projects  in  the  10-200 kW  range.  A  new 
business model promoted by two local companies 
(Sunergise – a subsidiary of Sunergise International 
–  and  Clay  Engineering)  entails  the  company’s 
ownership of such systems operated under a lease 
contract  with  the  client;  i.e.  the  systems  can  be 
easily  redeployed  if  clients  terminate  contracts. 
At  the  end  of  the  contract,  customers  have  three 
options:  extending  the  arrangement;  purchasing 
the  panels;  or  terminating  the  arrangement  and 
having  Sunergise  (or  the  company  in  charge) 
remove  the  panels.  Currently,  there  are  several 
grid-connected  commercial  PV  installations  using 
the  lease  model,  totalling  around  600 kilowatt-
peak  (kWp)  in  Western  Viti  Levu.  Of  these,  the 
largest  grid-connected  installation  is  a  250 kWp 
system at a poultry farm near Ba. Sunergise is the 
leading  solar  company  in  Fiji  and  has  installed  a 
total  capacity  of  1 MW  with  an  estimated  output 
of  1.5 GWh  per  annum.  Installations  are  mostly 
At  current  prices,  roof-mounted  solar  PV  shows 
levelised cost on the order of USD 0.14/kWh,  which 
is  lower  than  FEA’s  retail  tariffs.  Levelised  cost 
of  solar  would  be  less  than  50%  of  what  can  be 
expected  from  FEA’s  latest  investment  in  35 MW 
of  heavy  fuel  oil  generation,  which  has  a  capital 
cost on the order of USD 1,100 per installed kW and 
a levelised cost of roughly USD 0.25/kWh at  heavy 
fuel oil supply cost of USD 800/tonne. 
The  favourable  generation  cost  of  solar  PV  has 
already  allowed  commercial  investors,  mainly  in 
the tourism industry, to install roof-mounted solar 
to partially generate their own power. However, in 
the absence of either a net metering framework or 
a viable feed-in tariff, only those FEA clients who 
have  a  high  and  stable  daytime  load  can  achieve 
commercial  viability  for  their  investments.  The 
29
nature  of  the  load  curves  for  private  households 
and  for  most  commercial  electricity  consumers 
excludes them from participating in this market. 
heaters  are  popular  in  high-cost  housing  and  the 
tourism  sector.  Off-grid  PV  solar  systems  have 
been  installed  in  Fiji  since  the  1980s,  beginning 
with small-scale projects in the islands of Kadavu 
and  Koro.  Solar  electrification  continued  over  the 
years  with  mixed  successes,  mostly  under  donor 
sponsorship.43 
In  2008,  the  European  Union 
funded  a  programme  of  solar  electrification  for 
schools in rural areas, which included 1 kW systems 
for  schools  and  200-watt  systems  for  teachers’ 
quarters. 
Grid supply – Biomass-fuelled electricity 
generation
Biomass,  as  stored  energy  resource,  can  be  used 
to  generate  base  load  electricity  if  the  feedstock 
supply  can  be  managed  effectively.  As  discussed 
in  the  previous  chapters,  Fiji  has  a  wide  range 
of  feedstock,  including  bagasse  from  the  sugar 
industry  and  forestry  residues  such  as  sawdust 
and wood chips from the forestry industry, which 
have  already  been  used  for  generating  power 
and  heat.  The  scale-up  of  these  applications  is 
under  development  and  has  been  supported  by 
Government of Fiji. 
With  the  significant  decline  in  system  cost  and 
the  continued  advancement  of  technology,  solar 
PV  has  now  become  the  DoE’s  preferred  rural 
electrification option for areas without grid access. 
In  total,  the  DoE  had  already  installed  4,600 
solar  systems  between  1990  and  2013  and  as  of 
31 December  2014,  5,500  solar  home  systems 
were installed. All newly installed systems receive 
technical  support  under  the  DoE  programme  in 
order to ensure sustainability of supply.
It  was  estimated  that  during  2014  FSC  would 
produce about 450,000 tonnes of bagasse. Wood 
chips  or  other  biomass  are  used  to  supplement 
bagasse  in  some  of  the  mills  when  there  is  a 
shortage  of  bagasse.  Forestry  residues  from 
the  logging  and  wood-processing  industry  can 
also  provide  a  significant  amount  of  feedstock. 
This  industry  is  estimated  to  produce  nearly 
200,000 cubic  meters  (m3)  of  biomass  residues 
per year. 
For  the  villages  that  can  be  powered  by  mini-
grids, over the years the Fiji DoE has supported the 
installation of approximately 600 mini-grids powered 
by diesel engines in the power range of 5-35 kVA. Most 
of  the  existing  mini-grid  diesel  generation  capacity 
has  become  non-operational  or  underperforming 
largely due to the following reasons: 
Although  sugar  cane  production  in  Fiji  has  been 
declining  since  2006,  the  Government  of  Fiji  is 
also keen on revitalising the industry. FSC plans to 
double its bagasse-fired power generation capacity 
by adding a total of 5–10 MW at Labasa by 2014 and 
40 MW at Rarawai by 2016, respectively. 
•  Rapidly increasing fuel prices in addition to the 
difficulties  encountered  in  getting  fuel  from 
urban  centres  to  the  villages  and  settlements, 
especially in the outer islands; 
•  Lack of financing for fuels and spare parts;
In  addition,  Fiji  is  also  looking  into  other  biomass 
in  particular.  The 
resources,  waste-to-energy 
recent  study,  conducted  jointly  by  UNDP  and  Fiji 
DoE  in  2014,  on  resource  assessment  for  waste-
to-energy  has  detailed  the  amount  and  type  of 
resources available, covering municipal solid waste, 
wastewater,  livestock  waste  from  the  husbandry 
industry,  non-hazardous  organic  industrial  waste 
and agricultural residues. This will not only address 
the  energy  issues  but,  more  importantly,  address 
the environmental challenge posed by the growing 
population,  rapid  urbanisation,  and  changed 
consumption patterns. 
•  Lack of skilled operators; and 
•  Lack  of  proper  maintenance  –  most  of  the 
existing  diesel  power  generation  systems 
require a complete overhaul, which could cost 
as  much  as  FJD 3.6 million  according  to  DoE’s 
estimate. 
Hybridisation  would  be  an  effective  way  to 
relieve  villagers  from  the  burden  of  high  costs 
for  operation  and  maintenance  (O&M)  and  fuel. 
There  is  an  opportunity  to  convert  a  significant 
portion of the 600 diesel-powered rural mini-grids 
that  suffer  from  high  fuel  and  generation  cost 
(approx.  USD 0.56/ kWh  or  1 FJD/kWh)  and  face 
problems in the fuel supply chain and the O&M of 
the  diesel  units.  The  existing  mini-grids  represent 
a  substantial  asset  funded  by  the  government, 
Off-grid renewables – Rural energy 
supply 
Solar  energy  has  been  used  for  meeting  the 
demand in rural areas. Over the past decades, Fiji 
has had considerable experience with both stand-
alone PV and solar thermal technology. Solar water 
43 Some  of  these  projects  failed  after  the  sponsorship  was  finished,  due  to  institutional  arrangements  that  did  not  factor  in  the 
  sustainability of the system operation. 
30
which  could  be  made  more  environmentally  and 
economically sustainable by significantly reducing 
diesel  operation  time  (thus,  diesel  consumption) 
through  hybridisation  with  solar  PV  systems  with 
battery  storage.  The  diesel  gensets  would  be 
retained  and  the  systems  would  be  optimised  in 
hybrid configurations keeping battery capacity at 
a minimum.
The  regional  organisation  mandated  to  support 
the maritime transport sector in the Pacific region 
is  the  SPC’s  Economic  Development  Division, 
based  in  Suva.  In  response  to  calls  from  Pacific 
Forum  leaders,  SPC  has  developed  a  framework 
for  action  on  transport  services.  The  framework 
addresses both maritime and civil aviation and has 
been  developed  with  the  broad  participation  of 
regional governments and other key stakeholders 
in the region. The framework has integrated seven 
themes: governance, capacity development, safety 
and security, improved access, energy, information 
and  sustainability.  The  framework  acknowledges 
the  potential  for  fuel  savings  through  both 
technology  and  operational  improvements  and 
logistics (SPC, 2011). 
Hybrid  projects  of  this  nature  have  started  to 
emerge  in  Fiji  and  are  financed  mainly  by  private 
operators  in  the  tourism  industry  in  areas  not 
covered  by  FEA’s  supply.  There  is  also  one  rural 
electrification project that has used the technology, 
which  consists  of  a  10 kWp  solar  array  producing 
40 kWh per day. Instead of designing the battery 
bank  for  4-5  days  of  supply  (which  is  necessary 
when  there  is  no  diesel  generator),  the  project 
could  cut  total  investment  cost  to  approximately 
USD 50,000  by  reducing  battery  capacity  to 
two days of supply or 80 kWh. Further refinement 
of the technology could achieve even lower battery 
capacity but would require a good understanding 
of  the  solar  regime  at  a  given  site.  Converting 
some  500  diesel-powered  rural  mini-grids  into 
solar-diesel  hybrids  would  cost  approximately  
USD 20 million,  including  rehabilitation  of  those 
diesel generators that have fallen into disrepair.
Applied research at the University of the South Pacific 
(USP) in Fiji and elsewhere in the world suggests that 
solar-  and  sail-assisted  maritime  transport  has  the 
potential  to  reduce  fuel  consumed  by  vessels  and 
ships. A research group at USP believes that medium-
sized  cargo  ships  and  ferries  operating  in  Fiji  and 
across the Pacific are suitable for such retrofits. The 
USP  group  has  approached  a  number  of  potential 
sponsors  to  obtain  financing  for  a  pilot  project  in 
renewable energy-assisted maritime transport. 
In  2014,  SPC  completed  a  study  specifically 
addressing  the  question  of  whether  alternative 
energy has a role in sustainable maritime transport 
within  the  Pacific  Islands  region.44  The  study 
concludes that there is clearly a market for sailing 
and hybrid ships today; the question is not whether 
they work but whether they are the type of vessel 
appropriate for the Pacific Islands feeder shipping 
services  for  cargo  and  passengers.  In  comparing 
studies  completed  by  ADB  and  others,  and 
considering the costs of wind power options today, 
the  study  further  concludes  that  sail  assistance 
on  ships  involved  in  regular  relatively  large-scale, 
scheduled  inter-island  services  for  freight  and 
passengers  is  at  present  not  a  good  investment 
financially  or  operationally.  Hybrid  sail-assisted 
vessels for the Pacific islands are not considered a 
realistic commercial option and the study expresses 
the view that scarce resources such as aid funding 
should  not  be  spent  on  these  options  but  focus 
instead  on  energy  efficiency  improvements  (hull 
forms, propellers, paints, etc.). The development of 
sail  or  hybrid  systems  should  be  conducted  on  a 
user-paid or cultural basis. Requirements of service 
reliability and predictability make the management 
and governance issues of greater significance than 
the ship propulsion method, and efforts currently 
need to be placed in that direction.
Only  those  mini-grids  that  are  in  reasonable 
condition  warrant  upgrading  to  hybrid  systems. 
In  locations  where  mini-grids  are  dilapidated,  the 
DoE  prefers  to  supply  solar  home  systems  as  an 
alternative.  Such  a  retrofit  to  hybrid  would  not 
only safeguard a very substantial investment that 
the  government  and  participating  communities 
have  made  but  also  significantly  reduce  the 
burden that pure diesel generation has placed on 
rural  communities  in  Fiji.  Following  analysis  on 
the hybridization of a diesel grid, the solar option 
should be undertaken in the framework of the rural 
electrification master plan. One of the foci for the 
analysis  is  to  look  into  the  optimal  ratio  of  diesel 
to solar PV generation capacity in various settings. 
National and regional maritime transport 
– More efficient vessels
The maritime transport sector, which accounts for 
22% of fossil fuel use in Fiji, has recently attracted 
attention  as  a  potential  sector  where  significant 
quantities of fossil fuels could be conserved through 
a variety of new technologies and processes. The 
sector  is  critical  to  all  aspects  of  socio-economic 
development  in  the  region,  including  migration, 
transport  of  goods  and  services,  agriculture  and 
education, as well as evacuation and disaster relief. 
44 Sustainable maritime transport within the Pacific Islands region - does alternative energy have a role? Paper prepared for Economic  
  Development Division of SPC, J. Joy, January 2014
31
it 
is  acknowledged  that  sail  and  hybrid 
While 
propulsion  systems  have  a  place  for  roles  in  tourism 
sectors and other niche operations, it is argued that in 
local and regional shipping services, the emphasis on 
energy conservation should be carefully studied, along 
with the efficiency improvements mentioned above. 
With  regard  to  renewable-assisted  maritime 
transport,  it  appears  that  two  of  the  leading 
regional  organisations,  USP  and  SPC,  have  views 
that are quite different. There seems to be a need 
to  develop  a  common  strategy  for  the  maritime 
sector before embarking on investments.
Solar PV panel/Shutterstock
32
V. RECOMMENDATIONS
In  the  following  section,  key  recommendations  are  listed  together  with  the 
priority actions related to the service-resource pairs identified. These have either 
been  developed  at  the  national  RRA  workshop  or  in  direct  discussions  with 
representatives of key stakeholder institutions. 
The  RRA  adopts  a  coordinated  approach  and  facilitates  the  setting  of  priorities 
that can enhance discussions with bilateral and multilateral cooperation agencies, 
financial institutions and the private sector with regard to the implementation of 
actions and initiatives that are identified throughout the RRA process.
Endorsement of the new National Energy Policy
As an overarching recommendation, the Government of Fiji is urged to endorse 
and  implement  the  draft  NEP  2014  as  soon  as  possible.  Development  partners 
have already committed to support initiatives identified in the draft NEP 2014, such 
as the development of a rural electrification master plan and the strengthening of 
the regulatory capacity of DoE. An early endorsement of the draft NEP 2014 would 
reduce uncertainty and risk in the eyes of prospective energy sector investors and 
their lenders. 
Creation of an effective enabling environment for renewable energy
Efforts should be focused on creating an enabling environment that would allow the 
government’s objective of attracting private sector investment to the renewable 
energy  sector  to  materialise.  There  are  three  groups  of  private  sector  investors 
that could play a pivotal role in accelerating renewable energy deployment in Fiji: 
•  Small-scale investors (private households and businesses), who could invest in 
distributed generation (solar, wind) at their respective premises; 
•  Specialised private IPP developers, who could finance a considerable share of 
Fiji’s new generation requirements; and 
•  Concession  developers,  who  could  provide  power  supply  (generation, 
distribution, retail) in unserved areas, such as Taveuni. 
The  creation  of  an  enabling  environment  should  start  with  the  removal  of 
uncertainty for both prospective investors and their lenders. 
Firstly,  there  is  an  uncertainty  with  regard  to  future  ownership  of  FEA.  The  2013 
government budget supplement mentioned the energy sector reform, including the 
separating FEA’s regulatory and commercial roles, which is close to completion.45  
The Electricity Act review and the proposal of re-defining   FEA as a commercial 
body with both public and private ownership is being further investigated. However, 
details on these changes still have to be developed. Investors and lenders will be 
reluctant to move until there is clarity; the earlier this can be established, the more 
likely private sector investors will be to move forward. The adoption of the draft NEP 
2014, as explained above, would also add more certainty and clarity.
Secondly, there is a regulatory risk with regard to IPP investment. The Fiji Commerce 
Commission  determines  minimum  IPP  tariffs  (for  firm  power)  when  it  comes  to 
FEA’s  retail  tariffs.  This  is  an  unusual  procedure,  as  the  minimum  tariff  is  prone 
to  shift  either  upwards  or  downwards.  If  an  investor  expects  an  upward  move  in 
45 It  is  still  an  ongoing  activity.  ADB  is  working  together  with  the  DoE  to  restructure  the  department 
  and  make  an  investment  proposal  by  2016,  according  to  Fiji  Times  www.fijitimes.com/story 
.aspx?id=282699 
 
33
Development of a Coordinated Rural 
Electrification Master Plan
Developing a rural electrification master plan was 
an important element of the draft NEP 2014. It is 
even more important to ensure that such a master 
plan be developed in a coordinated fashion, both 
thematically  and  institutionally.  Rural  electricity 
supply  should  be  provided  in  connection  with 
rural  development  and  sustainable  operation  of 
a  power  system  in  rural  or  remote  areas.  When 
developing the plan, it would make both economic 
and technical sense to look into the low-hanging 
fruit options, such as hybridisation of the existing 
diesel-fuelled  systems.  To  take  advantage  of 
such  options,  changes 
in  the  existing  rural  
electrification policy might be necessary.
the  minimum  tariff,  he  will  hold  back  until  a  higher 
minimum  tariff  has  been  regulated.  If  tariffs  are 
regulated downward, it is unclear how existing power 
purchase agreement contracts would be affected. In 
this context, it would be worth studying carefully the 
policy instruments used in Fiji as well as the innovative 
policy  tools  developed  in  other  countries.  Based 
on  the  results,  an  effective  policy  scheme  could  be 
designed accordingly. 
It  is  also  advisable  to  review  and  harmonise  key 
legislation in order to improve the legal framework for 
renewable energy development. Such changes could 
include removal of conflicts of interest in regulation. 
The new functions of DoE should include the issuance 
of licences to operate electrical installation, which is 
currently  the  responsibility  of  FEA.  While  the  Fiji 
Commerce  Commission  should  remain  responsible 
for economic regulation, in line with the draft NEP 2014 
suggestion, it could be given a stronger mandate to 
implement these responsibilities through a multi-year 
regulatory contract or similar instrument. New legal 
provisions (such as amendment to the Electricity Act 
or new Energy Act) could be introduced to address 
the  reallocation  of  planning  responsibilities  in  the 
energy sector. DoE could be given the responsibility 
for  rural  electrification  planning, 
including  grid 
extension  and  national  electrification  master  plans. 
Power  development  and  asset  management  plans 
prepared by FEA would be expected to comply with 
these  plans.  Amended  legislation  should  also  allow 
DoE  to  enact  secondary  legislation  (regulations)  to 
cover specific topics in relation to the implementation 
of the draft NEP 2014. 
Coordination  amongst  the  ministries  within  the 
Fijian  system  should  be  facilitated  through  the 
establishment  of  a  National  Energy  Coordination 
Committee  and  the  restructuring  of  roles  and 
the  most 
responsibilities  as  suggested  by 
recent  draft  NEP  2014.  Effective  inter-ministerial 
coordination is crucial for effective implementation 
of  the  draft  NEP  2014  targets  and  associated 
Strategic Action Plan. 
Lastly, there is a need for inter-donor coordination 
on  this 
in  active 
formulate  a  consortium 
engagement  could 
to  support  Fiji’s  DoE  in  developing  the  rural 
electrification master plan. 
initiative.  Donors 
interested 
Consideration of alternative fuels for 
maritime transportation
About  20%  of  imported  fuel  is  used  for  maritime 
transportation 
in  Fiji.  One  consideration  with 
respect to powering boats with renewable energy 
sources 
is  whether  technological  options  are 
mature  enough  for  implementation.  The  USP  has 
conducted  a  study  on  this  subject.  The  practice 
of using biofuels in boat engines (dual tank) does 
exist  in  the  Pacific,  albeit  mostly  in  outer  islands 
for  shorter  distance  transportation.  Whether  or 
not  such  a  practice  can  be  rolled  out  on  a  larger 
scale  depends  largely  upon  feedstock  availability, 
management and production, in comparison with 
the  cost  of  imported  fuels.  Further  study  on  this 
concept  is  required  and  knowledge-sharing  with 
like-minded  islands,  such  as  Tonga,  should  be 
encouraged. 
While  some  changes  could  be  achieved  in  the 
short  term  by  amending  the  existing  legislation, 
development of a comprehensive Energy Act could 
be undertaken as an overarching primary legislation to 
govern the entire energy sector. It would consolidate 
various  aspects  of  legislation  related  to  the  energy 
sector by providing a primary legislative background 
to energy sector coordination.
Creation of a Renewable Energy 
Investors Association
As  suggested  by  private  sector  stakeholders  and 
prospective investors, a Renewable Energy Investors 
Association  should  be  formed,  as  private  sector 
participation  in  renewable  energy  development 
requires a stronger voice in advocating their cause.
34
Exploration and exploitation of 
geothermal energy
The  Legislative  Gap  Analysis  report  proposed 
development  of  a  geothermal  Decree  and 
Regulations.  This  would  mean  that  geothermal 
energy  would  eventually  be  separated  from  the 
Mining Act, which is currently regulating geothermal 
energy-related activities in Fiji. Geothermal energy 
attracts  increasing  attention  from  investors  and 
thus deserves its own regulatory framework, which 
could make more detailed and specific regulations 
and  thus  help  investors  understand  the  benefits 
and risks associated with investment in geothermal 
energy development. 
One example in this case is licensing. The current 
mechanism  is  under  review  with  the  aim  of 
addressing  the  lack  of  committed  investment 
once licensing is granted. One practical approach 
would be to make the validation of licensing time-
bounded.  If  the  investor/developer  who  has  been 
granted  a  licence  lags  behind  the  committed 
investment, the licensing could be revoked entirely 
or  partially,  with  some  possibility  to  resume  it 
within an agreed grace period. 
However,  as  far  as  geothermal  energy  projects 
are concerned, the biggest risk lies in exploratory 
drilling.  How  to  minimise  the  risks  of  drilling  is  a 
priority  issue  that  needs  to  be  solved.  There  are 
some  mechanisms  available  to  mitigate  the  risks. 
However,  it  is  advisable  to  develop  a  geothermal 
development risk mitigation fund supported by the 
key  multilateral  development  banks,  such  as  the 
World  Bank  and  ADB.  A  local  fund  management 
unit/office should be established to ensure that the 
fund is properly managed.
35
Grid connect PV at Government quarters
 Photo: Government of Fiji
36
VI. REFERENCES
ADB  (Asian  Development  Bank)  (2013),  Re-invigorating  private  sector  investment:  A  private  sector 
assessment for Fiji, ADB, Mandaluyong City. 
ADB (2014), “ADB Pacific Economic Monitor 2014”, ADB, July, www.adb.org/publications/pacific-economic-
monitor-july-2014.
APCTT-UNESCAP (Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology — United Nations Economic and 
Social Commission for Asia and Pacific) (2010), Fiji: Renewable Energy Report, APCTT-UNESCAP, Suva. 
Asmundsson, R.K. (2008), South Pacific Islands Geothermal energy for Electricity Production, IIDA (Icelandic
International Development Agency), Reykjavík.
Campo, J.A. and V. Sarmiento (2013). “The Relationship between Energy Consumption and GDP: Evidence 
from a Panel of 10 Latin American Countries”, Latin American Journal of Economics, Vol. 50, No. 2, 233-255.
FAOSTAT (n.d.), “Fiji”, http://faostat.fao.org/CountryProfiles/Country_Profile/Direct.aspx?lang=en&area=66, 
accessed November 2014.
FEA (Fiji Electricity Authority) (2007), FEA Annual Report, FEA, Suva. 
FEA (2011), FEA Power Sector Development Plan, Vol. 1-3, 24/11/2011, FEA, Suava.
FEA  (2012),  “Annual  Report  2012”,  Suava,  FEA,  www.fea.com.fj/UserFiles/files/FEA%20ANNUAL%20
REPORT%202012.pdf. 
FEA (2014), Terms of Reference for Valuation of FEA Using Discounted Cash Flow, Suava, FEA, January. 
Fiji Bureau of Statistics (2012a), “Poverty in Fiji: Changes 2002-03 to 2008-09 and Policy Implications”, 
https://narseyonfiji.files.wordpress.com/2012/04/final-poverty-report-15-februrary-2012-contents-preface-
and-acknowledgement.pdf.
Fiji Bureau of Statistics (2012b), “Population”, Key Statistics: June 2012, www.statsfiji.gov.fj/.
Fiji Islands Bureau of Statistics (various years). Overseas Merchandise Trade, Suva. 
GEF  (Global  Environmental  Facility)  (2009)  “Mid-Term  Report  of  the  Fiji  GEF  Pacific  IWRM  (Integrated 
Water Resource Management) Demonstration Project: Environmental and Socio-Economic Protection in Fiji: 
Integrated Flood Risk Management in the Nadi River Basin”, www.pacific-iwrm.org/mid-term-reports/GEF-
Pacific-IWRM-Fiji-Draft-Mid-Term-Report.pdf.
GoF  (Government  of  Fiji)  (2014),  Sustainable  Energy  for  All:  Rapid  Assessment  and  Gap  Analysis,  GoF, 
February. 
Goldstein, B., et al. (2011),  “Geothermal  Energy”,  In  IPCC  (Inter-governmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change)
Special  Report  on  Renewable  Energy  Sources  and  Climate  Change  Mitigation,  (Eds.  O.  Edenhofer,  et  al.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York. 
Gonelevu, A. (2002), “Mini and Micro Hydropower Development in the Republic of the Fiji Islands”, www. 
hrcshp.org/en/world/db/Fiji.pdf.
Holm, A., et al. (2010), Geothermal Energy: International Market Update, Geothermal Energy Association, 
Washington, D.C.
Huang, B.N., M.J. Hwang and C.W. Yang (2008), “Causal relationship between energy consumption and 
GDP growth revisited: A dynamic panel data approach”, Ecological Economics, Vol. 67, No. 1, pp. 41-54. 
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2013), World Energy Outlook 2013, OECD (Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development)/IEA, Paris.
37
International Journal on Hydropower and Dams (2011), World Atlas and Industry Guide 2011,  Aquamedia 
International, Surrey.
IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2013), Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2012: An 
Overview, IRENA, Abu Dhabi. 
Kumar,  A.,  and  S.  Prasad  (2010),  “Examining  Wind  Quality  and  Wind  Power  Prospects  on  Fiji  Islands”, 
Renewable Energy, Vol. 35, pp. 536-540.
Kumar, S., (2011), “Co-integration and the Demand for Energy in Fiji”, Global Energy Issues, Vol. 35, No. 1, 
pp. 85-97. 
NEP (2014), National Energy Policy, Fiji Department of Energy, Suva, Final Draft, October 2013.
RBF (Reserve Bank of Fiji) (2014), Economic Growth Projections Revised Upward, Press Release No. 12/2014, RBF.  
RBF (various years), Quarterly Review, Reserve Bank of Fiji, Suva.
Saula, I., (2012), “Country Presentation Energy Policy (A) Course: Japan 2012”, IEEJ (International Energy 
Economics Institute), http://eneken.ieej.or.jp/data/4447.pdf.
SOPAC  (South  Pacific  Applied  Geoscience  Commission)  (2007),  “Biofuel  from  Coconut  Resources  in 
Rotuma: A Feasibility Study on the Establishment of an Electrification Scheme using local Energy Resources”, 
SPC Applied Geoscience and Technology Division, www.rotuma.net/os/Publications/Biofuel_Rotuma.pdf.
SOPAC (n.d.), “Catalogue of Pacific Rivers: Fiji”, www.pacificwater.org/_resources/article/.
SPC (Secretariat of the Pacific Community) (2008), “Fiji Islands Country Profile, prepared for SPC Strategic 
Engagement, Policy and Planning Facility”, SPC, www.pacificwater.org/_resources/article/files/fiji.pdf.
SPC (2011), Framework for Action on Transport Services 2011 2020: Improving the Efficiency, Effectiveness 
and Sustainability of Pacific Transport Services, SPC, Noumea. 
The  Economist  (2012),  “The  Government’s  2012  Budget  Includes  Radical  Tax  Reform”,  Intelligence  Unit, 
Fiji,  9th  January,  http://country.eiu.com/article.aspx?articleid=588723243&Country=Fiji&topic=Economy
&subtopic=Current+policy&subsubtopic=Economic+policy:+The+government’s+2012+budget+includes+
radical+tax+reform#.
Trading  Economics  (2015),  “Fiji  Unemployment  Rate 
unemployment-rate.
1982-2015”,  www.tradingeconomics.com/fiji/
Tukana, A., (2005), A Study of Biogas Digesters as an Animal Waste Management Tool on Livestock Farming 
Systems in Fiji, Master’s Degree Thesis, The University of Western Sydney, Sydney. 
UNdata (n.d.), “Fiji”, http://data.un.org/CountryProfile.aspx?crName=fiji, accessed November 2014.
UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization) and ICSHP (International Centre on Small 
Hydro Power) (2013), “World Small Hydropower Development Report 2013: Fiji”, UNIDO and ICSHP, www.
smallhydropower.org. 
UNSD  (United  Nations  Statistics  Division)  (2011),  2008  Energy  Balances  and  Electricity  Profiles,  UNSD, 
New York.
World  Bank  (1978),  “Monasavu-Wailoa  Hydropower  Project  (Power  1):  Staff  Appraisal  Report”,  World 
Bank,  Washington,  D.C.,  22  May,  www-wds.worldbank.org/ECC9554A-ECB1-4557-B5BA-29707DAF01B7/
FinalDownload/DownloadId-D81FA78F8F468BACDCA39D5DAC2A596C/ECC9554A-ECB1-4557-B5BA-
29707DAF01B7/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2000/08/02/000178830_98101912374259/
Rendered/PDF/multi_page.pdf.
World Bank (2011), Republic of Fiji: Poverty Trends, Profiles and Small Area Estimation (Poverty Maps) in 
Republic of Fiji (2003-2009), World Bank, Washington, D.C.
World Bank (n.d.), Pacific Economic Monitor 2014, ADB and http://data.worldbank.org/country/fiji 
38
ANNEX:
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY
Geothermal Energy
Geothermal  energy  is  not  available  in  all  countries  or  locations,  but  where  it  is 
found,  it  is  a  clean,  renewable  energy  source  that  produces  electricity  and  heat 
at very competitive cost. Geothermal energy is ultimately derived from the heat 
contained in the core of the earth and from radioactive decay within the earth’s 
mantle. At high temperatures and pressures within the mantle, melting of mantle 
rock forms magma, which rises towards the surface carrying the heat from below. 
In some regions where the earth’s crust is thin or fractured, or where magma bodies 
are close to the surface, there are high temperature gradients. Deep faults, rock 
fractures and pores allow groundwater to percolate towards the heat source and 
become heated to high temperatures. Some of this hot geothermal fluid travels 
back to the surface through buoyancy effects to appear as hot springs, mud pools 
and geysers. Such hot springs can be observed in many locations in Fiji as shown 
in figure 12. 
If the ascending hot water meets an extensively fractured or permeable rock zone, 
the heated water will fill pores and fractures and form a geothermal reservoir. These 
reservoirs are much hotter than surface hot springs, reaching temperatures of more 
than 350°C, and are potentially an accessible source of energy. Reservoirs can also 
be created artificially (as hot dry rock systems) by injecting water into geothermal 
rock  causing  hydraulic  fracturing.  The  natural  replenishment  of  heat  from  earth 
processes and modern reservoir management techniques enable the sustainable 
use of geothermal energy as a low-emission, renewable resource. With appropriate 
resource management, the heat from an active reservoir is continuously restored 
by natural heat production, conduction and convection from surrounding hotter 
regions, and the extracted geothermal fluids are replenished by natural recharge 
and/or by injection of the depleted (cooled) fluids. 
Worldwide, geothermal resources have been used commercially for more than a 
century. Geothermal energy is currently used for base load electric generation in 
24  countries,  with  an  estimated  67.2  TWh/year  of  electricity  supply  provided  in 
2008, at a global average capacity factor of 74.5%. Newer geothermal installations 
often achieve capacity factors above 90%. Geothermal energy serves more than 
10% of the electricity demand in six countries and is used directly for heating and 
cooling  in  78  countries,  generating  121.7  TWh/year  of  thermal  energy  in  2008 
(Goldstein, et al., 2011). 
Outside  of  the  United  States  of  America,  about  29%  of  the  global  installed 
geothermal capacity in 2009 was located in the Philippines and Indonesia. Iceland, 
Italy, Japan, Mexico and New Zealand together account for one-third of the global 
installed geothermal capacity. 
Fiji’s neighbour, New Zealand, operates 12 geothermal power plants with a total 
capacity of 975 MW and an annual production of 7,300 GWh or 10 times the total 
current electricity generation in Fiji. The average capacity factor of New Zealand’s 
geothermal power plants is 85%; the largest plant, Te Mihi, has an installed capacity 
of 159 MW and a capacity factor of 86%. This latest plant has an investment cost of 
about USD 3,000 per kW or USD 0.4 million per annual GWh. This is 85% less than 
in FEA’s latest hydropower scheme.
39
Geothermal Technology
Geothermal power generation has a low footprint 
and  is  environmentally  sustainable.  The  basic 
types of geothermal power plants in use today are 
steam-condensing turbines, backpressure turbines 
(for  small-size  plants  only)  and  binary  cycle 
units. Steam- condensing turbines can be used in 
flash  or  dry-steam  plants  operating  at  sites  with 
intermediate-  and  high-temperature  resources 
(>150°C).  The  power  plant  generally  consists  of 
pipelines,  water-steam  separators,  vaporisers, 
demisters,  heat  exchangers,  turbine  generators, 
cooling  systems,  and  a  step-up  transformer  for 
transmission into the electrical grid. Power unit size 
usually ranges from 2 MW to 110 MW, and the unit 
may utilise a multiple flash system, flashing the fluid 
in a series of vessels at successively lower pressures, 
to  maximise  the  extraction  of  energy  from  the 
geothermal  fluid.  The  only  difference  between  a 
flash plant and a dry-steam plant is that the latter 
does  not  require  brine  separation,  resulting  in  a 
simpler and cheaper design (Goldstein, et al., 2011).
injection  well 
depending  on  plant  capacity, 
requirements, and the chemical composition of the 
geothermal fluids. Operating costs for geothermal 
plants  are  predictable 
in  comparison  with 
combustion-based  power  plants  that  are  subject 
to market fluctuations in fuel prices. 
Investment costs for a geothermal electric project 
are  composed  of  the  following  components:  (a) 
exploration and resource confirmation; (b) drilling 
of  production  and  injection  wells;  (c)  surface 
facilities  and  infrastructure;  and  (d)  the  power 
plant.  Component  costs  and  factors  influencing 
them  are  usually  independent  from  each  other, 
and each component is described in the text that 
follows,  including  its  impact  on  total  investment 
costs.  The  first  component  (a)  includes  lease 
acquisition,  permitting,  prospecting  (geology  and 
geophysics)  and  drilling  of  exploration  and  test 
wells.  Drilling  of  exploration  wells  in  green-field 
areas is reported to have a success rate of typically 
about 50% to 60%. Confirmation costs are affected 
by  well  parameters  (mainly  depth  and  diameter), 
rock  properties,  well  productivity,  rig  availability, 
time  delays  in  permitting  or  leasing  land,  and 
interest  rates.  This  first  component  represents 
between 10% and 15% of the total investment cost 
but for expansion projects may be as low as 1% to 
3%  (Goldstein,  et al.,  2011).  Drilling  of  production 
and  injection  wells  (component  b)  has  a  success 
rate  of  60%  to  90%.  Drilling  costs  vary  with  type 
of hole, geology, and mobilisation cost for drilling 
rigs.  Relevant  literature  quotes  typical  drilling 
cost  at  USD  1  200/m;46  with  a  drilling  depth  of 
500 - 1000 metres, an exploration well would cost 
around USD 1 million.
Binary cycle plants, typically organic Rankine cycle 
(ORC)  units,  are  commonly  installed  to  extract 
intermediate-temperature 
heat  from 
geothermal  fluids  (generally  from  70°C  to  170°C) 
from  hydrothermal  and  enhanced  type  reservoirs. 
Binary  plants  are  more  complex  than  condensing 
ones  since  the  geothermal  fluid  (water,  steam  or 
both)  passes  through  a  heat  exchanger  heating 
another  working  fluid.  This  working  fluid,  such  as 
isopentane  or  isobutene  with  a  low  boiling  point, 
vaporises,  drives  a  turbine,  and  then  is  air-cooled 
or  condensed  with  water.  Binary  plants  are  often 
constructed  as  small  modular  units  of  limited  MW 
capacity  and  could  be  the  technology  choice  to 
exploit  Fiji’s  resources.  More  recently,  geothermal 
combined  cycle  plants  have  been  installed  that 
utilise  a  steam  turbine  with  binary  plant  heat 
exchangers acting as the condensers, and additional 
binary  plants  operating  on  the  separated  brine.  A 
potential variation on the binary cycle concept is the 
Kalina cycle, which uses an ammonia-water mixture 
rather than an organic fluid, such as isopentane, as 
the working fluid. Whichever plant type is selected, 
the relatively low steam temperatures and pressures 
mean  that  the  efficiency  of  conversion  of  heat  to 
electricity  is  around  15%,  which  is  lower  compared 
with fossil fuel-fired plants.
low-  and 
Factors  influencing  generation  cost  include  well 
productivity 
temperature), 
(permeability  and 
well  depths,  rig  availability,  vertical  or  directional 
design,  special  circulation  fluids,  special  drilling 
bits,  number  of  wells  and  financial  conditions  in 
a  drilling  contract.  This  component  represents 
20%  to  35%  of  the  total  investment.  The  surface 
facilities and infrastructure component (c) includes 
facilities for gathering steam and processing brine: 
separators,  pumps,  pipelines  and  roads.  Vapour-
dominated  fields  have  lower  facility  costs  since 
brine handling is not required. 
Factors  affecting  this  component  are  reservoir 
fluid chemistry, commodity prices (steel, cement), 
topography,  accessibility,  slope  stability,  average 
well  productivity  and  distribution 
(pipeline 
length),  and  fluid  parameters 
diameter  and 
(pressure, temperature, chemistry). 
Like  all  other  renewable  energy  technologies, 
geothermal  power  projects  typically  have  high 
upfront  investment  costs  due  to  the  need  to 
drill  wells  and  construct  complex  power  plants. 
Operational  costs  are  relatively  low  and  vary 
46 Jennejohn, Dan (2009) Research and Development in Geothermal Exploration and Drilling, Geothermal Energy Association.
40
Figure 15: Investment Cost for Geothermal Power
Source: Goldstein, et al.,  2011
and 
facilities 
infrastructure 
Surface 
costs 
represent 10% to 20% of the investment, although 
in  some  cases  these  costs  could  be  less  than 
10%,  depending  upon  plant  size  and  location. 
Figure  15  displays  typical  investment  cost  for 
geothermal power generation depending on type 
of technology. Investment costs are typically below 
USD 4,000/ kW but may reach USD 6,000/kW for 
smaller-size  plants  that  are  likely  to  be  relevant 
for Fiji.
capacity  range,  meaning  that  short-run  marginal 
cost  for  geothermal  generation  is  in  the  same 
range as hydropower or wind.
lead  to 
Investment  and  O&M  costs 
levelised 
generation  cost  in  the  order  of  USD  0.06/kWh. 
These  costs  are  dependent  on 
technology, 
capacity  factor  achieved  and  discount  rates. 
For  smaller  plants,  lower  than  10  MW,  levelised  
costs  may  reach  USD  0.10-0.12/kWh.  Even  at  the 
high end of the levelised cost figures, geothermal 
power  would  be  significantly  cheaper  than  any 
other  generation  option  available  in  Fiji.  Apart 
from  potentially  becoming  the  least-cost  option 
for  power  generation  in  Fiji,  the  development  
of  Fiji’s  geothermal  resources  would  significantly 
enhance energy security and enable the utility to 
reduce tariffs. 
Each  geothermal  power  plant  has  specific  O&M 
costs  that  depend  on  the  quality  and  design  of 
the  plant,  the  characteristics  of  the  resource, 
environmental  regulations  and  the  efficiency 
of  the  operator.  The  major  factor  affecting 
these  costs 
is  the  extent  of  work-over  and 
make-up  well  requirements,  which  can  vary  
widely from field to field and typically increase with 
time. For the United States of America, O&M costs, 
including  make-up  wells,  have  been  calculated 
to  be  around  USD  0.025/kWh.  New  Zealand 
reports O&M costs in a range from USD 0.01/kWh 
to  USD 0.014/kWh  for  plants  in  the  20-50 MW 
At present, power supply is highly vulnerable and 
exposed to hydrological risks and to market risks 
for fossil fuel. There are also fuel supply risks for 
biomass  wastes  associated  with  fluctuations  in 
sugar production. 
41
