Accelerator Lab for Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean Responds to COVID-19 |
United Nations Development Programme     Skip to main content
Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean
Who we are
What We Do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What We Do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Locations           Home Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean         Accelerator
Lab for Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean Responds to COVID-19
Accelerator Lab for Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean Responds to COVID-19
                                                                               
                                                       COVID-19, mentioned in
almost every personal and professional conversation over the past few months, is
threatening the way people work and go about their daily activities. Between
loss of employment, changes to social dynamics and upended business operations,
the health and socio-economic crisis created by COVID-19 has changed life as we
know it. From Disruption to Opportunity At the same time, this disruption is
also providing an immense opportunity to re-evaluate the way  business is
conducted. In the Eastern Caribbean, new and innovative ways are needed for
nationals to access goods and services and support the shift into a digital
ecosystem accounting for the future of work. In response to the pandemic, the
UNDP Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean Multi Country Office is focusing on
health systems strengthening through procurement and technical assistance,
economic and human development impact assessments and implementation support and
economic transformation, recovery and citizen security. Accelerating Economic
Transformation  The Accelerator Lab for Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean’s
COVID-19 response journey to support the economic transformation pillar has been
rooted in innovation and incorporated methods such as sensemaking and iteration.
This included our acknowledgement of  open source medical design,  categorical
mapping tools  and important initiatives from our colleagues, such as the
#PayInAdvance  campaign advocated by the Argentina Accelerator Lab, volunteerism
promoting  elderly care  in India and the  #Tekkiheroes  Hackathon in
Azerbaijan.   After some further drilling down, priorities were set on assisting
with the economic transformation of Micro, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
(MSMEs). To do so while ensuring that no one is left behind, a digital approach
was explored in the interest of accelerating impact. By building the capacity of
MSMEs to retool and pivot in order to virtually conduct business and connect
suppliers directly with consumers, the hope is that online payment solutions
will increase customer access to local goods and services. Partnering for Change
To accomplish meaningful economic transformation, UNDP is partnering with
several stakeholders including private sector parties, not-for-profit
organizations, non-governmental agencies and social enterprises. Together, these
actors will contribute to experimental innovations for change. By bringing
multiple players together, UNDP is drawing on diverse sets of expertise, all
with a common goal: responding to COVID-19 and preparing for both economic and
digital transformations poised to occur in the present and well into the future.
  This builds on the global Accelerator Lab’s  Collective Intelligence
methodology, dedicated to harnessing the power of people, data and technology in
the context of development.  On the private side, enhancing the operations of
web-based grocery and pharmaceutical delivery solutions such as  WiFetch  will
help instantly connect community bakeries with citizens unable to leave their
home, thus linking supply with demand. Additionally, a taxi driver formerly
dependent on routes running from the airport to hotels can use the platform to
join a home safe delivery fleet of tracked vehicles, thus providing end users
such as senior citizens with  needed goods. On the not-for-profit end, Caribbean
start-up and entrepreneurship space  Ten Habitat  is supporting the creation of
a digital skills marketplace for MSMEs to help individuals find jobs online and
 advertise their services. The start-up and entrepreneurial space is also
contributing to a business development plan rooted in user experience and app
design for enterprises looking to change and re-focus within the COVID-19
landscape.   International non-governmental organization  FarmFinder  is also
being brought on  to further boost access to locally sourced produce and fish.
By building capacity for fisherfolk and farmers to engage in e-commerce to sell
their products while offering consumers quality assurance that products
purchased are sustainable, this could enhance the consumption of local products.
This is significant as Eastern Caribbean producers are grappling with an
abundance of food items due to declining buying levels from cruise ships, hotels
and restaurants. Leaving No One Behind A core theme throughout this innovation
model is to ensure that no one is left behind. Special effort is being made to
protect vulnerable communities, including senior citizens and the disabled. As
such, the objective is to strengthen equal access to goods and services by
improving country wide delivery models, comprehensive donation portals and the
use of e-volunteering spaces while ensuring digital inclusion. In order to
achieve and compliment some of the above activities, the Accelerator Lab is
collaborating with the Ecuador Country Office to provide Latin American and
Caribbean MSMEs with user-friendly economic transformation guides and tools.
Topics range from how to move commerce to WhatsApp channels to the importance of
driving appealing sales during low transactional periods. Additionally,
tinkerers, designers, dreamers and tech-savvy designers will be called on to
partake in #IslandHack, a Hackathon specifically dedicated to the creation of
prototypes solving for unique Eastern Caribbean challenges presented by
COVID-19. Bringing it all Together Through multi-sectoral collaboration and the
merging of various backgrounds, expertise and skills as one, we can empower
businesses and develop more resilient communities as we fight COVID-19 together.
  How can COVID-19 economic transformation be strengthened in Small Island
Developing States (SIDS)? Do you have a disruptive proposition on how SIDS can
recover from COVID-19 economically? If so, please e-mail:
acceleratorlab.bb.ec@undp.org By: Jordanna Tennebaum, Head of Solutions Mapping
and Nikola Simpson, Head of Exploration, UNDP Accelerator Lab for Barbados and
the Eastern Caribbean Twitter: @j_tenneb; @nikola_simpson         Search
Found  0  results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort by
Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development Programme
Who we are                                                      About Us
Funding and delivery
Where We Work                                                       What We Do
Our Focus                                                            Sustainable
Development Goals
Projects                                                      Our Impact
News Centre
Publications                                                            Stories
Blogs                                                      Get Involved
Careers                                                            Procurement
Contact Us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Scam
alert Submit social or environmental complaint Terms of use twitter facebook
instagram youtube © 2024 United Nations Development Programme