Behind the Blue: Community-focused solutions to harness the Blue Economy |
United Nations Development Programme     Skip to main content
Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean
Who we are
What We Do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What We Do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Locations                 Home Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean         Behind
the Blue: Community-focused solutions to harness the Blue Economy
Behind the Blue: Community-focused solutions to harness the Blue Economy   June
8, 2022               --- Image caption ---   We are faced with the indisputable
fact that we are in the age of the Anthropocene – this is the first time in our
history where human activity has been the dominant influence on climate and the
environment.  Our actions are changing the natural balance of the earth and the
ocean. Acknowledging this fact, as we celebrate UN World Oceans Day, under the
theme of Revitalization: Collective Action for the Ocean, we highlight the work
of Caribbean Small Island Developing States (SIDS) who are at the forefront of
the climate crisis. By combining resources, ideas and innovative solutions these
islands are creating a brighter (bluer) future. At UNDP we stand beside our
partners so as to foster a global conversation on the greatest challenges facing
the oceans and seas, inspiring bold innovative thinking, new partnerships and
effective action for a sustainable ocean economy.   Oceans produce more than 50%
of the world’s oxygen and its potential for accelerating decarbonisation is the
basis of our discourse. The ocean presents substantial climate mitigation and
carbon storage options to help limit global warming. It also holds limitless
opportunities for economic benefits and ocean-based industries—including
tourism, energy production, shipping, fishing and fish processing, and
aquaculture it is expected that ocean industries  could double  to US$3trn by
2030. Let us imagine a healthy ocean with a vital economy. Changing the tide
with respect to pollution, seeking and investing in new energy solutions and
pioneering innovative ocean-based economies and livelihoods is where we need to
focus. UNDP, especially in the Eastern Caribbean, works with its partners,
networks of government and non-government actors, and with communities to
protect and revitalize the Ocean and everything it sustains. UNDP’s Global
Climate Promise Programme, Global Accelerator Labs and numerous programmes and
projects are some of the instruments used in countries.  One such innovative
solution in the eastern Caribbean islands is BlueDIGITAL, an exciting project
that has the potential to support Micro, Small and Medium – sized Enterprises
(MSMEs) in key sectors of the Blue Economy such as fisheries and tourism
transform to the digital economy and build resilience. This project aims to
enhance access to digital tools and solutions while better telling the story of
the journey your fish takes from ocean to plate: #FromSEAtoME in order to better
connect fishers to consumers, change behaviour on sustainability and build
resilience. BlueDIGITAL allows fisherfolk to connect with hotels, restaurants,
businesses and individual consumers while rewarding consumers and secondary
suppliers for choosing responsibly sourced fish. By acting as an added digital
marketplace which is unaffected by physical closures, it allows fisherfolk to
still reach potential markets even if physical restrictions are in effect as was
experienced during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic as well as market closures due
to ashfall.  This solution can also help some fishers to monitor their catch and
manage their sales becoming more digitally and financially literate. By
connecting key sectors and value chains within the Blue Economy ecosystem,
BlueDIGITAL also provides an opportunity for government to collect data and for
tourism industry partners to be verified by the BlueSEAL based on their
sustainability efforts.   Moving to take a closer look at the waters surrounding
regional coasts, an influx of Sargassum Seaweed has become a collective blight
on the Caribbean. But a common problem, seen by some as an opportunity inspires
collaboration for a common solution. The UNDP, through funding from the
Government of Japan is embarking on a Project to improve the National Sargassum
Management Capacities in the Caribbean which will assist Barbados, St. Kitts and
Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago.
Japan, an island, albeit much bigger than the SIDS of the Caribbean, understands
how to deal with this influx of seaweed which is escalating due to warming seas.
Through equipment, funding, knowledge sharing and technical support, Japan is
helping the region to manage this reality sustainably. Not only does this
project clean up the beaches but it offers the possibility of creating
additional industry and employment opportunities. With solutions such as this,
the Caribbean can change “problems” into “profits”. This type of community-
focussed collaboration, support and innovative thinking is essential to find the
perfect balance between people and planet. As the past years have shown us, we
need to work together to create a new balance with the Ocean: for people and for
planet that no longer depletes but instead restores the Ocean’s vibrancy. It is
critical that all perspectives are brought to the table and diverse approaches
are explored so that revitalization efforts can complement and amplify each
other.⁠ Under UNDP’s Blue Economy for Green Islands Approach for economic
diversification, job creation and resilience, there have been many blue related
projects. From supporting Governments in the region to conducting Blue Economy
Scoping Studies to the Accelerator Lab’s BlueDIGITAL to the sargassum project to
Blue Invest, UNDP is committed to supporting, working with and learning from
diverse ocean community leaders and champions as we reposition Small Island
Development States (SIDS) to Big Ocean States (BOS). by Limya Eltayeb,  Resident
Representative, UNDP Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean, Nikola Simpson,  Head
of Exploration UNDP Accelerator Lab, Shara Spencer,  Communications Consultant 
Related Content News PACE Justice Project launched in Belize Read more
Publications EnGenDER Newsletter - Becoming Climate Resilient & Disaster Ready:
Crossing the Finish Line The fifth edition of the EnGenDER newsletter has been
published under the theme, Becoming Climate Resilient & Disaster Ready: Crossing
the Finish Line. This issue... Read more  Press Releases CariSECURE 2.0 supports
NGC 35th CBU Caribbean Media Awards Read more  Blog The Barbadian Matriarchy of
Fishing Read more  Press Releases Blue Economy Roadmap Takes Shape in British
Virgin Islands Read more    Search           Found  0  results.            Did
you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP
United Nations Development Programme                         Who we are
About Us                                                            Funding and
delivery                                                            Where We
Work                                                       What We Do
Our Focus                                                            Sustainable
Development Goals
Projects                                                      Our Impact
News Centre
Publications                                                            Stories
Blogs                                                      Get Involved
Careers                                                            Procurement
Contact Us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Scam
alert Submit social or environmental complaint Terms of use twitter facebook
instagram youtube © 2024 United Nations Development Programme