Blue Economy Scoping Studies | United Nations Development Programme     Skip to
main content
Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean
Who we are
What We Do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What We Do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Locations           Home Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean         Blue Economy
Scoping Studies           Blue Economy Scoping Studies                         
Barbados Blue Economy Scoping Study The increasing potential of the Blue Economy
in Barbados as a sustainable approach to diversify the economy and create jobs
is one of the key messages highlighted by the recent rapid Blue Economy Scoping
Study elaborated by UNDP under the leadership of the Ministry of Maritime
Affairs and Blue Economy and in consultation with key stakeholders. The document
will serve to stir discussions around relevant policies and long-term strategies
. This research is part of the support that UNDP Barbados and the Eastern
Caribbean Multi-Country Office is providing to governments in the region with
the objective of promoting resilience and accelerating the achievement of
Sustainable Development Goals in the Caribbean. Under the motto of  "Blue
Economy for Green Islands”  UNDP is providing technical and financial assistance
to strengthen businesses, create jobs and improve lives. The impact of the
COVID-19 crisis has emphasised the importance of this work and the Blue Economy
is at the core of UNDP’s COVID-19 Response Programme, which is now
transitioning to the second phase:  From Economic Recovery to Expansion.” Click
to download: Barbados Blue Economy Scoping Study Barbados Blue Economy Scoping
Study Synthesis Report Barbados Blue Economy Scoping Study Action Plan  Dominica
Blue Economy Scoping Study  This report, prepared on behalf of UNDP Barbados and
the Eastern Caribbean,  represents the outcome of a Blue Economy Scoping Study,
undertaken through the UNDP programme of assistance, to provide both UNDP and
the government of Dominica with some understanding of the possible opportunities
that the blue economy presents. The report provides an overview of current
context and opportunities, a technical analysis of impediments, and makes
recommendations for ways forward in the form of an Initial Action Plan. The
report focusses on the key economic sectors that rely on the marine environment,
namely tourism and leisure, capture fisheries and ports and shipping. In this
regard this report puts forward a range of possible options for the government’s
consideration. Click to download: Dominica Blue Economy Scoping Study British
Virgin Islands (BVI) Strategic Blue Economy Roadmap This Strategic Blue Economy
Roadmap, developed with support from the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean, sets out an integrated approach to
ocean based sustainable development which brings together economy, environment
and society, consistent with the Sustainable Development Agenda (2030), Aichi
Target 11 of the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change (2015). The roadmap sets the direction and development pathways
for future investment in and development of a sustainable ocean-based economy in
the Virgin Islands. Specifically, the roadmap aims to create a revitalization
process that results in healthy ecosystems that are able to sustain growth in a
number of economic sectors and provide an opportunity for building equitable
societies. Over time this revitalization will support the development of new
sectors attracting greater investment and financial support to the blue economy
resulting in a greater number of businesses supported by the blue economy. This
revitalization will be supported by capable management institutions, focused on
sustainable development, and enabled by an innovative and skilled private
sector. Click to download: BVI Strategic Blue Economy Roadmap Montserrat Blue
Economy Scoping Study Montserrat has the unique opportunity to capitalise on the
emerging blue economy (BE) as a way to build forward better in light of the
COVID-19 pandemic. In an effort to advance the BE agenda, the Government of
Montserrat (GoM) expressed their desire to explore BE opportunities.   The UNDP
Multi-Country Office for Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean collaborated with
the GoM and a team of consultants to undertake a rapid preliminary assessment of
the status of Montserrat’s Blue Economy to help build a snapshot of the island's
current blue wealth and productivity. The study aimed to uncover the constraints
to developing a more productive blue economy and assess the potential for
generating greater value, creating equitable blue growth and promoting climate
resilience. It provides guidance on the blue economy opportunities that can be
explored, and best fit the local context in Montserrat. Sector specific
opportunities that support the overarching framework of blue economy development
are also outlined.     Click to download Montserrat Blue Economy Scoping Study
Search           Found  0  results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort
by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development
Programme                         Who we are
About Us                                                            Funding and
delivery                                                            Where We
Work                                                       What We Do
Our Focus                                                            Sustainable
Development Goals
Projects                                                      Our Impact
News Centre
Publications                                                            Stories
Blogs                                                      Get Involved
Careers                                                            Procurement
Contact Us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Scam
alert Submit social or environmental complaint Terms of use twitter facebook
instagram youtube © 2024 United Nations Development Programme