Boosting Up Energy Efficiency in Belarus’ Small-Town Housing Sector | United
Nations Development Programme     Skip to main content
Belarus
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English
Русский   Global
Nav toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English Русский Locations                 Home Belarus Press Releases
Boosting Up Energy Efficiency in Belarus’ Small-Town Housing Sector
Boosting Up Energy Efficiency in Belarus’ Small-Town Housing Sector       The
combination of energy efficient technologies and green education saves energy
costs and reduces CO2 emissions in housing sector.    July 6, 2023         The
small-town house with improved energy efficiency characteristics in Cherikov,
Mogilev region.   Photo: UNDP in Belarus          Nearly 40% of the world's CO2
emissions come from the real estate sector. Of this, around 70% are produced
from operation of buildings and the remaining 30% belongs to construction.
Carbon emissions from building operations and construction sectors have recently
reached record high levels. Thus, enhancing the energy efficiency of buildings
is critical for decarbonization of the real estate sector. Designing of
behavioral strategies to promote energy efficiency among tenants in combination
with the use of innovations and technological improvements can be a cost-
effective way for the housing sector to reduce energy consumption and mitigate
climate change. In Belarus, heating and hot water supply in residential and
public buildings consumes about 35% of all heat energy produced in the country,
while the total amount of greenhouse gas emissions produced by the housing
sector is more than 12% of all emissions. Belarus is pursuing a targeted and
systemic policy to reduce heat energy consumption in the housing and communal
sector through upgrades and renovations, such as high-performance insulation
"warm" windows, "smart" ventilation systems, as well as green energy solutions
like heat pumps and solar panels.     Second-generation energy-efficient house
built with UNDP and the GEF support in Mogilev.   Photo: UNDP in Belarus
From 2012 to 2018 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and the Global
Environment Facility (GEF) partnered with the Energy Efficiency Department of
the State Committee for Standardization of the Republic of Belarus to pilot the
construction of the country's first model apartment buildings equipped with
energy efficient technologies in Mogilev, Grodno and Minsk. Brining energy
efficiency to the small-town housing sector. Energy efficiency and energy saving
technologies are now widely used in the capital and regional cities, however, in
the Belarusian districts they are still quite rare. The lack of energy efficient
practices in the districts puts a burden on local budgets and local people’s
wallets. Because houses in small towns often rely on expensive heating systems
that use coal, the cost of heating can account for up to 40% of utility bill. 
Closing the energy-efficiency gap in the housing sector between cities and small
towns requires partnerships, investment in green technology and environmental
education. The rate of application of energy efficient technologies in rural
areas is increasing and a number of local initiatives can serve as models for
districts that are at the very beginning of their journey towards energy
efficiency.     The management and the staff of UNDP, GEF/UNDP SGP, the Ministry
of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection of Belarus, Cherikov District
Executive Committee and local communal services discussed the results of the
energy efficient house project in Cherikov.   Photo: UNDP in Belarus        Two
energy-efficiency initiatives were implemented with the support from the
UNDP/Small Grants Programme (SGP) in Cherikov district, Mogilev region.  In
2018, the GEF/UNDP SGP, the Center for Innovative Development joined efforts
with the Cherikov Housing and Communal Service to implement a project aimed at
piloting energy efficiency practices and technologies in the district.     Smart
heating control system in one of the apartments of the energy efficient house in
Cherikov.   Photo: UNDP in Belarus        Smart technologies to help improve
energy efficiency in houses. The project helped to install an automated “smart”
heating system in the 20-apartment residential house in Cherikov. The smart
heating allows tenants to control their heat consumption and set a base
temperature. A special sensor monitors the air temperature and if it goes up or
down it can be adjusted manually by an electronic regulator. Further, the
selected temperature mode will be maintained by a thermostat.  This technology
also brings significant benefits to people’s health, especially vulnerable
people such as older people or those with respiratory conditions. In addition to
temperature sensors, a thermostat and a regulator, the system is also equipped
with a router connecting it to the Internet. This feature allows the tenants to
control the heating system via a mobile app installed on their smartphones, so
that the heating isn’t on when it isn’t needed. This is very comfortable in
situations when the tenants are away.  The pilot proved to be successful. Heat
energy consumption was reduced by 22.4% and heating cost savings reached 20%. In
addition to benefiting people, energy efficiency in the housing sector helps to
cut CO2 emissions and contributes to the country's Nationally Determined
Contribution set under the Paris Agreement – to reduce CO2 emissions by 35%
until 2030. The energy-efficient house in Cerikov helped to reduce CO2 emissions
by 0, 1735 tons per year. replication good model Transforming people’s behavior
towards sustainable energy use and energy efficiency. In addition to energy
saving technologies, the development of energy efficient practices in the
housing sector requires active community outreach and education.     UNDP
Resident Representative, Alexandra Solovieva visits the Environmental Behavior
Center in Cherikov district.   Photo: UNDP in Belarus       The UNDP SGP helped
to establish the Center for Environmental Behavior in the Cherikov Center for
Children's and Youth Tourism, Local History and Excursions.  Three educational
courses on green and energy-efficient behavior were developed by local teachers
who were trained in energy efficiency. Over the three years the Center has
educated about 600 schoolchildren.      A new energy efficient heating system
allows the Center to reduce solid fuel consumption by up to 12%.   Photo: UNDP
in Belarus       Apart from advancing children’s knowledge on energy efficiency
and green behavior towards sustainable use of energy, the project helped to
improve their learning environment by installing a “smart house” heating system
and a new energy saving boiler.  Local community engagement on energy efficiency
knowledge and behavior gives way to broader application of green technologies
and innovations at the regional level. "Reducing heat and electricity costs
helps the people to enhance their well-being along with providing substantial
benefits for the environment and the energy sector," said Alexandra Solovieva,
UNDP Resident Representative in Belarus. “The UNDP SGP project demonstrates the
importance of supporting districts and local communities in piloting innovative
approaches towards improving energy efficiency of residential buildings”.
Addressing the energy-efficiency in small towns and rural areas requires a
concerted effort by a whole range of local and national partners, including
local administration, communal services, businesses, and educational
institutions. The availability of financial support, the development and scaling
up of best practices are also important. The development of new types of
financing with banks and private sector will amplify these efforts further by
stimulating local initiative and partnerships to accelerate the movement of
rural areas along the energy efficient trajectory of local development.   News
Crafting Eswatini's Action Vision 2025 Read more  News Empowering Communities to
Effectively Manage Natural Resources  Read more  News  Practice Parliament for
Women Programme, 6th in the Series Concludes Read more  News Smart Air-Purifying
System Installed in the Open in Belgrade  With the financial support by the
European Union, the Institute Mihailo Pupin installed a smart open-space air-
purifying system, within the zone of the “Ušće” Mal... Read more  News Dialogues
on Just Green Transition held in Obrenovac and Boljevac On February 6 and 7,
dialogues were held in Obrenovac and Boljevac on how to devise and implement as
just as possible solutions for the challenges of energy trans... Read more
Search           Found  0  results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort
by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development
Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                            Funding and
delivery                                                            Legal
framework                                                            Our team
What we do                                                      Our focus
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
Our impact                                                      Blogs
News Centre                                                            Press
Releases                                                            Publications
Get involved                                                      Contact us
Jobs                                                            Procurement
Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Scam Alert  Submit social or environmental
complaint Terms of Use © 2024 United Nations Development Programme