Catalysing Serbia’s Green Transformation | United Nations Development Programme
Skip to main content
Serbia
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English
Srpski   Global
Nav toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English Srpski Locations                 Home Serbia         Catalysing Serbia’s
Green Transformation                       Catalysing Serbia’s Green
Transformation      How UNDP Serbia Innovation Challenge Calls turn green ideas
into reality    November 15, 2023         Photo/Midjourney               Authors
Miroslav Tadić                Programme Analyst for Environment and Climate
change                 Draško Drašković                Head of Exploration
Luka Chomich                MPA Candidate, Harvard University, John F. Kennedy
School of Government               In March this year, a biotech innovation for
air purification from Serbia –  Liquid Tree , gained international popularity.
Media outlets from the  USA  to  India  reported about it, following its
worldwide trending on  social media . The combination of a solar-powered bench
and an aquarium with 600 litres of water hosts microalgae that bind carbon
dioxide (CO 2 ) and produce oxygen in urban areas, which lack space for trees.
This was one of many innovative ideas that turned into reality thanks to a
unique program developed by the UNDP Serbia Resilience Team, the  Innovation
Challenge Calls.  From 2017   to September 2023, we supported 69 green
initiatives with USD 4 million in co-financing and attracted USD 45 million in
total for their implementation.     Photo/Vladimir Zivojinovic       These green
innovations came from private and public companies, research and civil society
organisations, as well as local governments that applied to our Challenge Calls.
After the first round of evaluation, selected solutions enter the acceleration
phase, where they receive mentorship and training to turn their ideas into
viable business plans or deployable green investments. Those that successfully
completed the acceleration process received co-funding for implementation. 
Impact of the UNDP Challenge Calls To fully assess the impact of our approach on
fostering green innovations, an independent consultant gathered key data on all
the Challenge Calls conducted since 2017. They verified the findings with the
UNDP project teams, representatives of donors, international financial
institutions (IFIs), and other relevant parties. The research focused on
challenge calls within UNDP Serbia projects related to mitigating climate change
in urban environments, decarbonisation (increasing renewable energy production),
accelerating the circular economy and reducing waste, improving air quality and
biodiversity, sustainable food systems, as well as increasing energy efficiency
and ensuring a just green transition in Serbia. The analysis of the green
financing and support programs ecosystem in Serbia shows that UNDP Challenge
Call program has some unique features that enable it to fill the gap in Serbia’s
green financing landscape: It provides no-strings-attached   funding for early-
stage innovations.  This allows projects that might otherwise struggle to secure
financing to get started, making them more appealing to other investors.  It is
among the rare programs to  focus on both green initiatives and innovation  and
one of the very few that specifically target green projects. It is the only
program  open to a wide range of participants , including startups, small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), public and private companies, as well as large
corporations. In addition, it provides  hands-on mentoring and guidance  to
participants, equipping them with the skills and knowledge needed to carry out
sustainable and financially viable ventures. The mentors help the project teams
to understand the relevant laws and obtain the necessary permits, to implement
their projects in accordance with the legal framework. The program is
significant for the scope and size of Green Transition in Serbia  The Challenge
Call program attracts a substantial amount of funding in addition to donor co-
funding. To put it in perspective, the 69 supported projects received USD 4
million through donor co-financing, but their total worth amounts to USD 45
million. In simpler terms, every USD 1 invested attracted USD 10 from other
sources, including applicant’s own funds. Compared to similar programs in
Serbia focused on funding innovation within traditional SMEs, the UNDP program's
leverage is notably higher. The estimated total green investments in Serbia in
2022 amounted to about USD 200 million [1] . Around USD 2 million in direct co-
financing were allocated from the EU for Green Agenda in Serbia-related
Challenge Calls alone. Considering the program's leverage, this translates to
roughly USD 20 million in total project investments. This makes up to 10% of all
green investments in Serbia, outpaced only by established international
financial institutions like KFW, IFC, and EBRD. Thanks to the UNDP expert
knowledge, networking opportunities and assistance for external promotion,
several co-funded projects have scaled beyond the scope of the Call. One project
managed to raise EUR 9 million in commercial bank loans to scale their  new
approach to biomass electricity production . A socially responsible group of
women entrepreneurs  successfully replicated their business model  by extending
their network of associates across Serbia. A big international company operating
in Serbia expanded their project to re-use old tyres for creating public urban
furniture.     A socially responsible group of women entrepreneurs
Photo/Zavicaj u tegli       Transparency and efficiency in disbursing donor
funds Each project selected for donor co-financing received the funds through
the Performance-Based Payment Agreements (PBPA). The PBPA encourages projects to
meet their objectives within an estimated 6–12-month framework by disbursing
payments only after the successful completion of the agreed deliverables. The
PBPA beneficiaries are also obliged to pre-finance planned activities from their
own sources or other available funding.  In addition, each project undergoes
rigorous impact measurement and estimation tailored to its unique
characteristics. For example, metrics like greenhouse gas emissions (GHG)
reductions are estimated, providing external stakeholders with an assurance of
the project's credibility and potential.  Donor feedback indicated satisfaction
with the program’s transparent processes. They appreciate the competitive
element, believing it ensures the most deserving and most impactful projects
receive funding. Additionally, they value the program's emphasis on early-stage
innovations, which highlights projects’ needs for grants vs. other types of
financing. Donors also particularly liked the multiple benefits that supported
projects bring in terms of environmental, social, and economic impacts. For
example, one supported project involved a new business model that promotes 
carbon neutral production of essential oils , while bringing green jobs to the
rural population, especially women.           In turn, the program has witnessed
a growing interest from donors. For example, while the Global Environment
Facility funds allowed us to pilot, it was the EU that scaled the 'Green Agenda'
Challenge Calls, with Switzerland and Sweden joining and other partners coming
in. Donors have also been increasing their financial commitments. Switzerland
initially contributed approximately €4.5 million and later added an extra €2.2
million. Sweden contributed with approximately €1,7 million.  Total donations to
the program soared from €8 million to €17 million within a single year. The
research also showed that the donor funds are spent efficiently as 85-95% of the
total budget of a Challenge Call goes into financial support for projects, while
only 5-15% is spent on administrative costs, mentors, consultants, experts, and
trainings. How can we be even more successful As the analysis showed, the
Challenge Calls program managed to create a favourable environment for the
development of innovative business solutions in Serbia, especially those that
contribute to the green transformation. In addition, it identified key
recommendations for ensuring the future growth of the program: Further tailor
the support and mentoring of the project teams during the acceleration phase by
grouping them according to their specific needs. Three different types of
support should be provided to: a) traditional SMEs and LSGs, b) innovative SMEs
and research organizations and c) large private sector companies.   Track the
projects well beyond one-year contracting period, as the real impact of early-
stage innovations may be expected after the completion of the projects. This
would allow for further support and establishing connections to other projects.
Ensure that the learnings from the acceleration and implementation of projects
continue to influence the policy and decision-making processes. An example of
this is how insights from the Circular Economy Challenge Calls led to
legislative changes in Serbia's waste management regulation, which included end-
of-waste regulation, a rulebook on by-products, or the use of waste for R&D
purposes.  Help the innovators gain access to more external funding, especially
green credit lines that IFIs provide through commercial banks. This would also
contribute to scale up of successful green investments, thus maximizing related
positive impacts on the environment and local economy.  Make clear why the
support provided through the Challenge Calls programme is needed for particular
solutions compared to other available commercial borrowing schemes or funding
mechanisms and further strengthen the innovativeness of the supported solutions
to complement elements of additionality. Create a sustainable green financing
mechanism in Serbia that builds on the successes and lessons learned from the
Challenge Calls Program. In the long run, this can help Serbian companies to
remain competitive in European and global markets, ultimately accelerating the
green transformation of the whole national economy. By addressing these gaps, we
will continue to drive positive change and make a lasting impact on Serbia's
journey towards a greener and more sustainable future. To find out more about
Challenge Calls, reach out to UNDP Serbia Resilience Team!     [1] Excluding
outlier rail investments in 2022       Search           Found  0  results.
Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All
UNDP United Nations Development Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                            Legal
framework                                                            Funding and
delivery                                                            Our Team
Partners                                                            UNDP Serbia
and the UN                                                      What we do
Sustainable Development Goals
Our focus                                                            Projects
Our impact                                                      News centre
Publications                                                            Stories
Blogs                                                      Get involved
Careers                                                            Procurement
Contact us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit
social or environmental complaint Scam Alert Terms of Use twitter facebook
youtube instagram linkedin © 2024 United Nations Development Programme