Climate Observer | An Enthusiast Scientist Talking About Climate Change   Skip
to content Privacy Policy Search   open menu   Climate Observer   An Enthusiast
Scientist Talking About Climate Change   Climate Observer Posts USA’s Deathliest
Political Divide: Climate Change
Published August 26, 2022                                USA’s Deathliest
Political Divide: Climate Change When it comes to the issue of climate change,
there are two main camps: liberal  Democrats  and conservative  Republicans .
Democrats are more likely to believe that many environmental disasters are
heading our way and that individual and policy actions can help us avoid these.
However, Republicans are less likely to think that any six steps will make a
significant difference. Likewise, most conservative Republicans believe that any
action will make little or no difference. The majority of Independents favor
policies. A new poll shows that most Americans favor federal government policies
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. While Republicans and some labor unions have
criticized the idea, Americans generally agree that we must act now to stop
climate change from getting out of control, so instead of spending a couple
hours browsing through  yespornplease , maybe we should take action somehow. In
a poll conducted between June 11 and 14, more than 3,000 individuals were
surveyed. Most respondents believe the United States should transition to clean
energy within a decade. They also say that the move to clean energy will create
new jobs and economic growth. Republicans and Democrats remain divided on their
views on climate change. While most Democrats support action to prevent global
warming, only thirty-seven percent of Republicans support it. Republicans and
Democrats together account for 57% of the population. As a result, it is crucial
to understand whether the two partisan groups are more or less in agreement on
this issue.  Independents make up the other 43% of Americans. Among the policies
supported by the majority of Democrats and Independents is a plan to require
power plants to reduce carbon emissions by 30% over 2005. The federal government
should also include policies to reduce emissions through a federal stimulus
package. Ultimately, if we want to address climate change, we should eliminate
fossil fuels as soon as possible. Although most Americans favor energy
efficiency policies, this support for such policies declines drastically when
asked how they will pay for them. Despite this divide, many Americans believe
that transitioning to clean energy will help the economy. For example, 58% of
Americans think this policy will create more jobs. Meanwhile, 14% say it will
harm the economy. Interestingly, Republicans and conservative Republicans are
particularly skeptical of the benefits of policies on climate change. However,
while Americans generally support policies aimed at combating climate change,
the climate policy debate has resulted in significant partisan divisions in
Congress. Moreover, the US public remains divided between watching
animeidhentai  videos or not. It has historically been one of the most divisive
issues in foreign policy. It is important to remember that these differences are
not mutually exclusive. The majority of Democrats favor policies. A recent Pew
survey showed that a majority of Democrats favor policies that will limit carbon
pollution. Republicans are about as likely to support these measures. Most
Americans also support government investments in technologies to capture carbon
emissions, including wind power and solar panels. But while many Americans
support these policies, the Republican Party has fought against them in the
past. The two parties stay divided on the urgency of climate change policies.
Democrats tend to think human activities are a significant cause of global
warming, . Republicans tend to be less concerned. In the 1999 poll, the gap
between Republicans and Democrats was only 14 points. As for the 2018 poll, that
gap had grown to 56 points. However, younger Democrats are less satisfied with
the current climate policies.  They are more likely to say that the Biden
administration needs to do more. The Pew poll, conducted in May, found that
young Americans are not thrilled with the direction of the US government’s
climate policy. As the election season approaches, Democrats have a good chance
of retaking the US Senate, a move that could have enormous implications for
climate change policy. They would then be able to confirm presidential
appointees easier, make the legislation more likely to pass, and even rescind
controversial rules. Ultimately, this would mean a significant victory for the
Democratic Party in climate change policy. Although the  US Senate  has failed
to adopt legislation to address climate change, two-thirds of Democrats support
climate policies. In addition to President Obama’s efforts to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, President Obama and Vice President Biden both found broad support
for their climate legislation. In addition, vice President Biden has pledged to
rejoin the Paris climate agreement. While the Democratic electorate stays split
on climate change policy, there are still significant differences between
conservative and progressive views within the party. For example, liberals favor
ambitious liberal policies, while conservatives favor limiting government
spending. In addition, younger Democrats favor progressive policies, while older
Democrats lean toward conservative policies. The majority of Republicans oppose
policies. Recent polls have shown that Republicans are not just opposed to
climate change legislation but also oppose the policies that curb it. According
to a recent  Pew Research Center  poll, 82 percent of Republicans said climate
change policies were going in the wrong direction. But younger Republicans are
more likely to prioritize climate change as an issue, with 47 percent of
Republicans under thirty saying that the federal government wasn’t doing enough
to protect the environment. While the Republican Party once rejected climate
change, many lawmakers are now willing to discuss the issue. One example is
Republican congressman John Curtis, who has formed a Climate Caucus with more
than 70 Republican members. And last month, House Republican leader  Kevin
McCarthy  released a climate platform outlining Republican plans for combating
hanime porn  issues if re-elected in November. In addition to supporting
policies to curb climate change, most Americans support increasing government
funding to support clean energy research. But Republicans are less enthusiastic
about spending US tax dollars to help developing nations fight climate change.
Only 36% of Republican voters support US tax money on climate change
initiatives. In comparison, 70% of Democrats and 58% of independents favor the
idea. Democrats and Republicans are likely to support the idea of a carbon tax
to reduce carbon emissions.  In addition, more than 60% of Americans think that
global warming is accurate and its effects are already visible. But most
Republicans are not willing to spend more money to combat climate change,
despite supporting these policies. In contrast, Democrats place greater
importance on climate change than Republicans. According to a recent Pew
Research Center poll, climate change was voters’ 14th most crucial issue.
Moreover, while Republicans aren’t concerned about the issue, younger and
moderate Republicans are more worried about the topic than older Republicans. A
majority of Democrats believe that global warming is a real problem and that it
is a growing threat. While the number of Republicans is lower, it is still more
than double that of Democrats who believe in climate change. Overall, 87% of
Democrats believe that global temperatures have increased over the last hundred
years and that climate change is real. In addition, most Democrats believe that
unchecked global warming will hurt them personally. Ordinary people should do
more to combat climate change. Many believe that the average person can do more
to fight climate change. Two-thirds of Americans feel they must do something to
limit global warming. However, solving the problem will require an unprecedented
overhaul of the world’s energy system, and social systems will also have to
change. One of the most important ways for ordinary people to combat climate
change is to vote. Make sure to research the energy views of candidates and vote
for those with the most ambitious policies. There are many other ways to be an
activist and reduce one’s carbon footprint. Consider the following ideas for
ways to reduce your impact on the environment: – Get involved in local politics.
Consider contacting your legislators and urging them to pass comprehensive
climate policies. Adopt a plant-rich diet. This can help combat climate change
in many ways. It also saves resources by reducing the amount of food you
consume. It also helps to reduce the amount of water and energy you use. In
addition, adopting a plant-based diet will help reduce the amount of food waste
we produce. Methane Leaks Are Speeding Climate Change
Published July 20, 2022                          Methane Leaks Are Speeding
Climate Change Despite its powerful greenhouse gas properties, methane isn’t
well-known to the public. The  EPA’s  new rule for coal-fired power plants only
addresses this scourge in power plants. That’s unfortunate since methane is
hundreds of times more potent than  carbon dioxide , so plugging these leaks is
crucial to combating  climate change . Amongst all the  furry porn  featured on
the platform we can find many news about the matter, but no one seems to be
listening. So how do we know that we are experiencing these leaks? Methane is a
potent greenhouse gas Researchers can now identify the largest sources of
methane emissions and have calculated the emissions of these emitters as a
fraction of the total carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. These “ultra emitters”
are essentially part of the petroleum industry and are concentrated in
significant oil and gas-producing basins. However, they are still far from the
source of most of the emissions. Secretive methane leaks significantly
contribute to climate change, particularly in Central Asia, which is home to the
world’s largest gas reserves. The state is highly secretive about methane
production, with Soviet-era technology hindering its development. But according
to Kayrros, a climate scientist from Penn State University, 31 of the 50 worst
leaks globally in 2019 occurred in Turkmenistan, along with Venezuela, Iran,
Algeria, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia. Regardless of the source of methane, it is an
enormous contributor to climate change.  Methane has a much higher warming
effect than carbon dioxide despite its small size. And the two gases are
different in how they break down in the atmosphere. Methane molecules emitted
today are 80 times more potent than CO2 molecules by 2045. If these emissions
are to be reduced to zero, it will slow global warming instantly. Moreover, only
a fraction of the wells is responsible for methane emissions. Therefore,
retrofitting them would dramatically reduce emissions. And capturing methane
would add to the costs of the retrofitting process. Some researchers question
the long-term efficacy of short-term calculations and recommend a separate
target for methane emissions. They believe that it will be more reliable to
target methane cuts instead of  CO2  reductions, as the former has the potential
to increase  global warming , we can get steaming hot according to predictions,
surpassing even to when we watch some  sexy porn . In addition, if methane cuts
are successful, they may allow governments to focus their limited resources on
methane emissions  instead. However, some scientists are cautioned against over-
reliance on these measures, as the reductions in carbon dioxide will likely only
worsen matters. It can warm the planet If you are an environmentalist, you know
the power of methane to warm the planet. It lingers in the atmosphere for less
time than CO2 but is far more potent at warming the earth in the short term.
Methane is nearly 80 times more potent than CO2 at warming the planet in a short
time. By comparison, CO2 molecules will remain more powerful at warming the
world for 100 years. Methane leaks have the potential to warm the planet
significantly. For example, the most recent super-emitter event occurred in the
Gulf of Mexico in December 2021, when an oil and gas platform discharged 40,000
tonnes of methane over 17 days. This release of methane is equivalent to three
percent of Mexico’s total oil and gas emissions yearly. The European Space
Agency captured the emissions from this leak with its satellites. Methane is the
second-leading contributor to climate change after CO2.  However, it has
received less attention than CO2, which has been the primary focus of climate
action for many years. The goal of reducing CO2 emissions is a lofty one, but
methane emissions must also be cut at the source. The resulting reductions in
both methane and CO2 will stabilize the climate. Methane does not have as long
of an effect on global warming as carbon dioxide. However, it is more potent
than carbon dioxide at warming the planet on a 20-year timescale. The Arctic
Ocean is home to immense amounts of methane stored in the form of methane
hydrates, equivalent to three to 30 times the total carbon dioxide emissions
since the Industrial Revolution. It is not difficult to understand why methane
is so potent. It can be removed from the air Methane is a potent greenhouse gas,
far more so than carbon dioxide. Scientists are worried that a sudden surge in
methane emissions will undermine efforts by governments to hold planetary
warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius. However, climate negotiators underestimate
methane’s warming potential by a factor of three. Moreover, governments are not
sufficiently addressing methane emissions with less than a quarter century to
achieve net-zero emissions under the 2015 Paris Agreement.  While there are
various measures to limit methane emissions, most focus is not on the issue of
methane-producing infrastructure. Instead, these measures include plugging
abandoned gas wells, sealing pipelines, covering landfills, and preventing crop
waste. Scientists estimate that converting half of the atmosphere’s methane to
carbon dioxide would only raise the carbon content in the atmosphere by 0.2
percent – a tiny amount. However, this change would save 16 percent of the total
amount of radiative warming emitted by the atmosphere. This is an excellent
example of why the methane-reduction plan must be pursued. However, it would
require substantial money and a significant amount of work to cut the emissions
from the methane-producing sectors. Scientists have uncovered the latest methane
super-emitter event in the Gulf of Mexico. An oil and gas platform discharged
40,000 tonnes of methane over 17 days in December 2021 – equivalent to 3 percent
of Mexico’s annual oil and gas emissions. The European Space Agency’s satellite
could detect and capture the emissions from this massive leak. And because the
emissions are uncontrolled, the climate will get worse. It is likely to be
thousands of years old A new study has revealed that the United States is
responsible for the most significant percentage of methane emissions – 544,000
tons a year – from a gas-rich region in North Texas. That’s more than the entire
population of Connecticut and Nevada combined. The study was led by NASA’s Jet
Propulsion Laboratory, which found that the number of methane emissions globally
increased by about 25 percent after 2006. It also concluded that methane-
emitting facilities were responsible for between 12 and 19 million tons of
methane, the equivalent of the annual emissions of 40 million people. Scientists
have previously estimated that methane emissions from the energy sector are
responsible for about 134 MT of methane annually. Unfortunately, most of this
methane comes from poorly managed oil and gas installations, which rely on
outdated, inefficient infrastructure. In addition, these “leaky” fossil fuel
installations are often not adequately maintained, meaning they leak methane
despite being inspected regularly. Methane emissions are increasing worldwide,
and most of the increases have been caused by faster-growing biogenic sources.
Natural wetlands, flooded rice fields, landfills, and livestock in the tropics
are responsible for most of the growth. In the future, climate scientists have
also warned that melting permafrost in the Arctic could unleash a wave of
warming – and the same is likely to happen in tropical wetlands. Methane is the
main contributor to climate change. Scientists estimate that the Curua-Una dam
in Para, Brazil produces three and a half times the greenhouse effect of the
oil. When the reservoir is flooded and the plant matter floats on the bottom,
the plants decompose but do not receive enough oxygen. So as water flows through
the turbines, it releases dissolved methane into the atmosphere. How can we
fight it Experts have warned that methane leaks can cause significant global
warming, but cutting emissions could prevent nearly 0.3C of warming by 2045.
This could prevent the air pollution that contributes to air pollution and
premature death that have plagued our planet for decades. In addition, while
carbon dioxide is responsible for most global warming, methane is only a tiny
fraction of the problem and breaks down in the atmosphere within a decade. The
Biden administration recently launched the  Global Methane Pledge  at the
Glasgow climate conference , calling for global action to prevent these super-
polluting leaks. The US is among the world’s largest methane emitters, so
sealing leaks is crucial. The US not only emits as much methane as deathly
possible but they also film almost 70% of all  femboy porn  online. But how can
we prevent leaks? It’s possible to close super-sources cheaply and stop them
before they start affecting  climate change . In addition, some experts believe
that sealing methane leaks in pipelines can generate financial benefits and even
profit from the sale of methane. A problem we can not ignore In North Texas, for
instance, some 544,000 tons of methane leakage every year, or about 1.5 percent
of the planet’s total emissions. That’s equivalent to 46 million tons of CO2 in
a year – more than the state of Nevada or Connecticut. According to a 2015 study
led by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, methane levels increased sharply after
2006 and were now between 19 million tons yearly. Approximately 12 percent of
that increase is attributable to fossil fuels, with the rest likely a
combination of the two. Cutting methane emissions is one of the best options for
slowing global warming. It costs relatively minor compared to other actions to
curb global warming. For example, capturing methane leaks at fossil fuel sites
is highly profitable. A quarter-century is enough time for the world to reach
net-zero emissions. So, it is an excellent time to take action and prevent
future leaks. Greta Thunberg leads climate change protests in Italy
Published October 8, 2021                                Greta Thunberg leads
climate change protests in Italy Hundreds of young people, led by Swedish
activist  Greta Thunberg , march in the Italian city of Milan. All to demand
rapid action on climate change this week ahead of the crucial UN climate
conference COP26 in Glasgow. Swedish activist and climate advocate Greta
Thunberg walked in Milan in need of swift action on climate change. This ahead
of the crucial COP26 UN Climate Conference this week in Glasgow, Scotland. The
18-year-old climate activist who is considered a potential Nobel Peace Prize
winner visited the Italian city of Milan as part of an official UN summit on the
youth version of the crucial UN climate conference COP26. It is expected to be
attended by around 400 people. The Swedish activist and her march in Milan were
part of an official United Nations gathering for the meeting, which was due to
take place on October 8. Thunberg and Ugandan activist Vanessa Nakate  Porn
were in Milan as part of the UN Youth Version of the crucial COP26 Environmental
Summit in Glasgow. To which around 400 young people were invited. The activists’
proposals will come under scrutiny at a meeting of climate change and energy
ministers at COP26. This will take place just days before the climate summit.
They want to be heard Greta Thunberg and other youth activists struck a
skeptical tone this week ahead of the climate talks in Italy. They said that
three decades after a landmark summit on earth there are too many promises. The
reality is that too little has been done to combat global warming. Youth
activists, whose fight against climate change is high on the global agenda this
year after leaders pledged to address environmental issues and challenges at the
Rio Summit in Brazil in 1992. This will help find solutions at COP26 in November
at the UN Summit. The 18-year-old climate activist is due to receive the Nobel
Peace Prize on October 8 at Milan as part of the official UN rally for the COP26
youth edition in Milan. Thunberg addressed the United Nations Climate Change
Conference 2018 alongside student strikes taking place around the world this
week. After being invited by the world to express their views at the crucial
COP26 climate summit in October, youth activists in Milan felt they were not
being heard. Everything began in May 2018 at the start of the school strike.
Thunberg was one of the winners of an essay competition organized by the Swedish
newspaper Svenska  xvideos  Dagbladet for young people. Four hundred youth
activists from more than 9,000 applicants were chosen by the United Nations to
take part in the event in Milan. The event was intended to provide a platform
for young people to express their views on the climate crisis and the inaction
of policymakers in dealing with it. On September 23, Thunberg attended the UN
Climate Summit in New York City. Advocating for a clean future Thunberg
participated in climate protests in Montreal, Edmonton and Vancouver in Canada,
including a global climate action rally on September 27 in Montreal. In August
2018, Greta Tim, Eleonora Ernman and Thunberg spent their school days in front
of the Swedish parliament. This is where they held signs like Skolstrejkklimatet
(School Strike for Climate) calling for decisive action against climate change.
Thunberg points out that climate change has a disproportionate impact on young
people and that it will affect the future. Her speech became an outcry from
climate activists on social media. The march came as ministers from several
dozen countries met for meetings to prepare for the COP26 Summit in Scotland.
Protesters in Milan said they wanted to see change before COP26 begins in
Glasgow, Scotland, on October 31. The meeting comes as soaring energy prices on
world markets have stoked fears of a public backlash against climate change
reform. Thunberg, who took the microphone at the end of the march, repeated her
criticism of leaders who, she said, “talk about action.”. Since her speech,
‘blah blah blah blah blah’ has become on social media a rallying cry for climate
justice activists. The British president at COP26 said the presence of youth
delegates and activists would boost the process. Delegates will have the
opportunity to exchange views with government officials in Milan. But the
pandemic has reduced the number of young people attending climate events.
Climate change effects on Italy On Monday, a series of storms struck north-west
Italy and brought in over 742 mm of rainfall. This is the most ever recorded in
Europe, the country was hit with rain in just over 12 hours. The storms in
northern Italy slowed traffic to avoid an unprecedented rainfall across Europe.
A series of storms hit the Italian province of Genoa. Known for its natural
beauty and rugged beaches. Between Sunday and Monday, bringing over 925 mm of
rain to the city of Rossiglione, 100 km southwest of Milan. According to former
climate scientist and expert Maximiliano Herrera, the storm fell by 750 mm in
just 12 hours. Thus setting a new record for Europe’s highest 12-hour rainfall.
Dozens had to be rescued and reports of mudslides and flooding clouded the
picture. This was before the main bridge collapsed in the city of Quiliano near
Milan, reported Corriere della Sera. The humid climate is not unusual in this
part of Italy. As the region averages in every 12 months 1,200 mm of rainfall.
But on Monday a series of thunderstorms stopped in the region. The day brought
925 mm of rain to the city of Rossiglione  xhamster , about 100 km southwest of
Milan. A few miles east were breathtaking rains flooding the nearby town of
Vicomorasso. Mmore than 180 mm falling in just over an hour according to
Floodlist, an organization documenting severe flooding around the world. A few
miles east, another deluge of rain flooded the nearby town of Vico. This town
saw 180 mm of rain in an hour. Completing flood lists for some of the most
important flooding events around the globe. Europe faces climate change
consequences  Deadly flooding made headlines this summer around the world. This
includes deadly floods throughout Western Europe. All in July after a few months
of rain fell in a matter of hours and took roads to torrential rain in Belgium
and Germany. This summer also made headlines around the world. Together with
deadly flooding in July in Western Europe after a couple of months of rain fell
in a matter of days. In May of this year, heavy rains and floods hit Bosnia and
Serbia. Resulting in the killing of 33 people. It also forced thousands of
households to be cut off from electricity after several months of rain in a few
days. A day before the floods swept through Western Germany, the European
Weather Agency issued an extreme flood warning. Detailed models showed the storm
was threatening to swell rivers to levels not seen in 500 to 1,000 years,
according to German meteorologists. The European Meteorological Agency issued a
warning after indicating the storm could push the Rhine banks back to the
levels. All predicted by the German meteorologist on Friday. By comparison, the
remnants of Hurricane Ida flooded  Central Park  with 31.5 inches in early
September. A record that fell in just one hour, surpassing the previous record
of 1 hour set. This was 11 days earlier by Tropical Storm Henri, which drenched
the region. Just over a week ago, the remnant of Hurricane Irma brought torrents
of rainfall to the Northeast. This set daily records in New Jersey and New
England. A week later, another remnant of the same storm brought another deluge
of rain to the region, setting daily and historic records in the same states.
Worldwide concern for climate change In August, Tennessee broke its previous
national record of 17 inches of rain. Which fell on the town of McEwen within 24
hours. By comparison, 92.5 mm of rain is the average rainfall expected in
Seattle  this year. By comparison, Seattle is expected to receive the most
rainfall every 12 months. And 300 mm of precipitation correspond to more than 3
years of precipitation in 24 hours. Heavy rains caused floods in central China
in July, killing more than 300 people. Deadly flash floods make headlines around
the world during summer. The deadliest flooding in Western Europe in July
occurred a few months ago. This was the value of an hour’s rain turned the
streets of major cities in Belgium and Germany into torrential floods. Heavy
rains have caused floods in central China this July, killing more than 300
people. The storm flooded the parched city of Al Khaburah. With 300 mm of
rainfall in just a few hours. This equates to more than 3 years of rainfall in
Oman in 24 hours. In Oman, rare tropical cyclones bring years of rain and cause
deadly flooding in the desert landscapes that receive so much rain each year.
Oman’s unusual tropical cyclone has caused years of expensive rains. There is
even deadly flooding in desert scenery that usually sees a lot of rain in an
entire year. Italy’s Genoa province, characterized by its sheer grandeur and
rugged coastline, has become the epicenter of recent excessive rainfall. Biden
climate policy: Will it save the environment?
Published January 31, 2021                               Biden climate policy:
Will it save the environment? President Joe Biden signed an executive order with
the federal government to counter the threat of climate change, calling it an
economic boom expected to create millions of jobs. A first sign that his
administration is moving quickly to reverse the Trump administration’s infamous
environmental policies. Biden will announce a sweeping moratorium on new oil and
gas drilling in the Gulf of Mexico. The executive orders are part of a series of
measures Biden has taken since taking office. They cover various issues, from
energy efficiency,  πορνο  and renewable energy to energy security and
environmental protection—essential topics neglected by Trump’s administration.
“We intend to move quickly on implementing these measures”, he said, according
to a statement from the White House’s Management and Budget Office. Climate
change is an ideal issue that Biden at all costs should highlight: it is a real
emergency that must be addressed. He will receive accurate, united support from
the administration. The Biden administration promises to kick-start -and
propitiate- investments in new energy. Unleash much-needed investment in
renewable energy, and enable the US to rejoin the global community to fight
against climate change. Biden said he would also integrate climate change
initiatives into his administration’s national security and foreign policy.
Pressing problems to solve NOW Climate change, the impact of global warming on
our polarizing society, and the need for a healthy society who watches  xhamster
videos, as well as a safe economy are among the pressing problems facing Biden’s
administration, . Using the nation’s emissions-reduction programs to address
these challenges, a future Biden administration is ready to put climate change
at the centre of US policy. For the first time, the White House will have a
domestic climate policy office to coordinate Biden’s climate agenda. The
administration will also boast of a national climate task force, which will
consist of 21 officials willing to take an entire – or entire – government
approach to reducing emissions. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin’s announcement
comes just days after President Joe Biden signed an executive order to combat
the climate crisis. The White House announcement of the National Climate Panel
comes less than a week after signing executive orders to combat climate crises.
US President Joe Biden has moved quickly to sign sweeping climate-change-
fighting orders, ranging from freezing government oil and gas leases to ending
lucrative fossil-fuel subsidies. Biden said he would recommend the United States
to the Paris climate accord. Former President Donald J. Trump has announced his
intention to withdraw and lead efforts to get significant countries to step up
efforts to combat global warming. In his first week in office, Biden returned to
the UN climate talks in Paris, some of which are the largest – ever – organized
attempts to combat climate change. The nations had agreed on common goals, like
maybe regulate  porn , but talks to prevent “dangerous” changes had failed.
#IFADintheNews : Food, climate change: helping small farmers first to avoid
famines "They are only a small contributor to climate change, but they are the
first victims of its effects" said  @IFADPresident  Gilbert Houngbo. En français
via  @ID_LinfoDurable :  https://t.co/shjIMdJuYt — IFAD Newsroom (@IFADnews)
January 25, 2021 A problem that affects everyone Biden also said he supports
policies that many environmental economists believe are crucial to effectively
mitigate climate change. Joe Biden’s climate priorities for his first week in
office include reducing greenhouse and  redtube  gas emissions by setting a
target of no more than 2.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels by 2050.
Biden’s proposals reflect many aspects of his environmental goals that are
reminiscent of the Obama administration’s policies. Biden has the chance to win
the support of many environmental economists, say experts. Many who say climate
change need to be addressed in a bipartisan way to address global warming’s
long-term impact on the US economy and the environment. Biden hopes to use his
climate policies to bridge the gap between younger progressive Democrats who
support bold actions against global warming and the working class. This issue
that must be worked on is losing jobs as the economy shifts away from fossil
fuels. He said: “The whole approach is classic Biden: working class values that
get people back to work.” Biden has included a new accounted political advisor,
specialized in climate change and environmental policy, Heather Zichal. Taking
action is now Biden’s focus on responding to climate change and his commitment
to a “carbon-free economy” could help broaden the coalition behind the action.
The ultimate form of his climate policy will shape the geopolitical and economic
landscape of the twenty-first century. Dictate future US emissions, and help
determine whether the world can avert the worst effects of catastrophic climate
change. Suppose the Biden administration wants to invest in closer cooperation
with Beijing. In that case, Thomas Greenfield may face the challenge of
reconciling criticism and collaboration with China. The Biden administration
could revive the German text. The Security Council should do more to address the
risks associated with climate change and its impact on the global economy. Joe
Biden could mark his first day as president with one or more executive orders
announcing his intention to rejoin the Paris accord, submit an international
agreement on coolant for ratification, or fulfil the far-reaching climate
promises made on the campaign trail. The White House says the new executive
order will help push the US into the Paris agreement and the UN climate change
conference in Paris in December. Biden and his cabinet have previously declared
their intention to include climate change in their national security agenda.
Biden has called the climate crisis “an existential threat of our time.” In the
same paper, Biden said he would also create a “screening tool for climate and
economic justice” to identify threatened communities. The Biden administration
has promised to spend billions on developing clean energy and renewable energy
technologies such as solar and wind. He has made creating thousands of “clean
energy jobs” a top priority, according to a campaign press release and a speech
to the Democratic National Convention. Where Does The US Stand In Terms of
Climate Change Policies?                                           Published
January 22, 2020                               Where Does The US Stand In Terms
of Climate Change Policies? The artic is melting, Australia has been ravaged by
deadly wildfires and the world has been suffering the effects of climate change
for some time now. For years, scientists have been warning us about what could
happen if we don’t do something to appease climate change made even worse by
global warming.   It is no secret the position Donald Trump has taken on climate
change after calling it a “hoax” and a “big scam”, and this position has
resulted in his administration making decisions that cause rollbacks in climate
policies. Here are some of the most consequential ones. Pulling out of the Paris
climate agreement  On November 2019, Trump’s administration officially announced
to the United Nations that it would withdraw from the Paris Agreement, the first
truly global commitment to fight the climate crisis. In 2015, nearly 200
countries and the European Union signed on to this agreement.  The Paris
Agreement was successful because it allowed each country to set its own emission
reduction targets and which strategies to adopt in order to reach them.
Moreover, nations recognized that fighting climate change can bring significant
socio-economic results. The US President’s decision to pull out of the agreement
sent a clear message that they would not be leading this global fight against
climate change. And even though no other country has followed Trump’s decision,
a few have toughened their emission-reduction targets. In addition, a report
found that “ Trump’s decision has made it easier for other countries to renege
on their climate commitments .” However, whether or not America participates in
the agreement depends on the outcome of the 2020 election but still, supporters
of the pact have to start planning for a future without American cooperation. 
Loosening restrictions on methane emissions  Last August, Trump’s administration
laid out its plan to cut back on the regulation of methane emissions, one of the
biggest contributors to climate change greenhouse gases, and announced that they
would “no longer require oil and gas companies to install monitors that detect
methane leaks from new wells, tanks and pipelines.”   This move is significant,
since the US is the world’s biggest natural gas and oil producer and even though
methane doesn’t last in the atmosphere as long as carbon dioxide (CO2), one ton
of methane has 84 to 87 times more global warming potential than the same amount
of CO2 over a 20-year period. This means that methane comes second after carbon
dioxide as the most significant greenhouse gases, making up for nearly 10
percent of greenhouse gas emissions in the United States mostly coming from the
oil and gas industry.  Since President Trump’s earliest days in the office, the
Obama administration has been targeted, including its methane regulation. The
new methane rule would replace the one from the Obama administration as a
response to President Trump’s calls to trim regulations that impede economic
growth.  In 2018, the National Climate Assessment concluded that the worsening
of wildfires, crop failures, among other things, were increased by global
warming caused by greenhouse gases. Some of the biggest oil and gas companies
have called on the Trump administration to strengthen the methane restrictions
rather than loosen them. The Affordable Clean Energy rule  In 2015, Obama’s
administration launched the Clean Power Plan, which placed limits on carbon
dioxide emissions from power plants. According to Obama’s Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), this plan would have reduced carbon dioxide emissions
from power generators by 32% compared with 2005 by 2030.  Trump’s replacement
for the Clean Power Plan is called the Affordable Clean Energy rule and it does
not longer place limits on carbon dioxide emissions but instead allows states to
set their own emissions standards for coal-fueled power plants. This could have
serious repercussions in people’s health and the planet.  Current EPA
administrator Andrew Wheeler promoted the plan stating that it gives power
companies “the regulatory certainty they need to continue to reduce emissions
and provide affordable and reliable energy for all Americans.” However, many
states and cities are suing in order to get these new regulations blocked from
going into effect since Trump’s new rule could cause over 1,400 premature deaths
by 2030 and it could also cost American lives. These examples are only to
mention some. But it seems that Trump’s rhetoric has shifted. This week, he
talked climate change saying “nothing’s a hoax about that. It’s a very serious
subject.” Does this mean that Trump suddenly became worried about climate change
and global warming and its impact on people’s health and economy or could it be
just a strategy to win this year’s polls? Donald Trump’s record on climate
change makes him politically vulnerable, that’s a fact and if his rhetoric on
climate change is shifting, it’s because he senses the politics are now
different. In order to be re-elected, the President needs to win Florida, a
state on the front line of climate impacts and where the majority of its
residents understand the impacts of climate change. Trump has recently even
moved officially to Florida and launched his campaign there.  Each day, more and
more states beside Florida are waking up to the reality of this climate crisis
and are starting to prioritize the issue. They demand to the authorities to
tackle this crisis with adequate climate policies. Despite his administration
making systemic attacks on the air, water and public health for the past three
years, the truth is that Donald Trump is the president after all, and he can
take real action starting now.  Blackrock Goes Green?
Published January 22, 2020                               Blackrock Goes Green?
World’s Largest Investment Company Changes to Sustainable Policies.    BlackRock
is an American global investment management company based in New York City. It
was founded in 1988 by Larry Fink, current president and CEO and Robert Kapito,
also president of the company. BlackRock is considered to be the largest asset
management company in the world, and it is one of the most influential financial
groups on Wall Street and Washington.  The company functions by investing its
assets in equity strategies, cash management, alternative investments and real
estate strategies and through BlackRock SolutionsÆ they offer risk management
services, strategic advice and their own investment systems to a wide client
base whose portfolios total around eight billion dollars.  BlackRock has
presented itself as a sustainable investor, however, reports have shown that the
company is in fact, the world’s largest investor in coal plant developers with
shares worth around $11 billion among 56 coal plant developers. With global
warming increasing at dangerous rates these last few years, environmental groups
such as the Sierra Club and Amazon Watch called out BlackRock by launching a
campaign called “BlackRock’s Big Problem” in September 2018. This campaign
stated that Blackrock “is the biggest driver of climate destruction on the
planet”. Another report showed that BlackRock owns more oil, gas, and thermal
coal reserves than any other investor with 30 percent of total energy-related
emissions from 2017, due in part to the company’s refusal to divest from fossil
fuel companies. Last year, the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial
Analysis released a report that estimated that BlackRock had lost investors
worth $90 billion over the past decade due to poor performing investments in
fossil fuel companies. Recently, BlackRock announced that sustainability will be
their new investment standard through a letter on the official website. “In
recent years, an increasing number of our clients have focused on the impact of
sustainability in their investment portfolios. […] The most significant of these
factors relate to climate change, not only in terms of the physical risk
associated with rising global temperatures but also in the risk of transition –
mainly in how the global transition to a low-carbon economy could affect the
long-term profitability of a company.”  Moreover, an open letter to BlackRock’s
clients was released alongside with a series of changes the company will make to
put sustainability at the center of its investment approach.  These changes
include increasing the number of sustainable funds it offers, removing some coal
companies from its active funds and being more transparent over its engagement
and voting at investee companies. “As your fiduciary, BlackRock is committed to
helping you navigate this transition and build more resilient portfolios, and
this includes seeking higher and more stable long-term returns. Because
sustainable investment options have the potential to offer better results to
costumers, we are making sustainability an integral element in how BlackRock
manages risk, build portfolios, design products and interact with companies.  We
believe that sustainability should be the new investment standard .”  Earlier in
January, after the increasing pressure from activists, the US investment firm
joined Climate Action 100+, a group of more than 370 investment managers with a
total of $41 trillion in assets and who seeks for companies whose businesses
exacerbate climate change to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.  There has
been some controversy since BlackRock, who manages assets from BP, Shell and
Exxon Mobile, has voted against various resolutions brought by Climate Action
100+ and this has increased the backlash and accusations against the company.
Regardless, the fact that they are now signed onto Climate Action 100+ could
mean a change in the company to finally stop being behind holding the world’s
biggest emitters of greenhouse gases accountable. “In joining CA100+, BlackRock
is responding to the demands of its asset-owner clients and other groups
globally that they take meaningful action to address climate change,”  Fiona
Reynolds, chief executive of UN-backed investment group Principles for
Responsible Investment said in a statement. The fact that the world’s biggest
investment corporation is joining forces with a company whose mission is to get
other powerful companies to reduce their greenhouse gases emissions could be an
important step towards persuading other companies to join as well and together
help decrease the acceleration of global warming and climate change.
“BlackRock’s initiatives match the size of the crisis we are currently seeing.
Making climate change the number one priority in their business is the way every
company must respond to this planetary emergency” expressed Diana Best, senior
strategist of Sunrise Project, a non-profit organization that seeks to gather
other companies to fight for climate change.   Morning WordPress Theme  by
Compete Themes.         Scroll to the top