CO2 Emissions in 2022 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News Events
Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down
Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables
Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency
and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand the
biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global
Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global
Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency
Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and
Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by
country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia
Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea
Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic
Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports CO2 Emissions in 2022 CO2 Emissions in 2022
Download pdf                             Overview
About this report CO2 Emissions in 2022  provides a complete picture of energy-
related greenhouse gas emissions in 2022. The report finds that global growth in
emissions was not as high as some had originally feared amid the disruptions
caused by the global energy crisis. This latest release brings together the
IEA’s latest analysis, combining the Agency’s estimates of CO2 emissions from
all energy sources and industrial processes, as well as providing information on
energy-related methane and nitrous oxide emissions. This report is part of the
IEA’s support of the first global stocktake of the Paris Agreement, which will
be finalized in the run up to COP28, the next UN Climate Change Conference, at
the end of 2023. Find other reports in this series on the IEA’s  Global Energy
Transitions Stocktake  page. Published March 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Press
release Share Cite Key messages Global energy-related CO 2  emissions grew by
0.9% or 321 Mt in 2022, reaching a new high of over 36.8 Gt.  Following two
years of exceptional oscillations in energy use and emissions, caused in part by
the Covid-19 pandemic, last year’s growth was much slower than 2021’s rebound of
more than 6%. Emissions from energy combustion increased by 423 Mt, while
emissions from industrial processes decreased by 102 Mt. In a year marked by
energy price shocks, rising inflation, and disruptions to traditional fuel trade
flows,  global growth in emissions was lower than feared , despite gas-to-coal
switching in many countries. Increased deployment of clean energy technologies
such as renewables, electric vehicles, and heat pumps helped prevent an
additional 550 Mt in CO 2  emissions. Industrial production curtailment,
particularly in China and Europe, also averted additional emissions. Specific
challenges in 2022 contributed to the growth in emissions.  Of the 321 Mt CO 2
increase, 60 Mt CO 2  can be attributed to cooling and heating demand in extreme
weather and another 55 Mt CO 2  to nuclear power plants being offline. CO 2
growth in 2022 was well below global GDP growth of 3.2% , reverting to a decade-
long trend of decoupling emissions and economic growth that was broken by 2021’s
sharp rebound in emissions. Improvements in the CO 2  intensity of energy use
were slightly slower than the past decade’s average. Emissions from natural gas
fell by 1.6% or 118 Mt , following continued tightening of supply exacerbated by
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Reductions in emissions from gas were particularly
pronounced in Europe (-13.5%). The Asia Pacific region also saw unprecedented
reductions (-1.8%). Increased emissions from coal   more than offset reductions
from natural gas . Amid a wave of gas-to-coal switching during the global energy
crisis, CO 2  emissions from coal grew by 1.6% or 243 Mt, far exceeding the last
decade’s average growth rate, and reaching a new all-time high of almost
15.5 Gt. Emissions from oil grew even more than emissions from coal, rising by
2.5% or 268 Mt to 11.2 Gt.  Around half of the increase came from aviation, as
air travel continued to rebound from pandemic lows, nearing 80% of 2019 levels.
Tempering this increase, electric vehicles continued to gain momentum in 2022,
with over 10 million cars sold, exceeding 14% of global car sales. The biggest
sectoral increase in emissions in 2022 came from electricity and heat
generation,  whose emissions were up by 1.8% or 261 Mt. In particular, global
emissions from coal-fired electricity and heat generation grew by 224 Mt or
2.1%, led by emerging economies in Asia. A strong expansion of renewables
limited the rebound in coal power emissions . Renewables met 90% of last year’s
global growth in electricity generation. Solar PV and wind generation each
increased by around 275 TWh, a new annual record. Emissions from industry
declined by 1.7% to 9.2 Gt   last year . While several regions saw manufacturing
curtailments, the global decline was largely driven by a 161 Mt CO 2  decrease
in China’s industry emissions, reflecting a 10% decline in cement production and
a 2% decline in steel making. China’s emissions were relatively flat in 2022,
declining by 23 Mt or 0.2%.  Growing emissions from combustion were offset by
declines from industrial processes. Weaker economic growth, declining
construction activity, and strict Covid-19 measures led to reductions in
industrial and transport emissions. Power sector emissions growth slowed
compared with the average of the past decade but still reached 2.6%. The
European Union saw a 2.5% or 70 Mt reduction in CO 2  emissions  despite oil and
gas market disruptions, hydro shortfalls due to drought, and numerous nuclear
plants going offline.   Buildings sector emissions fell markedly, helped by a
mild winter. Although power sector emissions increased by 3.4%, coal use was not
as high as anticipated. For the first time, electricity generation from wind and
solar PV combined exceeded that of gas or nuclear. US emissions grew by 0.8% or
36 Mt. The buildings sector saw the highest emissions growth, driven by extreme
temperatures.  The main emissions reductions came from electricity and heat
generation, thanks to unprecedented increases in solar PV and wind, as well as
coal-to-gas switching. While many other countries reduced their natural gas use,
the United States saw an increase of 89 Mt in CO 2  emissions from gas, as it
was called upon to meet peak electricity demand during summer heat waves.
Emissions from Asia’s emerging market and developing economies, excluding China,
grew more than those from any other region in 2022,  increasing by 4.2% or
206 Mt CO 2 . Over half of the region’s increase in emissions came from coal-
fired power generation. Energy-related CO2 emissions grew by 0.9% to over 36.8
Gt in 2022 Global carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions from energy combustion and
industrial processes 1  grew 0.9% or 321 Mt in 2022 to a new all-time high of
36.8 Gt. This estimate is based on the IEA’s detailed region-by-region and fuel-
by-fuel analysis, incorporating the latest official national statistics and
publicly available data on energy use, economic indicators, and weather. Last
year’s increase follows two years of exceptional oscillations in energy-related
emissions. Emissions shrank by more than 5% in 2020, as the Covid-19 pandemic
cut energy demand. In 2021, emissions rebounded past pre-pandemic levels,
growing more than 6% in tandem with economic stimulus and the roll-out of
vaccines. Annual change in global CO2 emissions from energy combustion and
industrial processes, 1900-2022 Open expand Global CO2 emissions from energy
combustion and industrial processes, 1900-2022 Open expand CO 2  emissions from
energy combustion grew by around 1.3% or 423 Mt in 2022, while CO 2  emissions
from industrial processes declined by 102 Mt. Emissions growth in 2022 was below
global GDP growth (+3.2%), reverting to a decades-long trend of decoupling
emissions and economic growth that was broken in 2021. Meanwhile, improvements
in CO 2  intensity of energy use were slightly slower than the past decade’s
(2012-2021) annual average. There were divergent trends between regions and
sectors. CO 2  emissions grew in North America and Asia (excluding People’s
Republic of China [“China” hereafter]), outweighing reductions from Europe and
China. At a global level, CO 2  emissions from power and transport (including
international bunkers) grew by 261 Mt and 254 Mt, respectively, more than
offsetting reductions from industry and buildings. Change in CO2 emissions by
sector, 2021-2022 Open expand Change in CO2 emissions by region, 2021-2022 Open
expand Greater deployment of clean energy technologies helped prevent further
emissions growth amid crises In an exceptionally turbulent year with Russia's
invasion of Ukraine, energy price shocks, rising inflation, and major
disruptions to traditional fuel trade flows, global growth in emissions was
lower than anticipated.  Impressive growth of solar PV and wind generation
helped prevent around 465 Mt CO 2  in power sector emissions. Other clean energy
technologies, including other renewables, electric vehicles, and heat pumps,
helped prevent an additional roughly 85 Mt CO 2 . Without this increased growth
in clean energy deployment, the annual increase in energy-related emissions
would have been almost triple. Emissions reductions also resulted from economic
slowdowns, including 155 Mt CO 2  from decreases in energy-intensive industrial
production, mainly in China, the European Union, Japan, Korea and North America.
Specific challenges in 2022 also contributed to the global increase in
emissions. Of the overall increase of 321 Mt CO 2 , extreme temperatures
contributed 60 Mt from heating and cooling for buildings. The decline in nuclear
power generation, due to both maintenance and continued phase-outs, led to
another 55 Mt CO 2 . Change in global CO2 emissions by driver, 2021-2022 Open
expand Reductions in emissions from natural gas were more than replaced by
emissions from coal Emissions from natural gas decreased by 1.6% or 118 Mt in
2022, as an already tight gas supply was exacerbated by Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine and the widespread trade disruptions that followed. Emissions reductions
were particularly pronounced in Europe, where they fell by 13.5%, with the
strongest year-on-year reductions coming in the last months of the year.
European gas prices reached record highs in 2022 following a sharp decline in
Russian gas flows. However, a mild start to winter helped reduce household
heating demand. In the Asia Pacific, LNG spot prices also spiked, and natural
gas emissions declined by 1.8%, the largest year-on-year decline ever seen in
the region. By contrast, natural gas demand remained robust in the United States
and Canada, where emissions from gas increased by 5.8%. Coal emissions grew
243 Mt to a new all-time high of almost 15.5 Gt. This 1.6% increase was faster
than the 0.4% annual average growth over the past decade. Change in global CO2
emissions by fuel, relative to 2019 levels, 2015-2022 Open expand Oil emissions
grew the most last year Emissions from oil grew by 2.5% (or 268 Mt) to 11.2 Gt
in 2022. Around half of the year-on-year increase came from aviation as air
travel continued its recovery from pandemic lows. The rebound to pre-pandemic
emissions levels was faster in advanced economies, where last year’s aviation
emissions reached 85% of 2019 levels, compared with 73% in emerging market and
developing economies. Total transport emissions increased by 2.1% (or 137 Mt),
also driven by growth in advanced economies. Nonetheless, emissions would have
been higher without the accelerating deployment of low-carbon vehicles. Electric
car sales surpassed 10 million in 2022, making up over 14% of global sales. If
all new electric cars on the road had been typical diesel or gasoline cars,
global emissions last year would have been another 13 Mt higher. Despite
promising growth in renewables, power sector emissions had the largest sectoral
growth The largest absolute sectoral increase in emissions in 2022 was from
electricity and heat generation. Electricity and heat sector emissions increased
by 1.8% (or 261 Mt), reaching an all-time high of 14.6 Gt. Gas-to-coal switching
in many regions was the main driver of this growth: CO 2  from coal-fired power
generation grew by 2.1%, led by increases in Asian emerging market and
developing economies. Natural gas emissions in the power sector remained close
to 2021 levels, propped up most significantly by an increase in the
United States. Global electricity demand increased by 2.7%, and overall carbon
intensity of the electricity generation declined by 2.0%, resuming a nine-year
trend that had been broken in 2021.  The resumed decline in carbon intensity
resulted from the fast deployment of renewables across all regions, with
renewables meeting 90% of global growth in electricity demand. Solar PV and wind
generation each increased by around 275 TWh, helping to avoid around 465 Mt in
power sector emissions. Although several countries registered severe droughts in
2022, global hydro generation grew by 52 TWh from 2021’s levels, which were low
because of water shortages in many regions. Global CO2 emissions by sector,
2019-2022 Open expand Reliance on coal- and gas-fired power in extreme weather
drove up emissions across regions Emissions were pushed up by reliance on fossil
fuel power plants to meet excess cooling demand during extreme summer heat, with
cooling degree days across several regions in 2022 exceeding typical levels or
even the maximum seen between 2000 and 2021. In the United States, the share of
natural gas in the power fuel mix surpassed 40% in July and August. Coal power
generation in China increased in August by  around 15% year-on-year  to exceed
500 TWh. In both countries, emissions levels for the first half of the year were
lower than in 2021, before summer heat waves reversed the trend. Europe saw the
second warmest start to winter in the last 30 years, and as a result, emissions
from buildings were lower than anticipated. For the full year, cooling and
heating demand from extreme weather pushed up global emissions by around
60 Mt CO 2 , around two-thirds of which came from additional cooling needs, and
the remaining third from heating needs. This accounted for almost one-fifth of
the total global increase in CO 2  emissions. Heating degree days in winter
months for selected countries and regions, 2000-2022 Open expand Cooling degree
days in summer months for selected countries and regions, 2000-2022 Open expand
China’s emissions barely changed from 2021 to 2022, amid Covid-19 lockdowns and
a real estate slump Energy-related emissions in China were relatively flat
between 2021 and 2022, decreasing by 0.2% or 23 Mt to around 12.1 Gt. Emissions
from energy combustion alone grew by 88 Mt, entirely due to increased use of
coal, but this was more than offset by declines in emissions from industrial
processes. The overall yearly decline was the first since structural reforms
drove emissions lower in 2015. While China significantly ramped up domestic coal
production and coal power capacity additions last year, actual coal consumption
did not fully keep pace. Tempered by a large increase in solar PV and wind
generation, coal accounted for around three-fifths of the fuel mix in
electricity generation. Total electricity demand grew much slower than the
average seen over the last decade. As such, emissions from coal-fired power
increased by around 3%, in part due to the ramp-up of coal power plants during
heat waves, as well as to increasing reliance on electricity or district heating
fuelled by coal. Industry sector emissions declined, but the effects of China’s
crackdown on debt-financed property and the ongoing real estate slump were not
fully reflected in 2022 industry emissions. Construction new starts were down by
around 40% year-on-year, while the production of steel and cement were just 2%
and 10% lower than in 2021, respectively. As a result, China’s industry sector
emitted 161 Mt less than the year before, with a large share of this decline
from process emissions. China’s unprecedentedly large year-on-year decline
pulled down global industry emissions. In contrast to the global growth in
transport sector emissions, China’s transport emissions registered a 3.1%
decrease in 2022. Covid-19 measures were strongly reinforced in comparison to
2021, including total lockdowns in major cities and restrictions on crossing
prefecture or province boundaries. At the same time, electric car sales reached
6 million in 2022, preventing further emissions from diesel and gasoline cars.
United States emissions grew in 2022, driven by rising natural gas consumption
US emissions grew by 0.8% (or 36 Mt) to 4.7 Gt in 2022. The annual growth was
much slower than 2021’s spurt but still a deviation from the previous decade’s
declining trend. While most other countries shifted away from natural gas in the
face of last year’s price spikes, the United States increased its consumption.
Emissions from natural gas increased 89 Mt, more than supplanting the 69 Mt
decline in coal emissions. Emissions grew the most in the buildings sector,
rising 26 Mt and far exceeding the last decade’s annual average growth (around
7 Mt per year). The jump was mostly caused by cold weather during the early
months of the year. Power sector emissions decreased by 20 Mt, in large part
thanks to solar PV and wind generation increasing by around 95 TWh. Without last
year’s rise in renewables, power sector emissions would have been around
65 Mt CO 2  higher. However, power generation contributed more than half of the
growth in natural gas emissions, as the trend of coal-to-gas switching resumed
after a strong coal rebound in 2021, with natural gas power plants meeting peak
cooling demand during the summer’s heat waves. Energy crisis pushed European
Union to cut emissions through clean power and demand reduction measures Despite
the coinciding challenges of oil and gas market disruptions, hydro shortfalls
due to drought, and numerous nuclear plants going offline, the European Union
reduced its emissions by 2.5% (or 70 Mt), thanks to a mild winter, effective
energy conservation measures, fuel switching, behaviour changes, and industrial
production curtailments. Reduced natural gas emissions more than offset
increases in emissions from coal and oil. Buildings sector emissions declined
the most, by 60 Mt, enabled by exceptionally mild weather from October to
December 2022 – the second warmest start to winter in the last 30 years – and
collective energy conservation measures. Average electricity consumption was
lower, even accounting for weather, and electricity use was less sensitive to
temperature changes in 2022 than in 2019, pointing to the role of behaviour
change. EU heat pump sales reached 2.8 million, more than doubling in several
countries from the previous year. Meanwhile industry sector CO 2  emissions
declined by 42 Mt.  Daily average electricity load at different temperatures in
the European Union, 2019 and 2022 Open expand Power sector emissions increased
by 28 Mt even though electricity demand declined, as a temporarily higher
reliance on coal increased carbon intensity. A 15% increase in wind and solar PV
generation helped prevent further coal use with wind and solar PV for the first
time jointly overtaking gas as well as nuclear as the top source of Europe’s
electricity generation. This record-breaking increase in solar PV and wind
generation avoided almost 75 Mt CO 2  of emissions. Without hydro generation
decreasing by 21% year-on-year and nuclear by 17%, another 80 Mt could have been
averted. Despite the global energy crisis, recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic
is proving more sustainable than past crises Countries responded to the high
energy prices and energy security concerns caused by Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine with energy conservation measures, fuel switching, and an acceleration
of clean energy technology deployment. Emissions trends now stand in contrast to
those seen after the 2008 global financial crisis. Energy intensity of GDP is
now 3.5% below 2019 pre-pandemic levels, compared to 2% below three years after
the onset of the financial crisis. CO 2  intensity of energy use in 2022 was
lower than before the pandemic, after a short-lived rebound in 2021, unlike the
increase that emerged in the early 2010s. The large green spending component of
stimulus packages appears to be making a lasting impact on controlling emissions
growth. Between April 2020 and October 2022, economic recovery packages enacted
by governments worldwide included USD 1 215 billion in clean energy investment
support, as detailed in the IEA’s  Government Energy Spending Tracker . This is
well over twice the financial commitments made to green recovery measures after
the financial crisis. Global emissions intensity of energy use and energy
intensity of economic activity, 2019-2022 Open expand Global emissions intensity
of energy use and energy intensity of economic activity, 2008-2011 Open expand
Energy-related greenhouse gas emissions reached 41.3 Gt CO2-eq in 2022 Total
energy-related greenhouse gas emissions increased by 1.0% to an all-time high of
41.3 Gt CO 2 -eq (see “Data sources and method” for global warming potential
values). CO 2  emissions from energy combustion and industrial process accounted
for 89% of energy-related greenhouse gas emissions in 2022. Methane from energy
combustion, leaks and venting represented another 10%, mostly coming from
onshore oil and gas operations as well as steam coal production.  Methane
emissions rose to nearly 135 Mt  CH 4  or around 4 Gt CO 2 -eq in 2022, despite
high natural gas prices that increased the cost effectiveness of methane
abatement technologies. Global energy-related greenhouse gas emissions,
2000-2022 Open expand Data sources and method The IEA draws upon a wide range of
respected statistical sources to construct estimates of energy demand, energy-
related CO 2  and other greenhouse gas emissions for the year 2022. Sources
include the latest monthly data submissions to the IEA Energy Data Centre, real-
time data from power system operators across the world, statistical releases
from national administrations, and recent data from the IEA Market Report series
that covers coal, oil, natural gas, renewables, electricity and energy
efficiency. Where data are not available on an annual or monthly basis,
estimates are used. The scope of CO 2  emissions in this report includes
emissions from all uses of fossil fuels for energy purposes, including the
combustion of non-renewable waste, as well as emissions from industrial
processes such as cement, iron and steel, and chemicals production. Estimates of
industrial process emissions draw upon the latest production data for iron and
steel, clinker for cement, aluminium, and chemicals. CO 2  emissions from the
combustion of flared gases are also included in estimates of global energy-
related greenhouse gas emissions. Non-CO 2  greenhouse gas emissions include
fugitive emissions from oil, gas and coal supply. Methane and nitrous oxide
emissions related to energy combustion are also evaluated, based on typical
emissions factors for the corresponding end uses and regions. When converting
non-CO 2  greenhouse gas emissions to equivalent quantities, a global warming
potential over a 100-year period is used, with global warming potential values
of 30 for methane and 273 for nitrous oxide. Economic growth rates underlying
this analysis are those published by the International Monetary Fund’s
January 2023  World Economic Outlook  update. All monetary quantities are
expressed in USD (2021) in purchasing power parity (PPP) terms. References All
subsequent mentions of CO 2  emissions refer to CO 2  emissions from energy
combustion and industrial processes, unless otherwise specified. Further details
about methodology are at the end of the report. Reference 1 Close dialog All
subsequent mentions of CO 2  emissions refer to CO 2  emissions from energy
combustion and industrial processes, unless otherwise specified. Further details
about methodology are at the end of the report. The Energy Mix Get updates on
the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error
Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries &
regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About
News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east
Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube
instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA
(2023),  CO2 Emissions in 2022 , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/co2-emissions-in-2022, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to
clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on
Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on
Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing.
You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.