Cross-Cutting Technologies & Infrastructure – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search
Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search
Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or
sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Cross-Cutting Technologies & Infrastructure
Cross-Cutting Technologies & Infrastructure
Tracking Clean Energy Progress 2022                              This report is
part of  Tracking Clean Energy Progress                             Overview
About this report Several clean energy technologies and infrastructure
components will be important to enabling decarbonisation across multiple
sectors. These include: Components of the  carbon capture, utilisation and
storage  (CCUS) value chain, which reduce emissions in the electricity and
industry sectors, as well as provide negative emissions to offset residual
emissions Electrolysers  that enable decarbonised hydrogen production for use
across numerous applications District heating  that can help decarbonise
buildings, industry and agriculture Data centres and data transmission networks
, which underpin the digital transformation of energy systems and beyond, also
consume energy and need to rapidly decarbonise. This section of Tracking Clean
Energy Progress provides an assessment of progress for these cross-cutting
components against 2030 milestones, as well as offers recommendations to
continue advancing progress. Published September 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Share
Cite Annual CO2 capture capacity vs. storage capacity, current and planned,
2020-2030 Open expand CO2 Transport and Storage    Not on track In the Net Zero
Emissions by 2050 Scenario, CO 2  transport and storage infrastructure underpins
the widespread deployment of carbon capture, including carbon dioxide removal
(CDR) via direct air capture with storage (DACS) and bioenergy with CCS (BECCS).
There are currently around 8 000 km of CO 2  pipeline – mainly in North America
– and 7 dedicated geological CO 2  storage operations with a combined capacity
of 10 Mt/year. Based on projects currently in the early and advanced stages of
development, dedicated CO 2  storage capacity could reach around 110 Mt CO 2
/year by 2030, which is far less than the nearly 1 200 Mt CO 2 /year that is
captured and stored by 2030 in the Net Zero Scenario. CO 2  transport
infrastructure will need to increase at least at the same rate as capture and
storage capacity. Explore CO2 Capture and Storage circle-arrow Venture Capital
investments in CCU start-ups, 2015-2021 Open expand CO2 Capture and Utilisation
More efforts needed Carbon capture and utilisation refers to a range of
applications through which CO 2  is captured and used either directly (i.e. not
chemically altered) or indirectly (i.e. transformed) into various products.
Around 230 Mt of CO 2  are currently used each year, mainly in direct use
pathways in the fertiliser industry for urea manufacturing (~130 Mt) and for
enhanced oil recovery (~80 Mt). New utilisation pathways in the production of CO
2 -based synthetic fuels, chemicals and building aggregates are gaining
momentum. By 2030 the current project pipeline shows that around 5 Mt of CO 2
could be captured for synthetic fuel production. While this level of deployment
is not far from the 7.5 Mt of CO 2  used in synthetic fuels production in 2030
in the Net Zero Scenario, half of announced projects are at early stage of
development and will likely require further support to proceed towards
operation. Explore CO2 Capture and Utilisation circle-arrow Operational and
planned BECCS capture capacity by stage of development vs Net Zero Scenario,
2022-2030 Open expand Bioenergy with Carbon Capture and Storage    More efforts
needed Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) involves any energy
pathway where CO 2  is captured from a biogenic source and permanently stored.
Only around 2 Mt of biogenic CO 2  are currently captured per year, mainly in
bioethanol applications. Based on projects currently in the early and advanced
stages of deployment, carbon removal via BECCS could reach ~40 Mt CO 2 /yr by
2030, which falls short of the circa 250 Mt/yr removed through BECCS by 2030 in
the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario. The momentum behind BECCS has, however,
grown substantially in recent years: plans for over 50 new facilities involving
BECCS (totalling biogenic capture capacity of around 20 Mt CO 2  per year) were
announced between January 2021 and June 2022, across several BECCS applications,
boosted by company- and country-level net zero commitments. Explore Bioenergy
with Carbon Capture and Storage circle-arrow CO2 capture by direct air capture,
planned projects and in the Net Zero Scenario, 2020-2030 Open expand Direct Air
Capture    More efforts needed There are currently 18 direct air capture plants
operating worldwide, capturing almost 0.01 Mt CO 2 /year, and a 1 Mt CO 2 /year
capture plant is in advanced development in the United States. In the Net Zero
Emissions by 2050 Scenario, direct air capture is scaled up to capture almost 60
Mt CO 2 /year by 2030. This level of deployment is within reach, but will
require several more large-scale demonstration plants to refine the technology
and reduce capture costs.  Explore Direct Air Capture circle-arrow Planned
electrolyser manufacturing capacity by region, 2021-2030 Open expand
Electrolysers    More efforts needed Electrolysers are a critical technology for
the production of low-emission hydrogen from renewable or nuclear electricity.
Electrolysis capacity for dedicated hydrogen production has been growing at an
accelerated pace for some years. The past year has been a record year of
electrolysis deployment, with more than 200 MW of capacity entering operation, a
threefold increase on 2020. Total installed capacity has reached 0.5 GW and is
expected to grow to over 1 GW by the end of 2022. The realisation of all the
projects in the pipeline could lead to an installed electrolyser capacity of
134-240 GW by 2030, twice the expectations from last year. Also, electrolyser
manufacturing capacity has doubled since last year, reaching nearly 8 GW per
year. However, electrolysis capacity is growing from a very low base and
requires a significant acceleration to get on track with the Net Zero Emissions
by 2050 Scenario, which requires expanding electrolysis capacity to above 700 GW
by 2030.   Explore Electrolysers circle-arrow Annual energy supplies to district
heating networks in the Net Zero Scenario, World, 2010-2030 Open expand District
Heating    Not on track In 2021 district heat production increased by around 3%
compared with 2020 and met nearly 8% of the global final heating need in
buildings and industry. District heating networks offer great potential for
efficient, cost-effective and flexible large-scale integration of low-carbon
energy sources into the heating energy mix. However, the decarbonisation
potential of district heating is largely untapped, as fossil fuels still
dominate district network supplies globally (about 90% of total heat
production), especially in the two largest markets of China and Russia. Aligning
with the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario requires significant efforts to
rapidly improve the energy efficiency of existing networks, switch them to
renewable heat sources (such as bioenergy, solar thermal, heat pumps and
geothermal), integrate secondary heat sources (such as waste heat from
industrial installations and data centres), and to develop high-efficiency
infrastructure in areas with dense heat demand.  Explore District Heating
circle-arrow Global renewable energy power purchase agreements by sector,
2010-2021 Open expand Data Centres and Data Transmission Networks    More
efforts needed Demand for digital services is growing rapidly. Since 2010, the
number of internet users worldwide has more than doubled, while global internet
traffic has expanded 20-fold. Rapid improvements in energy efficiency have,
however, helped moderate growth in energy demand from data centres and data
transmission networks, which each account for 1-1.5% of global electricity use.
Significant additional government and industry efforts on energy efficiency,
RD&D, and decarbonising electricity supply and supply chains are necessary to
curb energy demand and reduce emissions rapidly over the coming decade to align
with the Net Zero by 2050 Scenario.  Explore Data Centres and Data Transmission
Networks circle-arrow The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news,
analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample
Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system
Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries
Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east
Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024
Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Cross-Cutting
Technologies & Infrastructure , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/cross-
cutting-technologies-infrastructure, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share
this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook
Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print
Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can
unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.