De-risking renewable energy Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions for the
Nigerian power sector | United Nations Development Programme     Skip to main
content
Nigeria
Who we are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Locations         Home Nigeria Projects         De-risking renewable energy
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions for the Nigerian power sector
De-risking renewable energy Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions for the
Nigerian power sector                          Background The energy sector is
the largest source of GHG emissions in Nigeria, accounting for over 70% of the
country’s total GHG emissions (155.34 MtCO2e in 2000). Over 85% of energy sector
emissions emanated from fuel combustion activities, and the remaining from
fugitive fuel emissions. This project is aimed at supporting the Government of
Nigeria in developing a National Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) for the
country's power sector. The NAMA targets solar power systems as entry points for
achieving a transformation in the electricity mix with a goal of having 20GW of
electricity in the country generated from solar energy. The project is building
on existing national development policies and initiatives that seek to place
public de-risking instruments to support the more efficient and effective
participation of the private sector in the country's power sector. The project
is developing the NAMA architecture and enabling conditions through a
combination of complementary policy and financial de-risking instruments which
will be validated through the implementation of the 100MW solar power
plant. Therefore, the overall goal of the project is De-risking Renewable Energy
for the Nigerian Power Sector. Achievements in previous calendar year (2017)
Through the project, a number of consultations were hed with solar power systems
investors aimed at identifying partners to support the development of the
baseline project, the first Commercial Solar Power Plant. Additionally,
engagements were held with Lagos Energy Academy (LEA) that led to the
identification of experts to support the training LEA’s staff. A demonstration
project for the creation of Solar-Based Electricity Markets and Up-takers
towards de-risking renewable energy development through the design, construction
and operationalization of solar-powered agro-processing cottage industries in
Ogun and Jigawa States was completed.        Related Materials
00086990-Derisking RE NEMA ProjectDoc Download Annual Workplan 2019/20 Download
Activity Web Page Read more Mid-term Evaluation of De-risking Renewable Energy
(NAMA) for Nigerian Power sector Read more Purchase Order Summary Read more
Final Evaluation of De-risking Renewable Energy (NAMA) Read more Project Results
Read more Project Tenders Read more Impact START DATE January 2016 END DATE
December 2022 STATUS Completed PROJECT OFFICE Nigeria IMPLEMENTING PARTNER
Energy Commission of Nigeria DONORS Global Environment Fund Trustee UNITED
NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS $3,510,273 DELIVERY IN
PREVIOUS YEARS 2017 $395,094 2018 $801,503 2019 $853,775 2020 $517,902 2021
$240,240 Full Project information Related Content News Improved learning space
brings hope to Uba Hong community Ruth Edward is a pupil of Government Science
Secondary School (GSSS) in Uba Hong Local Government, Adamawa State. She joined
the school in 2019 in hopes of earnin... Read more  News Football for peace and
development 25-year-old Lawan Yaru from Bama, Borno State Nigeria, joined his
first official football league through the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and Europ... Read more  Press Releases Investing with Purpose: A race
against time to achieve the SDGS in Nigeria by 2030 .UNDP Nigeria launched its
SDG Investor Map in December 2020 as part of its solution towards increasing
private sector capital flows for the SDGs. The process inc... Read more  News
Access to safe water empowers communities of Tofa and Doka To address this
growing challenge, the Women Farmers Advancement Network (WOFAN), with support
from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), assisted by d... Read more
Press Releases Nigeria’s first International Women’s Day Gala advocates for
increased women’s political and socio-economic empowerment To commemorate
International Women’s Day (IWD), and to advocate for increased women’s political
and socio-economic empowerment in Nigeria, the United Nations Deve... Read more
Search           Found  0  results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort
by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development
Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                            Funding and
delivery                                                            Legal
Framework                                                            Our
Partners                                                            Our team
UNV Volunteers                                                      What we do
Sustainable Development Goals
Focus areas                                                      Our Impact
Blogs                                                            News Centre
Publications                                                            Projects
Get Involved                                                      Careers
Contact us
Procurement                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit
social or environmental complaint Scam Alert Terms of Use twitter instagram
facebook youtube © 2024 United Nations Development Programme