Decentralised Renewable Energy Solutions for Inclusive and Sustainable Mining -
The Alliance for Rural Electrification Become a member About About us Team
Governance Contact us Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our
Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What
our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification
Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub
Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE
Publications Project database Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit
Member login About About us Team Governance Contact us Membership Our Members
Why become a Member? What our Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our
Partners Why partner with us? What our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic
Pillars Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub
Markets for Electrification Hub Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge
Centre Discover DRE Publications Project database Job platform News & Events
News Events Media kit Member login Become a member
Download
Publication 29 November, 2021 Decentralised Renewable Energy Solutions for
Inclusive and Sustainable Mining The global mining sector is currently facing a
conundrum. As a growing energy and emission-intensive industry, the mining
sector continues to be exposed to policy and regulatory risks arising from
concerns of climate change and impacts on the environment. The remoteness of
mine sites and difficulty in accessing reliable electricity grids, has compelled
the industry to heavily depend on fossil fuels as an energy source, especially
for extractive and transportation equipment, as well as for mineral processing.
This has positioned the mining sector to be among the highest greenhouse
gas emitters. With power generation playing a crucial role for the mining
industry, decentralised renewable energy (DRE) offers a variety of benefits,
such as a reliable and modern electricity supply, cost reduction, reduced
environmental impacts, as well as the potential to mitigate climate change at
scale. The challenge of sustainable power supply for mines also presents an
opportunity for renewable energy and mining companies to collaborate with local
communities to develop mutually beneficial solutions that meet the demands of
both mining operations and surrounding communities. By doing so, local socio-
economic development can be catalysed, relationships with communities
strengthened and more investments mobilised. In this context, UNIDO ITPO Germany
and ARE are highlighting the opportunity for mining companies and renewable
energy solution providers to enter into partnerships to move towards a
responsible and inclusive mining sector. The publication highlights four case
studies and two experts’ interviews of DRE in mining operations and community
electrification and draws the lessons learned for future projects. WATCH THE
VIDEO:  Decentralised Renewable Energy Solutions for Inclusive and Sustainable
Mining Statutes Terms & conditions Privacy Policy Alliance for Rural
Electrification Renewable Energy House Rue d'Arlon 63-67 1040 Brussels Belgium
are[at]ruralelec.org +32 2 400 10 00 Follow along Facebook Twitter LinkedIn
YouTube Flickr Newsletter Get in-depth analyses, market intelligence & insights
from the rural electrification sector in your inbox every second month. For
free. Subscribe                                                         ©2024
Alliance for Rural Electrification
Made by  Novel We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By
browsing this website, you agree to our use of cookies. Accept