E-mobility & DRE Innovations in Emerging Economies - The Alliance for Rural
Electrification Become a member About About us Team Governance Contact us
Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our Members say Become a Member
Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What our Partners say Become a
Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for
Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub Sustainability for
Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE Publications Project database
Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit Member login About About us
Team Governance Contact us Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our
Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What
our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification
Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub
Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE
Publications Project database Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit
Member login Become a member
Download
Publication 1 December, 2022 E-mobility & DRE Innovations in Emerging Economies
The global mobility sector is increasingly becoming electric as a result of
climate action, changing regulatory landscapes, shifting consumer behaviours, as
well as technological improvements and reducing costs through innovations in
battery technologies and charging infrastructure. This increased focus on
sustainable transportation is triggering market growth for electric mobility
(e-mobility) solutions and especially electric vehicles. With an increase of
e-mobility solutions powered by decentralised renewable energy (DRE) in rural
and peri-urban regions of emerging economies, the potential for these regions to
become the frontrunners of the future low-carbon mobility sector is high. This
hypothesis is best exemplified by the case studies featured in the publication.
UNIDO ITPO Germany and ARE have joined hands to promote the role of integrated
DRE and e-mobility solutions to accelerate the transition to sustainable and
decarbonised mobility by showcasing innovative real-life examples from emerging
economies. The 13 case studies and an expert interview in this publication
highlight key challenges and benefits of this transition, while also proposing
key recommendations and a way forward. This publication is dedicated to all
companies taking pioneering steps by incorporating DRE solutions to power
e-mobility. This not only boosts labour and economic productivity but also, on a
broader scale, increases overall energy efficiency, thereby contributing to the
decarbonisation of the mobility sector. The target audience for the publication
are private sector companies and investors looking to enter the e-mobility
space, the public sector entities considering establishing favourable
environments for DRE-powered e-mobility solutions in their respective countries
and regions and lastly, the international organisations, civil society, and
local communities who are crucial at all levels of the project cycle to ensure
their long-term sustainability. Statutes Terms & conditions Privacy Policy
Alliance for Rural Electrification Renewable Energy House Rue d'Arlon 63-67 1040
Brussels Belgium are[at]ruralelec.org +32 2 400 10 00 Follow along Facebook
Twitter LinkedIn YouTube Flickr Newsletter Get in-depth analyses, market
intelligence & insights from the rural electrification sector in your inbox
every second month. For free. Subscribe
©2024 Alliance for Rural Electrification
Made by  Novel We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By
browsing this website, you agree to our use of cookies. Accept