Empowering Solomon Islands: A Brighter Future with Renewable Energy | United
Nations Development Programme     Skip to main content
Pacific Office
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
Locations                 Home Pacific Office Stories         Empowering Solomon
Islands: A Brighter Future with Renewable Energy
Empowering Solomon Islands: A Brighter Future with Renewable Energy   October
20, 2023         Left to right: school principle Mr. Robert Solomon, Member of
Parliament for East Are'are constituency, Hon. Junior Peter Kenilorea, SPIRES
project manager Ms. Judith Reynolds, MMERE Permanent Secretary Dr. Chris Vehe
and UNDP Programme Manager Ms. Vini Talai.   Photo: UNDP         Honiara,
Solomon Islands  – Access to energy in Solomon Islands is a widespread issue.
Supply is unreliable and cost unaffordable for most of the population. In rural
areas this is an even greater issue, with access almost non-existent. However, a
recent initiative by the Stimulating Progress towards Improved Rural
Electrification in Solomon Islands (SPIRES) project has set a shining example of
how renewable energy can revolutionize communities. Spearheaded by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and implemented by the Ministry of Mines,
Energy and Rural Electrification (MMERE) and the Ministry of Environment,
Climate Change, Disaster Management and Meteorology (MECDM), the SPIRES project
is paving the way for a brighter and more sustainable future for the energy in
the Pacific nation. The Dawn of Change: Rokera Provincial Secondary School   A
very sunny day in October, the Rokera Provincial Secondary School in East
Are’are, Southern Malaita, witnessed a transformative event. The inauguration of
a 36kWp solar hybrid photovoltaic (PV) power system marked the first step
towards releasing the school from diesel-generated power. The event was
organized to coincide with the school's graduation – bringing together
officials, school staff, students, parents and guardians, and people from nearby
villages. All united to celebrate this milestone that promises 24-hour access to
a more affordable and sustainable energy source. Hon. Junior Peter Kenilorea,
Member of Parliament for East Are’are, eloquently encapsulated the essence of
this monumental occasion, highlighting the profound impact of education and
electricity on the development of the society. The school principal, expressing
heartfelt gratitude, emphasized the significance of this initiative in reducing
energy costs for the school, allowing more investments in education at the same
time as curbing greenhouse gas emissions. A more brilliant future: Hunanawa
Community  The following day, the light of transformation extended beyond
Rokera, reaching the Hunanawa community, also in East Are’are. The installation
of a 30kWp solar PV system, accompanied by a battery bank, now illuminates the
lives of over a hundred households – 50 of them nestled within the heart of
Hunanawa but also reaching the surroundings.  Beyond providing electricity, the
SPIRES project brings a model for a more sustainable future. By reducing the
dependence on fossil fuels, the project is making significant strides in
mitigating the adverse effects of climate change in Solomon Islands, one of the
most vulnerable countries to global warming and the climate crisis.  Moreover,
the emphasis on community involvement in the maintenance and sustainability of
the system underscores the holistic approach adopted by the project.     The
project promises 24-hour access to a more affordable and sustainable energy
source.    Photo: UNDP       A National Strategy in the Making  As Dr. Chris
Vehe, Permanent Secretary from the Ministry of Mines, Energy and Rural
Electrification (MMERE) suggested, this pilot paves the way for the renewable
energy policy encompassing the entirety of the Solomon Islands. It is expected
that the Rokera and Hunanawa project sites will serve as the blueprint for a
comprehensive national strategy. Furthermore, the project's inclusive approach,
focusing on the empowerment of women and youth, embodies a visionary step
towards a more sustainable development in the country. A Beacon of Hope  The
success of the SPIRES project stands as a beacon of hope for the Solomon
Islands. As UNDP Programme Manager Ms. Vini Talai summarized, “Villagers will
now be able to use electricity to stimulate economic growth in their communities
through increasing production of goods by switching from using manual tools to
electric equipment. For example, women can increase garment production with the
use of electric sewing machines and sell the surplus for income.” Beyond the
immediate benefits of electricity, the project promises an economic upsurge, an
education renaissance, and a greener, more sustainable future. As the nation
steps into a brighter tomorrow, the echoes of this project will resound in the
efforts towards the renewable energy policy, highlighting the vital role of
community participation and the inclusion of marginalized voices in shaping a
more equitable and sustainable future for Solomon Islanders. The SPIRES project
is being implemented by the Ministry of Mines, Energy and Rural Electrification
under its Energy Division with financial support from the Global Environmental
Facility through the United Nations Development Programme. In addition, for this
component, both institutions have partners with the Ministry of Environment,
Climate Change, Disaster Management and Meteorology. For more information or
media inquiries please contact: Jeanine Gadepeta - Communications, Monitoring
and Evaluation Officer, SPIRES Project  jgadepeta@spires.gov.sb , +677 7464457.
News Solar grandmas powering communities in Ghana Elderly rural women, supported
by UNDP, are electrifying off-grid communities in the Upper West region of
Ghana. Read more  News 2023 in Pictures: 12 Chapters, 12 Stories   Read more
News Solar Installation to Ease Service Delivery in South Sudan’s Health Sector
Read more  News Call for Proposals: Grants for Interest Rate Subsidies on Green
Energy Loans The Green Energy Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Development
project invites grant proposals exclusively from micro-credit funds registered
in Tajikistan. Read more  News Equipping youth with green skills Read more
Search           Found  0  results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort
by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development
Programme                         Who we are
UNDP in the Pacific
Our team                                                            Legal
framework                                                            Funding
Partnerships                                                            UN
Volunteers                                                      What we do
Sustainable Development Goals
Focus areas                                                      Our impact
News Centre
Publications                                                            Projects
Stories                                                            Blogs
Get involved                                                      Careers
Procurement                                                            Contact
us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit social or
environmental complaint Scam Alert Terms of Use facebook twitter instagram
linkedin youtube © 2024 United Nations Development Programme