Energy Transitions Require Innovation in Power System Planning – Analysis - IEA
IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip
navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel,
technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels
Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and
Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore
all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's
50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical
Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy
Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable
Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries
Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or region Member countries
Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany
Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand
Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands
Türkiye United Kingdom United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa
Rica Israel Latvia Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India
Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All
Countries and Regions Data Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data
Data explorers Understand and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and
trackers Data explorers Data sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy
system available for download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or
planned government policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access
every chart published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports
Chevron down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February
2024                     Fuel report — February 2024
Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast to 2026                     Fuel report —
January 2024                  World Energy Outlook 2023
Flagship report — October 2023                  Net Zero Roadmap: A Global
Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Energy Transitions Require Innovation in Power
System Planning                     Report                                  24
January 2022                                  License                  CC BY 4.0
The relationship between electricity supply and demand changes in low carbon
systems The past year has seen a rising number of countries pledging to reach
net zero emissions in the coming decades. Even many countries without net zero
pledges are pursuing increasingly ambitious decarbonisation plans. Meeting these
targets will reshape the power sector in the coming decades. In 2021, the IEA
released its landmark global roadmap,  Net Zero by 2050 , which detailed two
parallel transformations for the power sector as it decarbonises. The first is
that variable renewables will increasingly be the foundation of low carbon power
generation. The second is that power will be responsible for an increasing share
of total energy demand, as electrification becomes a pathway to decarbonisation.
Emerging economies are central to global emissions reduction, since they
typically have high shares of fossil fuel generation and because electricity
demand is expected to significantly increase along with economic growth and
greater electricity access.  Increasing shares of variable renewable energy such
as solar and wind will mean power systems need to become more flexible. At the
same time, the traditional providers of this flexibility – mainly thermal power
plants – will play a smaller role as decarbonisation objectives require their
reduced use. Variable renewable generators depend on the availability of the sun
and wind, and thus require complementary technologies to ensure that the balance
between supply and demand is maintained at all times. New technologies – in
particular batteries and other energy storage, biomass, and thermal plants
either with carbon capture and storage or burning clean fuels – will therefore
play an increasing role to supply this flexibility. At the same time, growing
use of electricity and new demand sources represent a huge opportunity to create
a world where flexible demand is at least as important as flexible supply
technologies. Such a system is going to look very different than today’s power
sector, and these changes mean we need to alter how we plan for a secure
electricity system. Our understanding of demand needs to be much more than just
how peak demand evolves, and our understanding of supply needs to be much more
than how much dispatchable capacity is installed and what is the risk of an
outage during supply peaks. In short, it is not sufficient to look only at the
system's ability to stay balanced during selected tight moments.  This article
explores how system planning, and in particular assessments of system adequacy,
will need to innovate and evolve to allow power systems to keep delivering
secure and affordable electricity supply during energy transitions. It draws on
modelling of the Chinese power system undertaken by the IEA. System planning is
getting more complex Shifting away from centralised thermal power plants as the
main providers of electricity makes power systems more complex. Multiple
services are needed to maintain secure electricity supply. In addition to
supplying enough energy, these include meeting peak capacity requirements,
keeping the power system stable during short-term disturbances, and having
enough flexibility to ramp up and down in response to changes in supply or
demand.  IEA modelling for China  in the Announced Pledges Scenario in 2060
illustrates how the technologies providing these services will be more varied in
a net zero world compared with today. Energy and service contributions of
different technologies to maintain electricity security in China in Announced
Pledges Scenario, 2060 Open expand Energy and service contributions of different
technologies to maintain electricity security in China, 2020 Open expand Power
system adequacy assessments have traditionally relied on a reserve margin
approach, which measures how much spare or ‘reserve’ capacity the system has
during the tightest periods, expressed as a percentage of the peak demand. This
approach focuses on the peak demand period(s), and requires an assessment of the
availability of different technologies – including generators, grid elements,
and demand response providers – at times of system stress. System operators can
then target a certain margin to ensure the combined generation and grid
infrastructure is sufficient. Target reserve margins vary by region.  In a world
with high variable renewables and a larger share of controllable demand, this
approach hits its limits – in part because it is more complex to assess the
contribution of demand response resources to adequacy, and in part because the
way they interact with each other and the system cannot be fully captured in a
reserve margin calculation.  As a result, countries and regions are increasingly
looking to more sophisticated approaches to adequacy assessment, and in
particular to probabilistic Monte Carlo assessments, explored in more detail
below. Some regions are already undertaking full Monte Carlo assessments,
including  Australia ,  Belgium  and  France , as well as an  EU-wide assessment
undertaken by ENTSO-E. The methodologies are still evolving and vary between
regions, however these studies can indicate areas to focus on for countries that
wish to move towards probabilistic assessments. In particular, these approaches
are important to consider for emerging economies that are expecting to deploy
large shares of renewables in the coming decades. Probabilistic adequacy
assessments allow many uncertainties to be evaluated together A Monte Carlo
assessment simulates the power system under many possible conditions in order to
calculate the risk of certain loads not being served, taking into account the
uncertainty of different input variables. This uncertainty can include many
aspects: the extent and timing of unplanned generation and transmission outages;
inter-annual variability in demand and renewables supply based on weather
incidents; and deeper structural uncertainties such as longer-term shifts in
weather patterns due to climate change and evolving electricity demand. Key
aspects of uncertainty that probabilistic modelling assessments can capture Open
expand                                     Key aspects of uncertainty that
probabilistic modelling assessments can capture
Close dialog Download image Download image Monte Carlo assessments have many
advantages over reserve margin approaches, such as allowing variable renewables
to be assessed more accurately in the context of the electricity demand profile.
Alongside this, the detailed modelling approach allows sector coupling,
including electrification and demand response, to be explicitly represented so
that the interactions with renewables availability can be fully captured. Such
assessments are also better suited to account for the contributions of
interconnected neighbouring regions. Probabilistic adequacy assessments give
more insights for systems with high renewables shares Monte Carlo assessments
derive their statistics from potentially thousands of simulations and express
the risk of unserved energy through different reliability metrics. These metrics
are diverse, but they can be categorised by two basic parameters. First, whether
they assess the amount of load not served (volume), or how often periods with
unserved load occur (frequency). Second, whether they focus on the average or
‘expected’ case, or whether they focus on high-impact, low-frequency events. Due
to the simulation approach, these assessments have the potential to give
detailed information about adequacy risks, providing information on all
different parameters that might affect the acceptability of unserved energy –
frequency and magnitude of events, average risk, and what extreme events might
look like. However, today’s assessments do not yet fully realise their
potential, in particular because many regions use probabilistic assessments that
focus on a single metric. For example, one common metric is the Loss of Load
Expectation, which is a frequency-based measure focusing on the average outcome.
The Loss of Load Expectation is calculated from a probabilistic assessment of
the average number of hours annually where some energy is not served across all
simulations. While this is a useful indicator, the Loss of Load Expectation
value is insensitive to the size of these events, and as an average indicator
does not distinguish between rare but extreme multi-hour events and more
frequent, low-impact events.  An adequacy assessment case study undertaken by
the IEA for  China in 2035  compared two regions under different scenarios with
approximately the same value of Loss of Load Expectation. In spite of the
similarity in the average statistics, we saw a large gap between the two cases
for high-impact, low-frequency events as indicated by the 95 th  percentile and
maximum values for hours of demand not served. Difference in reliability
statistics for extreme events in regions with similar average statistics in
China in the Sustainable Development Scenario, 2035 Open expand Difference in
reliability statistics for extreme events in regions with similar average
statistics in China in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2035 Open expand These
differentials can have meaningful implications for system planning, as larger
events, even if rare, may be less acceptable to consumers than more frequent,
low-impact occurrences. Planners should adopt probabilistic approaches, taking
into account the frequency, magnitude and duration of unserved energy events, as
well as both average and extreme occurrences. Demand response modelling can
build on improved demand forecasting The rate of demand growth can be one of the
largest uncertainties in system planning, and increasing electrification adds to
this uncertainty. This is even more challenging in emerging economies, with
their faster economic growth and improving electricity access. Better demand
forecasting is thus essential for system planning. At the same time, more
detailed demand side modelling enables a more sophisticated representation of
demand response, in particular because both are limited by data availability.
Demand forecasting often relies on historical profiles and only involves
projecting overall and peak growth rates. With the support of detailed sectoral
data, including disaggregated sectoral load profiles and specific end uses, this
can be refined so the forecast reflects changes in the demand structure over
time. The same type of data also allows power system models to represent the
flexibility of specific end-use sectors.  Modelling the relationship between
electricity demand and temperature is another key area of improvement that is
integral to short and long-term demand forecasting, and also provides a
foundation for more accurate demand reponses in adequacy models. Demand response
is more complex to represent accurately in probabilistic adequacy assessments
than generators. For example, the amount of demand response available varies
with the time of day and season since it depends on the consumption patterns of
the participating loads, while generators typically have the same maximum
capacity at all times of day. In addition, unlike most generators, demand
response providers may only be able to act with limited frequency. For example,
demand response contracts between aggregators and their clients may limit the
number of activations per month or year, and willingness to participate in these
programmes may be based on historical occurrences which are fewer than the
contractual maximums. By fully simulating system dispatch under different
conditions, probabilistic assessments have the ability to directly inform
aspects such as the frequency and duration of demand response activation in
future system conditions. System planning needs to put all the pieces together
In order to ensure electricity security, in addition to system adequacy, power
system planning also needs to consider operational security and resilience.
Operational security refers to the ability of the system to maintain or rapidly
return to normal operating conditions during and after disturbances. Maintaining
operational security requires both system stability – supported by power system
inertia and operating reserves – and the flexibility to ramp up and down to
maintain the balance between supply and demand. Components of electricity
security (left) and integrated planning aspects (right) Open expand
Components of electricity security (left) and integrated planning aspects
(right)                                  Close dialog Download image Download
image Resilience is the ability of the power system to absorb short- and long-
term shocks such as high-impact, low-frequency extreme weather events. With
climate change expected to increase the frequency and severity of extreme
weather, resilience will be an increasingly important pillar of power system
planning.  These three goals are impacted by increased shares of variable
renewables. While planning for each involves different modelling approaches,
many of the inputs and assumptions are common. Performing studies in a more
integrated way creates many opportunities for synergies between different models
and for information flow between modelling efforts. For this reason many regions
are moving towards increasingly integrated planning across areas that were once
treated as silos.  For example, increasing integration of generation and network
planning and investment creates opportunities for cost savings by allowing
investment decisions to be optimised across the entire system. Interregional
planning across different balancing areas also creates opportunities for more
efficient investment, accounting for the value that interconnected regions can
provide to one another.  In addition, it is also essential to ensure that the
prevailing contractual structures allow system operators to utilise the
flexibility that the system is technically capable of. Contractual structures
that do not allow for operational flexibility can prevent making full use of
capable technologies for providing flexibility, for example with rigid long-term
fuel purchasing contracts. In addition, integrated planning between the
electricity sector and other sectors will become increasingly important as more
sectors become electrified and sector coupling increases. This article has been
produced with the financial assistance of the European Union as part of the
Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Economies programme. This article reflects
the views of the International Energy Agency (IEA) Secretariat but does not
necessarily reflect those of individual IEA member countries or the European
Union (EU). Neither the IEA nor the EU make any representation of warranty,
express or implied, in respect to the article's content (including its
completeness or accuracy) and shall not be responsible for any use of, or
reliance on, the publication. The Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Economies
programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement No 952363. The Energy Mix Get
updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice
monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics
Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics
Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-
east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin
youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Subscription
successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any
time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.