Successfully implemented energy efficiency measures at the Elementary School
"Vuk Karadžić" in Petrovo | United Nations Development Programme     Skip to
main content
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English
BHS   Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English BHS Locations                 Home Bosnia and Herzegovina
Successfully implemented energy efficiency measures at the Elementary School
"Vuk Karadžić" in Petrovo                       Successfully implemented energy
efficiency measures at the Elementary School "Vuk Karadžić" in Petrovo      As
part of the GCF-funded LowCarbon project     November 22, 2023            
Elementary school "Vuk Karadžić" in the Municipality Petrovo was successfully
upgraded through comprehensive energy efficiency measures in the value of
522,000 KM. The works were implemented within the UNDP project  "Scaling-Up
Investment in Low-Carbon Public Buildings in BiH - LowCarbon",  financed by the
Green Climate Fund (GCF), and with the support of the Fund for Environmental
Protection and Energy Efficiency of Republika Srpska. Speaking at the ceremony
to mark the completion of the works at the school,  Resident Representative a.i.
of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Sylvain Merlen , said:  "Ahead of the COP28, we are glad to celebrate a
successfully energy-retrofitted school in Petrovo today. We are also proud to
contribute to better conditions for children to learn and grow in a climate-
resilient future." Director of the Fund for Environmental Protection and Energy
Efficiency of Republika Srpska, Srđan Todorović , said that the works at the
school included the installation of new windows, the thermal insulation on the
walls of the school building, as well as on the roof and ceiling, while the roof
and gutters of the gym and locker room were replaced. The heating and lighting
systems were upgraded, which contributed to the overall improvement of the
school environment. Mayor of Petrovo, Ozren Petković , expressed gratitude for
the significant improvements of working conditions in the school, acknowledging
the support from UNDP and the RS Fund for Environmental Protection and Energy
Efficiency. Director of the School, Igor Cvijanović , anticipates significant
savings, estimating a reduction in heating costs of up to 30%, which will
contribute to a more sustainable and cost-efficient future for the school. In
addition, the estimated reduction of CO2 emissions is approximately 165 tons
annually, contributing to the protection of the environment. This successful
completion of the works on "Vuk Karadžić" Elementary School in Petrovo is an
example of effective cooperation between UNDP, the RS Fund for Environmental
Protection and Energy Efficiency, and the local community, with a positive
impact on the entire community.                                   News Smart
Air-Purifying System Installed in the Open in Belgrade  With the financial
support by the European Union, the Institute Mihailo Pupin installed a smart
open-space air-purifying system, within the zone of the “Ušće” Mal... Read more
Press Releases On the path to a "green" future: visit to Kazakhstan of CEO and
Chairperson, the Global Environment Facility From 16 to 18 February, Carlos
Manuel Rodríguez, CEO and Chairman of the Global Environment Facility (GEF),
paid his first official visit to Kazakhstan. Read more  Press Releases UNDP
lends support as Environmental Compact for Ukraine is unveiled The Environmental
Compact for Ukraine, a plan of measures to address the environmental damage
Ukraine has suffered due to the full-scale Russian invasion and war,... Read
more  Press Releases The Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan – a roadmap
for green economy and energy – was publicly consulted  The draft of the
Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan (NECP) 2025-2030, a roadmap for
achieving the country's decarbonization objectives, was consulted on ... Read
more  News Dialogues on Just Green Transition held in Obrenovac and Boljevac On
February 6 and 7, dialogues were held in Obrenovac and Boljevac on how to devise
and implement as just as possible solutions for the challenges of energy
trans... Read more  Press Releases Consultations to analyse vulnerabilities to
climate change impacts and identify adaptation priorities with representatives
of Osh, Jalal-Abad and Batken provinces Read more    Search           Found  0
results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy
Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development Programme
Who we are                                                       About us
Our team                                                            Partners
Funding and delivery
Legal Framework                                                      What we do
Sustainable Development Goals
Our Focus                                                            Projects
Gender Equality and Empowerment of Women
Our impact                                                      News centre
Blogs                                                            Publications
Stories                                                      Get involved
Contact us                                                            Jobs and
internships
Procurement                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit
social or environmental complaint Scam alert Terms of Use facebook x-twitter
youtube instagram flickr © 2024 United Nations Development Programme