Energies | Free Full-Text | Financial Development, Clean Energy, and Human
Capital: Roadmap towards Sustainable Growth in América Latina Next Article in
Journal Influence of Properties of Hydraulic Fluid on Pressure Peaks in Axial
Piston Pumps’ Chambers Previous Article in Journal Net Zero Energy Buildings:
Variations, Clarifications, and Requirements in Response to the Paris Agreement
Journals Active Journals Find a Journal Proceedings Series Topics Information
For Authors For Reviewers For Editors For Librarians For Publishers For
Societies For Conference Organizers Open Access Policy Institutional Open Access
Program Special Issues Guidelines Editorial Process Research and Publication
Ethics Article Processing Charges Awards Testimonials Author Services
Initiatives Sciforum MDPI Books Preprints.org Scilit SciProfiles Encyclopedia
JAMS Proceedings Series About Overview Contact Careers News Press Blog Sign In /
Sign Up Notice You can make submissions to other journals here . clear Notice
You are accessing a machine-readable page. In order to be human-readable, please
install an RSS reader. Continue Cancel clear All articles published by MDPI are
made immediately available worldwide under an open access license. No special
permission is required to reuse all or part of the article published by MDPI,
including figures and tables. For articles published under an open access
Creative Common CC BY license, any part of the article may be reused without
permission provided that the original article is clearly cited. For more
information, please refer to https://www.mdpi.com/openaccess . Feature papers
represent the most advanced research with significant potential for high impact
in the field. A Feature Paper should be a substantial original Article that
involves several techniques or approaches, provides an outlook for future
research directions and describes possible research applications. Feature papers
are submitted upon individual invitation or recommendation by the scientific
editors and must receive positive feedback from the reviewers. Editor’s Choice
articles are based on recommendations by the scientific editors of MDPI journals
from around the world. Editors select a small number of articles recently
published in the journal that they believe will be particularly interesting to
readers, or important in the respective research area. The aim is to provide a
snapshot of some of the most exciting work published in the various research
areas of the journal. Original Submission Date Received:  .
You seem to have javascript disabled. Please note that many of the page
functionalities won't work as expected without javascript enabled.
clear zoom_out_map search menu Journals Active Journals Find a Journal
Proceedings Series Topics Information For Authors For Reviewers For Editors For
Librarians For Publishers For Societies For Conference Organizers Open Access
Policy Institutional Open Access Program Special Issues Guidelines Editorial
Process Research and Publication Ethics Article Processing Charges Awards
Testimonials Author Services Initiatives Sciforum MDPI Books Preprints.org
Scilit SciProfiles Encyclopedia JAMS Proceedings Series About Overview Contact
Careers News Press Blog Sign In / Sign Up Submit     Search  for Articles :
Title / Keyword Author / Affiliation / Email Journal All Journals Acoustics Acta
Microbiologica Hellenica Actuators Administrative Sciences Adolescents Advances
in Respiratory Medicine (ARM) Aerobiology Aerospace Agriculture AgriEngineering
Agrochemicals Agronomy AI Air Algorithms Allergies Alloys Analytica Analytics
Anatomia Anesthesia Research Animals Antibiotics Antibodies Antioxidants Applied
Biosciences Applied Mechanics Applied Microbiology Applied Nano Applied Sciences
Applied System Innovation (ASI) AppliedChem AppliedMath Aquaculture Journal
Architecture Arthropoda Arts Astronomy Atmosphere Atoms Audiology Research
Automation Axioms Bacteria Batteries Behavioral Sciences Beverages Big Data and
Cognitive Computing (BDCC) BioChem Bioengineering Biologics Biology Biology and
Life Sciences Forum Biomass Biomechanics BioMed Biomedicines BioMedInformatics
Biomimetics Biomolecules Biophysica Biosensors BioTech Birds Blockchains Brain
Sciences Buildings Businesses C Cancers Cardiogenetics Catalysts Cells Ceramics
Challenges ChemEngineering Chemistry Chemistry Proceedings Chemosensors Children
Chips CivilEng Clean Technologies (Clean Technol.) Climate Clinical and
Translational Neuroscience (CTN) Clinics and Practice Clocks & Sleep Coasts
Coatings Colloids and Interfaces Colorants Commodities Complications Compounds
Computation Computer Sciences & Mathematics Forum Computers Condensed Matter
Conservation Construction Materials Corrosion and Materials Degradation (CMD)
Cosmetics COVID Crops Cryptography Crystals Current Issues in Molecular Biology
(CIMB) Current Oncology Dairy Data Dentistry Journal Dermato Dermatopathology
Designs Diabetology Diagnostics Dietetics Digital Disabilities Diseases
Diversity DNA Drones Drugs and Drug Candidates (DDC) Dynamics Earth Ecologies
Econometrics Economies Education Sciences Electricity Electrochem Electronic
Materials Electronics Emergency Care and Medicine Encyclopedia Endocrines
Energies Eng Engineering Proceedings Entropy Environmental Sciences Proceedings
Environments Epidemiologia Epigenomes European Burn Journal (EBJ) European
Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education (EJIHPE)
Fermentation Fibers FinTech Fire Fishes Fluids Foods Forecasting Forensic
Sciences Forests Fossil Studies Foundations Fractal and Fractional (Fractal
Fract) Fuels Future Future Internet Future Pharmacology Future Transportation
Galaxies Games Gases Gastroenterology Insights Gastrointestinal Disorders
Gastronomy Gels Genealogy Genes Geographies GeoHazards Geomatics Geosciences
Geotechnics Geriatrics Gout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition Disease (GUCDD)
Grasses Hardware Healthcare Hearts Hemato Hematology Reports Heritage Histories
Horticulturae Hospitals Humanities Humans Hydrobiology Hydrogen Hydrology
Hygiene Immuno Infectious Disease Reports Informatics Information
Infrastructures Inorganics Insects Instruments International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health (IJERPH) International Journal of
Financial Studies (IJFS) International Journal of Molecular Sciences (IJMS)
International Journal of Neonatal Screening (IJNS) International Journal of
Plant Biology (IJPB) International Journal of Translational Medicine (IJTM)
International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power (IJTPP)
International Medical Education (IME) Inventions IoT ISPRS International Journal
of Geo-Information (IJGI) J Journal of Ageing and Longevity (JAL) Journal of
Cardiovascular Development and Disease (JCDD) Journal of Clinical &
Translational Ophthalmology (JCTO) Journal of Clinical Medicine (JCM) Journal of
Composites Science (J. Compos. Sci.) Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy (JCP)
Journal of Developmental Biology (JDB) Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Analyses (JETA) Journal of Functional Biomaterials (JFB) Journal of Functional
Morphology and Kinesiology (JFMK) Journal of Fungi (JoF) Journal of Imaging (J.
Imaging) Journal of Intelligence (J. Intell.) Journal of Low Power Electronics
and Applications (JLPEA) Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing
(JMMP) Journal of Marine Science and Engineering (JMSE) Journal of Market Access
& Health Policy (JMAHP) Journal of Molecular Pathology (JMP) Journal of
Nanotheranostics (JNT) Journal of Nuclear Engineering (JNE) Journal of
Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Medicine (JOHBM) Journal of
Personalized Medicine (JPM) Journal of Pharmaceutical and BioTech Industry
(JPBI) Journal of Respiration (JoR) Journal of Risk and Financial Management
(JRFM) Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks (JSAN) Journal of Theoretical and
Applied Electronic Commerce Research (JTAER) Journal of Vascular Diseases (JVD)
Journal of Xenobiotics (JoX) Journal of Zoological and Botanical Gardens (JZBG)
Journalism and Media Kidney and Dialysis Kinases and Phosphatases Knowledge
Laboratories Land Languages Laws Life Limnological Review Liquids Literature
Livers Logics Logistics Lubricants Lymphatics Machine Learning and Knowledge
Extraction (MAKE) Machines Macromol Magnetism Magnetochemistry Marine Drugs
Materials Materials Proceedings Mathematical and Computational Applications
(MCA) Mathematics Medical Sciences Medical Sciences Forum Medicina Medicines
Membranes Merits Metabolites Metals Meteorology Methane Methods and Protocols
(MPs) Metrology Micro Microbiology Research Micromachines Microorganisms
Microplastics Minerals Mining Modelling Molbank Molecules Multimodal
Technologies and Interaction (MTI) Muscles Nanoenergy Advances Nanomanufacturing
Nanomaterials NDT Network Neuroglia Neurology International NeuroSci Nitrogen
Non-Coding RNA (ncRNA) Nursing Reports Nutraceuticals Nutrients Obesities Oceans
Onco Optics Oral Organics Organoids Osteology Oxygen Parasitologia Particles
Pathogens Pathophysiology Pediatric Reports Pharmaceuticals Pharmaceutics
Pharmacoepidemiology Pharmacy Philosophies Photochem Photonics Phycology
Physchem Physical Sciences Forum Physics Physiologia Plants Plasma Platforms
Pollutants Polymers Polysaccharides Poultry Powders Proceedings Processes
Prosthesis Proteomes Psych Psychiatry International Psychoactives Publications
Quantum Beam Science (QuBS) Quantum Reports Quaternary Radiation Reactions Real
Estate Receptors Recycling Religions Remote Sensing Reports Reproductive
Medicine (Reprod. Med.) Resources Rheumato Risks Robotics Ruminants Safety Sci
Scientia Pharmaceutica (Sci. Pharm.) Sclerosis Seeds Sensors Separations Sexes
Signals Sinusitis Smart Cities Social Sciences Société Internationale d’Urologie
Journal (SIUJ) Societies Software Soil Systems Solar Solids Spectroscopy Journal
Sports Standards Stats Stresses Surfaces Surgeries Surgical Techniques
Development Sustainability Sustainable Chemistry Symmetry SynBio Systems Targets
Taxonomy Technologies Telecom Textiles Thalassemia Reports Thermo Tomography
Tourism and Hospitality Toxics Toxins Transplantology Trauma Care Trends in
Higher Education Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease (TropicalMed) Universe
Urban Science Uro Vaccines Vehicles Venereology Veterinary Sciences Vibration
Virtual Worlds Viruses Vision Waste Water Wind Women World World Electric
Vehicle Journal (WEVJ) Youth Zoonotic Diseases Article Type All Article Types
Article Review Communication Editorial Abstract Book Review Brief Report Case
Report Comment Commentary Concept Paper Conference Report Correction Creative
Data Descriptor Discussion Entry Essay Expression of Concern Extended Abstract
Guidelines Hypothesis Interesting Images Letter New Book Received Obituary
Opinion Perspective Proceeding Paper Project Report Protocol Registered Report
Reply Retraction Short Note Study Protocol Systematic Review Technical Note
Tutorial Viewpoint     Advanced  Search   Section Special Issue Volume Issue
Number Page   Logical Operator Operator AND OR Search Text Search Type All
fields Title Abstract Keywords Authors Affiliations Doi Full Text References  
add_circle_outline remove_circle_outline     Journals Energies Volume 14 Issue
13 10.3390/en14133763 Submit to this Journal Review for this Journal Propose a
Special Issue ► ▼ Article Menu Article Menu Academic Editor Abbas Mardani
Subscribe SciFeed Recommended Articles Related Info Link Google Scholar More by
Authors Links on DOAJ Ponce, P. Álvarez-García, J. Medina, J. del Río-Rama, M.
de la Cruz on Google Scholar Ponce, P. Álvarez-García, J. Medina, J. del Río-
Rama, M. de la Cruz on PubMed Ponce, P. Álvarez-García, J. Medina, J. del Río-
Rama, M. de la Cruz /ajax/scifeed/subscribe Article Views Citations - Table of
Contents Altmetric share Share announcement Help format_quote Cite
question_answer Discuss in SciProfiles thumb_up ... Endorse textsms ... Comment
Need Help? Support Find support for a specific problem in the support section of
our website. Get Support Feedback Please let us know what you think of our
products and services. Give Feedback Information Visit our dedicated information
section to learn more about MDPI. Get Information clear JSmol Viewer clear
first_page Download PDF settings Order Article Reprints Font Type: Arial Georgia
Verdana Font Size: Aa Aa Aa Line Spacing:    Column Width:    Background:
Open Access Article Financial Development, Clean Energy, and Human Capital:
Roadmap towards Sustainable Growth in América Latina  by Pablo Ponce Pablo Ponce
Scilit Preprints.org Google Scholar View Publications  1 ,  José Álvarez-García
José Álvarez-García Scilit Preprints.org Google Scholar View Publications  2 ,
Johanna Medina Johanna Medina Scilit Preprints.org Google Scholar View
Publications  1  and  María de la Cruz del Río-Rama María de la Cruz del Río-
Rama Scilit Preprints.org Google Scholar View Publications  3,*   1 School of
Economics, Universidad Nacional de Loja, Loja 11050, Ecuador 2 Financial Economy
and Accounting Department, Faculty of Business, Finance and Tourism, University
of Extremadura, 10071 Cáceres, Spain 3 Business Management and Marketing
Department, Faculty of Business Sciences and Tourism, University of Vigo, 32004
Ourense, Spain * Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.  Energies
2021 ,  14 (13), 3763;  https://doi.org/10.3390/en14133763 Submission received:
8 May 2021 / Revised: 19 June 2021 / Accepted: 21 June 2021 / Published: 23 June
2021 Download  keyboard_arrow_down Download PDF Download PDF with Cover Download
XML Download Epub Browse Figures Versions Notes Abstract : The consumption of
renewable energy has become a substitute for fossil fuels to mitigate
environmental degradation. However, this substitution of energy raises many
questions regarding its possible impact on economic growth. In this context,
this research aims to examine the long-term relationship between economic growth
and financial development, non-renewable energy, renewable energy, and human
capital in 16 Latin American countries. Panel data techniques during the period
1988–2018 and statistical information compiled by the World Bank and Penn Word
Table databases were used. Second-generation econometric techniques (cross-
sectionally augmented Dickey–Fuller (CADF) and cross-sectionally augmented IPS
(CIPS) were used in the work methodology, which allow the presence of cross-
sectional dependence between sections to be controlled. The main results
indicate that there is a long-term equilibrium relationship between financial
development, non-renewable energy consumption, renewable energy consumption,
human capital, and economic growth. The results show that the consumption of
renewable energy does not compromise economic growth; the 1% increase in
renewable energy consumption is related to the 1% increase in economic growth.
The policy implications suggest some measures to ensure economic growth
considering the role of green energy and human capital. Keywords:  sustainable
development ;  economic growth ;  financial development ;  panel data ;  clean
energies  1. Introduction The World Economic Outlook report developed by the
World Bank [ 1 ] indicates that the world economy showed the worst performance
since World War II, which, according to its forecasts, will have declined by
5.2% by 2020. In addition, due to serious domestic supply and demand
distortions, prolonged trade conflicts, and financial instability, economic
activities are expected to contract in 2020 by 7% in advanced economies and by
2.5% in emerging and developing economies (EMDEs). According to forecasts, all
this will cause a reduction in per capita income of 3.6%, pushing millions of
inhabitants into extreme poverty, and therefore, inequalities will increase [ 1
]. As for Latin America, the report based on the preliminary balance of the
economies of Latin America and the Caribbean developed by the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) [ 2 ] mentions that
between the years 2014 and 2019, there was a low economic growth of 0.3%
(specifically, in 2019, it reached a growth rate of 1%) and for the year 2020, a
decrease of 7.7% is expected. These data show that Latin America and the
Caribbean are facing the worst economic, social, and productive crisis in the
last 120 years, caused by the implementation of social confinement policies, the
fall of merchandise exports, and the closure of economic activities (mainly in
the tourism sector), causing an increase in unemployment and as a result an
increase in poverty and inequality. Several theoretical and empirical studies
have been published in the economic literature that explain the effect of
financial development, non-renewable energy consumption, renewable energy
consumption, and human capital on economic growth. Abubakar et al. [ 3 ] reveal
that financial development contributes significantly to economic growth in the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) region, either directly or
through human capital. In contrast, Shahbaz et al. [ 4 ] recommend that
implementing an investment climate and improving human resources will foster
economic growth, given that sustainable and unsustainable energies incentivise
economic growth in a sample of 38 renewable-energy-consuming countries. First,
the literature emphasises that financial services are the main engine of
economic growth, being important for innovation and productive investment [ 5 ].
In addition, studies such as Boukhatem and Ben [ 6 ], Ali et al. [ 7 ], and
Pradhan et al. [ 8 ] prove that financial development contributes positively to
economic growth, indicating that finances help improve families’ standard of
living. Another line of studies indicates that the consumption of non-renewable
energy is a key input for economies worldwide since it plays a major role in the
level of production and holds a key place in consumer spending [ 9 ]. In this
regard, the higher the non-renewable energy consumption is, the higher the
economic growth, with a high spread of contamination in 193 countries [ 10 ]. In
this sense, limiting this type of energy will exacerbate growth [ 11 ].
Therefore, polluting energy is crucial for economic growth, and economic growth
also drives polluting energy consumption in emerging market and developing
economies (EMDEs) [ 12 ]. Similarly, the literature assumes that renewable
energy is a strategic element that is positively related to economic growth and
sustainable development. For example, Alvarado et al. [ 13 ] show that
sustainable energy has a positive effect on economic growth in Latin American
countries. Likewise, for D8 countries, Mahjabeen et al. [ 14 ] find that
renewable energy has a strong positive association with economic development.
Consequently, removing financial and political obstacles are important paths
towards the deployment of renewable sources [ 4 ]. Finally, there is strong
evidence suggesting that human capital accumulation has a beneficial effect on
long-term economic growth [ 3 , 15 ]. In this context, the aim of this research
is to examine the causal link between financial development, non-renewable
energy consumption, renewable energy consumption, and human capital on long-term
economic growth for 16 Latin American economies, during the period 1988–2018.
The hypothesis that supports this research is the existence of a positive effect
of the explanatory variables on economic growth. Data collected from the World
Bank [ 1 ] and Penn World Table [ 16 ] were used, and in order to determine the
most efficient tests of the series under study, the existence of cross-sectional
dependence was determined through the Pesaran test [ 17 ]. In order to support
the findings of the previous test, second-generation unit root tests of Pesaran
[ 18 ] were performed. Next, through the cointegration tests of Westerlund [ 19
] and fully modified ordinary least squares (FMOLS), a long-term relationship
between the variables under analysis was observed. Finally, the Granger-type
causality test developed by Dumitrescu and Hurlin [ 20 ] was used to examine the
causality and direction of the variables. The main findings provided by the
estimates refer to the existence of a long-term equilibrium relationship between
financial development, non-renewable energy consumption, renewable energy
consumption, and human capital with economic growth. Similarly, through the
fully modified ordinary least squares (FMOLS) test, it is observed that there is
a positive and statistically significant relationship between the explanatory
variables of financial development, non-renewable energy consumption, renewable
energy consumption, and human capital on long-term economic growth. Finally,
bidirectional and unidirectional causalities are found among the variables
analysed. Finally, it is worth mentioning that this research contributes new
knowledge to the current scientific field regarding the analysis of the
variations in economic growth caused by financial development, non-renewable
energy consumption, renewable energy consumption, and human capital in 16 Latin
American countries at a global level. In this regard, the main novelty of the
research conducted is based on two aspects. First, unlike the work of Williams [
21 ], this study includes other explanatory variables, such as non-renewable
energy consumption, renewable energy consumption, and the role of human capital,
which contributes by obtaining new evidence to the current economic literature
for Latin American countries. Second, the presence of cross-sectional dependence
between countries is controlled by applying second-generation cointegration
tests that control this type of problem and are more effective in assessing the
effects of the determinants of long-term economic growth. This document includes
four sections in addition to the introduction.  Section 2  shows the literature
review related to current research on the subject.  Section 3  describes the
data to be used, and the methodological strategy is proposed.  Section 4
reports and discusses the empirical results of the research. Finally,  Section 5
presents the conclusions and policy implications of the study.  2. Literature
Review The theory that supports the relationship between financial development
and economic growth is that of Schumpeter [ 5 ], who identifies financial
services as the primary engine of economic dynamism because they are relevant
for innovation and productive investment. Thus, by raising the transcendental
value of credit for implementing the entrepreneur’s activities, it gives the
entrepreneur the role of the primary actor in economic growth. The value arises
from the entrepreneur’s need for credit in the event of creating, to perform
his/her business combinations and thus boost the production process. However,
other factors that determine economic growth should be considered in a
complementary way. In this regard, this section divides the studies into four
groups, depending on the explanatory variables used: financial development, non-
renewable energy consumption, renewable energy consumption, and human capital.
The most recent studies such as Boukhatem and Ben [ 6 ] are in the first group.
By using fully modified ordinary least squares (FMOLS) regressions grouped for
the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Region, it is found that Islamic
financial development has a positive impact on economic growth, but this impact
is obstructed by lagging institutional frameworks. In contrast, in a sample for
100 countries categorised according to their political stability, Ali et al. [ 7
] reveal that financial development is more beneficial in free countries than in
partially free and non-free countries in the long term. They also state that
there is bidirectional causality between financial development and GDP per
capita in all groups of countries. In addition, by using the autoregressive
distributed lag (ARDL) model based on past historical trends of financial
development with interaction to GDP per capita, Wu et al. [ 22 ] find that there
is a bidirectional causal relationship for China, Japan, and India with the
virtue of positive supply and negative demand in the short term. On the other
hand, when Pradhan et al. [ 8 ] use Granger cointegration and causality tests
for 49 European countries, they determine that financial development and
innovation are drivers of long-term economic growth. In addition, they explain
that there is bidirectional causality of financial development and innovation
with economic growth. On the contrary, when using the system dynamic panel
strategy (generalised method of moment (GMM)), Williams [ 21 ] argues that
financial development does not significantly contribute to economic growth in 32
emerging Latin American countries since credit is provided more to households
than to businesses. Therefore, applying appropriate measures to financial
development can regain the link between finance and growth [ 23 ]. Another study
carried out by Ouyang and Li [ 24 ] in 30 provinces of China finds that the
financial sector has a negative influence on economic growth due to the
excessive advance in tangible assets instead of knowledge-based assets; they
also find unidirectional causality that advances from economic growth to
financial development only for the central region, while at a global level, as
in the eastern and western regions, they determine unidirectional causality from
financial development to economic growth. However, Swamy and Dharani [ 25 ]
state that non-linearity is shown in the group of 29 advanced economies due to
the pre-existence of an inverted U-shaped relationship between financial
development and long-term economic growth, arguing that excessive financing is
harmful; they also argue that there is bidirectional causality, that is,
financial development must be related to an improvement in economic growth.
Finally, Polemis et al. [ 26 ] identify that in developed and developing
countries, financial indicators (domestic credit to the private sector and money
in the broad sense) have a weak and slightly non-linear relationship on economic
growth. The second group relates non-renewable energy consumption with economic
growth. Therefore, when using GLS estimators (generalised least squares) for 34
OECD economies in the research by Kahouli [ 9 ], it is argued that the
consumption of non-renewable energy is a primary factor for economic
development, indicating that a decrease in this energy can limit the production
process; furthermore, the presence of bidirectional causality between non-
renewable energy towards economic growth is suggested, which implies that both
variables are jointly determined. The implementation of energy strategies and
policies are therefore important to manage economic growth [ 8 ]. Furthermore,
after analysing 10 energy-consuming countries (China, the United States, Russia,
India, Japan, Canada, Germany, Brazil, France, and South Korea), Shahbaz et al.
[ 26 ] find that there is a positive association between energy consumption and
economic growth, with the presence of different variations according to the
characteristics of each country. In contrast, studies that include other
determinants of the economic boom such as Baz et al. [ 27 ], show the existence
of asymmetric cointegration between non-renewable energy consumption,
agriculture, capital, and economic growth when using a nonlinear autoregressive
distributed lag (NARDL) model; they also corroborate unidirectional causality
from the use of polluting energy to economic growth. However, Wu [ 28 ] affirms
that polluting energy has an asymmetric effect on economic growth; however,
reducing this energy reduces economic growth in the long term but not in the
short term in the United States. For this reason, financial systems must
consider environmental aspects in their current operations [ 29 ]. On the other
hand, Le [ 11 ] examines 46 emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs) by
using second-generation econometric techniques; augmented mean group (AMG)
estimator, mean groups (MG), and common correlated effects MG (CCEMG)
estimators. Their findings state that the use of non-renewable energy positively
affects long-term economic growth. In addition, they determine bidirectional
causality between the use of energy and economic growth, indicating that both
variables are interdependent. Similarly, Le and Van [ 12 ] and Adams et al. [ 30
] agree that non-renewable energy consumption and renewable energy consumption
have a positive impact on long-term economic growth; furthermore, they detect
the presence of bidirectional causality between the components of energy
consumption (non-renewable and renewable fuels) and economic growth. However,
after analysing Ecuador by Pinzón [ 31 ], causality is confirmed, in which the
argument advances from energy consumption evaluated by oil consumption to
economic growth in Ecuador, given that it is an oil-exporting country and an
importer of oil products. Moreover, when using cointegration and causality for
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) by Chontanawat [ 32 ], a
long-term equilibrium relationship between energy consumption, CO 2  emissions,
and economic growth is found; furthermore, he concludes that there is
unidirectional causality from GDP per capita to long-term non-renewable energy
consumption. Therefore, it is necessary to sensitise public opinion and carry
out structural reforms that help mitigate environmental pollution [ 33 ]. Maji
and Sulaiman [ 34 ] is in the third group, which relates renewable energy
consumption with economic growth, and who claim that renewable energy
consumption slows down economic growth, whereby the main source of energy is
biomass from wood, which is dirty and polluting when burned in West African
countries. Meanwhile, Chen et al. [ 35 ] state that developing countries seeking
a positive effect of renewable energy investment on economic growth must exceed
a particular threshold for clean energy consumption. By using an autoregressive
distributed lag (ARDL) model, Smolović et al. [ 36 ] find that in the short
term, the consumption of renewable energy has a negative effect on economic
growth, while in the long term, the consumption of renewable energy has positive
effects on growth in the member states of the European Union (EU). Similarly,
Shahbaz et al. [ 4 ] ensure that the consumption of renewable energy has a
positive impact on long-term economic growth. On the other hand, Alvarado et al.
[ 13 ] and Zafar et al. [ 37 ] detect the presence of a long-term equilibrium
relationship between renewable and non-renewable energy consumption and economic
growth when applying cointegration and causality approaches; they also find that
both types of energy have a positive effect on long-term economic growth.
Similarly, Mafizur and Velayutham [ 38 ] suggest that renewable and non-
renewable energies are drivers of long-term economic growth and, in addition,
they detect unidirectional causality that moves from economic growth to the
consumption of renewable energies. Therefore, countries must opt for the
combination of energy types and a progressive transition towards clean energy
sources, supported by policies and technological advances to create, preserve
and transmit renewable energy generation [ 14 ]. Finally, the fourth group
contains studies that relate human capital with economic growth. For example,
Fang and Chang [ 39 ] ensure the existence of a long-term equilibrium
relationship between human capital and economic growth through cointegration
techniques, and they show that human capital has an insignificant positive
impact on long-term economic growth. As for Abubakar et al. [ 3 ] and Fahimi et
al. [ 15 ], by using FMOLS estimators, they reveal that the accumulation of
human capital contributes significantly to economic growth, and they also
indicate that there is bidirectional causality between economic growth and human
capital. However, Hamdan et al. [ 40 ] confirm unidirectional causality ranging
from economic growth to human capital. Finally, Ogundari and Awokuse [ 41 ]
determine that the positive impacts of education depend on the development level
of countries.  3. Data and Methodology  3.1. Data The data used in this
investigation of GDP per capita (USD at constant 2010 prices), internal credit
to the private sector (USD at constant 2010 prices), non-renewable energy
consumption (Kg of oil equivalent per capita), and renewable energy consumption
(% of total final energy consumption) were obtained from the World Development
Indicators database [ 42 ] of the World Bank. The human capital index was
obtained from the Penn World Table [ 16 ], version 9.1 database of the Centre
for Growth and Development of the University of Groningen. These variables were
selected according to the previous literature review since there are no studies
that have considered these variables together in their analyses. Therefore, for
the econometric regressions, per capita GDP as an economic growth indicator was
considered a dependent variable, and domestic credit to the private sector as a
proxy for financial development was considered an independent variable, given
that it is the main source of financial intermediation for savers and investors
who channel the private sector in developing countries; three control variables
were also included: non-renewable energy consumption because it is the main
input to decide the degree of production of goods and services in a country;
renewable energy consumption since it comes from clean and inexhaustible
resources that help mitigate climate change and guarantee sustainable economic
growth; the human capital index since it is a fundamental factor of knowledge
and skills that individuals acquire through education that allows improving the
workforce. On the other hand, the research analysis covered 16 Latin American
countries that have data available for the five variables for the period
1988–2018: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Dominican
Republic, and Uruguay. In addition, the data of all the variables were
transformed into logarithms in order to reduce the measurement heterogeneity of
the variables. Following this,  Table 1  shows the description of each of the
variables used in the econometric models. Figure 1  shows the correlations
between the variables, namely, financial development, non-renewable energy
consumption, human capital, and economic growth in a preliminary way, which have
a high and significant positive correlation, suggesting that these variables
play an important role in promoting economic production in Latin American
countries. However, the renewable energy consumption variable shows a negative
correlation with economic growth. Table 2  summarises the correlations between
economic growth and the variables financial development, non-renewable energy
consumption, renewable energy consumption, and human capital at a significance
level of 1%. Table 3  collects the descriptive statistics of all the variables
included in the research, where it is observed that the data panel is balanced
because it consists of 496 data in general that involve 16 countries
corresponding to a time period of 31 years. In addition, the mean, standard
deviation, minimum and maximum values, and the number of observations are shown.
In general, economic growth, financial development, non-renewable energy
consumption, renewable energy consumption, and human capital show greater
variability at the general level than between countries and within each country.
The descriptive statistics that include the mean, standard deviation, minimum,
and maximum of the variables are illustrated in  Figure 2  below.  3.2.
Econometric Strategy Several approaches were adopted in the econometric
strategy. First, we started from a baseline regression to the theoretical
contribution of Schumpeter [ 5 ], who indicates that economic growth is a
function of financial development, as formalised in Equation (1). G D P i t = β
0 + β 1 F D i t + ε i t (1) To determine what other variables affect the
economic growth of Latin American countries, a new model is presented, which
includes control variables such as non-renewable energy consumption, renewable
energy consumption, and human capital, as shown in Equation (2). G D P i t = β 0
+ β 1 F D i t + β 2 N R E C i t + β 1 R E C i t + β 1 H C i t + ε i t (2) In
Equations (1) and (2),  GDP  represents the logarithm of economic growth;  FD
represents the logarithm of financial development;  NREC  represents the
logarithm of non-renewable energy consumption;  REC  indicates the logarithm of
renewable energy consumption;  HC  is the logarithm of human capital; for
countries  i  = 1, 2, 3,…, 16 in the period  t  = 1988, 1989,…, 2018 and
finally,  ε it  is the error term.  Then, to avoid biased and inconsistent
results, we tested for cross-sectional dependence using the Pesaran [ 17 ]
diagnostic test, which is recommended for balanced and unbalanced panels. The  C
D N T  statistic of the Pesaran test [ 17 ] has the following expression: C D N
T = 2 N N − 1 ∑ i = 1 N − 1 ∑ j = i + 1 N T ρ ^ i j       →             N 0 , 1
(3) where  N  denotes the number of cross sections (countries),  T  denotes the
period, and  ρ ^ i j  shows the ordered pairwise correlation that corresponds to
the cross sections in each period, as described in Equation (6). ρ ^ i j = T − 1
∑ i = 1 T ε i t ε j t (4) where  ε i t  and  ε j t  denote the scaled residuals
of the specific ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions for each cross section
(countries)  i  = 1, 2, 3,…, N. Next, for the panel with the presence of cross-
sectional dependence, the second-generation unit root tests were estimated,
which are more robust and reliable in this case, for which the cross-sectionally
augmented Dickey–Fuller (CADF) tests and the cross-sectionally augmented IPS
(CIPS) proposed by Pesaran [ 17 ] were estimated. Therefore, the first known
Dickey–Fuller augmented cross-sectional test (CADF) is specified in Equation
(5). Y i = α i + β i Y i , t − 1 + ω 0 Y ^ t − 1 + φ i Δ Y ^ t + ε i t (5) where
  Y ^ t = 1 N ∑ i = 1 N Y i t ,  Δ Y ^ t = 1 N ∑ i = 1 N Δ Y i t  and  ε i t  is
the regression error. As for the second test, it is calculated from the average
of the individual ADF statistics increased in the cross section (CADF) and is
called CIPS*, which analyses the unit root properties of the whole panel as
shown in Equation (6). C I P S * = 1 N ∑ i = 1 N C A D F i (6) where  C A D F i
indicates the cross-sectional augmented Dickey–Fuller statistic for  i
representing each cross-sectional unit. Subsequently, in the presence of cross-
sectional dependence, the Westerlund [ 19 ] error correction test was applied to
verify the long-term relationship between the variables. The test allowed us to
conclude whether there is cointegration for individual panels and the entire
panel as a whole, considering that the variables analysed are stationary.
Equation (7) expresses the error correction that defines the speed of correction
towards equilibrium as follows: Δ y i , t = δ i ´ d t + ε i y i , t − 1 − β i ´
x i , t − 1 + ∑ j = 1 p i φ i j y i , t − j + ∑ j = q i p i φ i j x i , t − j +
ε i , t (7) where  t = 1 ,   2 , 3 … , T ;  i = 1 ,   2 , 3 , , N  and  d t
express the deterministic components;  ε i  represents the constant term;  p i
and  q i  denote the orders and advances of each of the countries. The
Westerlund test [ 19 ] yields four statistics, where  G τ  and  G α  indicate
that at least one cross section is cointegrated, and the statistics  P τ  and  P
α  reveal that the entire panel is cointegrated, to evaluate the null hypothesis
of non-cointegration as shown in Equations (8)–(11). G τ = 1 N ∑ i = 1 N ε i S e
ε ^ i (8) G α = 1 N ∑ i = 1 N T i ε i ´     (9) P τ = ε ^ i S e ε ^ i (10) P α =
T ε ^ (11) Then, for the cointegration between the studied variables, the fully
modified ordinary least squares (FMOLS) method proposed by Phillips and Hansen [
43 ] was used, who analysed the semi-parametric correction to eliminate bias
problems. Next, the following equation formalises the FMOLS: y t + = y t − ω ^
12 Ω ^ 22 μ ^ 2 t (12) Finally, as part of the econometric strategy, the Granger
causality test [ 44 ] was applied for panel data developed by Dumitrescu and
Hurlin [ 20 ] to examine the causality and direction of the variables.
Therefore, causality can be shown in two ways, either unidirectional when  X
causes  Y  but  Y  does not cause  X  or bidirectional when  X  and  Y  cause
each other. As stated below in Equation (13), y i , t = α i + ∑ k = 1 k γ i k y
i , t − k + ∑ k = 1 k β i k x i , t − k + ε i , t (13) where  α i  indicates the
slope intersection;  k  shows the lag orders in all units assuming the panel is
balanced;  γ i k  is the autoregressive parameter;  β i k  indicates the
regression coefficient differing between cross sections.  4. Results Discussion
The existence of cross-sectional dependence indicates that violation of
independence assumption estimates often leads to undesirable finite model
properties. In fact, the diagnostic test of cross-sectional dependence proposed
by Pesaran [ 17 ] was applied, which uses the correlation coefficients between
the series of each of the countries.  Table 4  shows the results of the cross-
sectional dependence (CD) test of Pesaran [ 17 ]; given that the  p -value is
less than 0.001, the null hypothesis of cross-sectional dependence between
countries is strongly rejected, and it is concluded that the variables show
cross-sectional dependence between countries at a significance level of 0.1%.
Subsequently, the presence of cross-sectional dependence justifies the
application of second-generation unit root tests to verify the stationarity of
panel data series [ 37 , 45 ]. In this regard, the CADF and CIPS tests of
Pesaran [ 17 ] were applied, which are more robust and reliable in the presence
of cross-sectional dependence [ 46 ].  Table 5  shows the results obtained from
the unit root tests in levels (constant and constant–trend), in which it is
observed that two series of five are non-stationary at level I (0). Therefore,
the second difference was performed on all the variables to make them stationary
(constant and constant-trend), establishing that the series has an order of
integration II (2) at a significance level of 0.1% at the global level of
countries. In the next step, the stationarity of the series made it possible to
determine the long-term equilibrium relationship between the variables included
in the model. Therefore, in the presence of cross-sectional dependence of each
of the variables, the cointegration test developed by Westerlund [ 19 ] was
applied. In this context,  Table 6  shows the results of the statistics of the
four panel-wide tests, where the Gt and Ga test statistics define the
alternative hypothesis that at least one cross-sectional unit is cointegrated,
and the Pt and Pa tests define the alternative hypothesis that the entire panel
is cointegrated. Therefore, the null hypothesis of non-cointegration is rejected
and the existence of an equilibrium between the variables included in the long-
term model is confirmed at a significance level of 0.1% and 5%, respectively.
Consequently, there is a joint variation in financial development, non-renewable
energy consumption, renewable energy consumption, and human capital, which is
related to variations in long-term economic growth at the level of the countries
examined. In the next step, once the existence of long-term equilibrium was
proven, the fully modified ordinary least squares (FMOLS) regression was
estimated at the global level for Latin American countries in order to determine
the elasticities of the independent variables on the explained variable.  Table
7  reveals that financial development, non-renewable energy consumption,
renewable energy consumption, and human capital have a positive and
statistically significant relationship with economic growth. In other words,
financial development constitutes an advantage in the economy for individuals
who wish to invest in an economic activity since they have a greater possibility
of obtaining financing, and consequently, there is an expansion of aggregate
demand. These results are validated by the theoretical contribution of
Schumpeter [ 5 ], who determines that financial services are important to
determine the production of entrepreneurs since they are important for
innovation and productive investment. Moreover, our results are supported by the
study of Boukhatem and Ben [ 6 ], who confirm that financial development has a
positive impact on long-term economic growth. Similarly, our findings coincide
with those of Ali et al. [ 7 ], who show that financial development generates a
positive effect on long-term economic growth, thus concluding that financial
development is more beneficial in free countries than in partially free and non-
free countries. They also agree with those found by Pradhan et al. [ 8 ], who
state that a 1% increase in financial development leads to an increase of 0.38%
and 1.41% in long-term economic growth in European economies. Finally, our
results are contrary to those found by Swamy and Dharani [ 25 ], who point out
that there is an inverted U-shaped relationship between financial development
and long-term economic growth in advanced countries. In the case of non-
renewable energy consumption, it is positively related to long-term economic
growth. That is, the growth of the economy is based on the consumption of fossil
fuels, although it generates environmental degradation. These findings are
similar to those found in the study by Adams et al. [ 30 ], who state that a 10%
increase in non-renewable energy consumption results in a 0.27% increase in
long-term economic growth. Similarly, the results are aligned with Le [ 11 ] and
Le and Van [ 12 ], who corroborate that non-renewable energy consumption
produces a positive impact on long-term economic growth. However, this result
differs from that of Wu [ 28 ], who states that reducing polluting energy
reduces economic growth in the long term but not in the short term in the United
States. On the other hand, the consumption of renewable energy is positively
related to the overall long-term economic growth of Latin American countries. In
other words, the use of clean energy does not condition the expansion of
economic activity. On the contrary, it proves that sustainable development can
be achieved with the use of renewable energies in production processes. These
findings are similar to those found by Zafar et al. [ 37 ], who point out that
the use of renewable energy has a positive impact on long-term economic growth
and highlight the importance of its implementation since it helps to eradicate
poverty and ensures energy efficiency. Likewise, the results of this research
are consistent with those of Mahjabeen et al. [ 14 ] and Shahbaz et al. [ 47 ],
who confirm that renewable and non-renewable energy consumption are positively
related to long-term economic growth. They also highlight that renewable energy
consumption contributes less than non-renewable energy consumption to economic
development in the long term. However, renewable energy consumption allows for
sustainable growth, in contrast to the use of fossil fuels. Finally, it is found
that an improvement in human capital contributes to an increase in the overall
long-term economic growth of Latin American countries. The accumulation of human
capital leads to greater specialisation and improvement in economic activities,
which results in higher added value and generates efficient use of resources,
generating positive externalities in production processes. Thus, these results
are in line with the findings by Abubakar et al. [ 3 ], who observe that the
accumulation of human capital contributes to economic growth in the long term.
However, the results contrast with those of Fang and Chang [ 39 ], who reveal
that human capital has a positive and insignificant effect on long-term economic
growth. The last step of the econometric strategy consisted of performing the
Granger causality test developed by Dumitrescu and Hurlin [ 20 ] to test the
direction of causality of the variables examined. From the above,  Table 8
shows a bidirectional relationship between financial development and economic
growth, which indicates that both variables are mutually causal. This result is
in line with those found in the studies by Nawaz et al. [ 48 ], Swamy and
Dharani [ 25 ], and Wu et al. [ 22 ], who corroborate that there is a presence
of bidirectional causality between financial development and economic growth.
However, our findings contradict those provided by Stamatiou and Papadopoulou [
45 ], who find unidirectional causality from economic growth to financial
development. Likewise, they contradict those found by Ouyang and Li [ 24 ] who
find one-way causality for the regions of China, which ranges from economic
growth to financial development only for the central region, while at a global
level, as well as for the eastern and western regions, there is a one-way
causality from financial development to economic growth. Similarly,
unidirectional causality is found from non-renewable energy consumption to
economic growth. These results are consistent with those by Deng et al. [ 49 ],
who find that non-renewable energy consumption causes economic growth. However,
our findings contradict those by Chontanawat [ 32 ] and Kahouli [ 9 ], who
determine the existence of unidirectional causality from economic growth to
long-term non-renewable energy consumption. In addition, there is unidirectional
causality from economic growth to renewable energy consumption. In other words,
when the country has great economic growth, there is a greater concern for
environmental care issues. These results are consistent with those by Mafizur
and Velayutham [ 38 ], who determine the existence of unidirectional causality
from economic growth to renewable energy consumption. However, they differ from
those found by Alvarado et al. [ 13 ] and Zafar et al. [ 37 ], who observed
bidirectional causality, that is, renewable energy consumption and economic
growth are mutually causal. Finally, bidirectional causality is found between
human capital and economic growth. These results are supported by findings of
Abubakar et al. [ 3 ] and Fahimi et al. [ 15 ], who find bidirectional causality
between financial development and economic growth.  5. Conclusions and Policy
Implications This study aims to contribute to the scientific field with tools
that contribute to the discussion on the determinants of economic growth, which
is why this study analysed the relationship between financial development, non-
renewable energy consumption, renewable energy consumption, and capital human
growth with economic growth for 16 Latin American countries, during the period
1988–2018, through econometric techniques of panel data based on cointegration
and causality. In this regard, first, it is found that there is a long-term
equilibrium relationship between financial development, non-renewable energy
consumption, renewable energy consumption, human capital, and long-term economic
growth. Second, the FMOLS shows that there is a positive relationship between
the variables of financial development, non-renewable energy consumption,
renewable energy consumption, and human capital with economic growth, which
indicates that an increase in these variables generates an improvement in long-
term economic growth. Third, evidence of bidirectional causality is found for
the variables of financial development and human capital with economic growth,
respectively. Unidirectional causality from non-renewable energy consumption to
economic growth and from economic growth to renewable energy consumption is
observed. Based on the results for the overall sample of Latin American
countries, policymakers should consider the following recommendations: Focus on
offering policy reforms that encourage financial deepening and effective
financial intermediation that alleviates credit restrictions in the region so
that financial resources are effectively allocated to companies and households
in order to help boost the economy. It is also important that banks offer new
financial services such as digitalisation of payments, use of mobile wallets or
electronic money, creation of savings accounts for rural populations through
agents and cell phones, etc. at low costs and with lower risk in order to
achieve greater financial deepening. Regarding the consumption of non-renewable
energy, the findings of this study confirm that the use of polluting energy
encourages economic growth in Latin America. That is why it is determined that
reducing this type of energy limits growth in the region; knowing that it is one
of the main inputs that help stimulate economic growth in these countries, it is
recommended to design policies that cause the efficient use of consumption of
energy, replacing obsolete technologies with modern and efficient ones.
Furthermore, the results suggest that governments should guarantee a transition
from non-renewable to renewable energies that does not compromise economic
growth by strategies such as reducing subsidies for polluting energies,
designing cooperation programs that encourage the transfer of financial
resources and technology, and finally, establishing green trade policies that
help encourage sustainable development in the region with the use of carbon-free
energy that guarantees energy efficiency and helps mitigate climate change.
Finally, governments should promote investment policies in human capital that
guarantee access to education at all levels, which are important for raising and
improving economic growth. The limitation of the research is the low number of
econometric studies that use panel data with cointegration and causality
techniques that relate to the analytical variables for Latin America. It is
recommended that in future research, the analysis be extended to other regions
of the world or globally by groups of countries according to their income level.
The second limitation refers to the availability of information for all Latin
American countries; thus, the analysis focused only on 16 countries.
Consequently, the research contributes to the scientific field, firstly, in
terms of how sustained growth is generated through financial development, use of
non-renewable energies, renewable energies, and human capital; secondly, it
covers the breadth of the literature for the Latin American region since it is
evident that there are no studies to date that analyse this group of variables
for the region. Author Contributions Conceptualization, Investigation,
Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing—Original Draft, Preparation and
Writing—Review & Editing, P.P., J.Á.-G., J.M. and M.d.l.C.d.R.-R. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding This
research received no external funding. Institutional Review Board Statement Not
applicable. Informed Consent Statement Not applicable. Data Availability
Statement Not applicable. Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no conflict
of interest. References World Bank. World Development Indicators. 2020.
Available online:  https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-development-
indicators  (accessed on 21 June 2020). ECLAC. Preliminary Overview of the
Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean. Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). 2021. Available online:  https://www.cepal.or
g/sites/default/files/publication/files/46501/S2000990_es.pdf  (accessed on 21
June 2020). Abubakar, A.; Kassim, S.; Yusoff, M. Financial Development, Human
Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth: Empirical Evidence from the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).  Procedia-Soc. Behav. Sci.   2015 ,
172 , 96–103. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] [ Green Version ] Shahbaz, M.;
Raghutla, C.; Chittedi, K.; Jiao, Z.; Vo, X.V. The effect of renewable energy
consumption on economic growth: Evidence from the renewable energy country
attractive index.  Energy   2020 ,  207 , 118162. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef
] Schumpeter, J.  Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profits,
Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle ; Harvard University Press:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 1934. [ Google Scholar ] Boukhatem, J.; Ben, F. The effect
of Islamic banks on GDP growth: Some evidence from selected MENA countries.
Borsa Istanb. Rev.   2018 ,  18 , 231–247. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Ali,
Q.; Raza, A.; Narjis, S.; Saeed, S.; Iqbal, M. Potential of renewable energy,
agriculture, and financial sector for the economic growth: Evidence from
politically free, partly free and not free countries.  Renew. Energy   2020 ,
162 , 934–947. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Pradhan, R.P.; Arvin, M.B.;
Bahmani, S. Are innovation and financial development causative factors in
economic growth? Evidence from a panel granger causality test.  Technol.
Forecast. Soc. Chang.   2018 ,  132 , 130–142. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ]
Kahouli, B. Does static and dynamic relationship between economic growth and
energy consumption exist in OECD countries?  Energy Rep.   2019 ,  5 , 104–116.
[ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Khan, S.; Peng, Z.; Li, Y. Energy consumption,
environmental degradation, economic growth and financial development in globe:
Dynamic simultaneous equations panel analysis.  Energy Rep.   2019 ,  5 ,
1089–1102. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Le, H. The energy-growth nexus
revisited: The role of financial development, institutions, government
expenditure and trade openness.  Heliyon   2020 ,  6 , e04369. [ Google Scholar
] [ CrossRef ] Le, H.; Van, D. The energy consumption structure and African
EMDEs’ sustainable development.  Heliyon   2020 ,  6 , e03822. [ Google Scholar
] [ CrossRef ] Alvarado, R.; Ponce, P.; Alvarado, R.; Ponce, K.; Huachizaca, V.;
Toledo, E. Sustainable and non-sustainable energy and output in Latin America: A
cointegration and causality approach with panel data.  Energy Strategy Rev.
2019 ,  26 , 100369. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Mahjabeen, S.Z.A.;
Chughtai, S.; Simonetti, B. Renewable energy, institutional stability,
environment and economic growth nexus of D-8 countries.  Energy Strategy Rev.
2020 ,  29 , 100484. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Fahimi, A.; Akadiri, S.;
Seraj, M.; Akadiri, A. Testing the role of tourism and human capital development
in economic growth. A panel causality study of micro states.  Tour. Manag.
Perspect.   2018 ,  28 , 62–70. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Penn Word Table.
Statistical Review of PWT 9.1 of Income, Output, Inputs and Productivity. 2019.
Available online:  https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/productivity/pwt/pwt-releases/pwt9.1
(accessed on 21 June 2020). Pesaran, M.H. Testing Weak Cross-Sectional
Dependence in Large Panels.  Econom. Rev.   2015 ,  34 , 1089–1117. [ Google
Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] [ Green Version ] Pesaran, M.H. A simple panel unit root
test in the presence of cross-section dependence.  J. Appl. Econom.   2007 ,  22
, 265–312. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] [ Green Version ] Westerlund, J.
Testing for Error Correction in Panel Data.  Oxf. Bull. Econ. Stat.   2007 ,  69
, 709–748. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] [ Green Version ] Dumitrescu, E.-I.;
Hurlin, C. Testing for Granger non-causality in heterogeneous panels.  Econ.
Model.   2012 ,  29 , 1450–1460. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] [ Green Version
] Williams, K. Has the finance–growth link been broken? Panel data evidence from
Latin America and the Caribbean.  Economia   2018 ,  19 , 404–423. [ Google
Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Wu, C.F.; Huang, S.C.; Chang, T.; Chiou, C.C.; Hsueh,
H.P. The nexus of financial development and economic growth across major Asian
economies: Evidence from bootstrap ARDL testing and machine learning approach.
J. Comput. Appl. Math.   2020 ,  372 , 112660. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ]
Demetriades, P.; Rewilak, J. Recovering the finance-growth nexus.  Econ. Lett.
2020 ,  196 , 109563. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Ouyang, Y.; Li, P. On the
nexus of financial development, economic growth, and energy consumption in
China: New perspective from a GMM panel VAR approach.  Energy Econ.   2018 ,  71
, 238–252. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Swamy, V.; Dharani, M. The dynamics
of finance-growth nexus in advanced economies.  Int. Rev. Econ. Financ.   2019 ,
64 , 122–146. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Polemis, M.; Stengos, T.;
Tzeremes, N. Revisiting the impact of financial depth on growth: A semi-
parametric approach.  Financ. Res. Lett.   2020 ,  36 , 101322. [ Google Scholar
] [ CrossRef ] Baz, K.; Xu, D.; Ampofo, G.; Ali, I.; Khan, I.; Cheng, J.; Ali,
H. Energy consumption and economic growth nexus: New evidence from Pakistan
using asymmetric analysis.  Energy   2019 ,  189 , 116254. [ Google Scholar ] [
CrossRef ] Wu, H.M. The impact of non-clean energy consumption on economic
growth: Evidence from symmetric and asymmetric analyses in the US.  Energy
Environ.   2020 ,  31 , 291–307. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Bekhet, H.A.;
Matar, A.; Yasmin, T. CO 2  emissions, energy consumption, economic growth, and
financial development in GCC countries: Dynamic simultaneous equation models.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.   2017 ,  70 , 117–132. [ Google Scholar ] [
CrossRef ] Adams, S.; Kwame, E.; Klobodu, M.; Apio, A. Renewable and non-
renewable energy, regime type and economic growth.  Renew. Energy   2018 ,  125
, 755–767. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Pinzón, K. Dynamics between energy
consumption and economic growth in Ecuador: A granger causality analysis.  Econ.
Anal. Policy   2018 ,  57 , 88–101. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] [ Green
Version ] Chontanawat, J. Relationship between energy consumption, CO 2
emission and economic growth in ASEAN: Cointegration and causality model.
Energy Rep.   2020 ,  6 , 660–665. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Pata, U.
Renewable energy consumption, urbanization, financial development, income and CO
2  emissions in Turkey: Testing EKC hypothesis with structural breaks.  J.
Clean. Prod.   2018 ,  187 , 770–779. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Maji, I.;
Sulaiman, C. Renewable energy consumption and economic growth nexus: A fresh
evidence from West Africa.  Energy Rep.   2019 ,  5 , 384–392. [ Google Scholar
] [ CrossRef ] Chen, C.; Pinar, M.; Stengos, T. Renewable energy consumption and
economic growth nexus: Evidence from a threshold model.  Energy Policy   2020 ,
139 , 111295. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Smolović, J.; Muhadinović, M.;
Radonjić, M.; Đurašković, J. How does renewable energy consumption affect
economic growth in the traditional and new member states of the European Union?
Energy Rep.   2020 ,  6 , 505–513. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Zafar, M.;
Shahbaz, M.; Hou, F.; Sinha, A. From nonrenewable to renewable energy and its
impact on economic growth: The role of research & development expenditures in
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation countries.  J. Clean. Prod.   2019 ,  212 ,
1166–1178. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Mafizur, M.; Velayutham, E. Renewable
and non-renewable energy consumption-economic growth nexus: New evidence from
South Asia.  Renew. Energy   2020 ,  147 , 339–408. [ Google Scholar ] [
CrossRef ] Fang, Z.; Chang, Y. Energy, human capital and economic growth in Asia
Pacific countries—Evidence from a panel cointegration and causality analysis.
Energy Econ.   2016 ,  56 , 177–184. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Hamdan, A.;
Sarea, A.; Khamis, R.; Anasweh, M. A causality analysis of the link between
higher education and economic development: Empirical evidence.  Heliyon   2020 ,
6 , e04046. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Ogundari, K.; Awokuse, T. Human
capital contribution to economic growth in Sub-Saharan Africa: Does health
status matter more than education?  Econ. Anal. Policy   2018 ,  58 , 131–140. [
Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] World Development Indicators Database. 2020.
Available online:  https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-
indicators  (accessed on 21 June 2020). Phillips, P.C.B.; Hansen, B.E.
Statistical inference in instrumental variables regression with i(1) processes.
Rev. Econ. Stud.   1990 ,  57 , 99–125. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Granger,
C.W.J. Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and Cross-Spectral
Methods.  Econom. J. Econom. Soc.   1969 ,  37 , 424–438. [ Google Scholar ] [
CrossRef ] Stamatiou, P.; Papadopoulou, M. Financial Development and Economic
Growth: Evidence from the Eurozone.  Int. J. Account. Financ. Stud.   2021 ,  4
, 7. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Ponce, P.; Khan, S.A.R. A causal link
between renewable energy, energy efficiency, property rights, and CO 2
emissions in developed countries: A road map for environmental sustainability.
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.   2021 . [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Shahbaz, M.;
Zakaria, M.; Shahzad, S.; Mahalik, M.K. The energy consumption and economic
growth nexus in top ten energy-consuming countries: Fresh evidence from using
the quantile-on-quantile approach.  Energy Econ.   2018 ,  71 , 282–301. [
Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] [ Green Version ] Nawaz, K.; Lahiani, A.; Roubaud,
D. Natural resources as blessings and finance-growth nexus: A bootstrap ARDL
approach in an emerging economy.  Resour. Policy   2019 ,  60 , 277–287. [
Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] Deng, Q.; Alvarado, R.; Toledo, E.; Caraguay, L.
Greenhouse gas emissions, non-renewable energy consumption, and output in South
America: The role of the productive structure.  Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
2020 ,  27 , 14477–14491. [ Google Scholar ] [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Figure 1.
Correlation between financial development, non-renewable energy consumption,
renewable energy consumption, human capital, and economic growth.   Figure 1.
Correlation between financial development, non-renewable energy consumption,
renewable energy consumption, human capital, and economic growth. Figure 2.
Descriptive statistics.   Figure 2. Descriptive statistics. Table 1. Description
of the variables. Table 1. Description of the variables. Type of Variable
Variable  Symbol Unit of Measurement Source Description Dependent Economic
growth GDP Log USD at constant 2010 prices WDI 2020 [ 42 ] Known as GDP, income,
or income per capita that measures the relationship between economic growth and
the total population of a country. Independent Domestic credit to the private
sector as a proxy for financial development FD Log USD at constant 2010 prices
WDI 2020 [ 42 ] Internal credit to the private sector refers to financial
resources, such as loans, purchases of non-equity securities and commercial
credits, and other accounts receivable that establish a right of reimbursement.
Of control Non-renewable energy consumption NREC Log Kg of oil equivalent per
capita WDI 2020 [ 42 ] It is the consumption of primary energy before
transformation into other final fuels, which is equivalent to national
production plus imports and changes in inventories, minus exports and fuels
supplied to ships and aeroplanes assigned to international transport. Renewable
energy consumption REC Log % of total final energy consumption WDI 2020 [ 42 ]
They are inexhaustible and unlimited sources of energy that are produced from
natural sources (sun, wind, water, plant, or animal biomass, among others).
Human capital HC Log Index PWT 2019 [ 16 ] It consists of the value given to the
professional skills that an individual has, based on accumulated knowledge and
experiences that allow them to function within society. Table 2. Correlation
matrix of the variables. Table 2. Correlation matrix of the variables.   Log GDP
Log FD Log NREC Log REC Log HC Log GDP 1.0000         Log FD 0.7423 * 1.0000
Log NREC 0.8431 * 0.7083 * 1.0000     Log REC −0.4288 * −0.4316 * −0.5285 *
1.0000   Log HC 0.6128 * 0.4205 * 0.5649 * −0.5649 * 1.0000 Note. * indicates
significance at the 5% level. Table 3. Descriptive statistics. Table 3.
Descriptive statistics. Variable   Mean Standard Deviation Minimum Maximum
Observations Log Economic growth In general 8.453 0.676 6.958 9.624 N = 496
Between   0.661 7.226 9.218 n = 16 Within   0.215 7.872 9.057 T = 31 Log
Financial development In general 23.678 1.706 20.089 28.154 N = 496 Between
1.636 21.242 27.458 n = 16 Within   0.631 22.155 25.053 T = 31 Log Non-renewable
energy consumption  In general 6.709 0.431 5.859 7.745 N = 496 Between   0.410
6.240 7.449 n = 16 Within   0.166 6.145 7.141 T = 31 Log Renewable energy
consumption In general 3.444 0.596 2.028 4.439 N = 496 Between   0.588 2.299
4.225 n = 16 Within   0.173 2.962 4.892 T = 31 Log Human Capital In general
0.849 0.161 0.391 1.137 N = 496 Between   0.140 0.511 1.047 n = 16 Within
0.088 0.584 1.148 T = 31 Table 4. Cross-sectional dependence tests. Table 4.
Cross-sectional dependence tests. Pesaran Test Variables CD p -Value GDP 60.985
*** 0.000 FD 60.979 *** 0.000 NREC 60.977 *** 0.000 REC 60.880 ** 0.000 HC
60.857 *** 0.000 Note: t denotes significance **  p  < 0.01, ***  p  < 0.001.
Table 5. Results of the unit root tests in levels and second differences. Table
5. Results of the unit root tests in levels and second differences. CADF Test
Statistics   Levels Second Differences   Variables Constant Constant and Trend
Constant Constant and Trend Order Log Economic growth −1.136 0.276 −9.014 ***
−6.830 *** II (2) Log Financial development  −1.247 2.221 −8.223 *** −5.837 ***
II (2) Log Non-renewable energy consumption −3.163 ** −2.543 ** 13.123 ***
−11.298 *** II (2) Log Renewable energy consumption 1.393 3.514 −14.193 ***
−12.287 *** II (2) Log Human Capital  −3.815 *** −1.488 −3.399 *** −0.968 II (2)
CIPS test statistics Log Economic growth −2.347 −2.436 −5.981 *** −6.072 *** II
(2) Log Financial development  −2.163 −2.243 −5.938 *** −6.088 *** II (2) Log
Non-renewable energy consumption −2.980 *** −3.248 *** −6.190 *** −6.410 *** II
(2) Log Renewable energy consumption −1.975 −2.416 −6.190 *** −6.370 *** II (2)
Log Human Capital  −3.156 *** −3.150 *** −3.578 *** −3.649 *** II (2) Note: t
denotes significance **  p  < 0.01, ***  p  < 0.001. Table 6. Results of the
Westerlund [ 19 ] cointegration test. Table 6. Results of the Westerlund [ 19 ]
cointegration test. Statistical Value z-Value p- Value Robust  p -Value Gt
−2.630 ** −1.698 0.045 0.010 Ga −3.967 *** 4.041 1.000 0.000 Pt −8.098 ***
−0.468 0.320 0.000 Pa −3.399 *** −2.330 0.990 0.000 Note: t denotes the
significance **  p  < 0.01, ***  p  < 0.001. Table 7. Results of the FMOLS of
Phillips and Hansen [ 43 ]. Table 7. Results of the FMOLS of Phillips and Hansen
[ 43 ]. Economic Growth Variable Coefficient t-Stat FD 0.20 *** 64.27 NREC 0.39
*** 39.98 REC 0.13 *** 19.30 HC 2.41 *** 4.48 Note: *** denotes the significance
1% level. Table 8. Results of the causality test of Dumitrescu and Hurlin [ 20
]. Table 8. Results of the causality test of Dumitrescu and Hurlin [ 20 ].
Causal Direction W-Bar Z-Bar p -Value Conclusion GDP → FD 4.1533 8.9187 0.0000
There is a causal relationship FD → GDP 7.2343 17.6332 0.0000 There is a causal
relationship GDP → Log NREP 1.4406 1.2462 0.6000 There is no causal relationship
NREC → GDP 5.2328 11.9721 0.0000 There is a causal relationship GDP → REC 1.4406
5.0895 0.0000 There is a causal relationship REC → GDP 2.2868 3.6395 0.4000
There is no causal relationship GDP → HC 5.4919 10.8674 0.0000 There is a causal
relationship HC → GDP 4.6863 10.4265 0.0000 There is a causal relationship
Publisher’s Note:  MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations. © 2021 by the authors. Licensee
MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed
under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY)
license ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). Share and Cite MDPI
and ACS Style Ponce, P.; Álvarez-García, J.; Medina, J.; del Río-Rama, M.d.l.C.
Financial Development, Clean Energy, and Human Capital: Roadmap towards
Sustainable Growth in América Latina.  Energies   2021 ,  14 , 3763.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en14133763 AMA Style Ponce P, Álvarez-García J, Medina
J, del Río-Rama MdlC. Financial Development, Clean Energy, and Human Capital:
Roadmap towards Sustainable Growth in América Latina.  Energies . 2021;
14(13):3763. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14133763 Chicago/Turabian Style Ponce,
Pablo, José Álvarez-García, Johanna Medina, and María de la Cruz del Río-Rama.
2021. "Financial Development, Clean Energy, and Human Capital: Roadmap towards
Sustainable Growth in América Latina"  Energies  14, no. 13: 3763.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en14133763 Note that from the first issue of 2016, this
journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details  here
. Article Metrics No No Article Access Statistics For more information on the
journal statistics, click  here . Multiple requests from the same IP address are
counted as one view. Zoom |  Orient  |  As Lines  |  As Sticks  |  As Cartoon  |
As Surface  | Previous Scene | Next Scene Cite Export citation file: BibTeX  |
EndNote  | RIS MDPI and ACS Style Ponce, P.; Álvarez-García, J.; Medina, J.; del
Río-Rama, M.d.l.C. Financial Development, Clean Energy, and Human Capital:
Roadmap towards Sustainable Growth in América Latina.  Energies   2021 ,  14 ,
3763. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14133763 AMA Style Ponce P, Álvarez-García J,
Medina J, del Río-Rama MdlC. Financial Development, Clean Energy, and Human
Capital: Roadmap towards Sustainable Growth in América Latina.  Energies . 2021;
14(13):3763. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14133763 Chicago/Turabian Style Ponce,
Pablo, José Álvarez-García, Johanna Medina, and María de la Cruz del Río-Rama.
2021. "Financial Development, Clean Energy, and Human Capital: Roadmap towards
Sustainable Growth in América Latina"  Energies  14, no. 13: 3763.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en14133763 Note that from the first issue of 2016, this
journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details  here
. clear Energies , EISSN 1996-1073, Published by MDPI RSS Content Alert Further
Information Article Processing Charges Pay an Invoice Open Access Policy Contact
MDPI Jobs at MDPI Guidelines For Authors For Reviewers For Editors For
Librarians For Publishers For Societies For Conference Organizers MDPI
Initiatives Sciforum MDPI Books Preprints.org Scilit SciProfiles Encyclopedia
JAMS Proceedings Series Follow MDPI LinkedIn Facebook Twitter Subscribe to
receive issue release notifications and newsletters from MDPI journals Acoustics
Acta Microbiologica Hellenica Actuators Administrative Sciences Adolescents
Advances in Respiratory Medicine Aerobiology Aerospace Agriculture
AgriEngineering Agrochemicals Agronomy AI Air Algorithms Allergies Alloys
Analytica Analytics Anatomia Anesthesia Research Animals Antibiotics Antibodies
Antioxidants Applied Biosciences Applied Mechanics Applied Microbiology Applied
Nano Applied Sciences Applied System Innovation AppliedChem AppliedMath
Aquaculture Journal Architecture Arthropoda Arts Astronomy Atmosphere Atoms
Audiology Research Automation Axioms Bacteria Batteries Behavioral Sciences
Beverages Big Data and Cognitive Computing BioChem Bioengineering Biologics
Biology Biology and Life Sciences Forum Biomass Biomechanics BioMed Biomedicines
BioMedInformatics Biomimetics Biomolecules Biophysica Biosensors BioTech Birds
Blockchains Brain Sciences Buildings Businesses C Cancers Cardiogenetics
Catalysts Cells Ceramics Challenges ChemEngineering Chemistry Chemistry
Proceedings Chemosensors Children Chips CivilEng Clean Technologies Climate
Clinical and Translational Neuroscience Clinics and Practice Clocks & Sleep
Coasts Coatings Colloids and Interfaces Colorants Commodities Complications
Compounds Computation Computer Sciences & Mathematics Forum Computers Condensed
Matter Conservation Construction Materials Corrosion and Materials Degradation
Cosmetics COVID Crops Cryptography Crystals Current Issues in Molecular Biology
Current Oncology Dairy Data Dentistry Journal Dermato Dermatopathology Designs
Diabetology Diagnostics Dietetics Digital Disabilities Diseases Diversity DNA
Drones Drugs and Drug Candidates Dynamics Earth Ecologies Econometrics Economies
Education Sciences Electricity Electrochem Electronic Materials Electronics
Emergency Care and Medicine Encyclopedia Endocrines Energies Eng Engineering
Proceedings Entropy Environmental Sciences Proceedings Environments
Epidemiologia Epigenomes European Burn Journal European Journal of Investigation
in Health, Psychology and Education Fermentation Fibers FinTech Fire Fishes
Fluids Foods Forecasting Forensic Sciences Forests Fossil Studies Foundations
Fractal and Fractional Fuels Future Future Internet Future Pharmacology Future
Transportation Galaxies Games Gases Gastroenterology Insights Gastrointestinal
Disorders Gastronomy Gels Genealogy Genes Geographies GeoHazards Geomatics
Geosciences Geotechnics Geriatrics Gout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition Disease
Grasses Hardware Healthcare Hearts Hemato Hematology Reports Heritage Histories
Horticulturae Hospitals Humanities Humans Hydrobiology Hydrogen Hydrology
Hygiene Immuno Infectious Disease Reports Informatics Information
Infrastructures Inorganics Insects Instruments International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health International Journal of Financial
Studies International Journal of Molecular Sciences International Journal of
Neonatal Screening International Journal of Plant Biology International Journal
of Translational Medicine International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion
and Power International Medical Education Inventions IoT ISPRS International
Journal of Geo-Information J Journal of Ageing and Longevity Journal of
Cardiovascular Development and Disease Journal of Clinical & Translational
Ophthalmology Journal of Clinical Medicine Journal of Composites Science Journal
of Cybersecurity and Privacy Journal of Developmental Biology Journal of
Experimental and Theoretical Analyses Journal of Functional Biomaterials Journal
of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology Journal of Fungi Journal of Imaging
Journal of Intelligence Journal of Low Power Electronics and Applications
Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing Journal of Marine Science and
Engineering Journal of Market Access & Health Policy Journal of Molecular
Pathology Journal of Nanotheranostics Journal of Nuclear Engineering Journal of
Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Medicine Journal of Personalized
Medicine Journal of Pharmaceutical and BioTech Industry Journal of Respiration
Journal of Risk and Financial Management Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research Journal of
Vascular Diseases Journal of Xenobiotics Journal of Zoological and Botanical
Gardens Journalism and Media Kidney and Dialysis Kinases and Phosphatases
Knowledge Laboratories Land Languages Laws Life Limnological Review Liquids
Literature Livers Logics Logistics Lubricants Lymphatics Machine Learning and
Knowledge Extraction Machines Macromol Magnetism Magnetochemistry Marine Drugs
Materials Materials Proceedings Mathematical and Computational Applications
Mathematics Medical Sciences Medical Sciences Forum Medicina Medicines Membranes
Merits Metabolites Metals Meteorology Methane Methods and Protocols Metrology
Micro Microbiology Research Micromachines Microorganisms Microplastics Minerals
Mining Modelling Molbank Molecules Multimodal Technologies and Interaction
Muscles Nanoenergy Advances Nanomanufacturing Nanomaterials NDT Network
Neuroglia Neurology International NeuroSci Nitrogen Non-Coding RNA Nursing
Reports Nutraceuticals Nutrients Obesities Oceans Onco Optics Oral Organics
Organoids Osteology Oxygen Parasitologia Particles Pathogens Pathophysiology
Pediatric Reports Pharmaceuticals Pharmaceutics Pharmacoepidemiology Pharmacy
Philosophies Photochem Photonics Phycology Physchem Physical Sciences Forum
Physics Physiologia Plants Plasma Platforms Pollutants Polymers Polysaccharides
Poultry Powders Proceedings Processes Prosthesis Proteomes Psych Psychiatry
International Psychoactives Publications Quantum Beam Science Quantum Reports
Quaternary Radiation Reactions Real Estate Receptors Recycling Religions Remote
Sensing Reports Reproductive Medicine Resources Rheumato Risks Robotics
Ruminants Safety Sci Scientia Pharmaceutica Sclerosis Seeds Sensors Separations
Sexes Signals Sinusitis Smart Cities Social Sciences Société Internationale
d’Urologie Journal Societies Software Soil Systems Solar Solids Spectroscopy
Journal Sports Standards Stats Stresses Surfaces Surgeries Surgical Techniques
Development Sustainability Sustainable Chemistry Symmetry SynBio Systems Targets
Taxonomy Technologies Telecom Textiles Thalassemia Reports Thermo Tomography
Tourism and Hospitality Toxics Toxins Transplantology Trauma Care Trends in
Higher Education Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease Universe Urban Science
Uro Vaccines Vehicles Venereology Veterinary Sciences Vibration Virtual Worlds
Viruses Vision Waste Water Wind Women World World Electric Vehicle Journal Youth
Zoonotic Diseases Subscribe © 1996-2024 MDPI (Basel, Switzerland) unless
otherwise stated Disclaimer Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements,
opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the
individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s).
MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or
property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to
in the content. Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy We use cookies on our
website to ensure you get the best experience. Read more about our cookies  here
. Accept Share Link Copy clear Share https://www.mdpi.com/1160972 clear Back to
Top Top