Funding trends 2023: Climate change mitigation philanthropy - ClimateWorks
Foundation     Download Report   Download Report   Funding trends 2023: Climate
change mitigation philanthropy Funding trends 2023: Climate change mitigation
philanthropy Last year, philanthropic funding to climate change mitigation
experienced a slowdown in growth — even as climate impacts continued to
intensify. Download Report Report Global Intelligence
By  Helene Desanlis ,  Narine Esmaeili ,  Karolina Janik ,  Tim Lau ,  Megan
Turnlund   Our fourth annual report on funding trends in climate change
mitigation philanthropy covers eight years of funding data from 2015 to 2022. In
2022, the amount of philanthropic funding for climate change mitigation remained
essentially unchanged from the previous year — a slowdown from the consistent
growth we saw in  2019 ,  2020 , and  2021 . Climate giving showed some
resilience in 2022 despite challenging global economic conditions, but
ultimately fell short of the scale needed to address the crisis. In this
decisive moment for the planet, philanthropy must rapidly raise its ambition for
advancing transformative climate solutions — in partnership with a wider range
of communities, movements, and organizations — and move more funds faster to the
places that need them most. Watch to learn more about the key findings of the
report Five spotlights from this year’s report: Africa
Between 2018 and 2022, foundation funding to mitigate climate change in Africa
more than tripled, yet still represents only 6% of foundation funding for
climate in 2022.                                     Maritime shipping
From 2018 to 2022, foundation giving to the sector more than tripled, reaching
$16 million in 2022.                                     Built environment
Funding grew from $65 million in 2018 to $155 million in 2022, increasing by
almost 20% between 2021 and 2022 alone.
Corporate accountability                                         Funding has
steadily increased in recent years, with a particularly large increase of 130%
in 2021.                                     Minerals for the energy transition
This area has seen increased philanthropic engagement as the clean energy
transition drives new demand for minerals used in EVs, solar panels, wind
turbines, and more.                                     What climate
philanthropy leaders are saying: “This report should be a wake-up call for
philanthropy. The intensifying climate crisis demands greater ambition, scale,
and urgency to safeguard lives. There has been meaningful climate progress, but
maintaining the status quo is not enough, and that includes philanthropy. Now is
the moment for philanthropy to move more funds, faster, to the places that need
them, and work with a wider range of partners from government, to business, to
civil society and communities, to advance transformative and equitable climate
solutions.  ” Helen Mountford  | President and CEO of ClimateWorks Foundation
“Collaboration is the heartbeat of effective climate solutions that amplify
impact and transcend individual efforts. Philanthropic efforts are critical to
driving ambitious collective climate action in pivotal sectors to create massive
benefits for people and the planet. Quickly mitigating methane would be like
hitting the emergency break on global warming. Methane is the quickest way to
decrease the temperature to buy time to address other dangerous pollutants.”
Marcelo Mena  | CEO, Global Methane Hub “There is a persistent disconnect
between the disproportionate impacts of climate change in Africa and the lack of
sufficient philanthropic investments to advance climate-positive development on
the continent. Philanthropic capital is essential because it can spark rapid
investment, strong partnerships, and place-based solutions to unlock new
opportunities for development and help transform African economies at a systems
level, creating real benefits for the people and communities being impacted by
climate change.” Saliem Fakir  | Executive director, The African Climate
Foundation “The broader economic trends that slowed overall philanthropic giving
last year – decrease in global growth, inflation, declining stock market
performances – also impacted foundation giving. Despite these challenges,
foundation giving grew in 2022, albeit at a much slower rate than previously.
The fluctuations from year to year also show why multi-year grants are so
important. They provide stable support to the field, especially when times get
tough.  ” Helene Desanlis  | Director of climate philanthropy, Global
Intelligence, ClimateWorks Foundation   Research & Related Links Report
ClimateWorks’ 2022 Annual Report: Materializing Real-World Change in 2022 2022
was a year of great learning and stepped-up action across the climate landscape.
Despite formidable headwinds, 2022 was a year of significant climate wins and
real-wor...  Read More Aug 21, 2023 Report Global Intelligence Introductory
Africa country profiles for climate philanthropy Climate philanthropy can play a
significant role in advancing broader mitigation efforts in Africa, which in
turn has the potential to boost economic and social development...  Read More
Jul 6, 2022 Report China Global Intelligence Foundation funding for climate
change mitigation: China spotlight There can be no global solution to climate
change without ambitious action by China, the world’s most populous country and
largest emitter of greenhouse gases. While China ...  Read More Feb 15, 2022
About ClimateWorks Global Intelligence In partnership with a global network of
grantees, funders, and researchers, ClimateWorks Global Intelligence provides
insights to help funders build and execute transformative climate strategies.
Read More              Download Report   Share this report Share
Close modal Share this story                                 Close modal
Get the latest news from ClimateWorks              Subscribe
Services Global Intelligence Global Collaborations Global Grantmaking Programs
Carbon Dioxide Removal Cooling Food & Agriculture Forests & Land Use Governance
& Diplomacy Industry Power Sustainable Finance Transportation Grants database
Resources Reports Blog Events Press releases In the news Media center About us
People Partners Justice, equity, diversity, & inclusion Whistleblower policy
Privacy policy Contact us   ©2024 ClimateWorks Foundation, all rights reserved.