Bhutan launches its first grid-tied solar power plant | United Nations
Development Programme     Skip to main content
Bhutan
Who We Are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who We Are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Locations                 Home Bhutan         Bhutan launches its first grid-
tied solar power plant                       Bhutan launches its first grid-tied
solar power plant   October 4, 2021             The 180 kW grid-tied solar PV
plant, the first of its kind in the country, demonstrates viability of solar
power to diversify Bhutan's energy sources  Photo: Department of Renewable
Energy, Ministry of Economic Affairs Electricity in Bhutan is generated mostly
from hydropower, an energy source which is renewable unlike fossil-fuel driven
power plants that are major contributors to carbon dioxide emissions worldwide.
Like hydropower, sun is a bountiful resource Bhutan can tap into for producing
renewable energy in keeping with our carbon neutrality commitments and also for
enhancing energy security through diversification of energy sources. The
commissioning and inauguration of the 180kW grid-tied ground mounted solar
photo-voltaic power plant  marks the start of Bhutan’s investment in grid-tied
solar energy as a viable alternative energy source in the face of soaring
domestic demand and climate change. 4 October 2021:  The Chairperson of the
National Council of Bhutan, Lyonpo Tashi Dorji, inaugurated the 180 kW grid-tied
ground mounted solar photo-voltaic power plant at Rubesa, Wangduephodrang today.
The inauguration was attended by the Ambassador of Japan to Bhutan, Satoshi
Suzuki (virtually), UNDP Resident Representative Azusa Kubota, representatives
from the Gross National Happiness Commission (GNHC), Department of Renewable
Energy (DRE), Bhutan Power Corporation (BPC), the Local Government and other
power sector agencies. Chairperson of the National Council of Bhutan, Lyonpo
Tashi Dorji, and UNDP Resident Representative, Azusa Kubota, inaugurates the
solar plant  Photo: UNDP/Kinley Wangmo The project, which was commissioned on 31
August 2021, is part of Bhutan’s COVID-19 response and recovery project,
'Towards Smarter, Greener and More Resilient Recovery through Innovation in
Bhutan' funded by the Government of Japan and supported by UNDP. The USD 210,000
project was executed by DRE in collaboration with BPC as the implementing
agency. The 180 kW solar power plant is a first of its kind in the country and
since its commissioning has been generating and feeding electricity into the
local grid for distribution.  The solar plant, co-located with the existing 600
kW wind farm at Rubesa, is expected to generate 263,000 units of energy a year,
which will be adequate for supplying electricity to around 80-90 households.
Globally, the COVID-19 pandemic has shown that the current trend of development
is on an unsustainable path and corrective measures must be taken through smart
and green recovery.  Bhutan is undertaking various initiatives to broaden its
energy mix by exploring other clean, renewable energy sources. The solar plant
in Rubesa is one such initiative which takes Bhutan a step closer to achieving
energy security through a diversified and sustainable energy supply mix. The 
project particularly demonstrates viability of solar power plants on a utility
scale. This initiative is expected to create systems change and support the
nation in building resilience of Bhutan’s energy sector to the adverse impact of
climate change while also building the capacity of the national workforce on
solar photovoltaic technology for green employment and entrepreneurship
opportunities. The project activities, including the design, construction,
installation, grid integration was carried out by local workforce. Experienced
and trained personnel from this project will form a key group of professionals,
who will take up upcoming renewable energy on utility level projects. Despite
hindrances induced by the pandemic, the project was completed within seven
months.  The DRE Director Phuntsho Namgyal (left) gives a tour of the solar
plant  Photo: UNDP/Kinley Wangmo In his keynote address,  National Council
Chairperson Lyonpo Tashi Dorj i said, "Today, we are not just inagurating a
solar power plant, but also making history," he said.  The chairperson said that
energy plays a crucial role in everyday life, and it is at the core of socio-
economic development of any society. "Harnessing and investing in renewable
energy is key to sustainable development and clean energy future," he said,
adding that the most critical issue of our time  - climate change - threatens
our glaciers.  "Any significant impact on our glaciers would ultimately have an
effect on the hydrological regime of the country which may affect hydropower
generation. Therefore, it is timely that we accelerate harnessing solar energy
and other renewables to have a healthy mix of energy supply from various
renewable energy sources.” HE the Ambassador of Japan to Bhutan, Satoshi Suzuki,
joined the inaugural ceremony virtually from New Delhi, India  Photo: Embassy of
Japan, New Delhi The  Ambassador of Japan to Bhutan, Satoshi Suzuki,  who
addressed the gathering virtually said he hoped that the solar project would
help enhance Bhutan’s energy security, which is indispensable for the socio-
economic development of the country. “I hope that these solar photo-voltaic
facilities will be effectively used for many years to come,” he said. “I also
hope that the support provided by the people and the Government of Japan to
realize this project will further augment the friendship between our two
countries.” In her address during the inauguration,  UNDP Resident
Representative Azusa Kubota  said UNDP sees renewable energy solutions as a
lifeline to save our planet and humanity and that it must be an integral part of
every nation’s green recovery effort from the COVID-19 pandemic. She said that
the recently held UN-led High-level dialogue on energy was a clear reflection of
this growing realization that the pandemic must be used as an opportunity to
build back better and greener. "The energy sector accounts for 73 percent of
human-caused greenhouse gas emission globally, she said.   “Through the
implementation of this project, I hope we will demonstrate to people of Bhutan
that solar is a viable energy source with costs comparable to the latest
hydropower projects." The  Director of Department of Renewable Energy Phuntsho
Namgyal  said that besides demonstraing viability of solar power in Bhutan, it
would also diversify 'several thinggs'.  "While solar power has been equated to
subsistence level substitute for kerosene lamps in rural communities, it can, in
reality, power household appliances and tools that can improve productivy and
the overall economy," he said.  The Director also said that Bhutan generates all
our electricity from renewables, yet it hides a paradox.  He said that almost 78
percent of our energy consumption is fossil fuel because our transportation
system is dependent on it, including cooking and heating needs.   "Solar plant
such as this can augment hydropower supply to meet our rapidly increasing
domestic electricity demand, especially in winter months," he said. For further
inquiries, please contact: Kinley Wangmo, Programme Communications & Advocacy
Analyst, UNDP Bhutan, tel: +975 17342610, email: kinley.wangmo@undp.org
Related Content Stories Contributing to energy security Work underway to install
solar panels at the 180kW solar photovoltaic (PV) project site at Rubesa,
Wangdue Phodrang Few metres from the windmills at Rubesa, Wangd... Read more
News Promoting renewable energy for a clean and sustainable future The pilot
grid-tied solar project at the UN House will demonstrate solar as a reliable
energy source and serve as a key driver of energy source diversification in...
Read more  Projects Bhutan Sustainable Low-emission Urban Transport Systems The
project is to facilitate low carbon transition in Bhutan's urban transport
sector by promoting wider uptake of low-emission vehicles,  in particular
electric ... Read more    Search           Found  0  results.            Did you
mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United
Nations Development Programme                         Who We Are
About Us                                                            Our
Leadership                                                            Legal
Framework                                                            Funding
Our Partners                                                      What we do
Sustainable Development Goals
Our Focus                                                      Our Impact
News Centre                                                             Blogs
Stories                                                             Projects
Publications                                                      Get Involved
Careers                                                             Procurement
Contact Us                               Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Scam
Alert  Submit social or environmental complaint Terms of Use twitter facebook
youtube instagram linkedin © 2024 United Nations Development Programme