How much will renewable hydrogen production drive demand for new renewable
energy capacity by 2027? – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News
Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron
down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels
Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy
Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation
Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand
the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global
Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global
Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency
Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and
Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by
country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia
Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea
Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic
Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports How much will renewable hydrogen production
drive demand for new renewable energy capacity by 2027? How much will renewable
hydrogen production drive demand for new renewable energy capacity by 2027? This
report is part of  Renewables 2022                             Overview
About this report This report forms a component of Chapter 4 of  Renewables 2022
 and addresses a key question in renewable energy markets. Published December
2022 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite Hydrogen production from renewable electricity
is expected to play an important role in reaching long-term decarbonisation
goals and improving energy security. While less  than 1% of global hydrogen
production  comes from renewable energy sources today, renewable hydrogen is
receiving increasing policy attention. A total of  25 countries, plus the
European Commission , have announced plans that include hydrogen as a source of
clean energy, and several have begun to introduce financial support schemes.  As
a result, project pipelines for using electrolysers to produce hydrogen from
renewable electricity have swelled in recent years, with projects at various
stages of development. This momentum is expected to increase renewable capacity
needs, but the question is: By how much?  Total renewable capacity dedicated to
hydrogen production in the main case by region, 2021-2027 Open expand Total
renewable capacity dedicated to hydrogen production in the main and accelerated
case globally, 2021-2027 Open expand For 2022-2027, the main case forecasts
around 50 GW of renewable capacity to be dedicated to hydrogen production,
accounting for 2% of total renewable capacity growth. China leads expansion,
followed by Australia, Chile and the United States. Together, these four markets
account for roughly two-thirds of dedicated renewable capacity for hydrogen
production.  Globally, new capacity is split evenly between PV and onshore wind,
although regional shares vary depending on resource availability. For instance,
solar PV makes up most of the growth in the MENA, while in Latin America the
electrolyser project pipeline is expected to be mostly filled by onshore wind
projects in Chile. Given their long lead times, offshore wind projects account
for less than 1% of new renewable capacity built for electrolyser plants between
2022 and 2027. China  is expected to deploy over 18 GW of dedicated renewable
capacity by 2027, prompted by the central government’s goals to decarbonise
industry and transport as well as an industrial policy on electrolyser
manufacturing. While the central government announced renewable hydrogen
production targets in its 14th Five-Year Plan, the main catalysts for growth are
provincial and local-level policies.  Thus, expansion is expected to be
concentrated in provinces with good solar and wind resources and specific
targets for renewable hydrogen production, such as Inner Mongolia, which aims to
produce 500 000 tonnes/yr of renewable hydrogen – more than twice the national
target. Other key drivers are access to affordable financing through state-owned
enterprises and to industrial clusters for new project development. Many new
electrolyser projects are large demonstration plants located in industrial hubs
that can offer economy-of-scale savings, lower unit manufacturing costs and
access to local off-takers. Demand for renewable hydrogen, which is a forecast
uncertainty, will determine the pace of dedicated renewable capacity expansion.
While many provinces include hydrogen in their industrial development strategies
and identify production targets, not all specify that production must be from
renewable sources. Furthermore, demand-side policies such fuel-cell vehicle
targets are emissions-agnostic and therefore do not guarantee new demand
creation specifically for renewable hydrogen, especially if it costs more than
hydrogen made from non-renewable resources.  Transport infrastructure
limitations may also slow the pace of hydrogen industry development, as
provinces rich in renewable resources are located far from new demand centres.
Also adding uncertainty to the size of future renewable capacity projects is how
much electricity from the grid will be used and whether it can be certified as
renewable to meet provincial targets. Meanwhile,  Europe  is expected to deploy
7 GW of dedicated renewable capacity for hydrogen production during 2022-2027,
encouraged by decarbonisation goals and, more recently, the need to strengthen
energy security by displacing Russian gas. Spain is in the lead, accounting for
half of Europe’s growth, followed by Germany, Sweden, Denmark and the
Netherlands. The main drivers are ambitious electrolyser goals, supported by
financial incentives. While the European Union is considering setting an
electrolyser target of 44 GW by 2030,  REPowerEU modelling scenarios  suggest
that 65‑80 GW would be required to decrease Russian gas imports.  In the
meantime, several member states have already formulated their own hydrogen
strategies with electrolyser goals for 2030 (e.g.  Germany  and  Spain ).
Projects that are financed are at least partially funded by public support, for
instance through the Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPECI)
programme, or by other state-specific funds. For example, Spain is providing
financial support from funds allocated to Covid-19 crisis recovery in its
National Recovery and Resilience Plan.  Proposed European Union targets for
renewables of non-biological origin in transport and replacing non-renewable
with renewable hydrogen use in industry Open expand Europe dedicated renewable
capacity in the main case by country, 2021-2027 Open expand There are two key
uncertainties in the forecast for dedicated renewable capacity expansion in
Europe. The first is regulatory, concerning how hydrogen will be defined as
renewable and how additionality will be implemented. 1  Developers are awaiting
clarity on how electricity from the grid will be monitored to qualify hydrogen
production as renewable. This will ultimately affect size and location decisions
for dedicated onsite solar and PV wind capacity.  Second, policy uncertainty
over industry and transport mandates makes it challenging to assess renewable
hydrogen demand potential and plan new electrolyser investments. The European
Union is considering three different proposals for binding targets for
renewables in existing hydrogen use in industry (ranging from 35% to 50%) and
renewables of non-biological origin in transport (2.6% to 5.7%), but a final
decision has yet to be taken. Whether developers will be able to secure off-
takers and bring projects to financial close also poses a risk to the forecast.
Producing ammonia for export is the main impetus for dedicated renewable
capacity expansion in the  Asia Pacific ,  Latin America  and  MENA  regions.
Dedicated renewable capacity is expected to reach a combined 19 GW, led by
Australia, Chile, Oman and Saudi Arabia. Large electrolyser project pipelines
have emerged in these countries owing to the availability of space, the presence
of shipping ports along strategic trade routes, and access to low-cost renewable
electricity thanks to ample solar and wind resources.  The share of renewable
capacity dedicated to hydrogen in these markets is higher than in other regions,
accounting for 14% of total renewable deployment in MENA, 17% in Australia, and
19% in Chile, compared with 2% globally. While most projects are still at the
feasibility stage, our forecast assumes that government support will help move
projects to financial close, as these countries all aim to obtain market shares
of low-carbon fuel exports. In fact, the Australian and Chilean governments have
already funded developers, and state-owned enterprises are involved in planned
projects in Oman and Saudi Arabia.  For renewable hydrogen exporters, securing
off-takers to finance planned projects is a key forecast uncertainty, but
policies of importing countries to stimulate demand can help address this
challenge. For instance, the European Union proposes to import 10 Mt/yr of
renewable hydrogen by 2030. Germany announced funding of  EUR 4 billion  will be
awarded through competitive tenders through the H2Global initiative to
specifically bridge the cost gap between renewable hydrogen imports from non-EU
countries and domestic buyers. However, importer countries’ decisions on the
emissions intensity levels required for hydrogen imports to qualify for targets
and support remains an uncertainty for exporting markets. Rules and regulations
defining threshold levels will affect project viability and influence decisions
on technology choice and oversizing. Unprecedented federal policy support for
low-carbon hydrogen in  the United States  is expected to be responsible for
4 GW of dedicated renewable capacity additions, or 1.5% of total renewable
capacity expansion expected over 2022-2027. In 2022, the IRA introduced tax
credits based on the emissions intensity of hydrogen production. Renewable
hydrogen could be eligible for up to USD 3.0/kg if labour and wage criteria are
met. This incentive, coupled with state-specific support in the form of grants,
loans and tax breaks, is expected to drive growth.  However, dedicated renewable
capacity expansion will also depend on the business model chosen for new
electrolyser projects. Some projects in the pipeline are being developed through
long-term contracts with  existing solar PV projects  or  operating hydropower
plants . The main threat to forecast growth is the potential for long project
development periods, depending on equipment availability and permitting and
regulatory approval wait times.  Project design and business model strongly
influence forecasts for renewable capacity dedicated to hydrogen production.
Electricity can be supplied from the grid or generated onsite by dedicated
renewable plants, or a combination of both. The supply choice will depend mostly
on the business model used by the developer, the regulatory requirements for
hydrogen to qualify as renewable, and the stability of hydrogen supply needed by
the off-taker. When new renewable capacity is built, sizing is highly project-
specific and depends on cost optimisation based on multiple factors, including
location, the number of full-load hours expected, regulatory requirements to
meet renewable thresholds, and whether additional capex needs to be recuperated
to provide a stable supply or conversion to other fuels. Given the considerable
number of policy uncertainties, market challenges and project-specific variables
affecting dedicated renewable capacity growth, we took a conservative approach
in our main-case forecast. Thus, growth could be 80% higher (90 GW) in our
accelerated case if certain challenges are addressed. Securing off-takers to
bring projects to financial close and obtaining regulatory clarity over
definitions of low-emissions hydrogen could be the most important factors to
unlock development of the project pipeline.  For example, policy actions to
support demand creation for low-emission hydrogen, particularly in the industry
and transport sectors (e.g. through mandates, public procurement and auctions)
could increase the number of willing buyers; and financial incentives to help
reduce production costs could improve the competitiveness of renewable hydrogen
with other fuels and raise the likelihood of securing off‑takers. Investors
would be able to move forward with planned projects once they have regulatory
clarity over what qualifies as renewable hydrogen and how electricity is
accounted for. Policies that help lower costs associated with transport and
reconversion of ammonia and other hydrogen-based fuels would encourage the
development of international markets for renewable hydrogen.  References  The
“additionality” requirement, one of the sustainability criteria proposed to
qualify hydrogen as renewable, demands that the renewable electricity used to
produce hydrogen come from renewable capacity installed specifically for
hydrogen production and not be taken from existing projects generating
electricity to meet power demand. Discussions on if it will be implemented and
how it will be measured are ongoing. Reference 1 Close dialog  The
“additionality” requirement, one of the sustainability criteria proposed to
qualify hydrogen as renewable, demands that the renewable electricity used to
produce hydrogen come from renewable capacity installed specifically for
hydrogen production and not be taken from existing projects generating
electricity to meet power demand. Discussions on if it will be implemented and
how it will be measured are ongoing.         Related content      All results
circle-arrow Is the biofuel industry approaching a feedstock crunch?
Fuel report — December 2022                  Will new PV manufacturing policies
in the United States, India and the European Union create global PV supply
diversification?                     Fuel report — December 2022
Is renewable energy capacity in the European Union making windfall profits from
high wholesale prices?                     Fuel report — December 2022
Is the energy crisis really making the business case for heat pumps?
Fuel report — December 2022                  Is the European Union on track to
meet its REPowerEU goals?                     Fuel report — December 2022
Renewables 2022                     Fuel report — December 2022
Previous slide Next slide The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news,
analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample
Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system
Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries
Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east
Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024
Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  How much will
renewable hydrogen production drive demand for new renewable energy capacity by
2027? , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/how-much-will-renewable-hydrogen-
production-drive-demand-for-new-renewable-energy-capacity-by-2027, Licence: CC
BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter
Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email
Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for
subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom
of any IEA newsletter.