Locally designed fuel-efficient stoves help households in Gilgit Baltistan to
breathe clean air indoors | United Nations Development Programme     Skip to
main content
Pakistan
Who we are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Locations                 Home Pakistan Stories         Locally designed fuel-
efficient stoves help households in Gilgit Baltistan to breathe clean air
indoors                       Locally designed fuel-efficient stoves help
households in Gilgit Baltistan to breathe clean air indoors   January 3, 2020
Despite the breathtaking and scenic views, living in the valleys comes with its
challenges. Be it extreme weather or deprivation of basic amenities — like
electricity, gas, and water — the communities of the mountainous regions of
Karakoram Range face extreme difficulties on a daily basis. Kashmal  village is
one of the many villages located in the Karakoram. The people residing there
depend on wood for cooking and heating purposes. Generally, the wood comes from
high-value trees that have taken decades to mature. A traditional house in
Gilgit Baltistan is built from stone, timber, and mud that provides insulation
in harsh winters. The whole house’s structure is built around a central
fireplace, on square dimensions, with no internal, dividing walls. The central
fireplace is also used as a stove for cooking purposes. The house lacks windows,
and the only source of ventilation is from the chimney above the fireplace. The
smoke released from inhouse burning of wood, on traditional stoves, contributes
heavily to indoor pollution despite the chimney. Soot can be seen on the indoor
walls from years of burning of wood. Along with the elderly and children, women
are most vulnerable to the wood smoke pollutants, as they spend a significant
amount of their time preparing food for their families. UNDP in Pakistan is
working on improving the Central Karakorum National Park Management System, in
northern Pakistan, as a model for mountain ecosystems. Supported by the Italian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the initiative aims to improve governance of
mountain national parks in Gilgit-Baltistan, and to improve living conditions by
providing better livelihood options for people in the buffer zones of Central
Karakoram National Park and Deosai National Park. As part of this initiative,
200 locally designed and produced fuel-efficient stoves were provided to 50
households in 15 valleys of Gilgit Baltistan, through World Wide Fund for
Nature-Pakistan (WWF-Pakistan), to thwart the harmful effects of indoor burning
of wood. A mother of four children, 35-years old Bani has experienced several
health issues from the smoke due to indoor burning. With the installation of the
stove in her home in  Kashmal , she narrates experiencing a major health shift.
“I had to burn wood three times a day for cooking, heating water, and making
bread. The direct heat used to burn my hands”,  says Bani.  “It was also very
difficult to breathe due to the smoke. Now, I make bread, cook for my family and
heat water at the same time from the single stove and that too in a smokeless
and clean environment”. The stoves compromise of three different portions and
can perform three different tasks simultaneously; cooking at high heat, cooking
at low heat, and a water heating and storing chamber. The stoves are easy to
handle; the ash from burning is contained in an underlying chamber that can be
cleaned easily, while the smoke exits the house through a chimney. Meanwhile,
the amount of wood burnt has also been reduced to half due to this intervention.
In conventional stoves, 160 kilograms of wood were burnt weekly for household
purposes while in fuel-efficient stoves it is has been reduced to 80 kilograms
per week. Moreover, the burning of wood logs has been replaced by branches and
wood chips.  “Previously, in Bukhari (traditional heaters), we used to burn all
kinds of plastics and waste generated in household for heating purposes. We were
suffering from respiratory diseases, eyes and skin infections”, said Bani. “We
are happy with this stove, as now we can breathe in clean air inside our homes
throughout the year.”       Related Content Publications UNDP Pakistan Annual
Report 2022 2022 will be remembered as a critical, trying year for Pakistan,
with growing macroeconomic and fiscal concerns, a cost of living crisis
impacting the most vulner... Read more  Stories Early recovery from the floods
in Pakistan When the torrential rains and floods hit Pakistan in the summer of
2022, over 2 million houses were damaged, displacing nearly 8 million people.
Read the stories ... Read more  Blog 2022 Floods: Gender-Responsive and Risk-
informed Flood Recovery The debilitating impact of the floods on women can be
better explained through the example of Sakina Bibi who is a resident of Kacchi
district of Balochistan. The... Read more  Publications Pakistan Floods 2022:
Resilient Recovery, Rehabilitation, and Reconstruction Framework (4RF) Goal of
preparing the Resilient Recovery, Rehabilitation, and Reconstruction Framework
(4RF) is to ensure that transformational measures are put into place to ens...
Read more  Projects Balochistan SDGs (BSDG) Accelerated Delivery Balochistan,
the largest province of Pakistan, covers an area of 347,190 square kilometers
and accounts for 44 percent of Pakistan’s territory. It is also the lea... Read
more  Stories UNDP is with Pakistan. For a Resilient Recovery. For a Resilient
Pakistan. UNDP is working with the people and the Government of Pakistan for a
resilient recovery from the 2022 Floods. UNDP is with Pakistan. For a Resilient
Recovery. For... Read more    Search           Found  0  results.            Did
you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP
United Nations Development Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                            Our team
Legal Framework
Funding and delivery
Partnerships                                                            UN
Volunteers                                                      What we do
Sustainable Development Goals
Our Focus                                                            Gender
Equality                                                      Our Impact
News Centre
Publications                                                            Blogs
Stories                                                            Projects
Photo Library                                                            Photo
Stories                                                      Get Involved
Contact us
Procurement                                                            Work with
us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit social or
environmental complaint Scam Alert Terms of Use facebook twitter instagram
youtube flickr exposure © 2024 United Nations Development Programme