Mini-grid solutions to enhancing Ethiopia’s energy system | United Nations
Development Programme     Skip to main content
Ethiopia
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
Locations                 Home Ethiopia         Mini-grid solutions to enhancing
Ethiopia’s energy system                       Mini-grid solutions to enhancing
Ethiopia’s energy system   November 14, 2023             About 624km of mini-
grid power will be generated, with more than 31,000 Ethiopians benefiting from
access to electricity for lighting and cooking through a new Africa Mini-grid
Programme (AMP) to be implemented in Ethiopia. The AMP is also expected to boost
productivity in agriculture, facilitate the urbanization process in the country,
and also directly reduce 16,836 tonnes of CO2eq emission. The Africa Mini-grids
Program is a multifaceted energy solution for Ethiopia and 20 other African
countries with a 45 million USD country-led technical assistance program funded
by the Global Environment Facility (GEF). The support to access to clean energy
decreases costs, thereby increasing financial viability and promoting scaled-up
commercial investment in renewable mini-grids. The focus will be on cost-
reduction levers and innovative business models to benefit the end users. On 7
November 2023 UNDP supported the Ministry of Water and Energy to conduct a
 Mini-grid project inception workshop in Addis Ababa that brought together more
than 30 experts, including the regional representatives of key governmental and
non-governmental stakeholders. The inception workshop familiarized participants
with the Africa AMP's programmatic approach, its linkages regional coordination,
detailed strategy, objectives, expected outcomes and important milestones.
Participants also reviewed critical progress made so far and the implementation
requirements throughout the project cycle.   The AMP will have the following
four interrelated components :  (1) policy and regulations to support the roll-
out of mini-grids; (2) advancement of cooperative-led delivery models; (3)
scaled-up financing with de-risking; and (4) digital and data management to
ensure cost-effective delivery of electricity services. State Minister Sultan
Woli of the Ministry of Water and Energy of Ethiopia said in his opening remark,
“Though Ethiopia is endowed with a variety of renewable energy sources like
geothermal, hydro, wind and solar power, more than 52% of Ethiopians are still
living without access to electricity and living in darkness. The majority are
using dry biomass as an alternative energy supply, which has a diverse impact on
the health, environment, and agriculture production productivity.” State
Minister Sultan further elaborated that, “To address this a pitiable situation,
since 2017, the Ministry of Water and Energy has developed and being implemented
the National Electrification programme to electrify 65% of the population with
grid and the remaining 35% from off the grid by 2025. However, this requires
about 6 billion USD, which the Ethiopian government alone can’t afford. So far,
many developmental actors have been supporting this initiative, and the Africa
Mini-grid Programme is one of the projects that supports this national
initiative to integrate Ethiopia into off-grid technologies with multitudinous
advantages”.   News Powering Equality Read more  News South-South Cooperation:
UNDP partners with China and Ethiopia on renewable energy  Read more  News
Catalyzing South-South Cooperation on RET Read more  News Sharing south-south
knowledge on renewable energy tech Read more  News Promoting South-South and
Trilateral Cooperation for Renewable Energy : System Design, Installation,
Operation and Maintenance A four-day workshop in Adama, Ethiopia, brought
together participants to promote renewable energy technology and skills’
transfer as part of a Ethiopia-China-Sri ... Read more    Search           Found
0  results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy
Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development Programme
Who we are                                                      About us
Funding and delivery
Legal framework                                                      What we do
Sustainable Development Goals
Our focus                                                      Our impact
Blogs                                                            News Centre
Publications                                                            Stories
Get involved                                                      Jobs
Procurement                                                             Contact
us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit social or
environmental complaint Scam alert Terms of use © 2024 United Nations
Development Programme