Net Zero in conversation: How digitally-automated demand could transform the way
we use energy | The Carbon Trust       Skip to main content      Europe
(English) Global Europa (Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America (English)
Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国 Main Menu Who we are Overview Our
experts Our history Our values and commitments Our career opportunities Overview
Internships What we do Overview Strategy, delivery and reporting Overview
Avoided emissions Beyond value chain mitigation Climate action and Net Zero
planning Climate change risks, opportunities and TCFD alignment Decarbonisation
strategy Footprinting Implementation planning and execution Organisational
verification Plastic Packaging Framework Route to Net Zero Standard Supply chain
engagement Sustainability Reporting Sustainable finance Target setting The
Carbon Trust Standard for Zero Waste to Landfill Assurance and labelling
Overview Carbon neutral verification Footprint label – certified organisations
PAS 2080 Product carbon footprint label Market transformation Overview Acceso a
energía limpia Buildings and construction Clean hydrogen Climate policy
Electromovilidad Energy efficiency Energy Energía renovable terrestre Heat
decarbonisation Heat networks Industry Mining and metals Offshore wind
Sustainable cooling Transport Venture acceleration Our work and impact Overview
Impact stories Guides, reports and tools Overview 从英国能源技术清单（ETL）看英国节能技术推广 News
and insights News Events Insights Contact Europe (English) Global Europa
(Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America (English) Latinoamérica (Español) Asia
(English) 中国 Search Search Who we are Overview Our experts Our history Our
values and commitments Our career opportunities Overview Internships What we do
Overview Strategy, delivery and reporting Overview Avoided emissions Beyond
value chain mitigation Climate action and Net Zero planning Climate change
risks, opportunities and TCFD alignment Decarbonisation strategy Footprinting
Implementation planning and execution Organisational verification Plastic
Packaging Framework Route to Net Zero Standard Supply chain engagement
Sustainability Reporting Sustainable finance Target setting The Carbon Trust
Standard for Zero Waste to Landfill Assurance and labelling Overview Carbon
neutral verification Footprint label – certified organisations PAS 2080 Product
carbon footprint label Market transformation Overview Acceso a energía limpia
Buildings and construction Clean hydrogen Climate policy Electromovilidad Energy
efficiency Energy Energía renovable terrestre Heat decarbonisation Heat networks
Industry Mining and metals Offshore wind Sustainable cooling Transport Venture
acceleration Our work and impact Overview Impact stories Guides, reports and
tools Overview 从英国能源技术清单（ETL）看英国节能技术推广 News and insights News Events Insights
Contact Europe (English) Global Europa (Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America
(English) Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国 Breadcrumb Home Insights
Net Zero in conversation: How digitally-automated demand could transform the way
we use energy                              Insights Net Zero in conversation:
How digitally-automated demand could transform the way we use energy The  Net
Zero Intelligence Uni t sat down with Laura Glover, Bogi Hojgaard and Mauricio
Riveros from the Carbon Trust’s energy transition team to discuss the benefits
demand side flexibility can bring, and how digitalisation can unlock its
potential.  Questions by Chloe St George. 27 February 2023 Image   Chloe St
George Analyst, Net Zero Intelligence Unit, The Carbon Trust Share Image
Automated energy demand: How digitalisation could transform the way we use
energy Demand side flexibility enables an electricity grid to smooth peaks in
energy demand, but how can its value to a renewable energy system be unlocked?
Until recently, the balance of supply and demand in energy systems has rarely
been front of mind. Yet, in December 2022, high temperatures in Argentina led to
record electricity consumption which overwhelmed the grid and caused power cuts.
In February 2023, Australia’s energy market operator warned of insufficient
electricity supply to meet record levels of demand in Queensland, during an
ongoing heatwave. With energy prices rising and grid infrastructure struggling,
how can policy makers and energy providers create systems that reward users for
their part in restoring the balance? Could you begin by explaining what demand
side flexibility means?  Laura Glover : It’s the ability of end-users to adjust
their energy demand in response to what the grid needs. This could mean reducing
it, increasing it, or shifting their usage to different times of day. When
overall demand for energy is high, customers can decrease their usage or use on-
site generation like solar panels rather than using the grid. They could even
provide energy to the grid. If there are excess renewables on the system, users
can increase their usage or use batteries to soak these up.  Energy accounts for
almost 75% of global emissions, so decarbonising the energy system is essential
to achieving Net Zero. What role does demand side flexibility play in the fossil
fuel transition?  Mauricio Riveros : You normally balance supply and demand in a
power system by adjusting supply. In a fossil fuel-based system you can adjust
the amount you burn. But as you replace fossil fuels with renewables, the
electricity supply becomes more variable. We can’t turn sunlight or wind up when
we need to, which makes the system less flexible. In a Net Zero system, reliant
on renewables, there’s less flexibility coming from the supply side; looking to
the demand side for flexibility becomes very important.   Bogi Hojgaard : It’s
also about capacity. Even when the sun is shining, we can’t always harness this
energy as the grid only has a certain number of cables. Demand side flexibility
helps us make better use of renewable generation, as users can capture this
energy using their own solar panels for instance.  Laura Glover : And finally
cost. We'll need a mixture of all forms of flexibility, including batteries,
interconnectors and hydrogen storage, to reach Net Zero in the most cost-
effective way. However, demand side measures are the cheapest. In the UK, the
Carbon Trust’s systems modelling work found that a fully flexible system can
bring savings of £9 -16 billion a year by 2050. We modelled a scenario which
took away all the demand side flexibility, and it raised the costs to the UK
system by about £4.5 billion. To maximise savings, flexibility needs to be
scaled alongside decarbonisation of the power, heat and transport systems. 
Given the current energy crisis, why focus on the demand side rather than trying
to secure the supply of as much cheap energy as possible?  Laura Glover : A
driving factor of this energy crisis is the cost of gas. If this goes up, the
cost of meeting energy demand goes up, especially in providing reserve power.
Influencing peaks in demand is quicker and cheaper than relying on current gas
power stations or building alternative forms of flexibility. In the UK, the
National Grid has launched a demand flexibility service in response to the
crisis. When demand is really high, like on cold winter days, they're paying
customers to reduce their energy consumption. This has been rolled out in a
matter of months, even weeks, and they're seeing reductions of around 100
megawatts almost instantaneously, which is super impressive. That’s roughly
enough to power 30,000 homes.  Bogi Hojgaard : The more we can leverage demand
side flexibility, the less we have to turn coal-fired power plants back on,
which was the UK government’s other contingency plan. Coal may be cheaper than
gas, but it's still not cheap and obviously much dirtier. The National Grid has
to pay for a power plant to be on standby, even if it doesn’t generate anything,
as you still have to cover fixed overheads.  Mauricio Riveros : More broadly,
demand side flexibility should always be a priority. It’s not just about
decarbonisation or energy crises. Generally, as countries develop, demand for
energy increases. If you unlock some capacity from demand side flexibility,
you’ll need to spend less on installing new generation and reinforcing the grid.
That means fewer construction projects and as a result, less disruption to the
local environment and community.  It’s important for countries to scale
flexibility while ramping up renewables. In Latin America, for example,
renewable capacity is expected to increase by 45% in the next five years. Can
you quantify the value demand side flexibility could bring there?  Mauricio
Riveros : It’s a huge opportunity for Latin America. The Carbon Trust’s work
supporting Colombia’s smart grid deployment found that the country will need
81GW more power capacity by 2040 to meet their decarbonisation targets, but by
introducing demand side flexibility, they’ll only need 34GW. Essentially, demand
side flexibility would allow Colombia to expand renewable capacity at lower
costs, use renewable generation more efficiently, spend less on distributing
energy, and decarbonise the whole system by 2040. All of this, we found, could
deliver savings of up to $730m per year by 2040. The same could be seen
elsewhere. Chile, for instance, has the right kind of geography for deploying
lots of renewables and their grid greatly needs reinforcing.  It’s not just
about decarbonisation or energy crises. As countries develop, demand for energy
increases. If you unlock some capacity from demand side flexibility, you’ll need
to spend less on installing new generation.         Mauricio Riveros
Associate Director, Energy Transition, The Carbon Trust        Image   Previous
Slide Next Slide What role do customers play in demand side flexibility?  The
IEA says we’ll need to unlock 500GW of power from demand side flexibility
globally by 2030 to reach Net Zero. That’s an enormous amount - enough to power
500 cities, each with around 300,000 homes. Could asking people to do their
laundry at night generate that much grid flexibility? What are the most
impactful actions individuals can take?  Bogi Hojgaard : Is it enough to ask
people to do their laundry at different times? No, but it helps. The most
impactful activities are energy intensive, and easy to do at off-peak times, not
so much laundry or lighting, but things like electric vehicle charging or
heating and cooling. An electric vehicle typically charges at 7KW for around
five hours. If you can do that at another time, that redistributes a material
amount of energy. A heat pump uses less energy than vehicle charging but runs
for quite a long time. You can switch it off temporarily without affecting
comfort too much, but still helping to lower demand. Although these new
technologies create more electricity demand for the grid, they also bring more
flexibility. For customers who don’t have either of those, tumble dryers, ovens
and washing machines are where the biggest gains are. Industrial users also make
a huge difference. They represent around a third of demand in the UK. Many are
billed on a half-hourly basis, so they can switch off when energy demand peaks
and prices are higher.  Laura Glover : In warmer regions, air conditioning is
important. Turning it off for half an hour doesn't change the room temperature
that much.  The Carbon Trust and WWF study  on decarbonising Singapore’s energy
system found that although rising demand for cooling will put a strain on the
grid and increase infrastructure needs, low-carbon cooling can offer demand side
flexibility and therefore a cost-effective transition. Cooling systems can
consume and sometimes store excess renewable energy, while digital technologies
like smart thermostats can shift cooling to different times of day by adjusting
temperature.   Mauricio Riveros : The immediate step is asking people to use
less energy during peak times. But ultimately, what needs to change is not when
you use energy but when you use the grid. That’s what provides flexibility to
the system. That’s why it’s important to develop different systems which can
work together to give and take energy from the grid automatically, so customers
can, say, use electricity whenever they like without even realising when they’re
using the grid.  Bogi Hojgaard : Yes, getting people to change their habits
around energy use is really hard, especially if it inconveniences them, so we
should try to automate demand side flexibility to overcome these behavioural
barriers and maximise the benefits to both end users and the grid.  Getting
people to change their habits around energy use is really hard, especially if it
inconveniences them. We should automate demand side flexibility to overcome
these behavioural barriers and maximise benefits to both end users and the grid.
Bogi Hojgaard                Associate Director, Energy Transition, The Carbon
Trust        Image   Previous Slide Next Slide How can automation unlock the
full potential of demand side flexibility?  It sounds like automation is
critical here. What does this look like and what technology is needed?  Laura
Glover : Installing a smart meter is the first step, to record whether someone
has adapted their energy usage so that they can be rewarded for it. Step two is
home automation devices, which detect price signals and control appliances to
minimise energy cost. The next level up would be having a communication system
with a provider to manage more sophisticated responses. For example, the company
you bought your EV charge point from might also handle charging and maintenance
for you. That’s why demand side flexibility is cost effective. We're talking
about having a smart meter or a smart phone in homes, rather than new power
stations or other big pieces of kit. Mauricio Riveros : Smart meters, smart
tariffs, and all the IT technologies that make up a smart grid are the backbone
of a system needed to unlock the full potential of demand side flexibility. In
one home you could have solar panels, batteries, heat pumps and several home
devices connecting with a central unit controlling these. But none of these
assets can interact with the grid without a smart meter. Further upstream you
also need various elements to automate the grid itself.  Carbon Trust research
found high consumer engagement is needed, even with automation. If demand side
flexibility is all automated, what do we need from customers?  Laura Glover :
There's a lot happening to advance digitalisation and automation technologies,
but some of it relies on customers choosing to use them. At the moment,
customers need to choose to have smart meters, electric vehicles, or flexible
tariffs, for instance. For flexibility to be more effective and less disruptive
to the customer, your heating provider, for instance, would need to control your
heat pump to operate it as efficiently as possible.  Bogi Hojgaard :  Energy
Systems Catapult  ran a project introducing people to managed charging of
electric vehicles. At first, people hated the idea of someone else managing the
charging, but after about six weeks, it turned out there was power in the
battery in the morning and they were paying less, so they were happy with it,
but people need to get comfortable with this idea.  How can we support customers
to support the grid?  How can we encourage people to make these choices? What
barriers do they face?  Bogi Hojgaard : When you buy a new smart phone,
contracts are made as simple as possible and it’s easy to transfer your contacts
and photos across to create an exact copy of the old one. That’s the kind of
experience people expect in the smart digital world, which you don’t get with
smart meters currently.   Laura Glover : Exactly, governments can raise
awareness of the benefits of demand side flexibility and help users understand
how to manage their energy consumption, but the big thing is to make it seem
easy, normal and attractive to make choices which benefit the system. Things
like grants for smart appliances play a part. It also helps if you can leverage
key decision points where people are already bought into the idea of change and
haven’t yet developed alternative norms. When someone buys an electric vehicle
or EV charging point, for instance, you can offer them EV tariffs that are easy
to sign up to and will automatically optimise their charging to make it as cheap
as possible.  The Carbon Trust is involved with the UK’s  Alternative Energy
Markets Innovation programme , which is looking at designing compelling customer
propositions under new market arrangements. Part of it is just a really slick
customer journey, making it easy by bundling together EV charge points, smart
charging tariffs, a warranty and a smooth installation process.  Why don’t
governments mandate time-of-use tariffs, where all customers pay a different
price for energy every half hour?  Laura Glover : Because there would be some
big losers as well as winners. It’s not one size fits all, that’s very important
to keep front of mind when thinking about market design, particularly in
relation to vulnerable customers. We need a substantial number of people to
participate in demand side flexibility, but it’s not possible for everyone. The
market must be designed fairly, so that the right signals are there for people
who have the interest and incentive to make use of them, without penalizing
those who can't.  Bogi Hojgaard : Also, if there’s not much in your pattern of
energy consumption that can be shifted around, it might not make sense from a
cost perspective to have a smart tariff. However, if you have an electric
vehicle, having a smart tariff might be a no brainer, as it wouldn’t impact you
whether your car charged at 3am rather than 2am. Or even 2am vs 2.10am if you
just need to charge it enough to drive 10 miles to work and back rather than a
big trip. We need to find the overlap between customers who are aware and
willing to engage and those for whom there is actual value in engaging.  The
issue of privacy also comes up a lot when talking about smart devices, how do
you tackle this?  Bogi Hojgaard : Looking at someone's energy consumption can
tell you a lot about them. For example, when they leave for work, sleep or go
out. Sharing so much personal data is a real concern so strong security is key
to help manage people’s privacy and give them reassurance.  Laura Glover :
Absolutely. The Carbon Trust is supporting a project called  HOMEFlex , led by
Flex Assure and Scottish and Southern Energy Networks, to design a code of
practice that flexibility providers can sign up to. It will show they follow
certain standards to provide customers with the greatest level of protection
possible. Cybersecurity and customer protection concerns should also be
addressed at government level. This is something the Colombian government and
UK’s Digital Energy Task Force is currently working on.  We'll need a mixture of
all forms of flexibility to reach Net Zero in the most cost effective way.
However, demand side measures are the cheapest. We're talking about having a
smart meter or a smart phone in homes, rather than new power stations or other
big pieces of kit.         Laura Glover                Manager, Energy
Transition, The Carbon Trust        Image   Previous Slide Next Slide How can
governments create incentives and standards for the energy industry? Moving away
from customers to other decision-makers, what sort of support does the energy
industry require from government?  Bogi Hojgaard : Governments must carefully
determine the best way to support, as well-meaning interventions can stifle
innovation. However, there is certainly a role for government intervention to
mandate standards and create the right market nudges to encourage customers to
adopt, and suppliers to develop, smart energy technologies. For example, in the
UK, smart meter roll out was a supplier obligation. This meant that on any given
street, you might have 30 different suppliers installing smart meters, which
makes no sense operationally, and has slowed down deployment enormously. It
should be done on a street-by-street basis.  Laura Glover : In the UK, there’s
also no standardised meter if customers want to switch providers. Governments
can mandate certain standards or communication protocols that will allow your EV
charge point to talk to your home energy system, for example, and it will work
with whatever system you have. We want to avoid a situation where every
manufacturer has their own control protocols, as we’re currently seeing with
smart meters.  Bogi Hojgaard : Governments can also push the concept of
‘presumed open data’. To enable digitalisation, lots of data needs to be
available so everyone can see the same system and make rational decisions. Not
consumer data, but things like where the cables are, how big they are, what
they’re connected to and how much demand is going through them. Currently, we
don’t know all that, so we dig up roads much more than we should, which has real
cost implications. If governments advocate for system data to be free, unless
there’s a good reason otherwise, it can open up really simple ways of optimising
the system, and prevent companies from hoarding data to monetise it.  Mauricio
Riveros : Colombia doesn’t share the UK’s problem of competition between
retailers, but they do have issues around incentives. In the UK, distribution
network operators are paid to innovate and deploy new technology to keep the
grid efficient. In Colombia, the companies operating the grid are the same
companies selling energy. The way the current regulation works, they are
incentivised to maximise profit as an energy supplier by minimising what they
spend on developing the grid. I’d say the regulatory landscape is Colombia’s
biggest barrier to demand side flexibility; there is still no clear policy for
rolling out smart meters or pushing for digitalisation of the whole system.  The
UK is often seen as a leader in deploying demand side flexibility. What should
other countries replicate or avoid from the UK’s experience?  Mauricio Riveros :
Other countries can learn from the UK, just as the UK can learn from other
regions. Singapore, for instance, has a high deployment of smart meters,
batteries and solar panels, even though the government isn’t currently
leveraging these for demand side flexibility. Innovation is the backbone of all
transformation in the UK and is embedded in regulation, which is a great thing
to replicate, but the UK’s issues with rolling out smart meters were a good
lesson in what to avoid. The Carbon Trust is working with the Colombian
government on a framework to align digitalisation strategies with
decarbonisation goals in the energy sector. It takes several principles from the
UK’s Data Task Force, including the concept of open data.  I'm imagining a
triangle showing energy customers, governments, and industry. Customers need to
engage with their energy use and consent to sharing their energy data with
providers who can automatically optimise assets on their behalf. Governments
need to provide customer protection and design a market that incentivises both
customers and industry. And lastly, industry needs to provide smart
technologies, attractive tariffs, and manage the demand.  Laura Glover:
Exactly, there are things which need to happen on all sides of the triangle. The
best ways to make them happen is still being ironed out, but the key thing is to
keep these collaborative conversations going. No one can do this in isolation. 
The Net Zero Intelligence Unit would like to thank Bogi Hojgaard, Laura Glover
and Mauricio Riveros, as well as Hadrian Vivek and Kai Greenlees for their
advice on this subject.  Net Zero Intelligence Unit           Expert
contributors                              Laura Glover
Manager, Energy Transition                                        Bogi Hojgaard
Associate Director, Energy Transition                    Stay updated Receive
the latest news, insights and events from the Carbon Trust directly to your
inbox. Subscribe Contact us Get in touch to see how our experts can help you.
Contact us © 2024 The Carbon Trust Careers Contact us Privacy notice Cookies
notice Website terms Modern slavery statement Sitemap