NREA Toolkit: A Guide for National Renewable Energy Associations - The Alliance
for Rural Electrification Become a member About About us Team Governance Contact
us Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our Members say Become a
Member Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What our Partners say
Become a Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation
for Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub Sustainability for
Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE Publications Project database
Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit Member login About About us
Team Governance Contact us Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our
Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What
our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification
Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub
Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE
Publications Project database Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit
Member login Become a member
Download
Publication 19 March, 2021 NREA Toolkit: A Guide for National Renewable Energy
Associations The NREA Toolkit: A Guide for National Renewable Energy
Associations has been developed by  GOGLA  and  SolarPower Europe  with the
support of  GET.invest  and  Transforming Energy Access for Households and
Improved Livelihoods Programme (TEA) , funded by the UK Foreign, Commonwealth
and Development Office (FCDO), and in strategic partnership with  ARE . This
toolkit has been developed to provide guidance to existing national renewable
energy associations (NREAs) with a comprehensive and practical resource to help
strengthen their efforts in supporting the growth of the solar energy sector,
and guidance to those considering establishing a new NREA. The purpose of this
toolkit is to support the NREAs in their activities. These include developing,
improving, and sustaining their services to their membership; investing in
practicing high standards of management and good governance; and taking measures
to assure their sustainability over the long term. It aims to support NREAs to
continue to be strong advocates for the growth of the solar energy sector.
Statutes Terms & conditions Privacy Policy Alliance for Rural Electrification
Renewable Energy House Rue d'Arlon 63-67 1040 Brussels Belgium
are[at]ruralelec.org +32 2 400 10 00 Follow along Facebook Twitter LinkedIn
YouTube Flickr Newsletter Get in-depth analyses, market intelligence & insights
from the rural electrification sector in your inbox every second month. For
free. Subscribe                                                         ©2024
Alliance for Rural Electrification
Made by  Novel We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By
browsing this website, you agree to our use of cookies. Accept