Overcoming the NDC implementation gap | Oxford Policy Management Skip to main
content Toggle the keyword search input Menu Main navigation About us Our
approach Our leadership Our diversity Our story Our policies and reporting
Contact us Our expertise Meet our experts Climate, energy, and nature Education
Governance Health Poverty and social protection Research and evidence Cross-
cutting themes Our work Where we work OPM Australia OPM Bangladesh OPM Europe
OPM India OPM Indonesia OPM Kenya OPM Nepal OPM Nigeria OPM Pakistan OPM South
Africa OPM Tanzania OPM United Kingdom OPM United States Latest updates Work
with us Careers Clients Partners Working at OPM Trending AI in global
development Localization Enter your search terms search Toggle the keyword
search input Home Latest updates Overcoming the NDC implementation gap
Globally, 189 countries have pledged nationally determined contributions (NDCs),
signalling a major shift in climate governance. Share this page Share this page
Authors Katherine Cooke Senior Consultant Elizabeth Gogoi Team Leader, Energy,
Resources, and Growth Luca Petrarulo Consultant Publication details Date October
2018 Area of expertise Climate, Energy, and Nature Keywords Energy, resources
and growth   , Policy implementation Project Action on Climate Today: climate-
proofing growth and development in South Asia Contact Katherine Cooke    @email
However, the challenge now is how to put these plans into action. Early
lessons on the challenges of NDC implementation are emerging. NDCs will not
succeed without the right level of integration with national development policy
and planning. Without clear financing plans, strong and enforceable requirements
for measuring reporting and verification (MRV), and a high degree of political
commitment, they will fail. Sound familiar? These are the same barriers that
every previous climate change plan or target has faced. Download  Overcoming the
NDC implementation gap You may also be interested in How can we localize in a
meaningful way? Blog Post Assessing the climate mitigation potential of Indian
cities Project Climate adaption mainstreaming in India Blog Post Area of
expertise Climate, Energy, and Nature  Back to top Sign up to our newsletter
Sign up Footer Accessibility Careers Contact us Disclaimer Media Enquiries
Modern slavery and human trafficking Our policies and reporting Privacy & terms
of website use Reporting a concern/whistleblowing © Oxford Policy Management
Limited. Registered in England: 3122495. Design and development by  Soapbox