Position Paper - Off-Grid Renewable Energies to achieve SDG-7 and SDG-13:
Cheaper, Cleaner and Smarter - The Alliance for Rural Electrification Become a
member About About us Team Governance Contact us Membership Our Members Why
become a Member? What our Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our Partners
Why partner with us? What our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic Pillars
Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub Markets for
Electrification Hub Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre
Discover DRE Publications Project database Job platform News & Events News
Events Media kit Member login About About us Team Governance Contact us
Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our Members say Become a Member
Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What our Partners say Become a
Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for
Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub Sustainability for
Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE Publications Project database
Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit Member login Become a member
Download
Publication 26 March, 2020 Position Paper – Off-Grid Renewable Energies to
achieve SDG-7 and SDG-13: Cheaper, Cleaner and Smarter The number of people
without access to modern forms of electricity still remains at a level of almost
1 billion. Access levels are unevenly distributed with especially Sub-Saharan
African countries tailing behind on ambitions to reach universal access to
electricity by 2030. Significantly more investments are needed to achieve SDG-7
to “ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for
all,” as well as SDG-13 to “take urgent action to combat climate change and its
impacts.” Until now what has been missing is evidence of the potential of off-
grid technologies to achieve both SDG-7 and SDG-13 in a cheaper, cleaner and
smarter manner than other alternatives. New evidence from the GIZ, Reiner
Lemoine Institute and the greenwerk. study  “ Off-Grid Renewable Energy for
Climate Action ”  is without ambiguity: off-grid renewable energy solutions,
such as clean energy mini-grids and solar home systems have significant
environmental, practical, economic and socio-economic merits over grid
expansion. Off-grid renewables are vastly superior to its competitors on three
parameters: Cheaper cost of deployment Cleaner than grid extension Smarter,
faster and more reliable Statutes Terms & conditions Privacy Policy Alliance for
Rural Electrification Renewable Energy House Rue d'Arlon 63-67 1040 Brussels
Belgium are[at]ruralelec.org +32 2 400 10 00 Follow along Facebook Twitter
LinkedIn YouTube Flickr Newsletter Get in-depth analyses, market intelligence &
insights from the rural electrification sector in your inbox every second month.
For free. Subscribe
©2024 Alliance for Rural Electrification
Made by  Novel We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By
browsing this website, you agree to our use of cookies. Accept