Raising Global Energy Ambitions: The 1,000 kWh Modern Energy Minimum
Skip to content   The Rockefeller Foundation     Research Library   Search
Menu     Our Work  We are a philanthropic foundation that promotes the well
being of humanity by finding and scaling solutions that advance opportunity and
reverse the climate crisis.   Focus Areas   Focus Areas   Health   Food   Power
Economic Equity   Innovation   Innovative Finance   Health   Food   Power
Economic Equity   Innovation   Innovative Finance   Where We Work   Where We
Work   U.S. & the Americas   Africa   Asia   Italy (Bellagio Center)   U.S. &
the Americas   Africa   Asia   Italy (Bellagio Center)   What We Do   What We Do
Grants   Initiatives   Convenings, Residencies & Networks   Big Bets   Grants
Initiatives   Convenings, Residencies & Networks   Big Bets   Partners &
Alliances   Partners & Alliances   Global Energy Alliance   Co-Impact
Collaborative   RF Catalytic Capital   Global Energy Alliance   Co-Impact
Collaborative   RF Catalytic Capital   News, Ideas & Reports   News &
Announcements   Ideas & Insights   Reports   About Us   Mission and Vision   Our
People   Our Offices   Our History   Careers   Subscribe   Search     Subscribe
facebook twitter linkedin copy url   Reports  /          Reports Raising Global
Energy Ambitions: The 1,000 kWh Modern Energy Minimum The 1,000 kWh Modern
Energy Minimum    Download  Report Published Date January 26, 2021   Access
Report    Download  Energy is fundamental to modern living and economic
prosperity. The current global crisis has exposed stark inequalities and raised
the urgency of providing modern energy for everyone. Energy is a necessary
prerequisite to both recovery and to long-term development goals. Energy for
Growth Hub’s new report proposes a Modern Energy Minimum of 1,000 kWh per person
per year, inclusive of both 300 kWh of household and 700 kWh of non-household
electricity consumption. This new metric provides a significantly more ambitious
energy target that is better aligned with development aspirations for
employment, higher incomes, and economic transformation for emerging economies.
The Modern Energy Minimum can be used to track progress against energy poverty —
and for the next iteration of SDG7. Report Raising Global Energy Ambitions: The
1,000 kWh Modern Energy Minimum Energy is fundamental to modern living and
economic prosperity. The current global crisis has exposed stark inequalities
and raised the urgency of providing modern energy for everyone. Energy is a
necessary prerequisite to both recovery and to long-term development goals.
Energy for Growth Hub’s new report proposes a Modern Energy Minimum of 1,000 kWh
per […]   Download PDF Stay Updated Get quick updates in our e‑newsletter.
Subscribe Now   Related Updates Feature   Raising Energy Ambitions: The Modern
Energy Minimum Energy is fundamental to modern living and economic prosperity.
The current global crisis has exposed stark inequalities and raised the urgency
of providing modern energy for everyone. Energy is a prerequisite to both
recovery and to long-term development goals. Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
7 calls for “access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for
[…]   More     Jan   26   2021  Press Releases  Energy for Growth Hub and The
Rockefeller Foundation Call for Adoption of New Energy Poverty Metric   More
Apr   01   2020  Grantee Impact Story  Eliminating Energy Poverty and
Supercharging Livelihoods with Innovative Partnerships   More       Apr   03
2015  Blog Post  A New Program Helps Businesses Engage the Next Generation of
Talent   More     Show More Updates     Dec   03   2020  Press Releases  New
Global Commission To End Energy Poverty Report Calls For Urgent Action As Part
Of An Equitable Economic Recovery   More       Dec   03   2020  Report  GCEEP
Electricity Access 2020 Report   More       Jul   08   2020  Grantee Impact
Story  Entrepreneurs Use Solar Power to Sew Masks and Provide Comfort   More
Show Less Updates   Back to Top     Close  We use cookies to offer you a better
browsing experience, analyze site traffic, personalize content, and serve
targeted advertisements. Read about how we use cookies and our use of data by
reading our new  Privacy Policy . If you continue to use this site, you consent
to our use of cookies.   The Rockefeller Foundation home page Resources Grants
Annual Reports Governance Documents Privacy Policy Terms of Use Accessibility
Commitment  Statement Transparency in Coverage Rule Locations All Offices
Washington, D.C., United States Bellagio Center, Italy Nairobi, Kenya Bangkok,
Thailand New York City, United States Get In Touch Contact Us Careers The
Rockefeller Foundation's mission is to promote the well-being of humanity and
make opportunity universal and sustainable. Subscribe Sign up for our newsletter
to stay updated on all the latest news and events.    Sign Up      Subscribe to
our mailing list!   Sign up to receive updates from The Rockefeller Foundation.
NOTE: Fields with an asterisk * are required.   Name *       First         Last
Email *   Opt-in The Rockefeller Foundation will use information you provide on
this form to be in touch with you and provide updates. *     I agree to The
Rockefeller Foundation Privacy Policy and I agree to receive email
communications from The Rockefeller Foundation. You can change your mind at any
time by clicking the unsubscribe link in the footer of any email you receive
from us, or by contacting  info@rockfound.org . We will treat your information
with respect. For more information about our privacy practices please visit the
Privacy Policy  page on our website. By clicking "Subscribe" below, you agree
that we may process your information in accordance with these terms.   Set Your
Preferences Country Country Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra
Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan
Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan
Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso
Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African
Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Republic of the Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus
Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic East Timor Ecuador
Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Faroe Islands Fiji
Finland France French Polynesia Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece
Greenland Grenada Guam Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hong
Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica
Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati North Korea South Korea Kosovo Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania
Luxembourg Macedonia Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall
Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia
Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New
Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan
Palau Palestine, State of Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines
Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Saint Martin Samoa San Marino Sao
Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore
Sint Maarten Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa Spain Sri
Lanka Sudan Sudan, South Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan
Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey
Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United
States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam
Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, U.S. Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Job Title
Employer Field/ Background:     Academia     Philanthropy/ Donor     Government
Private Sector/ Business     Grantee     Researcher     Media     RF Alumni
Non-profit/ NGO     Other Interests     Food     Health     Power     Economic
Equity     Innovative Finance     Data & Technology     Convenings and Network/
Bellagio Center Geographic Focus:     Africa     North America     Asia Pacific
South America     Europe Comments This field is for validation purposes and
should be left unchanged.                         Facebook Twitter linkedIn
Instagram YouTube  Copyright 2024 The Rockefeller Foundation.  All Rights
Reserved  Twitter  Facebook  LinkedIn