Read your way to COP 28                      Discover       About FAO In action
Media Main topics Resources Member countries Get involved               English
العربية 中文 Français Русский Español                           About FAO
Loading...                                                     News
Loading...                                                     Multimedia
Loading...                                                     Main topics
Loading...                                                     Statistics
Loading...                                                     Members
Loading...                                                     Publications
Loading...                           Publications                       Share
Close Read your way to COP 28 ©Adobe Stock   19/09/2023 From 30 November to 12
December, the 28th Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP28) will bring together world leaders,
policymakers, scientists, and stakeholders from across the globe to deliberate
on strategies and commitments that will shape the future of our planet. For FAO,
COP28 serves as a platform for collaborative dialogue, knowledge sharing, and
decision-making on the unique role of agriculture and food systems in the fight
against climate change.  Agrifood system solutions are climate solutions.
FAO’s work includes climate change adaptation, reducing greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions, and building resilience, while safeguarding biodiversity and ensuring
food security for all. Ahead of this critical conference, we have put together a
selection of FAO publications that showcase the Organization’s core work on
tackling climate change.  For a wider range of titles, check the most recent 
FAO publications catalogue . FAO Strategy on Climate Change 2022–2031 FAO’s
Strategy on Climate Change 2022–2031 builds on its previous strategy, the latest
international developments and scientific evidence. Through the strategy, FAO
supports Member countries in adopting good practices and innovative solutions to
address climate resilience, adaptation and mitigation for sustainable agrifood
systems. FAO Action Plan 2022–2025 for the implementation of the FAO Strategy on
Climate Change The objective of the Action Plan is to implement the vision set
out in the FAO Strategy on Climate Change, enhancing support to Member countries
through climate change adaptation and mitigation, while striving to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals.  Using Metrics to Assess Progress towards the
Paris Agreement's Global Goal on Adaptation – Transparency in Adaptation in the
Agriculture Sector This publication aims to aid countries in evaluating climate
action in their agriculture sectors by establishing a comprehensive metric
framework, thereby playing a crucial role in assessing progress towards the
Global Goal on Adaptation. The State of the World's Forests 2022 – Forest
pathways for green recovery and building inclusive, resilient and sustainable
economies This report sets out three pathways for achieving green recovery and
tackling multidimensional planetary crises: halting deforestation; restoring
degraded land and expanding agroforestry; and sustainably using forests and
building green value chains. The State of Land and Water Resources for Food and
Agriculture in the Near East and North Africa region – Summary report The
publication provides policymakers, institutions and other stakeholders a
comprehensive overview of the current situation of land and water in the Near
East and North Africa region. To inform decision-making, it looks at the effect
of climate change and urbanization on food production.  The role of genetic
resources for food and agriculture in adaptation to and mitigation of climate
change This study explores the impact of climate change on animal, aquatic,
forest and plant genetic resources. It provides recommendations on how to take
advantage of genetic diversity in climate change adaptation, including
characterizing existing gene bank collections and securing their funding.
Climate change, biodiversity and nutrition nexus – Evidence and emerging policy
and programming opportunities Presenting recommendations for action, this paper
identifies entry points within agrifood systems to improve biodiversity and
diets, two levers to enhance nutrition and optimize environmental sustainability
while ensuring social equity, especially among the most vulnerable.  A snapshot
of the status and way forward for transforming agrifood systems in the Pacific –
Identifying entry points and analysing trade-offs for policymakers This report
describes the impact of climate change on agrifood systems in Pacific Island
countries and provides an overview of entry points for sustainable food system
transformation. Sustainable and circular bioeconomy in the climate agenda:
Opportunities to transform agrifood systems This paper gives an overview of how
the bioeconomy can contribute to the climate action strategies outlined in the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) recommendations, nationally
determined contributions (NDCs) and adaptation strategies. Methane emissions in
livestock and rice systems – Sources, quantification, mitigation and metrics
Addressing methane emissions from livestock and rice systems is vital for
promoting sustainable agriculture and mitigating climate change. This report
addresses methane emissions in agriculture and their impact on global greenhouse
gas levels. By analyzing sources, sinks, quantification methods, and mitigation
strategies, this publication highlights challenges and opportunities to reduce
methane emissions from livestock and rice production systems.  Agrifood systems
and land-related emissions – Global, regional and country trends, 2001–2021
Greenhouse gas emissions from agrifood systems are generated within the farm
gate, by crop and livestock production activities; by land-use change, for
instance deforestation and peatland drainage to make room for agriculture; and
in pre- and post-production processes, such as food manufacturing, transport,
retail, household consumption and food waste disposal. This brief provides an
update to the year 2021 of all agrifood systems emissions and indicators, as
well as a detailed focus on land-use change emissions. The Impact of Disasters
on Agriculture and Food Security 2023 – Avoiding and reducing losses through
investment in resilience This report provides an assessment of losses caused by
disasters in agricultural production over the past three decades and delves into
the diverse threats and impacts affecting the crops, livestock, forestry, and
fisheries and aquaculture subsectors. Global Report on Food Crises 2023 The 2023
report estimates that over a quarter of a billion people were acutely food-
insecure and required urgent food assistance in 58 food-crisis countries and
territories in 2022. This is the highest number in the seven-year history of the
GRFC. Climate action and nutrition – Pathways to impact This paper, a
contribution to the Initiative on Climate Change and Nutrition (I-CAN), explores
options for integrated actions addressing jointly climate change and
malnutrition across agrifood, water, social protection, and health systems. Also
available in  brief . Agrifood solutions to climate change – FAO's work on the
climate crisis The future of the world as we know it depends on sustainable
climate solutions and action. This publication addresses how FAO is working with
countries and partners at all levels to address the challenges of food security,
climate change and biodiversity loss. Also available in  digital format . Loss
and damage and agrifood systems – Addressing gaps and challenges Agrifood
systems are intrinsically linked to climate change and are particularly
vulnerable to its impacts. This report provides an overview and status of
affairs on the debate around loss and damage within climate change discourse. It
finds that support to countries needs to be targeted and strengthened so that
loss and damage in agrifood systems can be dealt with as early as possible.
Pathways towards lower emissions – A global assessment of the greenhouse gas
emissions and mitigation options from livestock agrifood systems This report
presents a comprehensive global assessment of greenhouse gas emissions from
livestock systems, utilizing FAO’s Global Livestock Environmental Assessment
Model (GLEAM) based on the most recent available data. It illustrates pathways
towards lower emissions through a set of interventions on both the supply and
demand sides of animal production. Climate-related development finance to
agrifood systems. Global and regional trends between 2000 and 2021 This
publication brings to light the evolution of climate finance in agrifood systems
over the past two decades, showcasing unique sectorial analysis of climate
finance allocations for adaptation and mitigation, delving into the diversity of
actors involved, from bilateral and multilateral agencies to the private sector,
highlighting the critical need for partnerships that transcend boundaries.
Catalysing climate solutions – An introduction to FAO’s work on climate change
adaptation in agrifood systems Climate change is a significant stressor on most
global and local value chains, posing a threat to food security. In alignment
with the FAO Strategy on Climate Change 2022–2031, this publication underscores
FAO’s commitment to transformative action in agrifood systems and calls for a
people-centred approach to climate change adaptation. Further reading El Niño:
Anticipatory Action and Response Plan, October 2023–March 2024 Greenhouse gas
emissions from agri-food systems – Global, regional and country trends,
2000–2020 Greenhouse gas emissions from food systems: building the evidence base
Animal health and climate change – Protecting the health of animals to help
reduce the effects of our changing climate on hunger and poverty Five practical
actions towards low-carbon livestock   FAST Partnership – Food and Agriculture
for Sustainable Transformation FAO submission on Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on
implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security The key role
of forest and landscape restoration in climate action Outcomes and lessons
learned from the Koronivia UNFCCC negotiations on agriculture and food security,
and the way forward after COP 27 – Brief note Private sector mapping, outreach,
and engagement in climate-responsive agrifood systems – SCALA private sector
engagement guidance series, March 2023 Colombia: advancing monitoring and
evaluation of adaptation in the agriculture sector – Experiences of integrating
agriculture in sectoral and national adaptation planning processes Strengthening
Agricultural Adaptation: SAGA project – Phase 1 Forest-based adaptation:
transformational adaptation through forests and trees The world’s mangroves
2000–2020 Strengthening gender-responsive climate policies and actions in the
livestock sector ,  climate-smart agriculture ,  agrifood value chains , and 
aquaculture and fisheries Climate Risk Toolbox – Guiding material for climate
risk screening Climate finance toolkit for Europe and Central Asia 2022
Forthcoming Integrated flood management for resilient agrifood systems and rural
development Catalyzing climate solutions: FAO’s work on climate change
adaptation in agrifood systems Climate-related development finance in the
agriculture and land use sectors. Global and regional trends between 2000−2021
Private sector: Enabling and de-risking private sector investment in climate
responsive food and land use priorities of National Climate Plans: Focus on
supply chains, small holders, and agribusinesses in developing countries
Additional resources FAO Climate Change website FAO at COP28 FAO Climate Change
Knowledge Hub FAO and the UNFCCC Contact FAO publications [email protected]
Follow us on FAO Organizational Chart               Worldwide offices
Regional Office for Africa Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Regional
Office for Europe and Central Asia Regional Office for Latin America and the
Caribbean Regional Office for the Near East and North Africa Country Offices
Jobs Contact us Terms and Conditions Data protection and privacy Scam Alert
Report Misconduct © FAO 2024