UNDP invites applications for renewable energy training | United Nations
Development Programme     Skip to main content
Türkiye
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English
Türkçe   Global
Nav toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English Türkçe Locations                 Home Türkiye         UNDP invites
applications for renewable energy training                        UNDP invites
applications for renewable energy training    November 13, 2023            
Applications are now being accepted for a new phase of renewable energy training
that the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Ministry of
National Education (MoNE) are organizing for Syrians under temporary protection
and host community members in Türkiye. Funded by the Republic of Korea, the
training combines digital and face-to-face learning, making it accessible for
adult participants. Already in its third year, the programme aims to train 1,800
persons in all: 1511 have already completed the course, while 300 places are
available in the current phase, which runs from November 2023-January 2024.
Participants learn how to install, maintain and repair the equipment and systems
used to produce solar and wind energy. The course is designed to meet labor
force demand for mid-level workers in the renewable energy sector while helping
both Syrian refugees and members of Turkish host communities gain new skills and
find good jobs.  Syrian refugees and host community members who pass the course
receive an internationally valid Europass certificate, which improves their
chances for employment in the country’s growing renewable energy sector. The
programme was launched in March 2021 in the provinces of Bursa, Kocaeli, Konya,
Hatay and Mersin with openings for 500 trainees, half Syrians and half host
community members, with women accounting for at least 25 percent of
participants. In 2022, Istanbul was added to the provinces, boosting total
capacity to 1,000 trainees. In 2023, Izmir, Mardin, Şanlıurfa and Gaziantep
joined the programme, bringing the total available places to 1,800. Applications
for the 300 places available in the new phase of the training are open until 17
November 2023. Syrians under temporary protection and Turkish host community
members between the ages of 18-45 who want to pursue a career in the field of
renewable energy are eligible. Female applicants are strongly encouraged to
apply. The new phase of training will be organized at the local public education
centers in seven provinces: İzmir, Mardin, Şanlıurfa, Gaziantep, Bursa, Kocaeli
and İstanbul. A total of 247 hours of instruction will be provided; 144 hours
will be face-to-face training and the remaining 103 hours will be held online.
Trainees who do well in the course are eligible for financial support, and the
programme also seeks to provide participants with opportunities for internships,
further training and job placement in private-sector companies in the renewable
energy sector.  UNDP is implementing the programme in partnership with the
MoNE’s General Directorate of Lifelong Learning. Please find the details about
the training and applications below. Where will the training be held? Where
should I apply? İzmir Bayraklı Nuri Atik Vocational and Technical Anatolian High
School İzmir Bayraklı Public Education Center Bursa Yıldırım Yeşilyayla
Vocational and Technical Anatolian High School Bursa Yıldırım Public Education
Center Kocaeli   Gebze Ali Nuri Çolakoğlu Vocational and Technical Anatolian
High School Kocaeli Gebze Public Education Center İstanbul Bahçelievler Şehit
Erol Olçok Vocational and Technical Anatolian High School İstanbul Bahçelievler
Public Education Center İstanbul    Ataşehir Dr. Nureddin Erk Perihan Erk
Vocational and Technical Anatolian High School İstanbul Ataşehir Public
Education Center Mardin    Midyat Telkari Vocational and Technical Anatolian
High School Şanlıurfa Karaköprü Public Education Center Şanlıurfa Karaköprü
Vocational and Technical Anatolian High School Gaziantep Merveşehir Public
Education Center Gaziantep Şehitkamil Ali Topcuoğlu Vocational and Technical
Anatolian High School Gaziantep Merveşehir Halk Eğitimi Merkezi For more
information:  Nazlı Dülger Örtücü, UNDP Türkiye Project Associate, 
nazli.dulger@undp.org   News UNDP Türkiye's message on the two major earthquakes
that struck Türkiye on 6 February 2023 Read more  News UNDP’s training in
renewable energy will further expand in 2023 Read more  News Renewable energy
training to expand in 2023 UNDP’s vocational training on renewable energy in
Türkiye targets a total of 1,600 trainees in more provinces next year Read more
News UNDP’s renewable energy training continues 166 trainees in 6 provinces
completed the pioneer training programme on wind and solar energy with new
educational technologies Read more  News UNDP helps build trainers’ skills on
new educational technologies in its renewable energy training programme
Renewable energy trainers participated in a one-week training on blended
learning and new education methods Read more    Search           Found  0
results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy
Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development Programme
Who we are                                                      About us
Funding and delivery
Legal framework                                                            Our
team                                                            UNDP and the UN
Our Goodwill Ambassador and SDG Advocates
What we do                                                      Sustainable
Development Goals
Focus areas                                                      Our impact
News Centre
Publications                                                            Success
Stories                                                            Blogs
Projects                                                      Get involved
Contact us                                                            Careers
Procurement                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit
social or environmental complaint Scam Alert Terms of Use facebook x-twitter
instagram linkedin youtube telegram © 2024 United Nations Development Programme