Renewable Energy Market Analysis   ENERGY TRANSITION
ENERGY TRANSITION                       Outlook   Partnerships   Policy
Technology   Socio-economic impact   Country engagement   Project Facilitation
Planning   Innovation   Finance & Investment   HOW WE WORK
HOW WE WORK                       Country focus Regional focus Africa   Asia &
Pacific   Europe   Latin America and the Caribbean   Middle East & North Africa
North America   Collaborative frameworks   News   PUBLICATIONS   Education
Data   Events   ABOUT                           ABOUT
About IRENA   Membership   Director-General   Procurement   Vision & Mission
Official documents   Senior Management   Working at IRENA   First time visitor?
Explore our handy tools               Skip Next Search
Look for information across IRENA.org                       Skip Next REmember
Log in to the Member section                       Skip Next Up to date with
IRENA                       Get informed about news and updates relevant to your
area of interests                       Skip Next Clipboard
Here you can find interests items you have saved by exploring IRENA.org
Close Download full report Select format PDF Kindle ePub IRENA and AfDB (2022),
Renewable Energy Market Analysis: Africa and Its Regions, International
Renewable Energy Agency and African Development Bank, Abu Dhabi and Abidjan.
Copy citation  Copied /-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2022/Jan/IRENA_Mar
ket_Africa_2022.pdf?rev=bb73e285a0974bc996a1f942635ca556 Copy url  Copied
Renewable Energy Market Analysis: Africa and its Regions      The report lays
out a pathway to a renewable-based energy system and shows that the transition
promises substantial gains in GDP, employment, and human welfare in each region
of the African continent.                         ISBN: 978-92-9260-417-2
January 2022     Executive Summary   Home > Publications > 2022 > Jan >
Renewable Energy Market Analysis   Newsletter    Go Le rapport est également
disponible  en Français . The Summary is also available in  Arabic ( عربي ), 
Chinese ( 中文 )  and Spanish ( español ).   An energy system centred on renewable
energy can help resolve many of Africa’s social, economic, health and
environmental challenges. A profound energy transition is not only feasible, it
is essential for a climate-safe future in which sustainable development
prerogatives are met. Renewables are key to overcoming energy poverty, providing
needed energy services without damaging human health or ecosystems, and enabling
a transformation of economies in support of development and industrialisation.
Africa is extraordinarily diverse, and no single approach will advance its
energy future. But efforts must be made to build modern, resilient and
sustainable energy systems across the continent to avoid trapping economies and
societies in increasingly obsolete energy systems that burden them with stranded
assets and limited economic prospects. This report from the International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) developed in collaboration with the African
Development Bank (AfDB) sets out the opportunities at hand, while also
acknowledging the challenges Africa faces. It lays out a pathway to a
renewables-based energy system and shows that the transition promises
substantial gains in GDP, employment, and human welfare in each region of the
continent. See the visual story:  An African Green Deal to Deliver a Prosperous
Future   Among the findings: A large part of Africa has so far been left out of
the energy transition: Only 2% of global investments in renewable energy in the
last two decades were made in Africa, with significant regional disparities.
Less than 3% of global renewables jobs are in Africa. In Sub-Saharan Africa,
electrification rate was static at 46% in 2019 with 906 million people still
lacking access to clean cooking fuels and technologies. But the continent has
enormous potential: Africa has vast resource potential in wind, solar, hydro,
and geothermal energy and falling costs are increasingly bringing renewables
within reach. Central and Southern Africa have abundant mineral resources
essential to the production of electric batteries, wind turbines, and other low-
carbon technologies. The last decade has seen progress: Renewable energy
deployment has grown in the last decade, with more than 26 GW of renewables-
based generation capacity added. The largest additions were in solar energy.
Average annual investments in renewable energy grew ten-fold from less than USD
0.5 billion in the 2000-2009 period to USD 5 billion in 2010-2020. Distributed
renewable energy solutions, including stand-alone systems and mini-grids, are
playing a steadily growing role in expanding electricity access in off-grid
areas and strengthening supply in already connected areas. Despite the difficult
shift away from carbon-intensive energy sources, the energy transition – when
accompanied by an appropriate policy basket – holds huge promise for Africa: The
energy transition under IRENA’s 1.5°C Scenario pathway predicts 6.4% higher GDP,
3.5% higher economy-wide jobs and a 25.4% higher welfare index than that
realised under current plans, on average up to 2050. Jobs created in the
renewable energy transition will outweigh those lost by moving away from
traditional energy. Every million U.S. dollars invested in renewables between
2020 – 2050 would create at least 26 job-years; for every million invested in
energy efficiency at least 22 job-years would be created annually; for energy
flexibility, the figure is 18. For these benefits to materialise, the following
will be required: A comprehensive policy package that combines the pursuit of
climate and environmental goals; economic development and jobs creation; and
social equity and welfare for society as a whole. Strong institutions,
international co-operation (including South- South co-operation), and
considerable co-ordination at the regional level.   Additional analyses
Renewable Energy and Jobs – Annual Review 2017                           1 May
2017   Related content                                  North Africa's Renewable
Potential and Strategic Location Reinforce Its Role in Energy Transition
26 February 2024 Articles                                 Heads of State
Accelerate the Partnership for Renewables in Africa at COP28
2 December 2023 Press Releases                                 Accelerated
Energy Transition Can Add 40 million Energy Sector Jobs by 2050
29 November 2023 Press Releases                                 MENA’s
Transforming Role in an Evolving Energy Landscape                           26
October 2023 Expert Insights                                 Infrastructure
Reform is Key to Accelerating Africa’s Energy Transition
9 October 2023 Expert Insights                               IRENA essentials
About IRENA   Employment   Procurement   Contact   Membership   Collaborative
Frameworks   Partnerships   Country engagement   News   Events   Publications
Education                                 Newsletter
Go                             © 2011-2022 IRENA - International Renewable
Energy Agency. All Rights Reserved.  * The designations employed and the
presentation of materials herein do not imply the expression of any opinion
whatsoever on the part of the International Renewable Energy Agency concerning
the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities,
or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.