Smart Power Connect | September 2021
Skip to content   The Rockefeller Foundation     Research Library   Search
Menu     Our Work  We are a philanthropic foundation that promotes the well
being of humanity by finding and scaling solutions that advance opportunity and
reverse the climate crisis.   Focus Areas   Focus Areas   Health   Food   Power
Economic Equity   Innovation   Innovative Finance   Health   Food   Power
Economic Equity   Innovation   Innovative Finance   Where We Work   Where We
Work   U.S. & the Americas   Africa   Asia   Italy (Bellagio Center)   U.S. &
the Americas   Africa   Asia   Italy (Bellagio Center)   What We Do   What We Do
Grants   Initiatives   Convenings, Residencies & Networks   Big Bets   Grants
Initiatives   Convenings, Residencies & Networks   Big Bets   Partners &
Alliances   Partners & Alliances   Global Energy Alliance   Co-Impact
Collaborative   RF Catalytic Capital   Global Energy Alliance   Co-Impact
Collaborative   RF Catalytic Capital   News, Ideas & Reports   News &
Announcements   Ideas & Insights   Reports   About Us   Mission and Vision   Our
People   Our Offices   Our History   Careers   Subscribe   Search     Subscribe
facebook twitter linkedin copy url   Reports  /          Reports Smart Power
Connect | September 2021    Download  Report Published Date October 14, 2021
Access Report    Download  Energy plays a critical role in increasing
productivity and improving livelihoods. However, the complex nexus between
sources of electricity and how that power is used productively in rural value
chains and businesses remains under-explored. Until this changes, opportunities
to transform lives across the world are being missed. Smart Power Myanmar, in
collaboration with TFE Energy, has spent the last 18 months taking a deep dive
into the nexus of agriculture and energy, identifying critical opportunities to
both end energy poverty and significantly enhance rural productivity. The result
is a comprehensive, actionable guide for policymakers and practitioners seeking
to understand and strategically invest in energy access along agricultural value
chains. Its contents are applicable across multiple geographies, providing a
unique opportunity to transform communities across the Global South. Report
Smart Power Connect | September 2021 Energy plays a critical role in increasing
productivity and improving livelihoods. However, the complex nexus between
sources of electricity and how that power is used productively in rural value
chains and businesses remains under-explored. Until this changes, opportunities
to transform lives across the world are being missed. Smart Power Myanmar, in
collaboration with TFE Energy, has […]   Download PDF Stay Updated Get quick
updates in our e‑newsletter.   Subscribe Now   Related Updates   Show Less  Tags
: india renewable energy sdg7   Back to Top     Close  We use cookies to offer
you a better browsing experience, analyze site traffic, personalize content, and
serve targeted advertisements. Read about how we use cookies and our use of data
by reading our new  Privacy Policy . If you continue to use this site, you
consent to our use of cookies.   The Rockefeller Foundation home page Resources
Grants Annual Reports Governance Documents Privacy Policy Terms of Use
Accessibility Commitment  Statement Transparency in Coverage Rule Locations All
Offices Washington, D.C., United States Bellagio Center, Italy Nairobi, Kenya
Bangkok, Thailand New York City, United States Get In Touch Contact Us Careers
The Rockefeller Foundation's mission is to promote the well-being of humanity
and make opportunity universal and sustainable. Subscribe Sign up for our
newsletter to stay updated on all the latest news and events.    Sign Up
Subscribe to our mailing list!   Sign up to receive updates from The Rockefeller
Foundation. NOTE: Fields with an asterisk * are required.   Name *       First
Last   Email *   Opt-in The Rockefeller Foundation will use information you
provide on this form to be in touch with you and provide updates. *     I agree
to The Rockefeller Foundation Privacy Policy and I agree to receive email
communications from The Rockefeller Foundation. You can change your mind at any
time by clicking the unsubscribe link in the footer of any email you receive
from us, or by contacting  info@rockfound.org . We will treat your information
with respect. For more information about our privacy practices please visit the
Privacy Policy  page on our website. By clicking "Subscribe" below, you agree
that we may process your information in accordance with these terms.   Set Your
Preferences Country Country Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra
Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan
Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan
Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso
Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African
Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Republic of the Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus
Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic East Timor Ecuador
Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Faroe Islands Fiji
Finland France French Polynesia Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece
Greenland Grenada Guam Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hong
Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica
Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati North Korea South Korea Kosovo Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania
Luxembourg Macedonia Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall
Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia
Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New
Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan
Palau Palestine, State of Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines
Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Saint Martin Samoa San Marino Sao
Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore
Sint Maarten Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa Spain Sri
Lanka Sudan Sudan, South Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan
Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey
Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United
States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam
Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, U.S. Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Job Title
Employer Field/ Background:     Academia     Philanthropy/ Donor     Government
Private Sector/ Business     Grantee     Researcher     Media     RF Alumni
Non-profit/ NGO     Other Interests     Food     Health     Power     Economic
Equity     Innovative Finance     Data & Technology     Convenings and Network/
Bellagio Center Geographic Focus:     Africa     North America     Asia Pacific
South America     Europe Name This field is for validation purposes and should
be left unchanged.                         Facebook Twitter linkedIn Instagram
YouTube  Copyright 2024 The Rockefeller Foundation.  All Rights Reserved
 Twitter  Facebook  LinkedIn