Solar thermal technologies deployed in around 400 million dwellings by 2030 –
Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre
IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system
by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission
Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and
Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore
all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's
50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical
Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy
Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable
Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries
Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or region Member countries
Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany
Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand
Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands
Türkiye United Kingdom United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa
Rica Israel Latvia Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India
Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All
Countries and Regions Data Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data
Data explorers Understand and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and
trackers Data explorers Data sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy
system available for download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or
planned government policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access
every chart published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports
Chevron down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February
2024                     Fuel report — February 2024
Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast to 2026                     Fuel report —
January 2024                  World Energy Outlook 2023
Flagship report — October 2023                  Net Zero Roadmap: A Global
Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Solar thermal technologies deployed in
around 400 million dwellings by 2030 Solar thermal technologies deployed in
around 400 million dwellings by 2030                                 Part of
Technology and innovation pathways for zero-carbon-ready buildings by 2030
Overview                                                      About this report
This analysis is part of a series from our new report,  Technology and
innovation pathways for zero-carbon-ready buildings by 2030 , and provides the
strategic vision of experts from the IEA Technology Collaboration Programmes
(TCPs) on how to help achieve some of the most impactful short-term milestones
for the buildings sector outlined in the  IEA’s Net Zero by 2050 Roadmap ; each
report’s title reflects one of these milestones. Learn more about the  report
and  explore the TCPs . Published September 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite
Highlights      Worldwide, dwellings using solar thermal technologies for water
heating reached  250 million  in 2020. To achieve the milestone of  400 million
dwellings by 2030 in the  Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario  (NZE Scenario),
290 million new solar thermal systems will need to be installed this decade.
This deployment target takes into account the expected decommissioning of solar
thermal systems which will happen during 2020s. According to the  IEA Solar
Heating and Cooling (SHC) TCP , 170 million new solar thermal systems using
standard technologies and 120 million new solar thermal systems using emerging
technologies will need to be installed by 2030. Therefore, the  deployment of
solar thermal technologies  in the 2020s will need to at least match the total
deployment from the previous two decades for the 2030 milestone to be met. The
contribution from emerging solar thermal technologies will be critical to meet
this goal. Targeted innovation (technology, regulatory, and market) directed
towards bringing these emerging technologies into their growth phase will be
necessary in the next five years. To achieve the 400 million dwelling target, a
hybrid approach of deploying standard and emerging solar thermal technologies by
2030 will be required. Government support for large-scale pilot projects of the
emerging smart solar-powered heat storage systems in the 2020s could direct this
technology towards the 9 th  Technological Readiness Level  (TRL)
internationally by the end of the decade.  Penetration of solar thermal
technologies under current trends with respect to the Net Zero Scenario
deployment target to 2030 Open expand         Relevance      Solar thermal
technologies can provide high fractions of water heating demand at low capital
cost, even in cold climates. They can be used stand-alone or integrated into
virtually any type of heating system, regardless of the primary heat source
(direct electricity, heat pumps, district heating, biomass, or clean fuels).
Exemplary uses of standard solar thermal technologies (evacuated tube and flat
plate) with water-based heat storage include:  High-density housing developments
because standard collectors, including  hybrid photovoltaic-thermal collectors ,
have a high useful heat output per meter square of collector. District heating
networks (with and without seasonal storage) can provide a very low levelised
cost of heat using  centralised MW-scale solar thermal plants . Rural low heat
demand housing in low- and middle-income countries as low-cost solar
thermosiphon and  solar swimming pool heaters  can provide quicker financial
payback than other water heating technologies. Very  high solar fraction combi
systems  (space heating and hot water) for single-family buildings are
particularly suitable for rural houses in middle- and high-income countries.
Many of the 100 million households targeted in the NZE Scenario to rely on
rooftop solar PV by 2030 could have power-to-heat related technologies installed
that work intelligently to optimise self-consumption. These emerging solar
thermal technologies are:  Electrical heat storage (including hot water tanks
and  compact heat stores , both residential scale and district heating scale)
using the power from solar photovoltaics (on-site and/or off-site). These types
of smart solar-powered heat storage systems are suitable for rural and urban
housing in middle- and high-income countries and are currently at the 7 th  TRL
in Europe. Heat pumps (heating, cooling and dehumidification) and direct
electric heating using the power from solar photovoltaics (on-site and/or off-
site). These are particularly suitable for rural houses in middle- and high-
income countries. Centralised  solar power combined with air conditioning  is
particularly suitable for high-density housing in the sunbelt regions (±10ᵒ from
both the Northern and Southern Tropic).         Current state      Deployment
growth rates for standard solar thermal technologies have generally  declined
globally in recent years, however, 2021 did show a change in this downward trend
with a positive growth rate of 3%. Some markets in 2021 have demonstrated that
significant year-on-year deployment growth rates of standard solar thermal are
still achievable, with Italy, Brazil and the United States posting growth rates
of 83%, 28% and 19%, respectively. Data is scarce on the current deployment of
emerging solar thermal technologies (e.g. solar photovoltaic to heat), however
markets such as  South Africa have already reached 10 MWp  since the start of
data collection in 2018.         Challenges      The major challenges to
achieving the 2030 milestone are the certification and installation standards
for solar thermal technologies (standard and emerging), which are currently not
sufficiently harmonised across all regions. The discontinuous deployment and
promotion policies are not conducive to the efficient development of the solar
thermal industry; and innovation spending is often not aligned with industrial
strategy, leading to poor allocation of research funding and weak  internal
markets  for solar thermal technologies.          Innovation themes covered by
the IEA TCPs      Advancing solar thermal support schemes towards achieving the
2030 deployment milestone, whilst also securing prosperity and creating
sustainable employment opportunities. Enabling the comprehensive integration of
solar  energy considerations  into local planning and  buildings energy codes
(new building and renovation of existing buildings). Research and demonstration
that would result in the lowering of capital cost, improving the technical
performance, enhancing the  installation experience , and removing the  market
barriers  of emerging and standard solar thermal technologies.         Policy
recommendations      Strategies Policy recommendations Market creation and
standards   Harmonising of regulations across countries Regulations.   Consider
national and local requirements, and harmonise the regulations, standards,
testing, and certification procedures (for standard and emerging solar thermal
technologies). Develop and deploy zero-carbon-ready building (ZCRB) codes by
2030 Building codes.   Advance national building energy codes moving toward deep
energy efficiency, zero-carbon-ready metrics, renewables integration, and
flexibility.  Planning instruments   Integrate renewables energy source planning
and local planning Local energy planning.  Comprehensively integrate solar
technologies (passive solar, solar thermal, and solar photovoltaic) into urban
planning.  Develop national solar thermal roadmaps National energy planning.
Develop and implement solar thermal technology development and deployment
roadmaps based on the specific characteristics (political, social, and economic)
of the country Plan technology support schemes aligned with national market
potential National energy planning   Pay special attention whether internal
markets (or export market) for the technology exists in the particular country
once launching a governmental innovation support programme. Economic and
financial instruments   Implement financial instruments to deploy solar thermal
technologies  Incentives  Provide incentives to promote the development and the
use of solar thermal installation standards, which enable monitoring of
deployment.  Cooperation-based instruments   Enable industry consultations
Stakeholders' engagement  Develop consultation tables to promote exchange and
collaboration across the different low-carbon technology industries to exploit
synergies.  Public support to R&D   Implement R&D to test different installation
techniques Allocate funding.  Provide financial resources for demonstrating
solar thermal systems installed in different contexts. Education and training  
Develop capacity building Capacity building campaigns.  Mandate training for
designers and installers, for both conventional and emerging solar thermal
technologies.         Related content      All results circle-arrow Technology
and Innovation Pathways for Zero-carbon-ready Buildings by 2030 A strategic
vision from the IEA Technology Collaboration Programmes
Technology report — September 2022                  The Energy Mix Get updates
on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly.
Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics
Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics
Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-
east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin
youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close
dialog IEA (2022),  Solar thermal technologies deployed in around 400 million
dwellings by 2030 , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/solar-thermal-
technologies-deployed-in-around-400-million-dwellings-by-2030, Licence: CC BY
4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter
Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email
Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for
subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom
of any IEA newsletter.