Targeting 100% LED lighting sales by 2025 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search
Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search
Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or
sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Targeting 100% LED lighting sales by 2025
Targeting 100% LED lighting sales by 2025                                 Part
of Technology and innovation pathways for zero-carbon-ready buildings by 2030
Overview                                                      About this report
This analysis is part of a series from our new report,  Technology and
innovation pathways for zero-carbon-ready buildings by 2030 , and provides the
strategic vision of experts from the IEA Technology Collaboration Programmes
(TCPs) on how to help achieve some of the most impactful short-term milestones
for the buildings sector outlined in the  IEA’s Net Zero by 2050 Roadmap ; each
report’s title reflects one of these milestones. Learn more about the  report
and  explore the TCPs . Published September 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite
Highlights      All over the world, new companies focusing solely on Light-
Emitting Diode (LED) technologies are entering the market and challenging some
of the traditional lighting companies, further facilitating the market
transition that will contribute to significant CO 2  emissions savings. Market
players are moving quickly, with companies developing and introducing
increasingly efficient products with better performance, smart features and
excellent quality light.  However, policy makers must keep pace by implementing
and enforcing regulations in the buildings sector to ensure the switch in the
global lighting market to 100% LED by 2025 is reached — a key milestone in
transforming the global buildings sector under the  Net Zero Emissions by 2050
Scenario  (NZE Scenario). Many national and regional policies are already
leading markets towards efficient lighting technologies through minimum energy
performance standards (MEPS), energy labelling, quality assurance, and incentive
programmes. But with the 2025 target just three years away, more needs to be
done.         Relevance      LED lighting can now be found across all
applications in the market, from use in small keychains to football stadium
flood lighting. LED technology is the most efficient way to convert electrons
into photons, and it also offers features such as longer lifetime, superior
integration with lighting controls, better optical control, improved
dimmability, and colour-shifting. From a circular economy perspective, LED light
sources have the least environmental impact, offering the best options when
looking across the whole product life cycle. The energy efficiency – or
“efficacy” for light sources – is expected by the US Department of Energy to
continue to improve through 2050, further reducing the environmental impact and
lowering running costs. More improvements are incentivised because higher
efficacy means more light per chip (so fewer chips are needed in each light
source) and lower electrical currents (so LED drivers can be reduced in size and
last longer). LED lighting is already highly cost-effective compared to
conventional light sources, especially incandescent, halogen and fluorescent
lamps. Direct, drop-in replacement LED products have been developed by the
industry so that fixtures do not need to be changed. These drop-in LED retrofit
solutions allow existing fixtures to remain in place while the end user can
benefit from substantially lower running costs. Compared to incandescent, LED
lamps offer 80-90% energy savings. Compared to fluorescent, they achieve 50-60%
savings.  LED retrofit tubes can have payback periods as short as four months
(replacing linear fluorescent lamps). For general lighting service (A-type) LED
lamps, the payback can be instantaneous or just a matter of weeks when compared
with tungsten-filament light sources and compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) –
thereafter the LED products last typically for five to ten years depending on
the lamp lifetime and usage, generating even more savings. Compared with
fluorescent lighting technologies, LED lighting systems are much easier to
integrate with smart controls to create intelligent and responsive living
environments in homes, offices and cities – delivering light when and where it’s
needed. LED technology also offers substantial benefits for households that are
off-grid, and given its durability and efficiency, this sector converted to LED
more than a decade ago.         Current state      LED lighting is already a
mass-market technology in developed economies and is gaining a growing share in
many emerging and developing countries. Indeed, the technology has evolved so
quickly that in 2022 chip-on-board LEDs lumens per watt (lm/W) offer  efficacies
over 150 lm/W  – double the efficacy of the fluorescent technology – with high
colour rendering and stability. The best commercialised non-directional lamps
are  210 lm/W  – over 15 times more efficient than incandescent and four times
more efficient than CFLs. China is the world’s largest producer, consumer and
exporter of LED lighting products, with ongoing policy initiatives moving their
market towards 100% LED lighting. Many governments around the world are acting
quickly to phase out inefficient light sources through performance standards,
labelling and incentive programmes, such as in Europe where the transition to
LED started over a decade ago. The European Union recently  updated regulations
under the Ecodesign Directive and the Restriction of Hazardous Substances
Directive that will together eliminate virtually all fluorescent lighting in
2023. In Africa, 16 countries in the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) have adopted a  regionally harmonised lighting standard  that will move
their market to all LED in the next few years. Six countries in the East African
Community (EAC) are also adopting lighting regulations that will phase out
fluorescent. Other jurisdictions, including countries in Southeast Asia, are
introducing similar measures.         Challenges      Despite recent market
progress, several challenges remain. LED lamps often have a higher upfront cost,
but incremental costs are decreasing and paybacks are rapid. Bulk procurement
and awareness campaigns can help further reduce the upfront cost and to
accelerate the shift towards LED lighting sales. The market also needs to be
protected from poor quality products in terms of consumer experience (life,
colour, appearance, efficiency, standby power) as well as health (flicker, blue
light, safety). Improved metrics for LED lighting can be delivered by better
policy measures and regulations. In fact, it is important that LEDs installed
offer end users a good quality consumer experience, including long life, good
colour quality and low energy consumption, among other factors. These aspects
can be addressed through mandatory quality and performance regulations, such as
those recommended in the IEA’s  Solid State Lighting  (SSL) Annex’s  Quality and
Performance Requirements  for LED Lighting Products.  New and sustainable
business models are also needed to move towards lower volume sales of LED
lighting with improved product quality and features, such as an increased
building level systems integration (home energy management systems).  Putting in
place systems for end-of-life collection and recycling is also a critical
challenge faced by the lighting market.          Innovation themes covered by
the IEA TCPs      Improvement in the efficacy of LED chips. Complementing this
are better methods of testing and regulating the lifetime of LED products
through advanced metrics and test procedures.  Improve the circularity of LED
technology, including modular approaches, upgradable light engines and
replaceable parts, to extend the serviceable life of LED luminaires. Energy
consumption for smart features that improve the user experience ( smart lighting
). Metrics for measurement, and establishing evidence-based requirements (
quality and performance requirements ). Reducing life cycle assessment impacts
and improving understanding of linkages and effects between lighting and both
human health and the environment . Enhance metrology through improving standards
and laboratory accuracy ( interlaboratory comparisons ). Integrated solutions
for daylighting and electric lighting  that improve comfort and lighting
quality.         Policy recommendations      Strategies Policy recommendations
Market creation and standards   Enforce minimum energy performance standards
(MEPS) Regulation and monitoring.   Implement and periodically review MEPS for
lighting in all countries that phase out conventional (i.e. non-LED) lighting
technologies by 2025. Government procurement Green procurements.   Adopt a green
procurement specification for 100% LED lighting as soon as possible; include
quality and performance criteria using the IEA 4E SSL Annex guidance. Planning
instruments   Include power density limits in energy planning Local and national
energy planning.   For new construction and renovation, define and introduce
maximum power density limits, incentivising the use of controls for optimisation
of the illuminated space. Economic and financial instruments   Economic
incentives and bulk procurement Financial incentives.   Provide subsidies, tax
breaks, public procurements and other fiscal incentives to encourage and
accelerate market adoption of LED technology. Engage electric utilities in LED
promotion schemes. Enable innovative business models Regulation.  Support
circular economy through “lighting as a service”, whereby high-efficacy lighting
services are leased from lighting specialists rather than owned by the end user.
Cooperation-based instruments   Enable international cooperation-based
programmes National and international collaboration.  Launch programmes to work
with other governments regionally and globally, and consider developing
harmonised standards on lighting quality and performance. Public support to R&D
 Support domestic LED manufacturing and start-ups Allocate funding.  Provide
financial resources to support the start-up of domestic LED lamp and luminaire
manufacturing.  Develop laboratory capacity Allocate funding.  Support the
development of lighting laboratories through funding and grants, encourage
accreditation to key metrics used in the national MEPS.  Education and training
 Awareness campaigns Awareness raising  Conduct communication campaigns to help
consumers to choose optimal lighting sources (and understand lumen equivalency,
colour temperature and other key metrics). Provide education for efficient and
healthy lighting design.         Related content      All results circle-arrow
Technology and Innovation Pathways for Zero-carbon-ready Buildings by 2030 A
strategic vision from the IEA Technology Collaboration Programmes
Technology report — September 2022                  The Energy Mix Get updates
on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly.
Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics
Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics
Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-
east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin
youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close
dialog IEA (2022),  Targeting 100% LED lighting sales by 2025 , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/targeting-100-led-lighting-sales-by-2025, Licence:
CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter
Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email
Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for
subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom
of any IEA newsletter.