Promoting renewable energy for a clean and sustainable future | United Nations
Development Programme     Skip to main content
Bhutan
Who We Are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who We Are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Locations                 Home Bhutan         Promoting renewable energy for a
clean and sustainable future                       Promoting renewable energy
for a clean and sustainable future   April 9, 2021             The pilot grid-
tied solar project at the UN House will demonstrate solar as a reliable energy
source and serve as a key driver of energy source diversification in Bhutan. The
UN House in Thimphu inaugurated its 83 KW grid connected rooftop solar, a first
of its kind in Bhutan, and the 20 KW solar-thermal space heating projects on 8
March 2021. Built at a total cost of USD 99,000, the investment works out to USD
1192/KW installed capacity and is comparable to the costs of other conventional
energy sources. As part of the UN’s collective efforts, UNDP contributed US$
70,000 through the Green Fund initiated by UNDP Regional Office.    While the
components of the solar projects are imported, the design as well as
installation of the project was carried out by JB Solar, a local firm involved
in the design, assembly, and installation of solar photo-voltaic systems. UNDP
is currently in the advanced stages of discussion with the Bhutan Electricity
Authority, the regulatory authority on electricity systems in Bhutan and Bhutan
Power Corporation Limited on piloting a net metering system of the solar
project. Net metering, simply put, is a billing mechanism that credits solar
energy generators for the electricity they add to the grid. In other words, it
allows residential, institutional, or commercial customers who generate their
own electricity from solar power to export the power they aren’t using back into
the grid and subtract the energy exported from the monthly energy bill. If the
net metering plan comes through, the excess or saved energy generated by the
newly installed solar panels at the UN House will be fed to the BPC grid.  The
benefits are manifold. First, a saving of over Nu. 500,000 in energy costs would
be made annually. Besides the cost savings, the surplus energy export to India
from the national grid will result in a mitigation benefit of 132.62 tons of
carbon dioxide per year. The most important benefit is its potential catalytic
impact. The project will demonstrate the viability of solar as a viable energy
source and is expected to serve as a key driver of energy source diversification
in Bhutan. This is crucial as Bhutan currently relies on a single source, that
is, hydropower. Climate change poses threats to Bhutan’s energy security as lean
flow generation may not be able to meet domestic energy demand leading to import
from the Indian grid. “Greenhouse gas emissions dropped significantly worldwide
last year due to the slowdown in travel and economic activities, but it may well
remain a mere blip on the long-term graph if countries do not work harder to get
all the way down to net-zero emission,” said UNDP Resident Representative Azusa
Kubota. “Bhutan is already carbon-negative, but here in the UN, we are going
beyond net-zero by rigorously promoting electric vehicles and renewable energy,
notably solar energy. I would like to thank our dynamic partnership with DRE in
pursuing green growth and sustainable development and look forward to taking
clean energy initiatives forward through policy dialogues and field
engagements.” This innovative project is led by UNDP with support from BPC. It
builds on the 180 KW Pilot Grid-Tied Ground Mounted Solar PV System being
installed in Rubesa, Wangdue Phodrang. The pilot project in Rubesa is being
implemented by the Department of Renewable Energy (DRE), Ministry of Economic
Affairs, and BPC in partnership with UNDP. It is part of UNDP’s COVID-19
response and recovery project titled,  ‘Towards a Smarter, Greener and More
Resilient Recovery through Innovation in Bhutan’  launched in July 2020 with
fund support from the Government of Japan.  The solar project is housed at the
Wind Farm in Rubesa and is expected to be commissioned by June 2021. The UN
House initiated its first solar project- a Solar Walkway- in 2017, which
generates 1,225 KWh monthly and the energy generated is stored and used to light
the UN House premises. Contributed by Sangay Dorji, National Energy and
Environment Expert and Dechen Wangmo, Communications Analyst       Related
Content Speeches Gender equality today for a sustainable tomorrow Opening
Statement by Resident Representative A special edition of Bhutan Dialogues to
mark International Women's Day 2022   Kuzuzangpola! On behalf of UN, UNDP an...
Read more  Stories Climate change endangers livelihoods, exacerbates women's
insecurity As Cordyceps, an expensive caterpillar fungus, become rarer due to
rising temperatures, women in Bhutan's highland community of Lunana foresee a
bleak future for ... Read more  Stories Making cloth diapers for environment
Sharan Kumari Gurung, a young mother of three makes reusable cloth diapers for
living and to save environment Sharan Kumari Gurung is a proud owner of Dhoriri,
a ... Read more  Press Releases 6 in 7 people worldwide plagued by feelings of
insecurity --- Image caption --- 9 February 2022: Global development progress
does not automatically lead to a greater sense of security, according to a new
United Nations D... Read more  Stories Saving lives of mothers and babies
Kunzang Choden with her newborn photographed at her home in Punakha on 24
December 2021 Kunzang Choden, 30, from Samdingkha in Punakha, a mother of three,
deliver... Read more    Search           Found  0  results.            Did you
mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United
Nations Development Programme                         Who We Are
About Us                                                            Our
Leadership                                                            Legal
Framework                                                            Funding
Our Partners                                                      What we do
Sustainable Development Goals
Our Focus                                                      Our Impact
News Centre                                                             Blogs
Stories                                                             Projects
Publications                                                      Get Involved
Careers                                                             Procurement
Contact Us                               Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Scam
Alert  Submit social or environmental complaint Terms of Use twitter facebook
youtube instagram linkedin © 2024 United Nations Development Programme