The Potential of Digital Business Models in the New Energy Economy – Analysis -
IEA IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip
navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel,
technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels
Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and
Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore
all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's
50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical
Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy
Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable
Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries
Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or region Member countries
Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany
Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand
Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands
Türkiye United Kingdom United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa
Rica Israel Latvia Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India
Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All
Countries and Regions Data Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data
Data explorers Understand and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and
trackers Data explorers Data sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy
system available for download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or
planned government policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access
every chart published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports
Chevron down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February
2024                     Fuel report — February 2024
Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast to 2026                     Fuel report —
January 2024                  World Energy Outlook 2023
Flagship report — October 2023                  Net Zero Roadmap: A Global
Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free The Potential of Digital Business Models in the New
Energy Economy                                                     Speeding
efficiency gains and increasing demand-side flexibility
Report — 07 January 2022                  Authors and contributors
License                  CC BY 4.0 Authors and contributors Close dialog Lead
authors Emi Bertoli Contributors                                      Monica
Troilo                                       Ahmad Al Mugharbil
Vida Rozite                                       Jean-Baptiste Le Marois
The pace of digitalisation in the energy sector has accelerated rapidly in
recent years, leading to a transformation of many traditional business models.
Thanks to innovative technologies and access to new types of data, new revenue
streams and services have emerged, costs have been reduced and barriers to new
market entrants have been lowered. Energy companies continue to find novel ways
of doing business and engaging with their customers.  This article highlights
the potential of digital business models to facilitate clean energy transitions,
with a particular focus on how they can enhance energy efficiency and demand-
side flexibility. It also identifies a set of general recommendations for
governments to support the scaling up of innovative business models. Reaching
net zero is a major challenge, but digitalisation can ease the transition The
energy system is undergoing deep structural change as electrification becomes
more prevalent across industries and energy-demand patterns shift. According to
the IEA’s Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario (NZE),  240 million rooftop photo-
voltaic solar systems   and  1.6 billion electric cars   are integrated into the
power system by the middle of this century, while more than 85% of the world’s
existing building stock is retrofitted to meet standards that are zero-carbon
ready. The average annual rate of economy-wide energy efficiency improvement
doubles through to 2030, compared with the average over the last ten years to
2020, in NZE. To achieve this, the flexibility of future low-carbon electricity
systems (based on hour-to-hour ramping needs) quadruples to accommodate variable
sources of renewable power. Batteries and greater demand-side response deliver
about half of NZE flexibility improvements. Thus, accelerating action in the
current decade is crucial for meeting these climate objectives.  Under the NZE,
annual investments in clean energy increase to around USD  4 trillion  by 2030.
Close to 70% of that is borne by the private sector – consumers and investors,
who will be reacting to price signals and government policies. The required
measures – including building retrofits, installations of electric vehicle (EV)
charging infrastructure and other initiatives – all involve high up-front
capital investments. Reaching this level of financial commitment is a huge
challenge, particularly – but not exclusively – in emerging markets and
developing economies. Given the magnitude of the investments needed, and the
rapid pace of change required, many legacy business models in the energy-service
sector may not be up to the challenge. Rapidly adapting their physical equipment
and infrastructure to customers’ changing needs is difficult, for example, and
their analog methods of data collection are labour-intensive and yield limited
insights. In contrast, digital business models are software-driven. Having
access to more granular data, combined with advanced analytics capability,
allows digitally enabled companies to more accurately quantify the benefits
their solutions bring to customers. This can also help speed the development of
new products and services. Digital tools and platforms can ease and accelerate
the energy transition by facilitating efficiency and demand-side flexibility. At
the same time, digitalisation creates new business opportunities and revenue
streams for energy service providers, while helping consumers to better
understand their energy use and lower their bills. Main characteristics of
traditional and digital business models   Traditional business models Digital
business models Product Based on sales of physical products or units. Limited
incentives for producers to improve the efficiency of their products. Based on
sales of services. Strong incentives for providers to invest in efficiency and
maintenance as a strategy to directly increase profits. Data collection
Traditional data collection methods such as surveys and market analysis. Limited
data points which take time to analyse. Access to granular data plus advanced
analytics for new insights. Eases product development and customised services
and offerings. Time to market Hardware-defined. Relatively inflexible due to
time needed to develop new equipment and adjust production processes. Software
driven. More reactive and flexible, greater opportunities to adjust to changes
in the market due to shorter development lead times. Supplier operations Based
on physical presence in markets with limited hours of operation and geographic
scope. Online presence. Potential to operate 24/7 through automation and staff
spread across time zones. Customer management Limited direct interaction with
customers. Timely and frequent interaction with customers via platforms and
apps. Supply chain and procurement Highly dependent upon supply chains. Assets
can be sourced from a wide range of retailers and manufacturers. Note: List is
not exhaustive Venture capital is flowing to digital energy start-ups despite
the Covid-19 pandemic Recent years have seen an  increase  in the number of
digital start-ups in the energy sector. Despite expectations of a slowdown in
venture capital (VC) financing due to the Covid-19 pandemic, early-stage
investments  in clean energy start-ups actually  increased  in 2020.  Global
early-stage venture capital investments in digital energy-efficiency and demand-
side flexibility start-ups, by type of new business model, 2015-2021 Open expand
Early-stage venture capital investments in energy-efficiency and demand-side
flexibility start-ups featuring new or innovative business models are on the
rise. In 2020, these aggregated to about USD 900 million (excluding outlier
investments of USD 150 million in a single deal), an increase of 20% from 2019,
and three times the level of financing in 2016. Preliminary analysis for the
first half of 2021 indicates the level of investment has remained stable year-
on-year.  Energy as a service (EaaS) schemes in buildings have attracted the
bulk of early-stage venture investments in new business models. In EaaS models,
customers pay a subscription fee in return for a package of energy services.
Unlike traditional  Energy Savings Performance Contracts , the upfront costs –
installing “smart” monitoring and control equipment, for example – as well as
the ownership and maintenance risks, are assumed by the service providers
instead of the end-users. More and more, commercial and industrial customers are
opting for  pay-for-performance  contracts with EaaS companies to retrofit their
premises. Under these arrangements, they pay a contracted rate based on energy
savings that have been verified, for example through smart metering. This
approach is compatible with efforts by national regulators to introduce more
ambitious energy efficiency requirements and it creates incentives for
entrepreneurs to enter the market with new and more nimble business approaches
that better meet the needs of end-users.  In 2020, EaaS providers were the
beneficiaries of about half of all early stage venture funding in the sector.
One such business is Veev, a company that develops and constructs smart
residential and commercial buildings. Veev raised about USD 100 million in a
series B  1  from venture capital in 2020  and another USD 100 million in a
growth equity financing round in 2021 .  Elsewhere, start-ups offering electric
vehicle charging as a service are also gaining funding momentum. In 2020, such
companies attracted about USD 200 million – one quarter of all early-stage
venture capital investments in the sector. That corresponds to a roughly ten-
fold increase since 2015 – a strong indicator of recent investor enthusiasm.
Among the companies that have drawn attention in this area is Wallbox, a Spanish
maker of smart car-charging stations. Wallbox received  more than USD 25 million
in seed money and series A  2  funding in 2019-20 to finance R&D, and a further
USD 40 million in growth equity in 2021  to expand their operations in China and
North America. Another example is United States-based Volta Charging, which has
quickly scaled up with support from a dozen investors including Schneider
Electric of France. Volta raised  more than USD 170 million in growth equity
money between 2018 and 2021. Both  Wallbox  and  Volta  announced “reverse
mergers” in 2021 with listed, special purpose acquisition companies, raising
still more capital to meet the growing demand for electric vehicle charging.
Early-stage venture capital investments in firms developing solutions for
distributed energy resources (DER) and grid management have more than doubled
since 2015. These account for a smaller share of start-up activity than smart
buildings or vehicle charging, however. Virtual power plants (VPPs) and similar
dynamic platforms and systems for aggregating DERs have so far attracted much
less money. Nonetheless, these still hold potential as demand increases for
smart grid technologies that enable flexibility and integration of renewable
sources, energy storage and electric vehicles on the grid.  Gridwiz , a Korean
aggregator of flexibility resources, for example, raised about USD 15 million in
early-stage financing in 2017, and another USD 40 million in growth equity in
2021. A similar though less active trend applies to investments in energy
trading and peer-to-peer (P2P) platforms, which have seen a slight increase in
venture funding in 2021 compared to previous years. Digital business models can
deliver additional benefits to consumers The growth in these investments
highlights the expanding role of digitalisation in the future energy landscape.
By lowering the most common barriers to energy transition investment – high
upfront costs, lack of access to finance, high perceived risk, lack of trust in
new technologies, competing investment priorities, lack of knowledge and
awareness, split incentives – these digitally enabled businesses are making
clean energy solutions more accessible and affordable.  Electric vehicle
charging as a service, for instance, includes offerings ranging from
infrastructure installation to efficiency monitoring and maintenance in exchange
for a subscription fee.  ENGIE in Latin America  offers such a smart charging
plan to enterprise clients, which it says can reduce their infrastructure and
energy costs by around 40%. EaaS models rely on internet-connected smart phones
and display devices as platforms where customers can actively track their energy
performance and financial status.  The peer-to-peer model, meanwhile, enables
online marketplaces where producers and consumers can trade electricity without
an intermediary, empowering individuals and communities to take active control
over their energy-generating assets.  One energy trading platform in Poland  is
enabling real-time auctions to buy and sell electricity, generating a total of
more than USD 970 thousand (PLN 4 million) in savings for users.  The crucial
aspect of all digital models is that they are software-based. This makes them
inherently more flexible, customisable and intuitive for end-users. This can be
of particular benefit to consumers in emerging markets and developing economies
where energy access is often an urgent problem and overcoming cost barriers is a
persistent challenge. Pay-as-you-go (PAYG) schemes spare customers in these
markets the burden of shouldering the full cost upfront. Instead, ownership of
solar kits  and  clean cooking solutions   is transferred over time via a
periodic payment plan. Such models are especially suited to rural communities,
enabling customers to purchase equipment using fintech-enabled digital wallets.
Uganda-based  Fenix , for example, provides solar systems to households, farmers
and small businesses. Its platform enables access to ultra efficient
technologies such as LED lights, TVs and other appliances, coupled with off-grid
solar and storage. Alternative payment options exist to accommodate customers
without access to traditional banking services, while instalment schedules can
be adjusted for those whose incomes are seasonal or irregular. Similarly,
cooling as a service makes clean and efficient cooling accessible to those who
might not otherwise be able to afford the upfront cost of equipment. Users pay a
monthly fee based on the amount of cooling used. This model also creates
economic benefits beyond energy. In India,  CoolCrop , supported by the  Basel
Agency for Sustainable Energy , provides  off-grid solar powered refrigeration
with digital controls  to farmers lacking cold storage resources. CoolCrop’s
initial assessments indicate that energy consumption can be reduced by as much
as 20% compared to conventional cooling thanks to a remotely accessible control
module that optimises energy use. Lower energy bills have the further potential
to increase farmers’ incomes by 50% or more and can reduce post-harvest spoilage
by more than 20%, the company says. Similarly, in Nigeria,  ColdHubs  provides a
plug-and-play, modular, efficient, solar-powered walk-in cold room. The company
says its solution reduces post‑harvest losses by 80% and increases farmers’
annual income by 25%. (ColdHubs also happens to be contributing to gender equity
in India by hiring mostly women for operations management and revenue
collection.) How digitalisation lowers barriers for energy-efficiency and
demand-side flexibility solutions Barriers to implementation Digital solutions
Business model examples Potential benefits are limited and distributed across a
range of entities Systems to monitor, forecast, and trade services. Pooling of
resources to achieve sufficient scale to attract investors. Virtual power plants
that aggregate distributed energy resources and enable participation in
electricity markets. Insufficient incentives, low and/or slow returns on
investment   Apps and platforms which bundle multiple value streams to improve
economies of scale. Known as “value stacking,” this can improve returns and
shorten payback periods. Vehicle-to-grid solutions that allow EVs to send power
into the grid when not in use. Use of DERs to lower electricity bills, reduce
peak demand or regulate voltage and frequency. High upfront asset costs and/or
perceived financial risk, lack of access to finance Apps, management platforms
or licensed software that remove the need to own or invest in hardware or
infrastructure. Remote monitoring and control. “As a service” subscriptions to
efficient and smart cooling or heating systems, charging infrastructure or other
services. Limited end-user access to energy, smart technologies, means of
payment or finance Stand-alone smart equipment. Mobile payments, virtual wallets
and other digital payment apps or platforms. Pay-as-you-go for home solar kits
and clean-cooking solutions for off-grid users. Lack of empowerment or influence
over electricity distribution systems Multi-sided buyer-seller configurations
enabled by IT platforms. Online peer-to-peer platforms that allow users to trade
power produced by their own assets (e.g. rooftop PVs) without an intermediary.
Note: List is not exhaustive. Digital business models support the deployment of
innovative technologies and create new revenue streams Digital business models
leverage technological advancements to alter and boost the revenue streams of
stakeholders, making way for a range of ancillary benefits. Large corporations
are increasingly looking to tap into these opportunities. Digitalisation is
creating new opportunities for legacy energy companies. It is also attracting
large technology corporations to the energy sector. Increasingly, energy and
tech companies are investing in projects, partnerships and digital energy
companies. For example, at the end of 2020, Sidewalk Infrastructure Partners – a
venture backed by Google’s parent company, Alphabet – invested  USD 100 million
to build a virtual power plant in California that plans to aggregate 750 000
electricity customers. In early 2021, Enel X of Italy and the Indian engineering
group Sterling and Wilson announced  a 50-50 joint venture  to sell, deploy and
manage smart electric vehicle charging infrastructure across India that uses a
software-as-a-service model. Additionally, the British energy group BP  acquired
Open Energi , an AI-driven company that integrates DERs into power markets.
Digital business models can also unlock new revenue streams for retail power
suppliers and can support the creation of new entities. Through virtual power
plants, for example, electricity suppliers and aggregators can earn revenue by
providing balancing services to the local network through matching DER
operations with grid needs. These entities can also trade in the wholesale power
market and provide retail power supply, as in the case of Centrica’s  USD 23
million virtual power plant project  in Cornwall, in south‑west England.
Entrepreneurs have also been stepping in with innovative models that build on
technologies developed by others. Some, for instance, have leveraged existing
smart building technologies to develop new engagement channels with their
customers (including through in-home displays and apps), generating revenue and
cost savings through more efficient energy use. By reducing upfront investments
and risk, and helping to optimise capital expenditures, digitalisation can also
accelerate the adoption of advanced technologies and foster innovation among
utilities and grid operators. In areas where cybersecurity is sufficiently
robust, for example, utilities can switch to software as a service (SaaS) – i.e.
buying online licenses or subscriptions instead of investing upfront on the
software itself – to enhance grid planning and dynamically monitor their assets.
Furthermore, the inherent flexibility of SaaS facilitates upgrades or other
system changes as technologies evolve. Aggregation models can also help
utilities to better plan their grid investments, lower their costs and improve
efficiency by providing flexibility at peak hours through virtual power plants
and electric vehicles. In the United Kingdom, regulators estimate that vehicle-
to-grid applications enabled by smart charging save around  USD 3.5 billion per
year  in electricity network reinforcements. Limited access to finance and
public budget constraints can present challenges in both advanced economies and
emerging markets. At the same time, these obstacles represent  significant
opportunities for energy entrepreneurs . Acting either as investors themselves
or by mobilising other sources of capital, energy start-ups and more established
players can help to identify and fill funding gaps – contributing to the
Sustainable Development Goal  of affordable, reliable and modern energy services
by 2030. Population growth, coupled with a recent slowdown in new investment,
has resulted in an increase in the global number of people lacking access to
electricity for the  first time since 2013 . Approximately  600 million people
in Africa  still have no access to electricity and millions of people are
relying on petrol and diesel generators as their primary source of power: In
Nigeria alone, back-up generation during frequent blackouts amounts to   USD 14
billion  of spending on fuel and equipment each year. Having spotted the
opportunity to serve this population, multiple companies – BBOXX, Baobab+ and
Engie Energy Access (grouping Fenix, Mobisol and Power Corner) – have moved in
to provide stand-alone solar home systems. These solutions also incorporate
mobile pay-as-you-go (PAYG) systems. In 2020,   2.1 million PAYG solar systems
were installed across Africa, providing electricity for homes, schools, health
care centres, and small enterprises. Globally, the volume of capital flowing
into off-grid solar increased to  more than USD 310 million in 2020  from just
USD 50 million in 2014. In 2020,  more than two-thirds of the global spend  on
such off-grid solar went to sub-Saharan Africa. Nonetheless, this pace of
investment remains insufficient to achieve the sustainability targets for the
end of this decade.  Suitable infrastructure as well as digital-ready regulatory
frameworks are essential With growing deployment of, and investments in,
digitally enabled business models, there are concerns about the readiness of
digital infrastructure, the adaptability of energy markets and existing
regulatory and policy environments. The Internet is the main information
exchange medium for these businesses. That means digital infrastructure must be
upgraded, both in terms of performance as well as coverage. Weak or unreliable
connectivity disrupts communication, hindering the transmission of metering data
and interrupting online payments as well electricity-trading platforms. Internet
outages and poor connectivity create headaches for rural communities, especially
in developing countries. Targeted initiatives to support digital development are
therefore required. One project tackling such barriers for new businesses is the
African Union’s  Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa (2020-2030) , which
supports affordable access to broadband Internet through smart devices as well
as cyber-security measures.  Real-time digital communication also depends on an
efficient and reliable electricity infrastructure.  IEA analysis  shows that the
deployment of smart electricity meters must be accelerated, particularly in
developing countries. In the last five years, emerging economies, excluding
China, have invested less than USD 2 billion per year in smart meter
installations – one-third of the USD 6 billion annual investment that the IEA’s
Sustainable Development Scenario  envisions between 2026 and 2030.  Governments
can take steps to support the scaling-up of innovative business models
Transitioning toward NZE requires significant leaps in clean energy investment,
technology deployment and demand-side flexibility. Digital business models offer
opportunities to help fill this gap in cheaper and more efficient ways – but
they frequently face regulatory and other hurdles. The growing interest from
venture investors and large corporations in digital energy innovators signals
how high the expectations are for growth in this sector. But these companies
urgently need governments and regulatory bodies to create suitable frameworks
that can help them to scale up. At the same time, consumers need regulations
that can protect them from abusive business practices, ensure transparency and
make sure any personal data shared with digital companies is appropriately used
and protected.  Economies are now rebounding from the Covid-19 recession.
Government recovery plans that include measures to encourage more user-centred
innovation, as well as incentives to upgrade energy and digital infrastructures,
can create new opportunities for digital businesses.  Regulatory frameworks  In
addition to adequate infrastructure, digital businesses need an innovation-
friendly regulatory environment. Peer-to-peer and virtual power plant models can
only thrive if  producers and consumers  are allowed to take part in
aggregations and if the roles of potential stakeholders are clearly defined
within the legal framework. The announcement of the  US Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission's Order 2222  – allowing aggregations of DERs in the
United States to compete in wholesale power markets – quickly led to more than
USD 1.2 billion  of investment commitments for virtual power plants in early
2021. Eliminating ambiguities in the law and industry standards can also help
pave the way for new business models to emerge. One example involves licensing
electric vehicle charging operators. In  Indonesia , licensing rights and
processes are clearly identified as part of a legal framework. In  India ,
however no license is required, but operators must meet a set of technical and
safety standards.  Peer-to-peer communities  also need consistent rules and
procedures that govern their relationships with utilities and retail customers,
as well as a system that manages potential charge imbalances. Standardisation
and interoperability Another frequent source of uncertainty facing new digital
businesses is compatibility with existing platforms and systems, as well as
potential issues linked to upgrade processes. Since technology evolves rapidly,
standardisation and interoperability are critical. For any consumer device
connected to a digital network, embedded interoperability should be the norm.
The  Energy Networks Association (ENA)  recently established a streamlined
process for connecting smart heat pumps and vehicles to electricity grids.
Openly disseminated standards identify performance benchmarks for businesses and
lower barriers to market entry for manufacturers and service providers. Social
acceptance and cybersecurity Social barriers can also be an impediment to the
uptake of smart technology, especially among consumers who are concerned about
data privacy. Once again, government regulation can play an important role in
building confidence by establishing safeguards to secure and protect access to
customer data by third parties. The  EU’s 2019 electricity market directive ,
for example, requires third parties that take on the “installation, operation,
data handling and maintenance” of metering devices to adhere to strict EU data
protection and privacy rules. By communicating these regulations – along with
the benefits and risks associated with digitalisation – through public awareness
campaigns, governments can foster broader acceptance of digital business models.
Meanwhile, because they rely on connected devices and technologies, digital
businesses and their customers are inherently more vulnerable to potential
cyberattacks. Governments, in collaboration with relevant stakeholders, can
ensure that the entire energy value chain is  cyber resilient , be it through
regulatory frameworks, establishing best-practice guidelines, international
certification or other similar mechanisms.  Building capacity and sharing
knowledge  A lack of digital literacy – among consumers as well as within
companies – is yet another obstacle that can hinder the progress of
digitalisation in the energy sector. This is of particular concern in
underprivileged communities. But the private sector, governments, and
international institutions can play an important role by supporting digital
skills education. The  Microsoft Airband Initiative  aims to enhance digital
inclusiveness by offering affordable Internet access, digital devices, and
skills training across Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. Similarly, the  IEA Global
Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions , established in 2021,
supports digital upskilling to ensure a socially affordable and equitable energy
transition. Acknowledgements:  The IEA would like to thank the participants in
the IEA Digitally Enabled Business Models Roundtable held on 29 July 2021, which
significantly informed the article.  The IEA gratefully acknowledges the support
of the Italian Ministry for Ecological Transition as part of its contributions
to the IEA’s Digital Demand Driven Electricity Networks Initiative (3DEN) and to
the  Clean Energy Transitions Programme . References Series B refers to funding
aimed at supporting the growth of a company after the initial stage of
development and earlier funding.  Series A refers to funding directed to
companies at an initial stage of growth, to kick off the business and flesh out
a strategy. Reference 1 Close dialog Series B refers to funding aimed at
supporting the growth of a company after the initial stage of development and
earlier funding.  Reference 2 Close dialog Series A refers to funding directed
to companies at an initial stage of growth, to kick off the business and flesh
out a strategy. The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis,
data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our
other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes
Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events
Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for
subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom
of any IEA newsletter.