Worth the hype? The role of clean hydrogen in achieving Net Zero | The Carbon
Trust       Skip to main content      Europe (English) Global Europa (Deutsch)
Africa (English) Latin America (English) Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English)
中国 Main Menu Who we are Overview Our experts Our history Our values and
commitments Our career opportunities Overview Internships What we do Overview
Strategy, delivery and reporting Overview Avoided emissions Beyond value chain
mitigation Climate action and Net Zero planning Climate change risks,
opportunities and TCFD alignment Decarbonisation strategy Footprinting
Implementation planning and execution Organisational verification Plastic
Packaging Framework Route to Net Zero Standard Supply chain engagement
Sustainability Reporting Sustainable finance Target setting The Carbon Trust
Standard for Zero Waste to Landfill Assurance and labelling Overview Carbon
neutral verification Footprint label – certified organisations PAS 2080 Product
carbon footprint label Market transformation Overview Acceso a energía limpia
Buildings and construction Clean hydrogen Climate policy Electromovilidad Energy
efficiency Energy Energía renovable terrestre Heat decarbonisation Heat networks
Industry Mining and metals Offshore wind Sustainable cooling Transport Venture
acceleration Our work and impact Overview Impact stories Guides, reports and
tools Overview 从英国能源技术清单（ETL）看英国节能技术推广 News and insights News Events Insights
Contact Europe (English) Global Europa (Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America
(English) Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国 Search Search Who we are
Overview Our experts Our history Our values and commitments Our career
opportunities Overview Internships What we do Overview Strategy, delivery and
reporting Overview Avoided emissions Beyond value chain mitigation Climate
action and Net Zero planning Climate change risks, opportunities and TCFD
alignment Decarbonisation strategy Footprinting Implementation planning and
execution Organisational verification Plastic Packaging Framework Route to Net
Zero Standard Supply chain engagement Sustainability Reporting Sustainable
finance Target setting The Carbon Trust Standard for Zero Waste to Landfill
Assurance and labelling Overview Carbon neutral verification Footprint label –
certified organisations PAS 2080 Product carbon footprint label Market
transformation Overview Acceso a energía limpia Buildings and construction Clean
hydrogen Climate policy Electromovilidad Energy efficiency Energy Energía
renovable terrestre Heat decarbonisation Heat networks Industry Mining and
metals Offshore wind Sustainable cooling Transport Venture acceleration Our work
and impact Overview Impact stories Guides, reports and tools Overview
从英国能源技术清单（ETL）看英国节能技术推广 News and insights News Events Insights Contact Europe
(English) Global Europa (Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America (English)
Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国 Breadcrumb Home Insights
Worth the hype? The role of clean hydrogen in achieving Net Zero
Insights Worth the hype? The role of clean hydrogen in achieving Net Zero The
scale up of clean hydrogen can play a crucial role in achieving Net Zero, by
enabling the decarbonisation of hard-to-abate sectors and the wider integrated
energy system. However, the hype around hydrogen also has the potential to
divert efforts to achieve Net Zero, by detracting attention from more efficient
low carbon alternatives in some sectors. In this briefing, our Net Zero
Intelligence Unit outlines the Carbon Trust’s systems-led vision for an
efficient, cost-effective role for clean hydrogen in achieving Net Zero. 12 June
2023 Image   Nina Foster Manager, Net Zero Intelligence Unit, The Carbon Trust
Share Image   In recent years, the potential role of clean hydrogen in achieving
Net Zero has captured the attention of policy makers and industry players around
the world. In 2020 alone, nine governments published strategies earmarking a
role for clean hydrogen in everything from buses to power generation. Industry
initiatives have promised the likes of hydrogen-powered jet engines and
hydrogen-heated homes. The hype around hydrogen has reached such a fever pitch
it would be easy to forget that less than 1% of current global hydrogen
production is clean. Also, in most modelled scenarios for Net Zero, clean
hydrogen is expected to remain costly throughout the 2020s, meaning that
deployment will need to be carefully prioritised.  In this briefing, we provide
some clarity by setting out our systems-led vision for the role of clean
hydrogen in achieving Net Zero. What is clean hydrogen? Currently, most global
hydrogen production is provided by  ‘grey’ hydrogen , or by ‘black’ hydrogen.
This carbon-intensive hydrogen is produced by splitting methane (CH4) into
carbon dioxide (CO2) and hydrogen (H2), or by partially burning coal to isolate
hydrogen. CO2 emissions are therefore a key by-product of current hydrogen
production: for every kilogram of grey hydrogen produced, approximately 10
kilograms of CO2 are emitted into the atmosphere. Across global hydrogen
production, 900 megatonnes of CO2 are emitted each year; roughly the same
quantity of emissions produced by the UK and Indonesia combined.  Novel methods
would lower or eliminate greenhouse gas emissions from hydrogen production
processes.  Whilst clean hydrogen is a term that has no official definition, it
is generally agreed that it is made using either of the following two production
methods: The first method creates  ‘blue’ hydrogen . The production process is
exactly the same as with grey hydrogen, however the majority (around 90 – 95%)
of the resulting CO2 emissions are captured and stored using Carbon Capture and
Storage (CCS) technology. CCS technology has not yet been deployed commercially
at the scale required to deliver the high rates of capture needed for blue
hydrogen production. As some CO2 emissions are inevitable even with high rates
of CCS, blue hydrogen is not directly compatible with Net Zero.  The second
method creates  ‘green’ hydrogen . Instead of using gas or coal to produce
hydrogen, electrolysis powered by renewable energy sources is used to split
hydrogen out from water molecules. The CO2 emissions from this production method
are therefore nil at the point of generation.   Potential risks of clean
hydrogen The colours of hydrogen refer only to the production method used. The
resulting hydrogen does not produce CO2 emissions when in use, regardless of the
production method used. However, recent research has shown that combustion of
hydrogen can create significant nitrous oxide (NO x ) emissions, which are a
harmful air pollutant. Though NO x  emissions are accounted for under
international obligations on air pollutants, the risks must be carefully
monitored and managed down to avoid unintended consequences of increased
hydrogen usage throughout the 2020s.  Further research has shown that if
hydrogen leaks, it can interact with other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere to
increase their global warming potential. To ensure green hydrogen supports the
delivery of Net Zero emissions, and precious resources of clean hydrogen are
conserved, this leakage risk must also be carefully managed.   The scale up of
clean hydrogen, particularly green hydrogen, also requires a systems-led
approach to the conservation of renewable energy resources and scarce water
resources. The production of green hydrogen through water electrolysis requires
a significant amount of renewable energy, indicating that increased green
hydrogen production will place demands of local renewable energy capacity. It is
important that this risk is managed to ensure local users of renewable energy
are not crowded out in favour of green hydrogen developers. A similar
consideration is required for water. Research shows that for every kilogram of
green hydrogen produced, nine kilograms of water are required. 1  The demand for
green hydrogen must therefore be managed in line with conservation of water
resources.  Why markets should aim for green hydrogen production Clean hydrogen
production is rare at present (less than 1% of current production), however the
International Energy Agency (IEA) has modelled that to stay on track for Net
Zero, around half of global hydrogen production will need to be clean by 2030,
with two thirds of this coming from green hydrogen, and the remaining third from
blue hydrogen.   This weighting towards green hydrogen is essential to drive
investment towards the most sustainable form of clean hydrogen production. Blue
hydrogen risks fossil fuel lock-in – a situation in which markets are compelled
to continue using fossil fuels – as well as stranded assets from the 2040s
onwards, when blue hydrogen is expected to be mostly replaced with green
hydrogen and so blue hydrogen production facilities will no longer be required.
It is also reliant on emerging CCS technology that has not been deployed at the
commercial scale required to support high rates of emissions removal.  For most
markets, especially those that have huge potential to scale up renewable energy
supplies, green hydrogen production should be the focus of policy and
investment.  Large-scale green hydrogen production also presents an attractive
export opportunity for these markets.   However, there are some circumstances in
which blue hydrogen may be needed to enable and accelerate the decarbonisation
of high-emitting sectors and the electricity system. For instance, in markets
where renewable energy supply pathways have had limitations placed on them
through policy decisions, blue hydrogen can help to stimulate economy-wide
demand for hydrogen by lowering costs through economies of production and
scale.  Any use of blue hydrogen must be supported by strict regulation and
enforcement to ensure at least 95% of CO2 emissions are captured and stored.
This use of blue hydrogen supports overall decarbonisation of the economy by
ensuring that where renewable energy supplies are limited, they are directed
towards the sectors where they can deliver the most impact. Clean hydrogen
should be prioritised for sectors where it can deliver maximum decarbonisation
impact Across all Net Zero modelling scenarios, resources of clean hydrogen are
expected to be relatively scarce across the world in the 2020s, as production
will be costly and will require a significant amount of renewable energy. It is
therefore vital that hydrogen resources are prioritised for use in sectors where
they can deliver maximum decarbonisation impact at the lowest cost, and where
alternative decarbonisation options are limited. As clean hydrogen is scaled up
around the world, investment and policy decisions should be guided towards
deployment of hydrogen in these sectors.  The Carbon Trust’s view is that clean
hydrogen should be prioritised for sectors where it can deliver significant
decarbonisation benefits at a systems level, avoiding sectors where mature
electrification technologies should be the primary focus of policies and
investment. Sectors and key areas for which clean hydrogen could deliver high
levels of decarbonisation:  Existing hydrogen production:  Carbon-intensive
hydrogen is currently used in industrial processes, such as oil refining and
chemical production. As hydrogen is the only feasible feedstock for these
processes, it is the responsibility of these high-emitting sectors to urgently
invest in the research and development required to enable a switch to clean
hydrogen. While fossil fuel production will need to be drastically scaled back
to achieve Net Zero, it is likely that some regions will continue to partially
rely on fossil fuels for decades to come. This makes the need to eliminate the
use of grey hydrogen in oil refining absolutely critical to minimise the
environmental impact of residual fossil fuel usage. Industrial processes:
Fossil fuel combustion for heat is responsible for a large proportion of
industrial emissions. Heat is often used to melt or vaporise substances or to
enable chemical reactions, for instance in the making of steel. Hydrogen has
comparative advantages for industrial heat above other clean options as it is
likely to face fewer barriers in terms of securing a network connection (a
barrier for electrification) or sourcing fuel (a barrier for biomass). 
Unlocking grid flexibility:  Decarbonisation of the energy system will be almost
impossible without production of electricity from stored hydrogen at times when
energy demand is not matched by renewables supply. The long-term, inter-seasonal
storage capacity of hydrogen enables it to be produced at times of lowest cost
to the wider energy system and re-electrified when needed. Provision of
flexibility to the energy system should therefore be explored further as a
future role for hydrogen. Hard-to-abate sectors, including shipping and
aviation:  Some sectors, such as long-haul aviation and shipping, are almost
impossible to electrify due to fundamental physical limitations of battery
technology. Hydrogen and hydrogen-derived fuels can play a role here, but there
is a huge need for innovation and cost reduction to make it scalable. De-risking
investment in hydrogen will be essential to enable hydrogen innovation in these
hard-to-abate sectors. Sectors for which clean hydrogen is highly unlikely to
deliver significant decarbonisation in comparison to electrification
alternatives: Home heating:  The overwhelming majority of evidence 2  indicates
that hydrogen boilers would be less efficient and more expensive 3  to run than
electrified heat, such as heat pumps. Retrofitting hydrogen heating
infrastructure is highly complex and cost-intensive, even in the UK where there
is an existing gas network for residential heating. While there may be a limited
number of applications for hydrogen-based heating as part of a regional cluster
approach (e.g. where the primary hydrogen use is for industry), hydrogen should
not be pursued as the primary route to decarbonisation of home heating. 
Personal transport:  Electric vehicles (EVs) are a mature, efficient, low carbon
solution to petrol and diesel vehicles. EVs are an efficient use of renewable
energy supplies due to their direct charging mechanism (only around 20% of
energy is lost from production through to powering the vehicle) and have the
potential to support grid resilience through demand-responsive charging.
Hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles on the other hand are significantly less efficient
for the overall energy system, as around 60% of energy is lost from production
to powering the vehicle. While hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles were seen as a viable
contender for the decarbonisation of personal transport a little over a decade
ago, market developments have established EVs as the most efficient, readily
available solution, with ever-expanding infrastructure to support wide-scale
use. Use of hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles in return-to-home fleet transport may be
an efficient approach to decarbonisation of heavy transport and applications
requiring rapid refuelling, but their cost effectiveness is yet to be
conclusively evidenced.   Five focus areas to unlock the role of clean hydrogen
in Net Zero Renewables and electrification will deliver the most significant
emissions reductions required for Net Zero, however clean hydrogen is
increasingly recognised as one of several other early-stage technologies that
will be critical to a decarbonised economy. To take clean hydrogen from its
current low level of production and use, global policy makers and industry
players should focus efforts on five key areas: Existing users of grey hydrogen
should deliver an urgent transition to clean hydrogen , for instance through the
introduction of quotas or targets to drive shifts in production method.
Governments should support this transition through clear policy signals. A
transition from grey to clean hydrogen will help to support the development of
clean hydrogen technologies and infrastructure whilst stimulating demand in the
market. Industry should come together to lower the end-to-end costs of clean
hydrogen and reduce investment risk , through automation of electrolyser
production, as an example. Lowering of production costs is crucial to reducing
investment risk, which is currently a major barrier to the financing of clean
hydrogen. An example of how to do this is the UK-Government-supported  Clean
Hydrogen Innovation Programme , led by the Carbon Trust, which aims to reduce
end-to-end costs by targeting supply chain innovation needs and solutions.
Awareness-raising of the risks and opportunities of the scale-up of clean
hydrogen amongst lenders could also help to alleviate barriers to investment. 
Governments and industry should collaborate to identify and implement regional
clean hydrogen solutions , recognising that one approach will not be appropriate
for all markets. For instance, some markets may require initial investment in
blue hydrogen as well as green, whereas others can move directly to green
hydrogen, perhaps taking advantage of significant export opportunities.
Governments should conduct supply and demand ‘matchmaking’ exercises to
stimulate the global market for clean hydrogen and support the decarbonisation
of hard-to-abate sectors.  Clusters’ of potential hydrogen demand could be
identified (such as a port) to help guide efficient markets for clean hydrogen
production. Supply and demand matchmaking can also be undertaken at a national
or international level. For example, the German government’s  recent hydrogen
strategy  outlines how Germany’s large steel industry will be decarbonised in
part through establishing it as an attractive import market for green hydrogen.
Governments should provide clear policy signals to guide the deployment of clean
hydrogen in the sectors where it can deliver the most decarbonisation impact.
This will ensure system-led decarbonisation by enabling electrification
initiatives in home heating and personal transport are supported to progress at
pace, while guiding investment in clean hydrogen towards its role in
decarbonising hard-to-abate sectors and supporting overall energy system
flexibility. Conclusion Clean hydrogen is a vital new energy technology for
achieving Net Zero. However, to ensure it is scaled in a way that aids system-
wide decarbonisation, governments and industry must adopt the right priorities
and manage potential risks. Clean hydrogen is not a silver bullet
decarbonisation solution and needs to be pursued with eyes open to its potential
promises and pitfalls.   [1]  Rebecca R. Beswick, Alexandra M. Oliveira, and
Yushan Yan, ‘Does the Green Hydrogen Economy Have a Water Problem?’,  ACS Energy
Letters,  2021 6 (9), 3167-3169:  Does the Green Hydrogen Economy Have a Water
Problem? | ACS Energy Letters [2]  Jan Rosenow, ‘Is heating homes with hydrogen
all but a pipe dream? An evidence review’,  Joule , Volume 6, Issue 10, 19
October 2022, Pages 2225-2228:  Is heating homes with hydrogen all but a pipe
dream? An evidence review - ScienceDirect [3]  Up to nine times the current cost
of natural gas heating.     Stay updated Receive the latest news, insights and
events from the Carbon Trust directly to your inbox. Subscribe Contact us Get in
touch to see how our experts can help you. Contact us © 2024 The Carbon Trust
Careers Contact us Privacy notice Cookies notice Website terms Modern slavery
statement Sitemap