United Nations 

Executive Board of the 
United Nations Development 
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services 

DP/DCP/AGO/4 

Distr.: General 
1 July 2019 

Original: English 

Second regular session 2019 
3 to 6 September 2019, New York 
Item 3 of the provisional agenda 
Country programmes and related matters 

Country programme document for Angola  
(2020-2022) 

Contents 

I.  Programme rationale.....................................................................................................  

II.  Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….… 

III.  Programme and risk management ....................................................................................  

IV.  Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….…………………… 

     Annex 

Results and resources framework for Angola (2020-2022) 

Page 

2 

4 

7 

8 

10 

19-11135X (E)    230719     
*1911135* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

I.  Programme rationale 

1. The 2017 general elections ushered in a new era in Angola, with a change of President after 38 
years.  There  is  strong  political  commitment  to  strengthen  democratic  governance,  justice  and 
human rights, and fight corruption. Creating the first-ever elected local governments in 2020 is a 
flagship policy.  

2. Governance, justice and human rights institutions at national and local levels remain fragile in 
responding to ongoing structural reforms and meeting citizens’ growing demand for inclusive, 
participatory governance, transparency and accountability in public management and for effective 
service delivery.  

3.  Advances  in  democracy  and  rights  are  taking  place  in  a  context  of  tight  fiscal  space  and 
deceleration of economic growth,1 as result of the sharp decrease in oil prices and its related tax 
revenues. Oil revenues accounted for 96 per cent of total revenues in 2017.2 This caused public 
debt to rise to 91 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP). Public debt operations account for 
48.2 per cent of the state budget in 2019 and consume 70 per cent of fiscal revenues.3  

4. Within this tight fiscal space, Angola aims to eradicate poverty. Thirty-six per cent of Angolans 
live in extreme poverty.4 In 2018, 51.2 per cent of Angolans were multidimensionally poor, with 
29.9  per  cent  in  urban  and  88.2  per  cent  in  rural  areas.5  The  2018  Multiple  Overlapping 
Deprivation  Analysis  (MODA)  on  multidimensional  child  poverty  in  Angola  concluded  that 
77.4 per cent of children under 18 are poor.6 The Gini coefficient was 0.43 in 2008.7 Due to higher 
life  expectancy,  Angola  improved  its  human  development  index  (HDI)  to  medium  human 
development status, ranking 147 out of 189 countries in 2017, with an HDI of 0.581.8 The tight 
fiscal space underscores the importance of increased private investments that support achievement 
of the Sustainable Development Goals. 

5. Angola will graduate from the least developed country (LDC) category in February 2021, based 
on the income-only criterion. The 2019 World Bank Ease of Doing Business Report ranks Angola 
173  out  of  190  countries.  The  country  is  currently  implementing  the  Programme  to  Support 
Production,  Diversification  of  Exports  and  Substitution  of  Imports  (PRODESI).  The 
unemployment rate is 28.8 per cent: 27 per cent for men, 31 per cent for women. Young people 
ages 15 to 24 face higher unemployment rates, at 52.4 per cent.9  

6. The major causes of poverty and unemployment are: non-inclusive economic growth due to 
limited  economic  diversification,  low  investment  in  human  capital,  a  challenging  business 
environment, lack of effective employment generation programmes, gaps between skill supply 
and demand, limited access to quality  technical and  vocational education and training (TVET) 
and constraints faced by micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSME).  

7. The population is projected to grow rapidly, from 25.9 million in 2014 to 41.8 million people 
by  2030.  In  2018,  46.6  per  cent  of  Angolans  were  14  years  old  or  less.10  In  December  2018, 
Angola  agreed  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  on  an  extended  fund  facility  for 
$3.7 billion, and committed to implementing several fiscal reforms that impact the poor and most 
vulnerable. 

1 Real GDP shrank 2.6 per cent in 2016, 0.1 per cent in 2017 and 1.7 per cent in 2018. 
2 Source: National Bank of Angola. 
3 Source: Government of Angola. 
4 Government of Angola 2008 (new data will be available before final submission of the country programme). 
5 Source: UNDP and Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI). 
6 Source: The National Institute of Statistics (INE). 
7 Source: INE. 
8 Source: UNDP. 
9 Source: INE. 
10 Source: INE. 

2 

 
 
                                                           
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

8. Angola presents high maternal, child and youth mortality rates, and a high incidence of malaria, 
tuberculosis and other communicable and non-communicable diseases. HIV prevalence is 2.6 per 
cent among women, 1.2 per cent among men, 1.1 per cent among 15 to 24-year-old adolescent 
girls and  young  women, 7.8 per cent among female sex  workers, and 2.4 per cent among  men 
having sex with men. Social determinants of health in Angola include the limited knowledge of 
prevention  methods  and  access  to  prevention  commodities,  high  cost  of  treatment  and  related 
services,  poor housing and sanitation, and gender inequalities.  Youth,  women, urban poor and 
socially marginalized groups tend to be the most vulnerable to infectious diseases.   

9. Climate change has severely affected Angola. In 2012-2016, El Niño-induced drought in the 
southern provinces caused $750 million in damages and losses, with 1.2 million people affected, 
mostly women and children.11 The Government has developed a drought recovery framework for 
2018-2022,  including  the  investment  plan  to  enhance  resilience.  Lack  of  information  on 
deforestation,  wildlife  depletion  and  overfishing  is  a  challenge;  existing  data  show  Angola  is 
losing  natural  resources.12  Angola  has  large  protected  areas  and  is  planning  its  first  marine 
protected  area.  Solid  waste  management  remains  a  challenge,  with  1.3  million  tonnes  of 
household waste produced yearly in the capital. Angola has made a strong commitment through 
its nationally determined contributions to reduce carbon emissions by 35 per cent.13 

10. Only 42 per cent of the total population has access to electricity.14 Traditional energy sources 
are still widely used, including charcoal. Of the electricity produced and consumed, 64 per cent 
is from renewable sources, mainly hydropower.15 Seven solar hybrid plants were commissioned 
in  2018.  Although  the  Government  promotes  private  investment  in  renewables,  and  there  is 
growing  private  interest,  the  insufficient  legal  and  regulatory  environment,  low  cost  of 
conventional energy, and limited access to foreign currency remain barriers. 

11.  Gender  and  women’s  rights  and  participation  remain  a  challenge  because  of  patriarchal 
customs and practices. Gender-based violence is widespread, with 8 per cent of women between 
15 and 49 claiming to have suffered some type of sexual violence; 35 per cent among ever-married 
women aged 15 to 49.16 Women represent 35.5 per cent of senior government positions.17 Gender 
barriers remain inherent in the HIV context, such as unequal age of consent to marry and gaps in 
sexual and reproductive health rights. 

12. The National Development Plan (NDP), 2018-2022, has six pillars: (a) human development 
and wellbeing; (b) inclusive, diversified and sustainable economic development; (c) infrastructure 
for  development;  (d)  democracy,  good  governance,  state  reform  and  decentralization; 
(e) harmonious development of territory; and (f) stability, territorial integrity and the country’s 
role in the regional and international contexts. Financing for the $97 billion plan18 is primarily 
domestic, with additional funding from international financing institutions (IFI) and an IMF loan. 
In contrast, the official development assistance (ODA) estimate for 2018-2019 is $175 million.19 

13. As  Angola is  undergoing  political reforms and addressing  major economic challenges, the 
NDP, 2018-2022, puts significant emphasis on maintaining stability and peace. Main challenges 
include managing the growing civic space, without risking instability, and effectively addressing 
socioeconomic challenges. 

14.  The  UNDP  rapid  integrated  assessment  of  the  NDP,  2018-2022,  revealed  that  overall 
alignment to Sustainable Development Goals-related targets is at 52 per cent. More investment in 

11 Source: National Commission for Civil Protection (CNPC).  
12 Source: National Millennium Development Goals report. 
13 Source: Government of Angola, Intended Nationally Determined Contributions, 2015. 
14 Source: Government of Angola. 
15 Source: Government of Angola. 
16 Source: INE. 
17 Source: Government of Angola. 
18 IMF estimate (2019). 
19 UNDP Angola Partnership Strategy 2019. 

3 

 
 
                                                           
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

acceleration is particularly needed for Goals 1, 5, 10, 12, 14 and 15. The INE published the first 
national baseline indicators report for the Goals in 2018, reporting on 41 per cent of total Goals 
indicators. Additional efforts are needed to improve access and quality of statistical information 
and  promote a coordinated multi-stakeholder approach to  monitor  implementation of the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The voluntary national review of Angola will contribute to 
this. 

15. Over the last three years, the UNDP country office has undergone a major transformation and 
is, at the start of the next country programme, a convener of multiple partners for the Goals and 
Agenda 2030. UNDP delivers quality policy advice and technical support and assists Angola in 
meeting  targets  and  requirements  of  complex  funding  mechanisms,  such  as  the  Global 
Environment  Facility and the Global Fund to Fight  AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. Because 
funding  through  core  resources  is  decreasing,20  reflecting  the  country’s  forthcoming  LDC 
graduation, Government funding to the country programme has increased significantly. 

16. The UNDP independent evaluation of the country programme for Angola, 2015-2019, found 
it  contributed  to:  (a)  poverty  eradication,  including  mainstreaming  the  Goals  into  national 
development policies and substantive support to boost the national response to HIV/AIDS; (b) the 
country’s graduation process, through technical support for elaboration of the first national report 
on  graduation  to  the  Economic  and  Social  Council  and  roadmap;  (c)  resilience,  by  improving 
access to environment funds, enhancing efforts to expand protected areas, drafting a new national 
climate change strategy, and developing provincial contingency plans in disaster-prone provinces; 
(d)  participatory  and  inclusive  governance,  by  helping  the  Government  define  strategies  to 
improve human rights, access justice and rule of law, and strengthen human rights and justice 
institutions; (e) gender mainstreaming, by supporting the Ministry of Social Action, Family and 
Women’s Promotion (known nationally as MASFAMU). 

17.  The  evaluation  report  recommended  that  UNDP  engage  further  in  mainstreaming  gender, 
eradicating  poverty,  reducing  inequalities,  and  enhancing  integration  and  synergies  among 
thematic areas. It recommended the development of thorough resource mobilization and sound 
human resources strategies. 

II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  

18.  The  UNDP  country  programme,  2020-2022,  is  based  on  the  premise  of  ‘leaving  no  one 
behind’ and ‘reaching those furthest behind first’. The programme includes integrated solutions 
to complex, interconnected development challenges. Three complementary priorities define the 
2020-2022 programme: 

(a)  fostering poverty eradication and inclusive economic growth; 
(b)  increasing  resilience  to  shocks  and  crises  and  enhancing  management  of  natural 

resources for conservation and economic development; and  

(c)  strengthening inclusive democracy, human rights, justice and rule of law. 

The  components  of  these  three  priority  areas  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  –  if  poverty 
eradication  and  inclusive  economic  growth  are  promoted,  resilience  is  reinforced,  and 
participatory  and  inclusive  governance  is  strengthened  –  Angola  will  be  able  to  accelerate  its 
human development progress, end poverty in all its forms and reduce inequalities. The country 
programme will support Angola in effectively managing its development resources and bolstering 
the voice of those furthest behind and their ability to hold government accountable. It will do this 
while  building  their  resilience  to  shocks  and  crises  through  effective  disaster  and  climate  risk 
management, and  increasing their access to inclusive, equitable employment. Within  the  three 
programme  components,  UNDP  will  support  the  Government  on  the  overarching  national 
objective in the NDP, 2018-2022, of maintaining stability and peace. 

20 56 per cent decrease in period 2015-2017. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

19.  Operationalizing  General  Assembly  resolution  72/279  on  the  repositioning  of  the  United 
Nations development system, the country programme represents the UNDP vehicle for delivering-
as-one in Angola, guided by its United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). 
Within  each  of  the  three  pillars,  UNDP  will  deliver  against  the  strong  joint  United  Nations 
commitment  on  youth,  women  and  people  with  disabilities  (UNDAF  outcome  2).  UNDP  will 
work closely with United Nations organizations through the common chapter of their strategic 
plans. 

20. The new UNDP country programme is aligned with the UNDP gender equality strategy, 2018-
2021. It will address gender inequalities, including discriminatory practices and social norms, and 
will strengthen investments in gender expertise and capacities. 

21. The country programme directly supports the country’s international commitments, including 
Agenda 2030, African Union Agenda 2063, the NDP, 2018-2022 and key national strategies, and 
the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021. UNDP will respond to government priorities through its six 
signature solutions and contribute to the achievement of specific targets defined in the UNDAF 
for Goals 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17.  

22. UNDP will continue to work with the Government at all levels for effective implementation 
of  policies  and  programmes,  including  projects  funded  from  national  budgets  and  IFIs.  This 
includes supporting the Government in aligning the NDP, 2018-2022, to the Goals and assisting 
in ensuring a multi-partner response to key multidimensional development challenges. UNDP will 
continue to act as operational support platform for other development organizations, and partner 
with civil society and academia in advancing development agendas and building capacities. 

23. Innovation will be a core element of the country programme. UNDP will devote 5 per cent of 
its core budget to delivering innovative solutions to development challenges. The UNDP country 
office is establishing an accelerator lab to create a learning network to test innovative ways of 
addressing development challenges. 

Fostering poverty eradication and inclusive economic growth 

24.  UNDP  will  significantly  deepen  its  engagement  to  end  poverty  in  Angola  and  reduce 
inequality through substantive analysis, dialogue and technical advice to develop more effective 
national  policies  and  programmes.  The  accelerator  lab  and  South-South  and  triangular 
cooperation  will  be  vehicles  for  prototyping  new  solutions.  It  will  provide  technical  support, 
including  for  data  analysis,  in  partnership  with  INE,  government  partners,  the  World  Bank, 
academia, civil society organizations (CSOs) and United Nations partners. UNDP will strengthen 
its partnership with the Government on analytics of expenditures and loan portfolio, measuring 
their impact in achieving the Goals. 

25. In support of PRODESI economic growth objectives, UNDP will work in partnership with 
MASFAMU,  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Planning  (MEP),  Ministry  of  Finance  (MINFIN), 
academia, CSOs, the World Bank and African Development Bank (ADB), focusing on inclusive 
strategies that help lift people out of poverty and increase their resilience to shocks and crisis. 
UNDP assistance will have two main elements. First, it will support policies and initiatives for 
self-employment and growth of micro and small enterprises, targeting sectors with high impact 
on  poverty  reduction  and  addressing  inclusion  of  the  informal  economy.  Second,  as  part  of 
government initiatives to strengthen entrepreneurship and employment for young Angolans ages 
18 to 35, it will support government policy on vocational training, institutional development and 
testing of innovative models, ensuring the most vulnerable sections of the workforce have access 
to skills and resources that match labour market demand. This will be done in collaboration with 
TVET network, private sector and International Labour Organization (ILO). UNDP will continue 
its youth internship programme and enhance it with the national volunteer programme. 

26.  Through  its  global  impact  initiatives  for  the  Goals,  UNDP  will  contribute  to  mobilizing 
international and national private capital for financing development projects within the context of 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

the NDP, 2018-2022. UNDP will help create menus and financial vehicles that stimulate impact 
investments  in  key  sectors.  In  its  integrator  role,  UNDP  will  facilitate  the  establishment  of  an 
engaged  private  sector  platform  through  the  umbrella  of  the  Angolan  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility Network and Public-Private Partnership Initiative. 

27. UNDP will strengthen its support to national efforts for sustainable solutions in health, in line 
with the UNDP HIV, health and development strategy, 2016-2022 (HHD). Building on its Global 
Fund  principal  recipient  role,  UNDP  will  deliver  packages  of  HIV  prevention  services  to 
adolescent girls and young women, female sex workers, men having sex with men, and treatment 
services to people living with HIV, including pregnant women.  The UNDP core programming 
approach  will  be  the  social  empowerment  of  these  population  groups  through  capacity 
development, involvement in service delivery and advocacy for sexual and reproductive health 
and rights. UNDP  will contribute to strengthening the  national health procurement and supply 
management system. 

28. To reduce gender, legal and human rights-related barriers to accessing basic social services, 
UNDP will promote national ownership of the 2018 HIV legal environment assessment  report 
and  the  national  strategy  for  key  populations,  and  revision  of  the  2004  HIV  law.  UNDP  will 
deliver capacity-building packages for advocacy to CSOs. Key UNDP partners  include National 
HIV/AIDS  Institute  (INLS,)  National  Network  Civil  Society  Organizations  for  HIV/AIDS  
(ANASO), CSOs, key populations-led associations,  parliament  health and  youth  commissions, 
Ministry  of  Health,  Ministry  of  Justice,  the  Ombudsperson,  United  States  Agency  for 
International Development (USAID), Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), 
United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), UNFPA, United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and World Health Organization (WHO). 

Increasing resilience to shocks and crises and enhancing management of natural resources 
for conservation and economic development 

29. Building  on  the  NDP,  2018-2022,  commitments  and  early  achievements  in  non-fossil  fuel 
options, UNDP will support low-carbon development. The UNDP de-risking renewable energy 
investments  (DREI)  initiative  will  provide  policy  support  to  boost  private  investments  in 
renewable energies, including in remote areas. UNDP is supporting private investment in off-grid 
solutions, and renewable electricity for public infrastructure, including in the health sector. 

30.  Through  policy  advice  and  implementation  of  GEF  projects,  UNDP  will  support  the 
Government  in  the  conservation  of  forest  and  protected  areas  by  rehabilitating  infrastructure, 
training, equipment, preparation of management plans, surveys of flora and fauna, engagement 
with communities, combatting illegal wildlife trade, and establishing the first marine protected 
areas.  These  actions  will  be  implemented  in  partnership  with  the  Ministry  of  Environment 
(MINAMB),  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Forests  (MINAGRIF)  and  Ministry  of  Fisheries  and 
Oceans (MINPESMAR). 

31. UNDP will scale up gender responsive disaster and climate risk management support, building 
on  its  demonstrated  results,  adopting  an  integrated  approach  to  resilience.  Partnering  with 
Ministry of Energy and Waters (MINEA) and relevant institutes at local level, UNDP will help to 
strengthen water management practices at the community level and adopt flood warning systems. 
UNDP will provide training to strengthen capacities to cope with shocks and crises. It will achieve 
this  in  cooperation  with  the  National  Civil  Protection  Commission  (NCPC),  MINFIN,  MEP, 
Ministry of Territorial Administration and State  Reforms (MAT), sector  ministries and United 
Nations partners. 

32. Partnering  with  IFIs, the European Union and bilateral agencies, as integrator, UNDP  will 
help to boost investments in building the resilience of the 1.2 million drought-affected people in 
the south, within the innovative common framework established. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

33. Addressing the country’s solid waste management challenge, UNDP will provide technical 
and  financial  assistance  to  promote  recycling,  through  the  UNDP  country  accelerator  lab,  and 
support  the  elimination  of  toxic  waste.  Through  integration  and  synergies  within  the  country 
programme  areas,  UNDP  will  support  entrepreneurship  and  promote  green  jobs,  including  for 
biodiversity  and  waste  management.  UNDP  will  facilitate  access  to  international  funding, 
including through GEF, Green Climate Fund (GCF), and South-South and triangular cooperation. 

Strengthening inclusive democracy, human rights, justice and rule of law 

34.  UNDP  will  support  efforts  to  ensure  the  first-ever  elected  local  governments  deliver  on 
promises for democratic development and improved local service delivery. UNDP will strengthen 
the capacity of elected local governance institutions and support participation mechanisms, such 
as participatory budgeting and civil society involvement in policy formulation, implementation 
and monitoring. Key partners include MAT, MASFAMU, Parliament, local governments, CSOs 
and bilateral donor partners. 

35. Through technical support and South-South and triangular cooperation with countries such as 
Brazil  and  Cabo  Verde,  UNDP  will  support  transparency  and  accountability  in  public 
management to improve services and finance development. UNDP will partner with the Office of 
the  Attorney  General,  General  Inspection  Services,  Court  of  Auditors,  Parliament  and  Public 
Procurement  Services  in  developing  standard  operating  procedures  and  tools  for  public 
management to strengthen prevention and fight corruption. UNDP will coordinate international 
assistance for the implementation of the national anti-corruption strategy, 2018-2022, launched 
with UNDP support.  

36. UNDP will support the capacity of justice and human rights institutions at national and local 
levels to handle citizens’ grievances and address human rights cases, including economic, social 
and cultural rights. This includes the core ombudsman function of the Provedor de Justiça and its 
possible accreditation as the national human rights institution (NHRI). UNDP will partner with 
the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, Ministry of the Interior, Parliament, United Nations 
High Commissioner for Human Rights and CSOs. UNDP will help to strengthen the policy and 
legal environment, alignment with international human rights principles and commitments, and 
support initiatives on crime prevention and security. 

37. UNDP will promote the inclusion of women in development and service delivery and their 
effective participation and representation in decision-making processes. UNDP will partner with 
MASFAMU and Parliament on capacity building and advocacy for sensitive gender-budgeting 
and development of gender statistics systems. UNDP will partner with MASFAMU, MAT and 
CSOs to promote a gender-inclusive framework for local elections and support capacity-building 
for women to participate as candidates in local elections in 2020-2030. 

38. UNDP will support the participation of youth in governance processes by advocating for pro-
youth participatory processes and mechanisms. For this, UNDP will partner with MAT, Ministry 
of Youth, Parliament, the national youth platforms, CSOs and local governments. 

III.  Programme and risk management 

39. National and direct execution modalities will be applied for programme implementation, and 
the  harmonized  approach  to  cash  transfers  (HACT)  will  be  used  to  manage  financial  risks.  In 
accordance with Board decision 2013/32, all direct costs associated with project implementation 
will be charged to concerned projects. Together with other United Nations organizations, UNDP 
will  implement  the  joint  programming  framework  and  business  operations  strategy  as  part  of 
delivering-as-one. 

40. The country office will review its capacity to ensure it is positioned for effective programme 
implementation. A human resources strategy will be developed and  implemented, including to 
support  gender  mainstreaming  within  the  country  office,  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  country 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

presence and profile with qualified, credible staff, backed by efficient operations. The country 
programme  will  benefit  from  the  UNDP  global  policy  network.  Four  major  risk  sources  are: 
(a) financial and economic shocks leading to limited fiscal space; (b) fragmentation and limited 
cross-sectoral coordination to address development challenges; (c) inability to mobilize resources 
from key donors in the context of LDC graduation; and (d) ensuring UNDP space for technical 
advice vis-à-vis development agencies offering larger financial contributions to Angola. 

in  order 

to  address 

41. UNDP will mitigate development financing risks by advocating for budget prioritization and 
reinforcement of national capacities in result-based budgeting. It will address fragmentation and 
limited  cross-sectoral  coordination  through  national  capacity  development  on  integrated 
development  approaches, 
institutional  bottlenecks,  planning  and 
implementation of the governance and human rights agenda. Within the country office’s resource 
mobilization  strategy,  the  country  programme  is  expected  to  be  implemented  using  increased 
resources from the state budget, in addition to donor and core resources. The country programme 
foresees  expanding  partnerships  with  IFIs,  including  UNDP  support  for  accelerating 
implementation of loans. With graduation from LDC status, core funding is expected to continue 
to decrease. The country office is developing a country programme action plan (CPAP), which 
includes a partnerships strategy and action plan for resource mobilization, with Bureau of External 
Relations and Advocacy (BERA) support, and a communication strategy. 

42. All projects will undergo systematic review to ensure environmental and social safeguards, 
costs  and  benefits  of  an  intervention  are  evaluated  in  accordance  with  UNDP  policies  and 
standards.  Interventions  will  be  scaled  up  or  down  depending  on  resource  availability.  Risk 
mitigation plans will be developed during preparation of programmes/projects, in collaboration 
with national stakeholders. 

43. Accelerated procedures can be adopted to provide rapid response to crisis situations  and to 
respond  effectively  to  new  requests  for  UNDP  support.  The  country  office  will  invoke  the 
business continuity plan in the case of crises affecting its normal operations.  

44. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Board for results alignment and resources assigned to 
the  programme  at  country  level.  The  accountabilities  of  managers  at  country,  regional  and 
headquarter  levels  with  respect  to  the  country  programme  is  prescribed  in  the  organization’s 
programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework.  

IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 

45.  A  strong  results  framework  (annex  A)  supports  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  country 
programme, aligned with national priorities, the UNDAF, 2020-2022, the UNDP Strategic Plan, 
2018-2021, the Goals and other international and national commitments. Based on the evaluation 
of the previous country programme, indicators are included to track change at outcome level. The 
programme theory of change will be reviewed on an annual basis and relevant changes reflected 
as necessary.  

46. UNDP will use, as far as possible, the national statistical systems and Goals targets to monitor 
its  contribution  to  national  results.  When  needed,  it  will  use  data  generated  by  international 
agencies. UNDP will contribute to mitigate risks related to  monitoring and evaluation, such as 
limited capacities and availability of nationally owned data, by strengthening existing data and 
information  systems,  including  improving  data  quality,  analysis  and  use.  UNDP  will  work 
towards ensuring interoperability of existing data systems and advocate for increased use of data 
for evidence-informed policymaking and monitoring of development results. 

47. UNDP will collaborate with academia, civil society, local and global think tanks in analyzing 
socioeconomic  disaggregated  data  to  provide  evidence  of  trends  on  vulnerabilities,  poverty, 
income and gender inequalities. 

8 

 
 
48. UNDP will evaluate and monitor the country programme and related projects in line with the 
UNDAF monitoring system and UNDP corporate policies. It will set aside at least 1 per cent of 
its programme resources for monitoring and evaluation. The UNDP gender marker will be used 
to assess programme results, as a proxy for monitoring the programme’s responsiveness to the 
gender equality agenda. 

DP/DCP/AGO/4 

9 

 
 
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

Annex. Results and resources framework for Angola (2020-2022) 

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: National Development Plan, 2018-2022: 1. Human development and wellbeing; 2. Inclusive and sustainable economic development. 
Goals: 1,2,3,4,5,8,9,10. 

UNDAF (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2022, the Angolan population, particularly the most vulnerable (children, adolescents, youth, women, 
people with disabilities), have greater access to quality, integrated, social services as well as to a diversified, job and income-creating economy, thereby realizing their rights in 
accordance with the Goals. 

Major 
partners/partnerships 
frameworks 

Indicative resources by 
outcome 
(United States dollars) 

MEP, MASFAMU, 
MAPTSS, Ministry of 
Trade, MININDU; 
MTES, INAPEM, INE 

Regular: 691,000 

Other:26,137,000 

United Nations, IFIs 

CSOs, academia 

Private sector 

RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions. 

UNDAF outcome, indicators 
baselines, targets 

Data source, frequency of data 
collection, responsibilities 

Indicative outputs 

Indicator: Proportion of 
population living below the 
national poverty line by sex. 
Baseline: 36.6% (men 37.7%, 
women 35.6%) 
Target: 25%  

Source: INE. 
Frequency: Annual. 
Responsibility: INE, MEP, MASFAMU.  

Output 1.1. National and 
subnational institutions have 
strengthened technical capacities to 
develop, implement and monitor 
strategies and programmes to end 
extreme poverty. 

Indicator 1.1.1. Extent to which 
national strategies and programmes 
to end poverty are developed, 
implemented, budgeted and 
monitored. 
Baseline: 221 
Target: 522 
Data source: MEP, MASFAMU, 
INE, the President’s Office, 
National Assembly. 
Frequency: Annual. 

Indicator1.1. Existence of national 
platform to operationalize 
strategies to tackle 
multidimensional poverty and 
promote the Goals. 
Baseline: No  
Target: Yes 

22   Scale: Strategies and programmes: (1) not implemented, budgeted and monitored; (2) partially implemented, budgeted and monitored, 25 per cent or less; (3) partially implemented, budgeted and 
monitored, 50 per cent or less; (4) partially implemented, budgeted and monitored, 75 per cent or less; (5) fully implemented, budgeted and monitored. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Source: INE, MAPTSS. 
Frequency: Annual. 
Responsibility: INE, MAPTSS, MEP, 
MTES, MJD. 

Indicator: Unemployment rate by 
sex, age and geographical location. 

Baseline: 19.9% in 2015 (men 
18%, women 22%; urban 25%, 
rural 9%). 

Target: TBD 

DP/DCP/AGO/4 

Data source: MEP, MASFAMU, 
INE, the President’s Office, 
National Assembly. 
Frequency: Annual. 

Output 1.2. National institutions 
and programmes support job 
creation and inclusive growth 
through the strengthening of micro, 
small and medium-size enterprises 
(MSMEs) and professional skills 
development, particularly for 
women and youth. 

Indicator 1.2.1. Number of high-
quality plans, strategies and 
analytical reports on labour market 
and entrepreneurship ecosystem 
produced, disaggregated data by 
sex, age and geographical location. 
Baseline: 1 
Target: 5 
Data source: INE, MEP, UNDP. 
Frequency: Annual. 

Indicator 1.2.2. Extent to which a 
programme to support MSME and 
enhance the economic inclusion of 
youth and women that targets 
poverty reduction is implemented 
and operational.  
Baseline: 122 
Target: 523 
Data source: MEP, INE, UNDP.  
Frequency: Annual.  

Output 1.3. Private sector 
platforms enabled to participate in 
the achievement of the Goals.  

22 Scale: Programme: (1) not implemented nor operational; (2) partially implemented and operational, 25 per cent or less; (3) partially implemented and operational,  50 per cent or less; (4) partially 
implemented and operational, 75 per cent or less; (5) fully implemented and operational. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

Source: INE, INLS; NGOs; UNDP, 
MCN. 
Frequency: Annual. 
Responsibility: INE, INLS, MINSA 

Indicator: Number and percentage 
of people living with HIV, 
disaggregated by sex.  
Baseline: Female: 2.6%; Men: 
1.2% 
Target: TBD 

12 

INLS, MINSA 
MASFAMU, MINJUD, 
MINARS, MAPTSS  
NGOs, CSOs, private 
sector 

United Nations, 
USAID 

Indicator 1.3.1. Extent to which an 
innovative solution for social 
impact investment initiatives is 
implemented and operational. 
Baseline: 122 
Target: 522 
Data source: MEP, INAPEM, 
private sector.  
Frequency: Annual. 

Indicator 1.3.2. Existence of an 
operational new public-private 
partnership that contributes to the 
SDGs. 
Baseline: No. 
Target: Yes. 
Data source: MEP, private sector. 
Frequency: Annual. 

Output 1.4. Capacities at national 
and local levels strengthened to 
deliver HIV and related services, 
including for people living with 
HIV, adolescent girls and young 
women, and key populations. 

Indicator 1.4.1. Number of people 
living with HIV currently receiving 
antiretroviral treatment, including 
adolescent girls and young women, 
and key populations. 
Baseline: 77,559. 
Target: 122,193.  
Data source: INLS. 
Frequency: Annual. 

Indicator 1.4.2. Number of HIV 
positive pregnant women who 
received antiretroviral treatment 
during pregnancy to reduce the risk 
of mother-to-child transmission of 
HIV. 
Baseline: 7 008  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

Target: 15,537  
Data source: INLS. 
Frequency: Annual. 

Indicator 1.4.3. Number of: 
(a) adolescent girls and young 
women; and (b) female sex workers 
reached with HIV prevention 
services. 
Baseline: (a) 27,859; (b) 2,499.   
Target: (a) 90,000; (b) 16,584. 
Data source: NGOs. 
Frequency: Annual. 

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: National Development Plan, 2018-2022: 1. Human development and wellbeing; 2. Inclusive and sustainable economic development; 
6. Ensuring stability and territorial integrity of Angola and reinforcing its role in the international and regional context. Goals: 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 

UNDAF (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2022, the vulnerable population is resilient to climate change and disaster risk, with sustainable and 
inclusive production, planning and management of the territory, cities, natural resources and the environment. 

RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 3. Build resilience to shocks and crises. 

Indicator: Percentage of public 
expenditure on environment, 
natural resources and climate 
change.  

Source: INE, ENAC, UN, UNDP.  
Frequency: Annual. 
Responsibility: INE, MINAMB, 
MINAGRI, MINEA. 

Baseline: 0.1% 

Target: 0.25% 

MINAMB, 
MINAGRI, MINEA, 
MINPESMAR 

Regular:1,110,000 

Other:37,590,000 

Provincial governments 

Local communities  

United Nations, GEF, 
CSOs, academia, 
private sector 

Output 2.1. Government 
institutions and local communities 
have enhanced technical capacity to 
implement low-carbon 
development pathways and 
promote renewable energy access. 

Indicator 2.1.1. Existence of 
targets for low emission and/or 
climate-resilient development in 
development plans and strategies. 
Baseline: No. 
Target: Yes. 
Data source: Ministries, UNDP.  
Frequency: Annual. 

Indicator 2.1.2. Number and 
proportion of households 
benefitting from clean, affordable 
and sustainable energy access in 
rural areas.      
Baseline: 180,000 (11.2%). 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

14 

Target: 300,000 (18.7%).  
Data source: Ministries, UNDP.  
Frequency: Annual. 

Output 2.2. Solutions scaled up for 
sustainable management of natural 
resources, including sustainable 
commodities and green and 
inclusive value chains.  

Indicator 2.2.1. Natural resources 
that are managed under a 
sustainable use, conservation, 
access and benefit-sharing regime: 
(a) area of land and marine habitat 
under protection (hectares); (b) area 
of existing protected area under 
improved management (hectares); 
(c) number of shared water 
ecosystems (fresh or marine) under 
cooperative management; 
(d) amount of harmful chemicals 
reduced or disposed (metric 
tonnes); 
(e) number of companies involved 
in solid waste recycling. 
Baseline: (a) 16,264,200 land; 0 
marine; (b) 1,615,000; (c) 2; (d) 0; 
(e) 20 
Target: (a) 16,500,000 land, 
150,000 marine; (b) 3,657,000; 
(c) 4; (d) TBD; (e) 30. 
Data source: Ministries, UNDP. 
Frequency: Annual. 

Indicator 2.2.2. Number of 
renewable energy supply chains 
improved, with involvement of 
national institutions. 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 2  
Sources of information: 
Ministries, UNDP.  
Frequency: Annual. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator: Number of: (a) deaths, 
(b) missing persons and (c) affected 
people attributed to disasters, per 
100,000 population. 
Baseline: (a) 1; (b) TBD; (c) 1,538 
(2014-2015). 
Target: TBD 

Source: INE, national disaster loss 
database. 
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: Ministry of Interior 
(MININT), sectoral ministries.  

MININT, MEP, 
MINFIN, MAT, 
sectoral ministries  

IFIs, European Union, 
bilateral partners 

United Nations 
development system 
organizations 

Academia, CSOs, 
private sector 

Local communities 

Output 2.3. Most vulnerable 
communities have strengthened 
technical capacities to respond to 
natural and human-induced risks 
and disasters and adapt to climate 
change.  

Indicator 2.3.1. Number of 
operational agrometeorological 
monitoring and early warning 
systems established to limit the 
gender-differentiated impact of 
natural hazards.     
Baseline: 0  
Target: 15  
Data source: CNPC. 
Frequency: Annual. 

Output 2.4. The Government has 
increased technical and financial 
capacities to support drought 
recovery and resilience building in 
the southern provinces.  

Indicator 2.4.1. Number of newly 
designed gender-responsive 
disaster risk reduction 
plans/strategies budgeted, 
implemented and monitored in 
accordance with the drought 
recovery framework, the Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk 
reduction, and the NDP, 2018-
2022. 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 3  
Data Source: CNPC. 
Frequency: Annual. 

DP/DCP/AGO/4 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/AGO/4 

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: National Development Plan, 2018-2022: 4. Consolidation of peace, democracy and rule of law, good governance state reform and decentralization; 
6. Ensuring the stability and territorial integrity of Angola and reinforcing its role in the international and regional contexts.  Goals: 5, 16, 17. 

UNDAF (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: 4. (1) By 2022, citizens participate and exercise governance oversight, people have access to justice, and human 
rights are observed in a context of regional peace and stability. 

Regular: 
1,922,000 

Other:2,893,000 

MAT, MJHR, MININT), 
MASFAMU, MJD, MINFIN, 
INE, Parliament. 

Ombudsperson, CSOs, private 
sector, OHCHR 

General Attorney Office, local 
administrations 

Parliament 

IFIs, European Union, bilateral 
partners 

RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development. 

Indicator: Percentage of seats held 
by youth and women in local elected 
institutions.   
Baseline: 0 
Target: 30% 

Source : MAT, MASFAMU, MINFIN, 
CNE, INE, Parliament. 
Frequency: Annual. 
Responsibility: MAT, MASFAMU, 
Parliament. 

Output 3.1. Inclusive and participatory 
local governance model, laws and 
regulations enabled for effective 
participation of individuals, particularly 
women and youth.  

Indicator 3.1.1. Percentage of women and 
youth under 35 years that participate as 
candidates in local governance elections. 
Baseline: 0  
Target: Women: 30%; youth: 10%. 
Data source: CNE, local elections 2020-
2030.  
Frequency: Annual 

Indicator 3.1.2. Percentage of supported 
municipalities with platforms for 
participatory engagements of youth in 
budgetary development processes.  
Baseline: 0  
Target: 20%  
Data source: Local authorities, United 
Nations.  
Frequency: Annual. 

Indicator 3.1.3. Existence of a 
functioning gender-responsive advocacy 
platform for pro-youth policies and 
programmes. 
Baseline: No.  
Target: Yes. 
Data source: Youth platforms and 
Ministry of Youth reports. 
Frequency: Annual. 

Output 3.2. Institutions and systems 
enabled to address awareness, prevention 
and enforcement of anti-corruption 
measures to maximize availability of 
resources for poverty eradication.  

Indicator: The country’s ranking in 
the African corruption percentage 
index improved. 
Baseline: 41 out of 54 countries (on 
safety and rule of law, including 
public transparency and 
accountability for 2017).    
Target: 30-35 out of 54 countries. 

Source: PGR, IGAE, UIF, SNCP, AGT, 
Supreme Audit Authority, Parliament. 
Frequency: Annual. 
Responsibility: MINJUS, PGR, Parliament. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator: Percentage of 
international human rights treaties 
ratified by Angola.  
Baseline: 55.5% 
Target: 100% 

Source: MINJUS, CSOs, OHCHR 
Parliament. 
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: MINJUS.  

DP/DCP/AGO/4 

Indicator 3.2.1. Percentage of public 
institutions that implement the national 
anti-corruption plan, 2018-2022, for 
effective assessment of risks and 
prevention of the impact of corruption on 
public interest. 
Baseline: 0  
Target: 20% 
Data source: Institutional reports. 
Frequency:  Annual. 

Indicator 3.2.2. Extent to which 
institutions at the national and local levels 
carryout gender responsive service 
delivery. 
Baseline: 223 
Target: 523  
Data source: Sectoral authority reports. 
Frequency: Annual 

Output 3.3. Capacities, functions and 
financing of rule of law and national 
human rights institutions and systems 
strengthened to expand access to justice 
and combat discrimination, with a focus 
on women and other marginalized groups. 

Indicator 3.3.1. Existence of strengthened 
local level institutions and systems 
supporting fulfilment of nationally and 
internationally ratified human rights 
obligations.  
Baseline:15 Provincial Human Right 
Committee (PHRCs) 
Target: 18 provincial human rights 
committees (PHRC) 
Data source: MINJUS, CSOs, OHCHR. 
Frequency: Annual. 

Indicator 3.3.2. Percentage of people who 
have access to justice, disaggregated by sex 
and marginalized groups. 
Baseline: 60%  
Target: 80%   

23 Scale: (1) Never; (2) Rarely; (3) Sometimes; (4) Most of the Time; (5) Always. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Data source: MINJUS.  
Frequency: Annual. 

Indicator 3.3.3. Percentage of gender-
based violence cases reported and cases 
prosecuted. 
Baseline: 41% 
Target: 71% 
Data source: MASFAMU, INE, CSOs.  
Frequency: Annual. 

DP/DCP/AGO/4 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
