Table of Contents:
I. Programme rationale ..: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 8
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
 
I.  Programme rationale 
1.  Chad remains among the poorest countries in the world, with a Human Development Index of 0.392 
(185th of 188 countries1). The dominance of oil in the economy presents medium- to long-term risks if 
Chad  does  not  manage  the  resulting  inequalities  while  diversifying  its  economy.  The  non-oil  gross 
domestic product  growth is projected at 4 per cent per year over the medium to long term, driven by 
agriculture, commerce, and transportation.2 The informal agricultural sector, however, continues to be 
the main source of national wealth,3 and Chad has potential in products such as gum arabic, small crops 
and leather to offset dependence on the oil sector and increase diversification of production. Poverty is 
mainly  concentrated  in  rural  areas,4  where  80  percent  of  Chadians  live.  There  is  high  youth 
unemployment and under-employment (22 per cent and 35 per cent, respectively),5 and low women’s 
participation in the formal economy due to lack of skills and access to finance. Women mostly work in 
the informal sector, where they earn 61 percent of men’s average incomes.6 While good policies exist, 
implementation is incomplete due to weak accountability and management mechanisms to implement 
policies,  strategies  and  programmes  at  all  levels,7  and  to  gaps  in  institutional  memory  and  capacity 
resulting from frequent turnover in government. 
2.  Per  capita  income  more  than  doubled  between  the  start  of  oil  production  in  2003  and  2013.8  The 
poverty rate fell from 55 per cent to 46.7 per cent9 during this period, and access to education improved 
between  2004  and  2014  (with  an  increase  in  the  gross  rate  of  primary  school  enrolment),  as  did 
children’s and  women’s health.  Between 2005 and  2010 Chad navigated a series of internal conflicts 
which  weakened  the  social  cohesion  among  the  Chadian  people.  The  country  has  nevertheless  made 
progress,  holding  peaceful  elections  in  2011,  2012  and  2016.  The  2013  political  agreement,  the 
composition  of  the  Independent  National  Electoral  Commission  and  the  national  framework  for 
political  dialogue,  as  well  as  the  biometric  voter  registration  of  over  6.2  million  voters,  are  major 
advances. Nevertheless, Chad faces challenges that, if left unaddressed, will threaten further progress.  
3.  To  address  inequalities,  Chad  will  need  concerted  attention  to  address  the  marginalization  that 
women encounter in social, political and economic life.10 Women are under-represented in parliament 
and government (15.3 percent and 9.8 percent, respectively). Moreover, 35 per cent of girls are married 
before the age of 15; 20 per cent of women are victims of physical violence; and 12 per cent are victims 
of  sexual  violence.  Prevailing  customs  and  low  enforcement  of  existing  laws  and  gender-sensitive 
policies,  as  well  as  lack  of  access  to  educational,  economic,  health  and  other  resources,  hinder 
development progress by preventing the full benefit of economic, political and social contributions to 
all Chadians.   
4.  Governance  institutions  face  low  public  confidence.  The  2015  Mo  Ibrahim  Index  rates  Chad  as 
32.8,11  or  48th,  out  of  54  sub-Saharan  African  countries,  with  declining  socio-economic  and  human 
development 
the  post-conflict  context,  prevention  and  management 
mechanisms  for  inter-  and  intra-community  conflicts  remain  limited.  While  an  encouraging  political 
indicators.  Considering 
                                                 
1 UNDP, Human Development Report, 2015 
2  IMF country report, 2016 
3 Over 50 per cent of gross domestic product since 2010, World Bank Institute, 2015 
4  52.5 per cent versus 20.9 per cent in urban areas: National Development Plan (NDP), Chad, report 2013 
5  National development plan, Chad, 2012 
6 Second general census on population and housing, Institut national de la statistique, des études économiques et 
démographiques, 2009 
7 Country policy and institutional assessment 2013, World Bank 
8  International Monetary Fund survey: Chad Reaps Benefits of High Oil Prices, Oil-related projects, March 2014 
9 Troisième enquête sur la consommation des ménages et le secteur informel au Tchad (ECOSIT3), Institut national de la 
statistique et des études économiques, juin-juillet 2011 
10  Human Development Report 2015: Gender inequality index 0.707 in 2015 
11  African average is 50.1 
2 
 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
dialogue is ongoing, there is weak participation of citizens and civil society in oversight and decision-
making. The legislature is not playing a sufficiently vital role, proposing only 10 laws out of 154 from 
2001 to 2011.12 Local governance is weak, as only limited power and resources have been transferred 
to  the  decentralized  territorial  collectivities,  which  in  turn  have  little  capacity  to  manage  them.  The 
leading cause of death in Chad is malaria, accounting for 28.2 per cent of consultations at health centres 
and adversely affecting people’s productivity and incomes.  
5.  Poor  governance  of  natural  resources  is  marked  by  deforestation,13  over-farming,  excessive 
livestock,  and  wildfires,  rendering  the  country  vulnerable  to  natural  disasters.14  Between  1980  and 
2010, over 44 natural disasters  struck the country, affecting about 5  million people and causing huge 
economic losses.15 While the country has – and depends on  – crude oil reserves, precious metals and 
stones (gold and diamonds), water, forests,16 fish and wildlife17 resources, human activity – combined 
with the effects of climate change – is threatening the environment. Domestic energy is based mainly 
on wood, resulting in deforestation, loss of biodiversity and species extinction. The Lake Chad region is 
the  most  affected:  it  has  shrunk  by  90  per  cent  between  1960  and  2016,18  with  enormous 
environmental,  socio-economic  and  security  effects.  Rapid,  unplanned  urbanization  continues  in 
settings where essential basic and public services cannot keep pace, increasing household vulnerability.  
6.  Closely intertwined with the socio-economic, governance and environmental challenges is the fact 
that for the past decade Chad has been experiencing cross-border insecurity heightened by the rise of 
extremism  in  the  Sahel-Saharan  strip  and  the  Lake  Chad  region,  where  Boko  Haram  attacks  are 
destroying  the  Chadian  economy,  disrupting  export  of  livestock  and  import  of  goods,  negatively 
affecting  people’s  livelihoods,  and  exacerbating  the  socio-economic  inequalities  of  rural  populations 
and youth. Lack of employment opportunities combined with primary school drop-out rates19 for young 
girls and boys make them easy targets  for recruitment by terrorist groups. The midterm review  of the 
United Nations  Development  Assistance  Framework  recommended  that  the  United  Nations  take  the 
youth-employment-radicalization  nexus  into  account  in  its  next  cycle.  A  joint  United  Nations 
framework is being developed to integrate humanitarian needs into development.  
7.  The previous programmes supported national development planning, good governance and human 
security.  The  2014  mid-term  review  of  the  programme  confirmed  the  strong  national  positioning  of 
UNDP  given  its  active  participation  in  the  formulation  of  various  national  development  strategies. 
Areas  such  as  environment,  energy  and  human  development  achieved  concrete  results,  with  an 
improvement in access to microfinance, including by women. An evaluation on biodiversity initiatives 
found  that  while  government  ownership  needs  strengthening,  the  creation  of  anti-poaching  village 
surveillance committees and other actions had a positive impact on beneficiaries and the environment.20 
The review highlighted UNDP relevance and its capacity to engage in political dialogue. Weaknesses 
cited  included  poor  project  management  practices;  weak  reporting,  monitoring  and  evaluation;  and 
insufficient partnership outreach, which is targeted for management improvement.  
8.  UNDP has built a solid track record as the focal point for governance among development partners. 
Its  expertise  in  parliamentary  and  electoral  assistance  resulted  in  its  successfully  managing  the  2016 
electoral  process,  and  the  European  Union  is  willing  to  pursue  this  partnership.  Also  significant  for 
social cohesion, the local peace committees resolved 150 inter- and intra-community conflicts between 
                                                 
 Annual report of the Chadian legislature, 2012 
 The country has lost over 90 per cent of its forest cover since the 1970s 
 According to the Index For Risk Management, Chad ranks 9th among countries with the highest risk (of 191 ranked countries) 
 http://www.preventionweb.net/english/countries/statistics/?cid=34 
 23.5 million hectares of natural forests 
 Chad country report, preparation for Rio+20, 2012 
 UNEP/GRID-Arendal 
 2006-2013: 38.4 per cent primary completion rate, national MDGR, 2015 
 Evaluation finale du projet Conservation et utilisation durable de la biodiversité dans le Moyen-Chari, 2015 
3 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
 
2011  and  2015.21  The  review  emphasized  UNDP  capacity  development  of  new  local  officials  in  10 
communes, while highlighting the deeper need of local governments to plan and manage development 
resources. Following UNDP Global Fund interventions, the malaria mortality rate fell to 50.96 per cent 
between 2004 and 2015.22 UNDP work with the justice sector to strengthen access to justice and train 
magistrates  and  judicial  personnel  complements  other  partners’  interventions,  such  as  those  of  the 
European Union and the United States of America. 
 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
 
9.  In  line  with  the  five-year  national  development  plan,  the  United  Nations  Development  Assistance 
Framework,  2017–2021,  and  the  humanitarian  response  plan,  the  overarching  objective  of  this 
programme  is  to  improve  inclusive  growth,  governance,  environmental  sustainability,  and  human 
capital,  breaking  inequalities  and  strengthening  resilience  to  natural  disasters  and  protracted 
humanitarian  vulnerabilities.  The  programme  is  premised  on  the  understanding  that  strong,  credible 
governance  institutions  that  manage  development  and  conflict  successfully  are  the  foundation  for 
robust and inclusive economic progress, and that growth cannot be sustained without diversification of 
the economy and appropriate management of natural resources, including through extractive industries. 
The proposed pathways will support inclusive political dialogue, participatory governance institutions, 
and  development  planning  processes  (including  equitable,  accountable  and  effective  delivery  of  anti-
malarial services) – particularly at the local level – as well as inclusive growth, with a focus on access 
to finance, and value chain-related job creation, particularly for youth and women. As the population is 
highly dependent on natural resources, the emphasis will be on ensuring management and prevention of 
the largest environmental challenge – drought – and the disasters that ensue from this vulnerability, as 
well  as  protecting  the  dwindling  biodiversity  of  the  country.  Since  the  environment  and  inclusive 
growth  are  linked  to  conflict  prevention  and  citizen  security,  the  programme  will  focus  on  building 
social  cohesion  and  youth  employment,  participation  and  anti-radicalization,  particularly  in  the  Lake 
Chad region. 
10.  The strategy is dependent on interlinkages between the four pillars of the programme. UNDP will 
engage  national  and  decentralized  institutions  in  all  pillars,  albeit  in  a  differentiated  manner.  In 
inclusive growth, UNDP will build national and local-level capacities to lead development policy and 
planning; in governance; UNDP will work at central and local levels to help legislative, electoral, and 
local  government  institutions  better  perform  core  functions  for  improved  accountability,  participation 
and  representation,  and  to  build  frameworks  and  procedures  for  dialogue  and  engagement  of  civil 
society in development planning; in environment, UNDP will work with national and local institutions 
to sustainably  prepare for and respond to  floods and drought; and in  human capital,  UNDP  will help 
build  the  functions  and  capacities  of  public  administration  and  decentralized  institutions  to  deliver 
improved  basic  services  and  respond  to  people’s  priorities.  This  approach  will  leverage  the  trust  and 
knowledge  built  in  decentralization,  local  governance,  parliamentary  development  and  electoral 
assistance  during  the  previous  programme,  while  placing  new  emphasis  on  natural  resource 
management and extractives, civil society, participation in development planning, and service delivery. 
11.  The  focus  areas,  aligned  to  the  national  development  plan,  led  to  several  consultations  with  the 
Government  and  partners  during  the  formulation  and  validation  processes.  In  line  with  the  new 
United Nations  Development  Assistance  Framework,  the  programme  approach  will  better  integrate 
with  the  strategic  planning  of  the  Government  and  humanitarian  partners  to  address  fundamental 
development  issues,  including  many  root  causes  of  vulnerability  and  humanitarian  risks.  UNDP  will 
assist the Government in the mainstreaming, acceleration and policy support plan to link the sustainable 
development goals agenda, focusing on goals 1, 3, 5, 8, 10, 15 and 16.  
                                                 
21 Rapport final du projet Prévention des Conflits par la stabilisation des communautés (2014) 
22 National blindness prevention programme, Ministry of Public Health, 2015 
4 
 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
Pillar I. Inclusive growth and sustainable development 
12.  To  complement  support  to  development  planning  and  build  on  lessons  and  experience  from  the 
previous programme, UNDP will seek to improve livelihoods and achieve structural transformation of 
productive  capacities  that  are  sustainable  and  employment-intensive.  It  will  do  so  through  economic 
diversification  and  value-chain  development  targeting  women,  youth  and  small  rural  producers  in 
selected  regions,  using  South-South  exchanges.  Partnering  with  the  United  Nations  Capital 
Development  Fund,  UNDP  will  scale  up  the  pilot  work  done  on  reorganization  of  the  microfinance 
sector to promote inclusive finance  for greater resilience. Support to producers’ organizations  will be 
through training and financial grants to promote access to inclusive financing and to new and renewable 
energy. Greater investment in the multifunctional platforms will strengthen local value chains. UNDP 
will support women’s empowerment through  multifunctional platform scale-up and access to new and 
renewable energy and micro-credit loans. The promotion of value chains will focus on transformation, 
storage, trade, and export of high-value agricultural, fishery and livestock products. UNDP will support 
the policy, legal and regulatory framework for the management of extractive industries and the use of 
revenue  for national and local development planning. UNDP will support evidence-informed national 
strategies  and  partnerships  to  advance  gender  equality  and  women’s  empowerment,  including  the 
implementation of the national gender policy and the national strategy to fight  gender-based violence. 
UNDP  will  support  the  finalization  of  the  national  policy  on  youth  employment,  including  anti-
radicalization. 
 
13.  UNDP  will  establish  a  partnership  framework  with  a  view  to  integrating  new  and  emerging 
development partners. With the World Bank, the African Development Bank and the European Union, 
UNDP  will  support  the  implementation  of  the  five-year  plan,  2016-2020,  particularly  by  mobilizing 
resources to finance it. 
Pillar II. Participatory governance and social cohesion 
14.  The governance focus will be on strengthening institutions and processes for greater participation 
and  oversight;  ensuring  strong  legal  frameworks  for  accountability;  supporting  the  national  dialogue; 
and promoting community conflict prevention and security, including through peace infrastructure and 
anti-extremism  and  radicalization  efforts.  Drawing,  inter  alia,  on  its  partnership  with  the  Inter-
Parliamentary  Union,  UNDP  will  assist  the  parliament  by  working  with  select  committees  and  the 
administration to fulfil their responsibilities, including to improve the transparency and inclusiveness of 
the  legal and institutional framework  for elections (especially  women’s participation).  Work  with the 
independent  National  Electoral  Commission  will  seek  to  reinforce  its  ability  to  manage  elections 
credibly and inclusively within a revitalized legal framework. Working with the Government, political 
actors,  civil  society,  the  Electoral  Commission  and  the  United  Nations  Regional  Office  for  Central 
Africa,  UNDP  will  support  the  revitalization  of  the  national  framework  for  political  dialogue.  In 
partnership  with  the  Office  of  the  High  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights  (OHCHR),  UNDP  will 
support national reforms for access to justice, human rights and security services. UNDP will build civil 
society capacity to act as a legitimate interface in political and social dialogue, including on topics such 
as the electoral process; the promotion of gender and citizenship; and local development. The dynamic 
partnership  UNDP  has  built  in  this  sector  will  be  maintained  and  developed  with  bilateral  and 
multilateral actors.  
 
15.  UNDP  will  work  with national institutions  and local communities to prevent and address violent 
extremism  and  radicalization,  including  through  greater  participation.  To  enable  the  decentralized 
territorial  councils  to  deliver  high-quality  public  services,  UNDP  will  deepen  its  support  to  the 
decentralization  process,  particularly  the  transfer  of  responsibilities  to  the  territorial  councils  and 
partnership  with the decentralized administration. This  work  will be linked to service  delivery efforts 
under  pillar  IV,  and  will  use  South-South  modalities  including  twinning  of  towns,  Africities, 
Environnement  et  développement  du  tiers  monde  (ENDA),  and  Economie  populaire  urbaine 
5 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
 
(ECOPOP).23 With a view to supporting peacebuilding and social cohesion, the local peace committees 
in vulnerable areas will be reinforced by involving women, youth, local officials and religious leaders. 
UNDP will partner with schools and religious institutions to confront youth radicalization and support 
local  authorities  to  set  up  employment  incubators  and  promote  entrepreneurship  and  socio-economic 
inclusion. This work will be closely tied to work under the inclusive growth pillar.  
 
16.  Local  plans  tied  to  the  five-year  plan  in  target  ‘hot-spot’  areas  (Lake  Chad,  Central  African 
Republic border, the oil-producing and Eastern regions) will be implemented by exploring innovative 
opportunities for participatory financing, decentralized cooperation and contributions from the diaspora 
through the Transfer of Knowledge through Expatriate Nationals programme. The National Volunteer 
Programme launched in the previous cycle will be leveraged to mobilize youth through a joint approach 
with UNFPA, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime,  and  the  Tokyo  International  Conference  on  African  Development.  Collaboration  with  the 
United  Nations  Peacebuilding  Fund  and  donors,  including  the  German  Agency  for  International 
Cooperation  and  the  European  Union  will  be  explored.  Partnership  around  policy  dialogues,  security 
and strengthening the rule of law will be bolstered with technical and financial partners, the Lake Chad 
Basin  Commission,  the  G-5  Sahel  and  other  subregional  organizations.  The  subregional  border 
management and border communities project  is a good example of South-South cooperation that will 
continue. 
Pillar III. Environmental resilience and disaster risk reduction 
17.  Previous efforts protected biodiversity and helped the return of endangered species such as lycaon, 
hippotragus,  lions  and  panthers.  Revenues  from  grazing  and  multifunctional  platforms  facilitated  the 
electrification  of  rural  areas,  diversification  and  transformation  of  agricultural  products,  and  the 
empowerment of women. UNDP will build on this work to improve national and community capacities 
to ensure the conservation, sustainable use, access and benefit-sharing of natural resources, biodiversity 
and ecosystems. In collaboration with the European Union, the Food and Agriculture Organization and 
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and with support from the Global Environment 
Facility,  the  programme  will  improve  natural  resource  ecosystems  management,  particularly  in  the 
Lake Chad basin. UNDP will support women’s organizations in accessing adaptation funds.  
 
18.  The  programme  will  support  access  to  inclusive,  sustainable  local  solutions  to  increase  energy 
efficiency  and  modern  energy  access  (especially  off-grid  sources  of  renewable  energy).  To  promote 
clean energy in rural areas, UNDP, in partnership with UNEP and the European Union, will support the 
Government in implementing the national strategy on new and renewable energy. Geographic targeting 
will  be  carried  out  jointly  with  United  Nations  partners  to  transition  towards  development  in  target 
locations  such  as  Sila,  Lake  Chad,  Kanem,  Chari-Baguirmi,  BorkouEnnedi  Tibesti,  Mandoul  and 
Moyen-Chari.24 
 
19.  The impact of climate change will be sustainably managed through contingency planning, working 
with  national  and  regional  entities,  including  selected  urban  and  rural  populations.  UNDP  will  seek 
South-South  cooperation  and  partnership  with  Green  Climate  Fund  and  the  United  Nations 
Collaborative  Programme  on  Reducing  Emissions  from  Deforestation  and  Forest  Degradation  in 
Developing  Countries.  To  address  the  challenges  of  urban  pressure,  UNDP  will  promote  energy-
efficient materials, sustainable management of  household waste, and tree planting. Implementation of 
the urban policy, with a focus on fragile areas, will be supported through joint action with UN-Habitat. 
 
                                                 
23 ENDA/ECOPOP: http://endatiersmonde.org/instit/index.php/40-membres-du-reseau-enda/288-ecopop-economie-populaire-urbaine 
24 Consumption Survey and the Informal Sector, III, 2011 
6 
 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
20.  UNDP will continue to support the Government and partners through the United Nations disaster 
risk  reduction  working  group,  with  support  from  the  Capacity  for  Disaster  Reduction  Initiative.  The 
implementation of the national disaster risk reduction action plan, 2015-2020, will be a priority. 
Pillar IV. Human capital 
21.  In  the  United  Nations  Development  Assistance  Framework,  human  capital  is  cast  in  social 
protection terms. The central element will be to reduce the impact of malaria through delivery of high-
quality  health  services  and  improved  governance  of  the  health  system,  with  a  view  of  achieving  an 
additional  reduction  of  20  per  cent  in  malaria  morbidity  and  mortality  and  successfully  completing 
80 per cent of malaria control support interventions by the end of 2018. UNDP work on human capital 
will  be  linked  to  its  decentralization  and  local  governance  support  under  pillar  II,  and  will  focus  on 
building public administration capacity to deliver improved basic services and respond to community 
priorities. 
 
III.   Programme and risk management  
 
22.  This  document  outlines  UNDP  contributions  to  national  results.  It  serves  as  the  primary  unit  of 
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources allocated to the programme at 
the  country  level.  Accountabilities  of  managers  at  country,  regional  and  headquarters  levels  with 
respect to country programmes are prescribed in the internal policies and controls framework. 
 
23.  The  programme  will  be  nationally  executed.  National  implementation  will  be  the  preferred 
modality  for  project  implementation.  Implementing  partners  will  be  selected  with  a  view  to  building 
sustainability  and  based  on  comparative  advantage  and  capacity  assessments.  By  using  Harmonized 
Cash  Transfers  principles,  the  risk  of  lacking  implementation  capacity  will  be  mitigated.  Direct 
implementation  may  be  explored  when  necessary  or  maintained  for  ongoing  and  approved  projects. 
Fast-track  procedures  can  be  adopted  to  provide  timely  response  in  crisis  situations  and  efficiently 
respond to emerging demands for UNDP support. Instability in neighbouring countries and attacks by 
Boko Haram are  major risks. National budgetary allocations  will  focus  more on security,  and less on 
other  programmes.  The  programme  will  intensify  its  advocacy  and  the  mobilization  of  alternative 
sources of funds and in-kind contributions through South-South cooperation, from traditional bilateral 
and  multilateral  partners  as  well  as  from  thematic  funds.  This  security  threat  could  impede  the 
mobilization  and  deployment  of  expertise  in  high-risk  areas  (Lake  Chad,  borders  with  the  Central 
African Republic and Sudan); UNDP will partner with non-governmental organizations to mitigate that 
risk.  
 
24.  Nationally, oil prices will continue to drive economic growth forecasts as will international donors’ 
availability of development funds for Chad. UNDP has developed a resource mobilization strategy that, 
while  targeting  traditional  development  partners,  also  reaches  out  to  newer  partners  such  as  Brazil, 
Russia, India, China and South Africa, and Arab foundations. UNDP will update partners’ databases; 
strengthen  its  communication  and  visibility;  reinforce  direct  project  costing;  and  update  project 
pipelines.  The  Government  of  Chad  will  be  asked  to  contribute  to  the  implementation  of  the 
programme. 
 
25.  Any socio-political unrest could affect operations and security for staff. In addition to programme 
criticality and United Nations Department of Safety and Security assessments, the programme focus on 
promoting  inclusive  political  dialogue  and  conflict  prevention  should  lessen  these  risks.  An  inter-
agency contingency plan will be updated and proactive communication on civic responsibility will be 
developed.  The  risk  of  natural  disasters  will  be  managed  using  the  programme  focus  on  disaster  risk 
reduction and mitigation. Appropriate implementation modalities will be applied to address the frequent 
turnover in government counterparts noted during the previous programme. 
 
7 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
 
26.  UNDP  will  strengthen  its  internal  capacity  and  establish  a  strong  internal  control  framework. 
Support  from  the  Regional  Centre  in  Addis  Ababa  and  the  Regional  Bureau  for  Africa,  as  well  as 
headquarters-based  departments,  will  be  needed  to  oversee  and  support  the  implementation  of  the 
programme. UNDP plans a continuous monitoring strategy, particularly through annual reviews. 
 
27.  Gender mainstreaming will be ensured and national capacities in this area will be strengthened. All 
interventions will guarantee the promotion of human rights. Environmental impact assessments will be 
conducted and appropriate mitigation measures put into place.  
 
28.  Implementing partners will be chosen through systematic use of the Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfers.  Quality  assurance  will  involve  compliance  with  norms  and  procedures  for  programme 
initiation, management and monitoring. The 2013 macro assessment, new tools, spot checks and audits 
will be systematically applied, sharing responsibilities for risk management with  the Government and 
partners. 
 
IV.     Monitoring and evaluation 
 
29.  Monitoring  and  evaluation  will  be  done  in  line  with  sustainable  development  goals  targets  and 
indicators, the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, and the monitoring and evaluation 
framework (2016-2020) of the Government, in collaboration with all in-country partners. Emphasis will 
be on supporting capacities for the National Institute of Statistics, Economic and Demographic Studies 
in planning, tracking and  monitoring development results in the  context  of the  goals and government 
priorities. 
 
30.  To  complement  the  national  information  system,  UNDP  will  conduct  socio-economic  studies  on 
governance, sustainable development, eradication of extreme poverty and inequalities. Periodic reviews 
will be planned with the Government and will be combined with field visits to monitor the efficient use 
of resources and ensure the fulfilment of mutual responsibilities and transparency requirements.  
 
31.  UNDP  will  set  aside  5  per  cent  of  its  programme  budget  to  address  gaps  in  baseline  data  and 
targets, and training staff and partners in monitoring and evaluation. UNDP will conduct independent 
evaluations  in  accordance  with  the  institutional  evaluation  plan.  The  ‘gender  marker’  will  be  used  to 
monitor programme expenditures and improve planning and decision-making. 
 
32.  UNDP  will regularly report to the Global Fund on results achieved, including cross-cutting areas 
and planned budget. The national malaria information system and the Malaria Indicators Survey will be 
the  main  tools  to  monitor  programme  interventions  and  provide  information  on  the  health  impact  of 
malaria control in Chad. 
 
33.  The Ministry of Planning will manage cooperation between UNDP and the Government. Together 
with sector ministries and institutions, it will coordinate annual planning, implementation, monitoring, 
evaluation  and  audits  of  the  programme.  The  Ministry  and  UNDP  will  organize  annual  joint 
programme reviews.  
 
8 
 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Chad (2017-2021) 
National priority or goal: Development of supply, production and opportunities for decent jobs (priority 1; sustainable development goals (SDGs) 1,2,5,7,8 and 10) 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) outcome 1. By 2021, the State of Chad puts in place a national development policy generating inclusive growth and job creation opportunities, 
particularly for youth and women, including refugees.  
Related strategic plan outcome: 1. Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded. 
UNDAF outcome indicators, 
baselines and targets 
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities 
Indicative country programme outputs 
Major partners and 
partnership frameworks 
Indicative resources by outcome 
(in $ thousands) 
Poverty rate (urban/rural/by age-
group, sex) 
Baseline: 46.7%; target: 37.5% 
 
Output 1.1. Legal and institutional frameworks are in place for 
budgeting and management of extractive resources.   
National and local institutions (NLIs):  
 
Regular: $5,325 
 
 
Planning, advocacy, resources 
mobilization, monitoring and evaluation 
 
 
Finance act and budget (annual) 
Indicator 1.1.1. Number of national and local strategic frameworks 
in the budgeting and management of extractives resources in which 
sustainable development goals are mainstreamed. 
Baseline: 2; target: 17 
Other: $500 
 
 
 
 
Under-employment rate among 
young people (formal and informal) 
(sex, age, vulnerable groups, areas) 
Baseline: 34%; target: 25% 
 
United Nations system/World Bank/ 
IMF/AfDB/Global Fund: Technical 
assistance, financing, advocacy 
 
 
Consumption survey and the 
informal sector/Demographic 
and health survey, Institut 
national de la statistique des 
études économiques et 
démographiques (3-5 years) 
 
Indicator 1.1.2. Percentage of partners reporting official 
development assistance to aid management platform  
Baseline: 50%Target: 100%  
 
 
Donors: European Union, France, 
Germany, Japan. Switzerland, United 
States  
Proportion of youth (aged 15-24) 
not in education, employment or 
training (formal or informal), 
disaggregated by sector, subsector, 
sex, age and excluded groups 
Baseline: 80%; target: 85% 
 
Indicator 1.1.3. Number  of proposals adopted to mitigate sector-
specific corruption risks  
Baseline: 4; target: 7  
 
 
CSOs: Surveillance/advocacy/ 
sensitization/information 
Surveys/NISEDS (5 years)  
 
 
 
South-South exchanges: Benin, Burkina 
Faso, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire and Niger 
Output  1.2.  Sustainable  value  chains  are  developed  and  create 
employment. 
 
 
Coverage of cost-efficient and 
sustainable energy, disaggregated 
by rural/urban  
Activity report (Ministry of 
Youth, National Office for 
Employment Promotion) 
(quarterly) 
 
 
Indicator  1.2.1.  Number  of  identified  value  chains  analysed    and  
developed 
Baseline: 1; target: 3 per year 
Private sector: Financing 
 
    (a) Percentage of population with 
connection to electricity (total) 
Baseline: 5%; target: 15% 
    (b) Percentage of population with 
access to non-solid fuels (total)  
Baseline: 5%; target: 15% 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator  1.2.2.  Number  of  jobs  created  through  analysed  value 
chains  
Baseline: 950; target:19,000 
 
Ministry of Regional Planning, 
Urbanism and Housing (annual)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 1.3. National and decentralized institutions are able 
to achieve structural transformation and create better living 
conditions and sustainable employment. 
 
 
 
 
Activity report (Ministry of 
Youth, National Office for 
Employment Promotion), 
 
Indicator 1.3.1. Number of full-time jobs created for women and 
men 15+ years old 
9 
 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
 
(quarterly) 
Baseline (women): 550; target: 1,550  
Baseline (men): 400; target: 1,200  
 
Indicator 1.3.2. Number of additional females and males benefiting 
from  livelihoods interventions 
Baseline: 264,418; target: 514,418 for women 
Baseline: 789,131; target: 1,578,262 for men 
 
Indicator 1.3.3. Extent to which policies, systems and institutional 
measures are in place to generate and strengthen employment and 
livelihoods 
Baseline: 3; target: 4  
 
Indicator 1.3.4. Number of people with access to financial services 
Baseline: 214,942; target: 1,00,00 
National priority or goal: Improved governance (SDGs 16 and 17) 
UNDAF outcome: By 2021, national and local institutions apply more best practices of inclusive governance, promoting democracy, rule of law, social cohesion, and equitable use of quality public services including 
for refugees.  
Related strategic plan outcome: 2. Citizen expectations for voice, development, the rule of law and accountability are met by stronger systems of democratic governance. 
Election participation rate 
Baseline: 72%; target: 85% 
Sub-Committee on 
Accreditation Report-NHRI 
(OHCHR) 
  Annual – Parliament  
Judicial Statistical Yearbook 
(Ministry of Justice, annual) 
National Assembly Annual 
Activity Report (2017, 2018, 
2019, 2020) 
Independent Electoral 
Commission Report 
  Every 5 years 
Electoral Observation 
Missions Reports 
  Every 5 years  
Survey on the perception of 
justice by citizens, European 
Union, 25/02/2015 
NLIs: Sectoral ministries and agencies: 
coordination, planning, monitoring and 
evaluation 
Regular: $7,842.5 
Output 2.1. Governance institutions at the central and local 
level enabled to perform core functions for improved 
accountability, participation and representation. 
 
Other: $12,800 
 
 
 
 
Rate of female parliamentarians 
Baseline: 15%; target: 30% 
Indicator 2.1.1. Extent to which the parliament improves its 
capacities for law-making, oversight and representation 
Baseline: 3; target: 4 
 
 
United Nations/European Union/ 
France/Japan/ Switzerland/ United 
States: Technical assistance, financing, 
advocacy, partnership 
 
Percentage of women elected at the local 
level (elected in 42 communes) 
Baseline: (14%); target: (30%) 
 
Indicator 2.1.2. Extent to which the Independent National 
Electoral Commission manages electoral operations 
Baseline: 2; target: 3 
 
 
CSOs: Citizen surveillance and oversight, 
advocacy, sensitization, information, 
partnership 
Level of satisfaction among users of the 
judicial system and for human rights 
Baseline: No date; target: 60% 
 
Indicator 2.1.3. Number of registered voters 
Baseline: 6,250,000; target: 6,800,000 
 
 
 
 
Number of competencies transferred to 
decentralized territorial councils  by the 
Government (health, education) 
Baseline: 0; target: 13 
Indicator 2.1.4. Number of women participating as candidates 
in local and national elections  
Baseline: 187; target: 300 
 
 
Indicator  2.1.5.  Extend  to  which  Chadians  are  confident  in  the 
justice and security systems 
Baseline: 1; target 3 
 
 
 
Perception study on drivers of 
insecurity and violent 
extremism in the border 
 
 
 
10 
 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
regions of the Sahel, UNDP, 
April 2016  
 
 
 
Output 2.2. Frameworks and procedures for dialogue in place 
for effective and transparent engagement of civil society. 
 
 
UNDP joint human security 
report, 2016 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.1. Extent to which women, youth and excluded 
groups have strengthened capacity to engage in critical 
development- and crisis-related issues  
Baseline: 2; target: 4 
 
 
 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Five-year national 
development plan, 
October 2016 
Indicator 2.2.2. Extent to which women’s and youth groups  
contribute to development 
Baseline: 2; target: 3 
 
 
Frequency: Annual 
Output 2.3. National institutions and communities enabled to 
prevent and address violent extremism and radicalization. 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.3.1. Number of at-risk youth and vulnerable people 
with improved livelihoods 
Baseline: 0; target: 150 men, 150 women 
 
Five-year national 
development plan, 
October 2016 
 
Indicator 2.3.2. Number of youth in ‘hot-spot’ areas25 engaged 
through programming 
Baseline: 1; target: 300 
 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
Indicator 2.3.3. Number of new jobs created for young women 
and men in ‘hot-spot’ areas. 
Baseline: 0; target: 750 for women, 750 for men 
National priority or goal: Protection of the environment and adaptation to climate change (SDGs 3, 4, 6, 12, 13, 14, 15) 
UNDAF outcome: By 2021, farms, fishing communities and small producers, notably youth and women,  in targeted regions, use sustainable production systems that allow them to meet their needs, bring food to 
market and adopt a living environment that is more resilient to climate change and other environmental challenges. 
Related strategic plan outcome: 1. Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded. 
Penetration rate of microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) 
Baseline: 2%; target: 7%  
Renewable Energy 
Development Agency reports 
(every 2 years, Agence 
nationale pour 
l’environnement et le 
développement des énergies 
renouvelables) 
NLIs: Sectoral ministries and agencies: 
coordination, planning, M&E 
Regular: $7,130.5 
Output 3.1. Capacities of national institutions and 
communities enabled to ensure conservation and management 
of natural resources in line with international conventions and 
national legislation. 
 
Other: $25,000 
 
United Nations system/African 
Development Bank/Central African 
State Development Bank: Technical 
assistance, financing, synergies, 
 
 
 
 
Percentage of households with access to 
renewable energy (according to sex of 
head of household) 
Indicator 3.1.1: Extent to which policy,  legal and institutional 
frameworks for conservation, sustainable use, and access and 
 
 
                                                 
25Lake Chad, border with Central African Republic and Eastern Chad 
11 
 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
 
Baseline: 2%; target: 10% 
benefit sharing of natural resources, biodiversity and ecosystems 
are in place  
Baseline: 2; target:4 
advocacy 
 
 
National strategy to promote 
new and renewable energy 
(every 3 to 5 years, Ministry 
of Energy) 
 
 
CSOs:  Surveillance 
advocacy, sensitization, information 
and  oversight, 
Number of existing protected areas 
Baseline: 3 parks and 7 wildlife reserves 
Target: 5 parks and 10 wildlife reserves  
Mortality rate from natural hazards 
Baseline: 0,01%; target: 0%  
 
Indicator 3.1.2. Extent to which capacities to implement national 
and local plans for Integrated Water Resources Management have 
improved 
Baseline: 3; target : 4 
 
Private sector: Financing 
 
 
National Adaptation Plan 
document (annual, 
AGRHYMET Regional 
Centre) 
MFI professional associations, Islamic 
Development Bank, technical and 
financial partners  
 
 
Economic loss from natural hazards  
(e.g., geo-physical and climate-induced 
hazards) as a proportion of GDP  
Baseline: 37,000/year  
Target:  7,400/year  
Indicator  3.1.3.  Number  people  benefiting  from  improved 
livelihoods through natural resource management 
Baseline: 2,000; Target: 12,000 (40% are Women) 
 
 
Green Climate Fund 
National Development Plan 
(annual, Ministry of Planning) 
 
Indicator  3.1.4.  Number  of  new 
management of natural resources 
Baseline: 1,005; target: 5,025 (40 % are women) 
jobs  created 
through  
 
 
Chad Habitat country 
programme document (every 2 
years, Ministry of Housing 
and UN-Habitat)  
 
Output 3.2. Inclusive and sustainable solutions adopted  to 
achieve energy efficiency and universal modern energy access 
(especially off-grid sources of renewable energy) for specific 
needs of women and men. 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.2.1. Number of new partnerships with funding in 
targeted underserved communities 
Baseline: 4; target:7 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.2.2. Percentage of women-headed households 
benefitting from improved energy access 
Baseline: 2%; target: 5% 
 
 
 
 
Output 3.3. National/local institutions and target populations 
in  urban  and  rural  areas  enabled  to  sustainably  manage 
floods and drought. 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.3.1. Proportion of population in flood and drought 
risk areas covered by national and regional contingency plans  
ORSEC Plan (annual, 
Ministry of Territorial 
Administration: Direction de 
la Protection Civile) 
 
Baseline: 15%; target: 45% 
 
 
Indicator 3.3.2. Proportion of households having access to decent 
housing 
Baseline: 28%; target: 38% 
 
 
 
 
Output 3.4: The institutional, legal and strategic frameworks 
(national and sub-national) for disaster risk reduction (DRR) 
are operational and include women’s specific needs. 
 
 
12 
 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.4.1.  Number  of  national  and  regional  plans    that  are 
gender responsive and address disaster and/or climate risk  
Baseline:3; target: 5 
United Nations Contingency 
Plan, 2016 (annual) and  
ORSEC Plan (annual) 
 
 
Indicator  3.4.2.  Extent  to  which  gender  is  mainstreamed  in  the 
national action plan, the DRR strategy and  mechanism for multi-
stakeholder coordination 
Baseline: Inadequate; target: High 
 United Nations Contingency 
Plan, 2016 (annual) 
National priority or goal: Human capital improvement (SDGs 2, 3, 10, 17) 
UNDAF outcome: By 2021, the most vulnerable communities, including women, teenagers and children under 5 years and refugees in targeted areas, use high-quality integrated health, nutrition, HIV and malaria 
prevention and care services. 
Related strategic plan outcome: 3. Countries have strengthened institutions to progressively deliver universal access to basic services. 
Ministry of Public Health, National 
malaria country programme, UNICEF 
Regular: $340 
L 
 
Output 4.1. Population has increased access to preventive and 
treatment services for malaria. 
 
Sector/multiple indicator 
cluster survey (3 to 5 years) 
Surveys/NISEDS 
National Malaria country 
programme reports 
National health information 
system 
Half-yearly 
 
Other: 
Global Fund: $23,567.563 
Indicator 4.1.1. Total estimated malaria cases having received 
frontline anti-malarial treatment in public health facilities 
Baseline:  959,582; target: 1,449,154 
 
 
 
Indicator 4.1.2. Percentage of women who have received at least 
3 doses of intermittent preventive treatment 
Baseline: No data; target: 45% 
 
 
 
Indicator 4.1.3. Number of insecticide-treated nets distributed to 
individuals during the mass distribution campaign 
Baseline: 3867,131; target: 4,976,390 
 
 
 
 
Output 4.2. National institutions, systems, laws and policies 
enabled for equitable, accountable and effective delivery of 
malaria and related services. 
 
 
 
 
National malaria country 
programme reports 
Indicator 4.2.1. Proportion suspected case of malaria submitted to 
parasitological testing in public sector health institutions 
Baseline: 75%; target: 90% 
 
 
 
 
Output 4.3. Capacity of public administration at national and 
decentralized levels enabled to deliver improved basic services 
and respond to community’s priorities. 
HACT evaluation, Ministry of 
Local Governance 
Administration, annual 
 
Indicator 4.3.1. Level of capacity of subnational 
governments/administrations for planning and budgeting delivery 
13 
 
DP/DCP/TCD/3 
 
 
of basic services. 
Baseline: 1; target: 3 
 
Indicator 4.3.2. Level of capacity of subnational 
governments/administrations for monitoring delivery of basic 
services 
Baseline: Partial; target: comprehensive 
 
 
14 
