                         Republic of Armenia  

Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program  
(SREP)  

Investment Plan for Armenia 
                          April 2014 

 
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  FOREWORD 

An affordable, secure and sustainable energy supply is essential for 
the prosperity of the people of Armenia, and for the growth of our 
economy.  Because  of  Armenia’s  dependence  on  energy  imports, 
energy prices are largely beyond our control. Over the past decade 
as we emerged from an energy crisis, we learned the importance of 
developing  our  domestic  energy  resources,  and  transformed  our 
government  institutions  to  support  private  sector  involvement  in 
the energy industry. In just a few years, a robust and thriving small 
hydropower  industry  has  emerged  from  these  efforts.  Despite  this 
success,  our  energy  sector  remains  vulnerable  to  price  shocks  and 
reliability  problems,  and  climate  change  continues  to  threaten  our 
natural resources and well-being. 

Yet in the face of these risks, we have a great opportunity: much of 
Armenia’s  conventional  energy  generation  infrastructure  will  need 
to be replaced in the coming years. If  we can replace  some of this 
with  indigenous  renewable  energy  resources,  we  can  improve 
energy  security  while  simultaneously  reducing  our  contributions  to 
global  climate  change.  Furthermore,  we  can  leverage  our  scientific 
and technical talent  to build domestic renewable  energy industries 
that will create new employment opportunities for years to come. 

At  this  crucial  juncture,  the  Scaling-up  Renewable  Energy  (SREP) 
Investment Plan will assist us as we chart a new future for Armenia’s 
energy  industry.  This  Investment  Plan  identifies  the  renewable 
energy  technologies  and  projects  that  can  best  contribute  to  the 
Government’s  energy,  economic  and  environmental  development 
goals.  As  such  it  is  an  update  and  further  elaboration  of  the 
Renewable  Energy  Roadmap  developed  in  2011.  It  outlines  the 
activities that must be carried out to realize a new energy future by 
deploying technologies that  have as of yet  only been implemented 
on  a  small  scale,  but  which  have  enormous  potential.  Particular 
focus  has  been  given  to  minimizing  risk  for  private  investors  in 
renewable energy, and to initiatives that can help reduce domestic 
consumption  of  imported  fuels.  SREP  will  support  the  Government 
in reaching its goals for the energy sector, and help leverage private 
sector funds to exponentially expand investment in clean, domestic 
energy resources. 

Investment  Plan  was  developed  collaboratively 

in 
The  SREP 
consultation  with  representatives 
from  Government,  private 
industry  and  academia.  Our  development  partners,  the  WBG,  the 
EBRD, and the ADB provided expertise and support that was critical 
to the successful creation of the plan. I thank these institutions and I 
look forward to their continued support in this timely and important 
initiative. 

                                                      Armen Movsisyan 

Yerevan, April 2014 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
 
Table of Contents 
Proposal Summary 
1 

1.1 

1.2 

The Role of Renewable Energy in Armenia 

SREP’s Role in Removing the Barriers to Renewable Energy 
in Armenia 

1.3 

The Proposed Investment Program for Armenia 

2 

Country Context 

2.1 

2.2 

2.3 

Energy  Sector 
Framework 

Legal,  Regulatory  and 

Institutional 

Energy Supply and Demand 

Electricity Cost and Pricing 

3 

Renewable Energy Sector Context 

3.1 

3.2 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

3.6 

Analysis of Renewable Energy Options 

Costs of Renewable Energy 

Barriers to Renewable Energy Projects 

Government Strategy for the Renewable Energy Sector 

Role of the Private Sector 

On-going  and  Planned 
Partners 

Investments  by  Development 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

Prioritization of Renewable Energy Technologies 

Program Description 

5.1 

5.2 

Geothermal Power Exploration and Development 

Utility-Scale Solar PV Project Development 

Financing Plan and Instruments 

Responsiveness to SREP Criteria 

Additional Development Activities 

Implementation Potential with Risk Assessment 

10 

Monitoring and Evaluation 

Appendices  
Annex A : Project Concept Briefs 

Annex B : Assessment of Absorptive Capacity 

Annex C : Stakeholder Consultations 

Annex D : Co-Benefits 

1 

1 

3 

6 

11 

12 

16 

20 

22 

22 

26 

31 

37 

38 

38 

41 

45 

46 

50 

54 

56 

58 

59 

62 

64 

84 

88 

90 

 
Annex E : Existing Activities in the Field of Renewable Energy 

Annex F : Assumptions Used in Estimating Levelized Energy Costs 

Annex G : Comments from Independent Technical Reviewer 

92 

93 

100 

Tables 
Table  1.1:  Renewable  Energy  Generation  Capacity  and  Production 

Targets 2020-2030 

Table 1.2: Financing Plan 

Table  1.3:  Renewable  Energy  Resource  Potential  in  Armenia  by 

Technology 

Table  2.1.  Power  Company  Tariffs  in  Armenia,  2009-2012  (AMD/kWh) 

(excluding VAT) 

Table  2.2.  Feed-in-Tariffs  for  Renewable  Energy  Systems,  2013 

(excluding VAT) 

Table 2.3: End-User Tariffs, VAT inclusive 

Table  3.1:  Renewable  Energy  Resource  Potential  in  Armenia  by 

Technology 

Table  3.2:  Concessional,  Commercial  and  SREP/Commercial  Financing 

Assumptions 

Table  3.3:  Levelized  Energy  Cost  Ranges  of  Various  Solar  Power 
Technologies  in  Armenia,  Assuming  Mixed  SREP/Commercial 
Financing 

Table  3.4.  Barriers  to  Renewable  Energy  Development  and  Mitigation 

Options 

Table  3.5:  Renewable  Energy  Generation  Capacity  and  Production 

Targets 2020-2025 

3 

8 

9 

20 

21 

21 

22 

27 

31 

33 

37 

Table 4.1: Ranking of Renewable Technologies Against Selection Criteria  42 

Table 4.2: Ranking of Renewable Technologies Against Selection Criteria  43 

Table 6.1: Indicative Financing Plan 

Table 7.1: Summary of Projects’ Responsiveness to SREP Criteria 

Table 9.1: Risk Assessment of the SREP Program in Armenia 

Table 10.1: Results Framework for the SREP Program in Armenia 

Table 10.2: Indicative Financing Plan for Geothermal Power Project 

Table 10.2: Timeline for Geothermal Exploratory Drilling Project 

Table  10.3:  Indicative  Financing  Plan  for  Utility-Scale  Solar  Power 

Project 

55 

56 

59 

63 

68 

69 

79 

 
 
Table  10.3:  Indicative  Financing  Plan  for  Utility-Scale  Solar  Power 

Project 

Figures 
Figure  1.1:  Renewable  Energy  Resources  Supply  Curve  for  Armenia, 
Commercial,  Mixed  Commercial/SREP  and  Concessional 
Financing 

Figure 2.1. Annual Change in Real GDP, 2002-2012 

Figure 2.2. Structure of the Electricity Sector of Armenia 

Figure 2.3: Natural Gas Consumption by End-Use 

Figure  2.4.  Natural  Gas  Import  Price  and  Domestic  End-User  Tariff, 

2005-2013 

Figure 2.5: Net Generation and Consumption, 2006-2011 

Figure  2.6:  Forecast  Gap  between  Installed  Capacity  and  Winter  Peak 

Demand 

Figure  3.1:  Renewable  Energy  Supply  Curve  for  Armenia,  Concessional 

Financing Assumptions, LEC of Less Than US$0.10/kWh 

Figure  3.2:  Renewable  Energy  Supply  Curve  for  Armenia,  Commercial 

Financing Assumptions, LEC of Less than US$0.20/kWh 

Figure  3.3:  Renewable  Energy  Resources  Supply  Curve  for  Armenia, 
Commercial,  Mixed  Commercial/SREP  and  Concessional 
Financing 

Figure  3.4:  Renewable  Energy  Resources  Average  Supply  Curve  for 

Armenia (Mixed Commercial/Concessional Financing) 

Figure  3.5:  Comparative  Cost  of  Renewable  and  Non-Renewable 

Heating Technologies 

Figure 10.1: Solar Zones 

80 

10 

11 

15 

17 

17 

19 

19 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

74 

 
 
 
 
Proposal Summary 

1 
This document contains the Investment Plan (IP) for the Republic of Armenia. The IP 
is  the  result  of  extensive  analysis  led  by  the  Renewable  Resources  and  Energy 
Efficiency Fund (R2E2) and a wide-reaching internal and public consultation process, 
led  by  government,  to  identify  priorities  in  the  development  of  renewable  energy 
technologies for electricity and heating. The consultations included a wide range of 
government  agencies,  as  well  as  representatives  from  the  private  sector,  civil 
society,  and  academia.  The  IP  serves  as  an  update  and  further  elaboration  of  the 
Renewable Energy Roadmap developed for Armenia in 2011. 

The Role of Renewable Energy in Armenia 

1.1 
Armenia’s energy sector has made significant progress in the last two decades. The 
sector  has  moved  from  severe  crisis—characterized  by  crippling  supply  shortages, 
and  near-financial  bankruptcy  of  the  sector—to  stability  more  characteristic  of 
developed  countries  than  emerging  markets.  The  use  and  development  of 
renewable  energy  has  been  an  important  part  of  the  transition  from  crisis  to 
stability,  and  will  remain  important  in  the  years  to  come  as  demand  grows  and 
ageing thermal plants are retired. 

The historic importance of renewable energy in Armenia 

Armenia  has  no  proven  oil  or  natural  gas  reserves  and  imports  all  of  its  fuel  for 
thermal generation from Russia and Iran. The country relies on imported natural gas 
to generate roughly 30 percent of its power and most of its heat. Nuclear fuel, which 
is  used  to  generate  another  30  percent  of  electricity  in  Armenia,  is  also  imported. 
The remaining electricity is generated by a series of hydropower plants in the Sevan-
Hrazdan  and  Vorotan  cascades,  more  than  130  small  hydropower  plants,  and  one 
small wind farm.  

Armenia’s dependence on imported fuels creates security of supply  risks as well as 
affordability problems for customers. The sector is highly susceptible to fuel supply 
interruptions and price volatility. Between 1991 and 1996—because of disruptions in 
gas  supply—customers  suffered  through  several  of  Armenia’s  brutal  winters  with 
little more than two hours of electricity supply per day. Meanwhile, the import price 
of natural gas has continued to increase. The increases of the price of imported gas 
meant  steady  increases  in  end-user  tariffs  for  natural  gas  and  electricity.  Between 
2005  and  2013,  the  end-user  natural  gas  tariff  increased  by  170  percent.  End-user 
residential tariffs for electricity increased 52 percent during the same time period. 

The Government of Armenia has worked for more than a decade to expand the use 
of renewable energy. A 2004 Law on Energy Savings and Renewable Energy in 2004 
provided  for,  among  other  things,  the  establishment  of  the  Renewable  Resources 
and  Energy  Efficiency  Fund  (R2E2),  a  non-governmental  agency  dedicated  to 
promoting and facilitating renewable energy and energy efficiency in Armenia. R2E2, 
with  the  support  of  the  World  Bank  and  GEF,  implemented  a  Renewable  Energy 
Program  that  helped  to  remove  barriers  to  the  development  of  renewable  energy 
generation,  and  create  an  enabling  environment  for  private  investors.  The  project 
was co-financed by EBRD and local private financing institution.  

1 

In  2007,  the  Public  Services  Regulatory  Commission  (PSRC)  set  renewable  energy 
feed-in tariffs for small hydropower plants (SHPPs), wind, and biomass  to stimulate 
private  investment.  The feed-in tariff  regime  guarantees  purchase  all  of the  power 
generated by renewable energy plants for 15 years. Tariffs are adjusted annually in 
line  with  changes  in  inflation  and  exchange  rates.  The  feed-in  tariff  has  been 
successful  in  attracting  private  investment  in  more  than  200  MW  of  small 
hydropower.  More  recently,  Government  took  steps  to  streamline  the  process  of 
developing  renewable  energy  projects,  including  relaxing  tax  obligations  for  some 
investments. 

The future of renewable energy in Armenia 

The historic threats to supply security and affordability are expected to continue in 
Armenia.  Therefore,  the  Government’s  commitment  to  developing  renewable 
energy remains as strong as before and there is now more urgency, given a looming 
gap between supply and demand. 

Demand  grew  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  roughly  4  percent  between  2004  and 
2013,  and  is  expected to  continue to  grow  at  a  rate  of  around  2  percent  per  year. 
New  supply  will  be  needed  since  50  percent  of  available  capacity  is  more  than  40 
years  old,  and  one  of  the  largest  generating  units  in  the  system,  the  remaining 
nuclear unit at Metsamor, is in urgent need of investments. Metsamor’s retirement 
has been postponed twice, most recently from 2021 until commissioning of the new 
nuclear power plant (expected in 2026) because of the difficulty in securing financing 
for it. If Metsamor is retired in 2026, Armenia can expect a supply gap of roughly 830 
MW,  considering  the  base-case  forecast  average  annual  peak  demand  growth  of 
roughly 2 percent per year.  

Natural  gas  prices,  too,  are  expected  to  increase.  Specifically,  the  import  price  of 
natural  gas  could  increase  by  more  than  50  percent  over  the  next  12  years 
depending on the domestic gas price increase in Russia and the US inflation to which 
the  Armenia  border  gas  price  is  linked  to.  This  will  affect  the  cost  of  power 
generation.  The  current  average  cost  of  generation  in  Armenia  is  roughly  US$ 
0.035/kWh, but is set to increase to US$0.08-0.19/kWh as gas prices increase, and a 
new nuclear plant is brought online in 2026. The range reflects different assumptions 
about the size of the new plant, and whether concessional or commercial financing is 
used  to  finance  it.  The  above  estimated  range  of  average  generation  cots  suggest 
that  geothermal  power  and  utility-scale  solar  PV  may  become  cost-competitive 
options (see Figure 1.1) for meeting forecast electricity demand in Armenia.   

The  Government’s renewable  energy  strategy  is  driven  by the overarching  goals  of 
improving  energy  security,  ensuring  tariff  affordability,  and  maximizing  the  use  of 
Armenia’s indigenous energy resources. A 2013 Decree of the President of Armenia 
approved an “Energy Security Concept” for the country, which prioritizes the use of 
renewable  energy  resources.  The  Government’s  Development  Strategy  for  2012-
2025  specifically  calls  for  the  development  of  indigenous  renewable  energy 
resources.  

Table  1.1  shows  Government’s  targets  for  various  renewable  energy  technologies. 
Excluding  output from the  large  hydroelectric  plants,  renewable  energy generation 
represented roughly 6 percent of total generation in 2012. The Government’s target 

2 

is for such generation to represent  21 percent of total generation by 2020,  and 26 
percent by 2025. 

Table  1.1:  Renewable  Energy  Generation  Capacity  and  Production  Targets  2020-
20301 

Small Hydro 

Wind 

Geothermal 

PV 

Total  

Capacity installed (MW) 

Generation (GWh) 

2020 

2025 

2020 

2025 

377 

50 

50 

40 

492 

397 

100 

100 

80 

677 

1,049 

1,106 

117 

373 

88 

232 

745 

176 

1,627 

2,259 

The  targets  shown  in  Table  1.1  update  the  2011  Renewable  Energy  Roadmap  for 
Armenia,  developed  in  cooperation  with  R2E2,  with  the  support  of  the  Global 
Environmental Facility (GEF) and the World Bank. Targets have been updated in this 
IP because a number of factors, global and local to Armenia, have changed since the 
development  of the  Roadmap.  There  is, for example,  more  information  now  about 
the  solar,  geothermal,  and  wind  resources  in  Armenia  than  there  was  when  the 
Roadmap  was  produced.  Wind  resources,  in  particular,  have  shown  to  have  lower 
capacity factors than previously thought, making them more expensive on a levelized 
energy cost (LEC) basis. Solar PV has, in contrast become more attractive. The capital 
costs of utility-scale solar PV projects have declined substantially over the past few 
years, shifting more of the technically viable solar potential toward financial viability. 
As  a  consequence,  Government’s  priorities  in  the  years  to  come  are  likely  to  shift 
away from wind and toward solar PV. 

1.2 

SREP’s  Role  in  Removing  the  Barriers  to  Renewable  Energy  in 
Armenia 

Armenia  faces  a  number  of  barriers  to  the  further  development  of  renewable 
energy. SREP funding can be instrumental in helping to remove or at least weaken a 
number of these barriers. 

Barriers 

One of the most significant barriers to renewable energy in Armenia is the high cost 
of  investment  relative  to  the  currently  low  cost  electricity  generation  mix  in  the 
country.  Tariffs  are  low  because  many  of  the  thermal  plants  generating  electricity 
are fully depreciated and need only to recover variable costs. This will change as new 
generation  plants  are  brought  online  and  tariffs  are  raised  to  reflect  their  capital 
costs.  In  the  meantime,  however,  the  low  cost  of  generation  makes  it  difficult  for 
consumers  to  understand  the  need  for  higher-cost  renewable  energy  generation 
which will satisfy –at least initially—only a small portion of demand. This is a barrier 

1 Excludes generation from the large hydro cascades. 

3 

  
 
 
                                                      
of  perception  which,  as  described  below,  Government  can  overcome  with  SREP’s 
assistance. 

There  are  also  legitimate  concerns  about  affordability.  The  global  economic  crisis 
increased the already high incidence of poverty in Armenia. Between 2008 and 2010, 
the poverty incidence increased from 27.6 percent to 35.8 percent of the population, 
and severe poverty grew from 12.6 percent to 21.3 percent of the total population.2 
Energy poverty—in which households spend more than 10 percent of their budgets 
on energy—affects nearly 30 percent of Armenian households. The poorest quintiles 
of the population allocate a relatively higher share of their budgets to electricity than 
rural  households.  These  households  are  likely  to  experience  more  significant 
pressures  on  their  budgets  as  a  result  of  increased  energy  tariffs.  A  recent  World 
Bank  study  has  estimated  that,  when  a  new  thermal  plant  is  built,  tariff  increases 
could  result  in  increases  in  poverty  of  1-8  percent,  depending  on  the  sources  of 
financing used, the gas price, and the technology (nuclear or gas) built first. Higher 
tariffs also have environmental consequences in Armenia. The historical experience 
in Armenia is that poorer, rural households have switched—at least temporarily—to 
traditional fuels (mostly firewood, collected illegally) when electricity and gas tariffs 
increase. Armenia’s forests shrunk by roughly half during the years of energy crisis, 
and now the forests cover only roughly 10 percent of total area of the country. 

Another  important  barrier  is  the  lack  of  experience  with  many  renewable  energy 
technologies. There is no experience building and operating utility scale solar PV or 
geothermal  in  the  country.  The  lack  of  experience  creates,  or  reinforces  several 
other barriers, namely: 

  The  absence  of  regulatory  incentives  for  certain  technologies.  The  Law  on 
Energy guarantees cost recovery through tariffs, but feed-in tariffs were never 
set for some renewable energy technologies because of perceptions about cost 
and  the  absence  of  long-term  financing  opportunities.  Solar  PV,  for  example, 
was not initially thought to be commercially viable, and so was not, until recent 
years, a priority in Armenia. 

  Limited  capacity  for  equipment  acquisition  and 

installation.  Limited 
experience with certain technologies limits the expansion of solar PV and large 
scale geothermal. It also substantially raises the costs of doing first projects in 
these technologies. 

  A  lack  of  technical  capacity  among  local  financiers.  The  success  of  the SHPP 
program  is  owed,  in  part,  to  the  good  quality  of  technical  assessments 
completed  by  local  commercial  banks  in  programs  supported  by  the  World 
Bank,  European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development  (EBRD)  and 
Germany’s  Kreditanstalt  für  Wiederaufbau  (KfW).  Local  commercial  banks  do 
not, however, currently have capacity to assess other types of RE projects. 

2 The poor are defined as those with consumption per adult equivalent below the upper general poverty line; the 
severely poor are defined as those with consumption per adult equivalent below the lower general poverty line. 
The poverty line in 2010 was computed using the actual minimum food basket and the estimated share of non-
food consumption in 2009. 

4 

                                                      
  A  lack  of  confidence  in  certain  technologies.  The  lack  of  experience  with  RE 
technologies  makes  potential  developers,  property  owners  and  energy  users 
skeptical of these technologies and uninclined to take the risk of being the first 
to use them.  

  Underdeveloped 

local  markets  for  certain  technologies.  The 

lack  of 
experience  in  certain  technologies  also  means  that  there  are  no  markets  for 
services  or  expertise  required  to  develop  projects  using  certain  technologies. 
Whereas  the  technologies  themselves  are  typically 
imported,  project 
development requires local expertise in engineering design, procurement and 
installation. The market for such services is extremely thin in Armenia.  

These barriers do not exist for all technologies, nor do all of the barriers listed above 
affect  any  single  technology.  There  is  some  experience,  for  example,  with  small 
hydro, wind, and biomass.  

SREP’s Role in removing barriers 

in  this 

identified 

The Government is asking SREP for support in facilitating the scaling-up of a subset 
Investment  Plan.  The 
of  renewable  energy  technologies 
technologies  were  selected  because  they  met  a  number  of  criteria,  identified 
through comprehensive analyses and stakeholder consultations, which aligned well 
with SREP’s objectives. Of these criteria, the potential for scale-up of the technology, 
the cost-effectiveness of the technology and the immaturity of the market were of 
key  importance.  The  Government  is  not  asking  for  support  in  markets,  which  are 
already developed (such as small hydro), or technologies, which show limited scale-
landfill  gas).  The  Government  may  seek  to  promote 
up  potential  (such  as 
development of many of these technologies on its own or through financing facilities 
already  provided  through  the  multilateral  development  banks  (MDBs),  but  has  not 
requested SREP support for them. 

SREP  support  will  be  critical  in  reducing  the  cost  of  technologies  that  lie  at  the 
threshold of competing with the expected future cost of generation in Armenia. As 
noted above, the next large thermal (gas or nuclear) plants to be built in Armenia will 
be  substantially  higher  cost  than  current  generating  costs.  SREP  funding  can  help 
overcome  the  perception  that  high-cost  renewable  energy  technologies  are  an 
unnecessary expense, as well as concerns about affordability. For technologies, such 
as geothermal power and utility-scale solar PV, the initial projects will help to reduce 
resource  and  performance  risks,  develop  local  markets  and  expertise,  and  provide 
Government  the  impetus  and  opportunity  to  put  in  place  reforms—in  particular 
appropriate  tariffs—to  support  their  development.  As  experience  with  the  new  RE 
technologies  increases  in  Armenia,  project  development  costs  can  be  expected  to 
decline,  and  for  some  technologies,  such  as  solar  PV,  local  production  may  also 
emerge.  The  eventual  development  of  service  providers  and,  possibly, 
manufacturers of RE technologies will have obvious follow-on benefits for Armenia’s 
economy as a whole. 

Finally,  SREP  support  will  be  critical  in  creating  a  demonstration  effect  for 
technologies that are relatively unknown in Armenia, and in funding directly—or by 
attracting other donor funding for—capacity building. 

5 

The Proposed Investment Program for Armenia 

1.3 
The  Government  of  Armenia,  led  by  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Natural  Resources 
(MENR)  and  supported  by  the  MDBs,  has  identified  two  areas  for  strategic 
investment  that  would  lead  to  scale-up.  The  areas  were  identified  through 
comprehensive  analysis  of  RE  technologies  and  a  participatory  process  involving  a 
wide  range  of  government  agencies,  non-governmental  organizations,  academic 
institutions, and the private sector. The participatory process included many one-on-
one meetings, a workshop with the Government’s SREP working group, as well as an 
open forum. 

The technologies identified 

Each  of  the  potential  renewable  energy  resources  were  evaluated  against  five 
criteria,  and  prioritized  accordingly.  The  five  criteria  reflect  the  Government’s 
strategic objectives, and the clear recognition that SREP funding should be  used to 
overcome  barriers  to  technologies  that  will  have  the  potential  to  have  a 
transformative  impact  on  the  energy  sector.  The  criteria  considered  were:  cost-
effectiveness  of  the  technology,  the  potential  for  scaling  up  the  technology,  the 
maturity  of  the  market,  the  potential  for  job  creation,  and  the  effect  of  each 
technology on the stability of the grid. Two investment priorities emerged from the 
analyses and the discussions with stakeholders. These are as follows: 

1.  Geothermal  Power  Development.  SREP  resources  would  be  used  for  further 
exploration  of  Armenia’s  most  promising  Karkar  geothermal  site  (in  the  South-
East),  thereby,  attempting  to  demonstrate  the  viability  of  geothermal  energy  in 
Armenia  if  the  exploratory  drilling  at  Karkar  confirms  availability  and  quality  of 
resource  for  power  generation.  Of  the  known  potential  geothermal  sites  in 
Armenia,  the  Karkar  site  has  been  the  most  comprehensively  assessed  through 
surface  studies  and  was  assessed  to  be  the  highest-potential  site  to  date,  with 
possible output estimated at around 28.5 MW. Exploratory drilling is required to 
confirm the availability and quality of the resource for power generation. By using 
SREP  grant  funding  for  drilling,  the  Government  can  help  reduce  the  risk  of 
developing  the  site.  If  a  geothermal  resource  exists  at  the  site,  this  support  can 
help  make  geothermal  power  a  financially  attractive  investment  for  private 
investors  and  an  affordable  source  of  electricity.3  This  support  will  serve  to 
demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  geothermal  power  in  Armenia  and  can  catalyze 
development of the other perspective geothermal sites.. 

2.  Development of Utility-Scale Solar PV. SREP resources would be used to develop 
roughly 40-50 MW of utility-scale solar PV. The rapid decline in solar PV costs in 
recent  years  has  made  utility-scale  solar  PV  more  competitive  with  the  other 
power  generation  options  available  to  Armenia.  Therefore,  it  is  strategically 

3 The exact commercial arrangement will need to be developed through further consultation within government, 
with  donor  partners,  and  with  potential  investors.  However,  the  arrangement  currently  envisaged  would 
involve a private operator having a BOT or BOO agreement under which they finance, build and operate the 
power  plants  and  have  a  power  purchase  agreement  with  the  transmission  company,  HVEN.  Government 
would own the steam fields, thereby taking risk on the resource availability. The SREP funding would be used 
to hire a transaction advisor to help structure, tender, and negotiate the BOT/BOO. 

6 

                                                      
beneficial  for  Armenia  to  develop  its  capacity  to  scale-up  this  technology.  SREP 
support would help catalyze private investment in first new plants, and show the 
potential for deploying solar PV on a commercial basis. A utility-scale commercial 
project would not only enable the country to take advantage of this technology in 
the  future  when  its  costs  decline  even  further,  but  reduce  costs  for  future 
projects because of learning effects.  

Therefore,  SREP  support  is  sought  to  allow  the  Government  to  develop  solar 
projects.  The  grant  would  be  used  for  feasibility  studies, 
including  site 
measurements  and  monitoring,  and  to  develop  projects  itself.  Initial  studies 
indicate that the areas in the vicinity of Lake Sevan have some of the highest solar 
irradiance  in  Armenia,  and  would  be  considered  as  a  first  potential  area  for 
development,  but  more  site-specific  analyses  will  be  needed  to  identify  specific 
projects. 

Additional donor financing will be sought to complement the SREP contribution, 
as  well  as  private  sector  equity  and  commercial  debt.  SREP  financing  would  be 
used in much the same way that MDB funds were used to successfully jump-start 
the small hydropower industry in Armenia nearly a decade ago. The expectation is 
that, as with small hydropower, once the domestic capacity to deploy solar PV is 
developed  and  the  financial  market  is  comfortable  with  the  technology,  the 
market  will  take  off.  The  SREP  contribution  and  donor  financing  will  also  be 
essential to softening the effect on tariffs of the first solar plants. 

Table 1.1 presents a plan for financing the projects described in Section  5. It shows 
the proposed contributions or grants from SREP as well as estimates of the amounts 
anticipated from MDBs and the private sector.  

As  the  table  shows,  roughly  US$40  million  of  SREP  funding  is  expected  to  catalyze 
nearly four times as much investment, most of it from the private sector (as equity 
or debt), and the commercial lending windows of the MDBs. 

7 

 
Table 1.2: Financing Plan 

SREP Project 
Geothermal Development 
Project Preparation 
Geothermal Resource Confirmation 
Transaction Advisory Services (structuring of PPP 
for power plant)  
Investments in 28 MW plant 
Subtotal: Geothermal Development 

Development of Utility-Scale Solar PV 
Grant for Project Preparation, Feasibility studies, 
site measurement and monitoring 
Transaction Advisory Services 

Investments in power plants (total of 40-50 MW) 

Subtotal: Development of Utility-Scale Solar PV 

Grand Total 
SREP Leverage 

MDB 
Responsibl
e 

Government 
of Armenia 

SREP 

World Bank/ 
Asian 
Development 
Bank 

(Million US$) 

Private 
Sector 
(Equity) 

Commercial
/ Private 
arms of 
MDBs 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

tbd 

- 
- 

- 

- 

tbd 

tbd 

Total 

0.4 
11.3 

0.9 
1064 
118.6 

- 
- 
20.00 
10.00 
30.00 

- 
- 
30.00 

- 
- 
27.50 

30.00 

27.50 

2.5 
0.6 
99.4 
22.5 
125.0 

0.1 
2.3 

0.2 
tbd 
2.5 

0.5 
0.1 
4.4 
2.5 
7.5 

10.00 

30.00 

30.00 

27.50 

243.6 

0.3 
9.0 

0.7 

10.0 

WB (IBRD) 

ADB 

2.0 
0.5 
17.5 
10.0  WB (IBRD) 
30.0 

40.0  
5.1  

4   Assuming Flash cycle design of the plant. Source of capital cost estimate: “Economic and Financial Appraisal of the Potential Geothermal Power Plant at Karkar ,” Nov. 2012; GeoFund 2: 

Armenia Geothermal Project. 

8 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
                                                      
Scale-up potential 

The scale-up potential of each RE technology in Armenia depends ultimately on how 
much of a resource is available, how much of that resource is commercially viable, 
and  what  the  transmission  grid  can  sustain.  Table  1.3  shows  the  total  estimated 
technical potential for renewable energy technologies in Armenia. 

Table 1.3: Renewable Energy Resource Potential in Armenia by Technology 

Technology 

Capacity (MW) 

Generation (GWh/yr) 

Wind 

Utility scale solar PV 

Concentrating solar power 
(CSP) 

Distributed solar PV 

Geothermal powerb 

Landfill gas 

Small hydropower 

Biogas 

Biomass 

Total (electricity)c 

Solar thermal hot water 

Geothermal heat pumps 

Total (heat) 

300  

830 – 1,200a 

1,200 

1,300 

650 

1,700 – 2,100a 

2,400 

1,800 

at least 150 

at least 1,100 

2 

100 

5 

30 

20 

340 

30 

230 

3,800 –4,300 

7,400 – 8,700 

n/a 

n/a 

260 

4,430 

4,690 

a The resource potential depends on which solar PV technology is deployed: Fixed PV, Single-Axis 

Tracking PV or Concentrating PV 

b Assumes flash technology is used. The actual capacity cannot be known without exploratory drilling. 

The geothermal capacity estimates are based on results of estimates for three potential 
sites, for which some geo-technical information was available. The potential can be 
significantly larger given several other potential sites, which have not been explored at all. 

c Solar PV and CSP were evaluated as options for development in the same areas. Therefore, the total 
resource potential includes only the generating potential for one of these technologies (Solar 
PV). For this reason, the total is not the same as the sum of the resource potential listed for 
each technology. 

Not  all  of  this  technical  potential  will  be  ultimately  commercially  viable.  As  noted 
above,  the  cost  of  generation  in  Armenia  is  likely  to  increase  substantially  as  new 
thermal  or  nuclear  generation  is  brought  on  line  and  older  thermal  plants  are 
retired. Figure 1.1 shows a supply curve of the cost of renewable power resources in 
Armenia  assuming  concessional,  commercial  and  mixed  financing  assumptions.  By 
way  of  reference,  Armenia’s  average  cost  of  generation  is  expected  to  range  from 

9 

 
 
 
 
USD$0.08/kWh  –  US$0.19/kWh  when  a  new  nuclear  plant  is  put  into  service  in 
2026.5 

Solar is not yet cost competitive under purely commercial financing assumptions, but 
the  combination  of  several  factors  could  make  it  more  so  in  the  near  future.  The 
factors  include:  (i)  new,  higher-cost  thermal  plants  being  built  to  serve  demand  in 
Armenia;  (ii)  lower  solar  installation  costs  that  will  result  as  a  domestic  industry 
develops around it;  (iii) lower financing costs as lenders become more comfortable 
with  the  technology,  and  (iv)  potential  further  reductions  in  the  global  costs  of  PV 
panels.  SREP  support  can  help  Armenia  nurture  its  solar  industry  so  that,  as  these 
factors  converge,  Armenia  can  look  to  utility-scale  solar  as  a  commercially  viable 
alternative to some thermal power generation. 

Figure  1.1:  Renewable  Energy  Resources  Supply  Curve  for  Armenia,  Commercial, 
Mixed Commercial/SREP and Concessional Financing 

___________________________________________________________________________ 

5   As noted above, the cost depends on the size of the plant, and whether concessional or commercial financing 

is used to finance it. 

10 

 
 
 
 
                                                      
Country Context 

2 
The Republic of Armenia is a mountainous, landlocked country of  30 thousand km2 
located  in  the  South  Caucasus  region  of  Eurasia.6  Armenia  borders  Georgia  in  the 
North, Azerbaijan in the East, Turkey in the West, and Iran in the South. Prior to the 
fall  of  the  USSR,  Armenia  was  a  Soviet  Republic  for  70  years.  Armenia  gained 
independence in 1991.  

Armenia  has  a  population  of  3  million  and  a  population  density  of  102  people  per 
km2. It is one of the most densely populated countries in the region.7 The majority of 
the population lives in urban areas and approximately 38 percent of the population 
lives  in  the  capital  city,  Yerevan.8  From  2000  to  2010,  the  population  of  Armenia 
decreased  by  an  average  of  0.4  percent  annually  and  increased  by  2  percent  from 
2010 to 2012. Population growth is projected to remain flat in coming years, and the 
World Bank projects population increase of less than 1 percent by 2025.9  

Armenia  experienced  strong  economic  growth  in  2002-2008,  but  was  severely 
affected  by  the  global  financial  crisis.  Real  GDP  grew,  on  average,  12.2  percent 
annually  from  2002  to  2008,  but  declined  14.1  percent  in  2009.  Armenia  has 
experienced  moderate  growth  since  2009,  but,  despite  annual  increases,  growth 
rates have not recovered to pre-crisis levels. Figure 2.1 shows the annual change in 
real GDP from 2002 to 2012.  

Figure 2.1. Annual Change in Real GDP, 2002-2012 

Source: The World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” accessed 7 July 2013. 

The  main  drivers  of  economic  growth  in  Armenia  include:  construction,  retail 
services,  mining,  manufacturing  and  agriculture.  These  sectors  were  some  of  the 
hardest  hit  by  the  financial  crisis,  with  construction  and  agriculture  remaining 

6 The Government of the Republic of Armenia, “Geography,” http://www.gov.am/en/geography/ 

7 The Government of the Republic of Armenia, “Demographics,” http://www.gov.am/en/demographics/ 
8 The World Bank, “World Development Indicators Database,” Accessed August 2013.  

9 The World Bank, “Health Nutrition and Population Statistics: Population estimates and projections Database,” 

Accessed August 2013.  

11 

 
 
 
                                                      
depressed  in  the  post-crisis  period.  Poverty  levels  also  increased  as  a  result  of  the 
crisis, with the percentage of the population living below the poverty line increasing 
from 27.6 percent in 2008 to 35 percent in 2011.10 Urban areas other than Yerevan 
host  the  largest  share  of  the  approximately  1.2  million  poor  in  Armenia.  Targeted 
social  assistance,  such  as  the  Poverty  Family  Benefit  Program  (PFBP),  has  helped 
mitigate  the  poverty  impacts  of  the  global  crisis.  Poverty  among  FB  recipients 
increased by 7 percent in 2008 to 2010 compared to the 30 percent increase for the 
population as a whole. 

Energy  poverty  affects  almost  30  percent  of  Armenian  households.  Energy  poverty 
refers  to  households  spending  more  than  10  percent  of  their  budgets  on  energy. 
Armenia’s targeted social assistance program, known as the Poverty Family Benefit 
Program (PFBP), helps to reduce poverty among vulnerable households. Government 
has also used the PFBP in conjunction with other measures, to help alleviate energy 
poverty.  Beginning  in  2011,  a  lifeline  tariff  for  natural  gas  consumption  was 
introduced for PFBP beneficiaries.11  

2.1 
Energy Sector Legal, Regulatory and Institutional Framework  
The  energy  sector  is  expected  to  play  a  critical  role  in  achieving  the  strategic 
objectives  of  the  Government  of  Armenia  (GoA)  in  coming  years.  Section  2.1.1 
describes the GoA’s strategic objectives for the energy section and the importance of 
the  energy  sector  in  achieving  national  development  objectives.  Section  2.1.2 
describes the institutional and legal framework of the energy sector of Armenia.  

2.1.1  Strategic Objectives of the Government of Armenia 

Energy  security  is  a  central  concern  of  several  strategic  planning  documents  in 
Armenia.  The  2013  National  Energy  Security  Concept  outlines  the  GoA's  strategies 
for  achieving  energy  security  through  fuel  diversification,  building  up  fuel  reserves 
the  promotion, 
and 
development  and  investment  in  renewable  energy  technologies  as  critical  to 
Armenia diversifying its energy supply and achieving energy independence.  

reserve  generation  capacity.  The  Concept 

identifies 

The Armenian Development Strategy (ADS) and National Security Strategy (NSS) also 
emphasize the importance of renewable energy and energy efficiency in addressing 
energy  security.  The  ADS  and  the  NSS  outline  the  GoA  strategic  objectives  for 
economic  growth,  poverty  reduction,  and  national  security.  Both  policies  highlight 
the  fundamental  importance  of  the  energy  sector  in  achieving  these  objectives. 
Strategic objectives of the ADS and NSS for the energy sector in the 2012-2017 time 
period are: 

  Increase of energy security; 

10  National  Statistical  Service  of  the  Republic  of  Armenia,  "Statistical  Yearbook  of  Armenia,  2004-2012," 

www.armstat.am. 

11 The poor covered by PFBP were given discounts on their natural gas consumption. From April 1, 2011 to March 
31, 2013, the discount applied to the first 300 cubic meters consumed. From April 1, 2013 till July 6, 2013, the 
discount applied to the first 75 cubic meters consumed. From July 7, 2013 to December 31, 2014 the discount 
applied to the first 450 cubic meters. 

12 

 
                                                      
  Development  of  renewable  energy,  including  increased  efficiency  of  existing 
hydropower potential and creation of alternative sources of energy supply; 

  Improvement of system reliability; 

  Development of regional trade; 

  Replacement of depreciated power plants;  

  Promotion of energy efficiency; 

  Further development of nuclear energy. 

Several energy sector strategic documents identify concrete targets for achieving the 
GoA’s  stated  objectives  in  the  sector.  These  documents  include:  (i)  Energy  Sector 
Development Strategy within the Context of the Economic Development in Armenia, 
approved  by  the  GoA  in  2005,  (ii)  the  National  Program  on  Energy  Saving  and 
Renewable  Energy,  approved  in  2007,  and  (iii)  the  Action  Plan  of  the  MENR  of  the 
Republic of Armenia in line with the National Security Strategy, approved in 2007. 

2.1.2  The History of Sector Reforms 

Armenia’s energy sector has made significant progress in the last two decades. The 
sector  has  moved  from  severe  crisis—characterized  by  crippling  supply  shortages, 
and  near-financial  bankruptcy  of  the  sector—to  stability  more  characteristic  of 
developed countries than emerging markets.  

In 1992, customers had only 2-4 hours of electricity supply per day; most households 
depended on firewood or electricity for heating. Fiscal and quasi-fiscal subsidies for 
the  energy  sector  were  a  major  drain  on  the  state—about  11  percent  of  gross 
domestic product (GDP). Collections were around 50 percent, and nearly 25 percent 
of all power produced disappeared before the meters as commercial losses (mostly 
electricity theft).  

Since  1996,  24-hour  electricity  service  has  been  restored  and  gradually  customers 
have  switched  to  cheaper,  more  efficient  gas  heating.  Meanwhile,  tariff  increases 
and  operating  efficiency  improvements  have  helped  create  commercially  viable 
service providers, technical and non-technical losses have decreased, and collections 
have  increased.  Now  the  energy  sector  is  one  of  the  largest  taxpayers  in  Armenia. 
Supply  security  has  also 
improved  with  new  regional  gas  and  electricity 
interconnections,  thermal  plant  construction  and  rehabilitation,  and  growth  in 
renewable energy generating capacity (primarily small hydro).  

A  series  of  ambitious  reforms  made  this  transition  possible.  The  principal  reforms 
were: 

  Unbundling  and  privatization  of  the  power  sector.  By  March  1995,  efforts 
began  on  unbundling  the  power  system  and  privatizing  the  power  sector; 
Armenergo,  the  state-owned  vertically  integrated  utility,  was  separated  into 
generation  and  distribution  entities.  In  March  1997,  a  Presidential  Order  and 
new Energy Law formalized separate generation, distribution, transmission and 
dispatch.  During  2002-03,  ownership  of  several  major  generating  plants  was 
transferred from the Government in exchange for US$96 million in state debt 
forgiveness. 

13 

 
  Establishment of a sector Regulator. A Presidential Order and the Energy Law 
enacted  in  1997  established  an  independent  energy  sector  regulator,  the 
Armenian  Energy  Regulatory  Commission  (AERC).  The  Law  on  the  Regulatory 
Body for Public Services, enacted in 2004, changed the name of the regulator 
to  the  Public  Services  Regulatory  Commission  (PSRC)  and  expanded  its 
authority 
including  water,  drainage  and  sewage, 
telecommunications, and rail transport.  

to  other  sectors, 

  Supporting  financial  sustainability.  Three  steps  were  essential  to  increase 
collections,  reduce  commercial  losses  and  improve  the  overall  financial 
sustainability of the sector. These included: 

–  Installing  meters.  Between  1997  and  1998,  twelve  thousand  new  tamper-
proof  meters  were  installed  throughout  the  power  system  at  a  variety  of 
voltage levels down to 0.4 kV. Residential customer meters were relocated 
to  public  areas.  An  Automated  Metering  and  Data  Acquisition  System 
(AMDAS) was installed in 2001 and linked to a settlement center to facilitate 
accurate meter reading at the 110 kV and above. 

–  Bringing  tariffs  to  cost  recovery  levels.  In  1994,  Armenia  began  a  gradual 
transition  to  cost-based  tariffs  by  bring  household  tariffs  to  the  average 
level of other retail tariffs. A schedule was established for further household 
tariff  hikes.  Since  1999,  household  tariffs  have  generally  remained  well 
above the overall average tariff. 

–  Increasing transparency in collections and billing. The Electricity Distribution 
Company  (EDC)  installed  a  computerized  customer  information  system  to 
better  track  utilization  and  billing.  In  1999,  the  EDC  established  a  new 
collection  scheme  requiring  bill  payments  at  post  offices  instead  of  cash 
payments  at  local  EDC  offices,  which  reduced  opportunities  for  collusion 
between customers and EDC inspectors. 

The use and development of renewable energy has also been an important part of 
the transition from crisis to stability. In 2007, the PSRC set renewable energy feed-in 
tariffs  to  stimulate  private  investment  in  renewable  energy.  The  feed-in  tariff,  and 
MDB  financing  through  local  banks,  helped  to  jump-start  a  previously  non-existent 
small  hydropower  industry.  The  framework  for  renewable  energy  feed-in  tariffs  is 
described in more detail in Section 2.3. 

In 2004, Government passed the Law on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy. This 
is the main legal act on renewable energy in Armenia. Its main objectives were to:  

  Strengthen the economic and energy independence and security of Armenia 

  Increase the reliability of energy systems in Armenia 

  Establish  and  develop  industrial  infrastructure  and  service  organizations  for 

promoting energy saving and RE 

  Reduce adverse impacts on the environment and human health as a result of 

technological developments 

The Law also provided for the establishment of the R2E2 Fund. The R2E2 Fund was 
formed in 2006. The role of the R2E2 Fund is discussed in more detail in Section 2.1.3 

14 

 
2.1.3 

Institutional Framework in the Energy Sector 

The MENR and the PSRC are the key entities regulating the energy sector. The MENR 
is responsible for developing primary legislation and main policy documents guiding 
energy  sector  activities,  including  system  planning  and  investment  planning  for 
state-owned  entities.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  approves  allocation  of  financing  for 
public  and  publicly-guaranteed  energy  sector  investments  recommended  by  the 
MENR. The PSRC regulates the water, electricity and natural gas sectors, and as part 
of  its  responsibilities,  sets  both  end-user  and  supply-side  power  sector  tariffs.  The 
PSRC allows for recovery of power system investment costs through the tariff.  

The  electricity  sector  consists  of  nine  publicly  and  privately-owned  generation 
companies,  one  state-owned 
transmission  company,  one  privately-owned 
distribution company, a state-owned system operator and a state-owned settlement 
center.  The  gas  sector  remains  vertically  integrated.  ArmRusGazprom,  the  gas 
company  fully  owned  by  the  Russia’s  Gazprom,  imports  gas  from  Russia  and  Iran, 
and owns and operates the gas transmission and distribution networks in Armenia. 
Figure 2.2 shows the structure of the electricity sector in Armenia.  

Figure 2.2. Structure of the Electricity Sector of Armenia 

Armenia’s  market  framework  is  based  on  the  “single  buyer  model”  with  regulated 
tariffs for generation, transmission, and distribution. Under this market framework, 
the  Electricity  Networks  of  Armenia  (ENA)  acts  as  the  single  buyer  of  electricity 
through  contracts  with  generating  companies  at  prices  regulated  by  the  PRSC.  The 
Settlement  Center  monitors  energy  flows  and  ensures  timely  payment  delivery 
between all sector entities. The System Operator dispatches generators taking into 
account  the  economic  dispatch  order  of  plants  as  well  as  plants’  operational 
constraints. 

In the renewable energy sector, the R2E2 Fund plays a critical role. The R2E2 Fund is 
an  independent  organization  which  facilitates  investments  in  renewable  energy  by 
sponsoring  renewable  energy  studies  and  projects,  and  supporting  local  renewable 

15 

 
 
 
 
the  project 

implemented 

energy  companies  and  stakeholders.  Among  numerous  other  projects,  the  R2E2 
Fund 
in  Armenia, 
comprehensive  surface  exploration  at  the  Karkar  geothermal  site,  as  well  as  the 
assessment of hydropower resource potential and the evaluation of the potential for 
solar  PV  manufacturing  and  bioethanol  production  in  Armenia,  and  some  other 
renewable energy related studies. 

for  development  of  SHPPs 

Energy Supply and Demand 

2.2 
Armenia relies on electricity and gas to meet the majority of its energy consumption 
needs.  The  industrial,  residential  and  transport  sectors  account  for  85  percent  of 
final energy consumption in Armenia.12 Industry relies on a combination of electricity 
and gas to meet its energy needs. Residential households rely on a mix of electricity 
and  gas  for  heating,  cooking  and  hot  water  and  electricity  for  lighting  and  other 
household  appliance.  The  transport  sector  relies  on  oil  and  gas  with  75  percent  of 
the automobile and truck fleet using compressed natural gas (CNG).  

The following subsections describe energy consumption in Armenia in further detail. 
Sections  2.2.1  and  2.2.2  describe  the  supply  and  demand  characteristics  of 
gas/heating and electricity, respectively.  

2.2.1  Gas and Heating 

Armenia has no proven oil or natural gas reserves and imports most of its fossil fuel 
resources from Russia and Iran. ArmRusGazprom, 100% owned by Gazprom, and the 
state-owned  Yerevan  TPP  are  the  only  companies 
import  gas. 
ArmRusGazprom  is  the  sole  distributor  of  natural  gas  in  Armenia.  The  company 
manages  10,483  km  of  gas  pipelines  and  has  approximately  640,000  consumers.13 
The residential sector is the largest consumer of natural gas in Armenia, followed by 
industry,  electricity  generating  plants,  and  transportation.  Figure  2.3  shows  the 
breakdown of natural gas consumption in Armenia, by sector.14  

licensed  to 

12 Energy Institute of Armenia, Energy Consumption Data, 2013.  
13  PSRC.  2010.  The  Gas  Sector  of  Armenia.  http://www.naruc.org/international/Documents/13  Gas  system  in 

Armenia-ENGLISH.pdf. 

14 http://www.iea.org/stats/gasdata.asp?COUNTRY_CODE=AM 

16 

 
                                                      
Figure 2.3: Natural Gas Consumption by End-Use 

Source: Public Services Regulatory Commission 

The  import  price  of  natural  gas  from  Russia  increased  consistently  in  recent  years, 
which  has  resulted  in  steady  increases  in  domestic  end-user  tariffs  for  natural  gas. 
From 2005 to 2013, the end-user natural gas tariff increased by 164 percent15. Figure 
2.4 shows the import price of natural gas and the natural gas tariff for domestic end-
users from 2005 to 2013. 

Figure 2.4. Natural Gas Import Price and Domestic End-User Tariff, 2005-201316 

Note: End-user represents low use customer consuming less than 10,000 cm per month 

Source: Public Services Regulatory Commission of the Republic of Armenia (PSRC), 

http://www.psrc.am/en 

15 For end-user consuming less than 10,000 cm per month. 

16 Fluctuations in the end-user tariff in USD that are not correlated with fluctuations in the import price of natural 

gas are caused by annual AMD to USD exchange-rate fluctuations. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Armenian  households  heat  primarily  with  natural  gas  and  electricity  Armenia’s 
district heating network, which used to provide heat supply for roughly 55 percent of 
Armenia  households,  has  fallen  into  disrepair.  Many  heat  supply  companies  went 
bankrupt  and  closed  following  the  economic  and  energy  blockade  that  occurred 
during the early 1990s. As a result, many households switched to individual heating 
solutions using electricity and, more recently, natural gas. In 2005-2011, the share of 
natural  gas  in  the  heating  fuel  mix  has  increased  from  10  percent  to  70  percent, 
displacing  firewood,  electricity  and  other  fuels,  thanks  to  a  rehabilitation  and 
extension of the gas distribution network.  

2.2.2  Electricity  

Armenia’s  electricity  system  has  3,319 MW  of  installed  capacity, and  2,530  MW of 
available  generating  capacity.  Electricity  is  produced  by  three  generation  sources: 
nuclear (roughly 30 percent), thermal (roughly 30 percent), and hydropower (nearly 
40 percent). Available capacity is low compared to installed capacity because due to 
the age and poor condition of many generating plants, significant share of installed 
generating  capacity  is  non-operational.  Roughly  50  percent  of  available  capacity  is 
more  than  40  years  old.17  Many  of  the  largest  generating  assets  will  need  to  be 
retired  soon.  The  Government  has  already  discontinued  operation  of  old  and 
inefficient units at Yerevan TPP and plans to retire the old units at the Hrazdan TPP 
by 2017. The nuclear plant is scheduled to remain online until 2026 because of a lack 
of alternatives, although it will require approximately US$300 million of investments 
to continue functioning. The share of thermal and hydropower plants in the capacity 
and  production  mix  has  increased  in  recent  years  because  new  plants  have  been 
built  and  Armenia  has  experienced  good  hydrological  conditions  over  the  past 
several years.  

The NPP provides baseload capacity. Other HPPs, including the Vorotan Cascade and 
several  HPPs  in  the  Sevan-Hrazdan  Cascade,  provide  daily  load  regulation,  while 
thermal plants operate to meet shoulder peak especially in the winter and to serve 
baseload for several weeks in autumn when the NPP goes offline for maintenance. 
The  Hrazdan-5  and  Yerevan  CCGT  plants  also  generate  electricity  for  export  under 
the gas for electricity swap arrangement with Iran. 

Demand grew steadily over the past decade, but dropped in 2008 as a result of the 
global financial crisis. Electricity consumption in Armenia grew 4.5 percent annually 
from 2004–2008, but consumption fell 7.4 percent in 2009 as a result of the financial 
crisis.  Consumption  has  since  increased,  growing  5  percent  and  3  percent  in  2012 
and 2013, respectively.18 Figure 2.5 shows Armenia’s electricity balance including net 
generation, consumption, exports, imports and transmission and distribution losses. 

17 Estimated based on available capacity of plants greater than 10 MW. 
18 PSRC. Main Characteristics Indicators. 

18 

 
                                                      
Figure 2.5: Net Generation and Consumption, 2006-2011 

Source: Public Services Regulatory Commission 

Given  the  growth  in  demand  and  the  need  to  retire  ageing  generating  assets, 
Armenia  will  potentially face  a  capacity gap to meet  the peak.  At  least 170 MW of 
new  capacity  will  be  needed  by  2018  to  meet  peak  demand  and  maintain  an 
adequate  reserve  margin.  An  additional  830  MW  of  new  capacity  will  be  needed 
starting from 2026 when the existing NPP is retired. Figure 2.6 shows the expected 
gap  between  generation  and  consumption.  Figure  2.6  shows  the  expected  gap 
between available capacity and winter peak demand. 

Figure 2.6: Forecast Gap between Installed Capacity and Winter Peak Demand 

Source: MENR 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
Electricity Cost and Pricing 

2.3 
The  PSRC  is  responsible  for  setting  and  reviewing  tariffs  in  the  electricity  sector, 
including tariffs for all companies in the sector as well as end-user tariffs. According 
to the Energy Law, a tariff should cover: 

  Justified operation and 
maintenance costs 

  Loan service costs 

  Costs related to environmental 

standards 

  Mothballing and preservation 

costs 

  Technical and commercial losses 

  Costs  of  the  safe-keeping  of  the 
utilized  nuclear  fuel  and  requisite 
allocations  to  the  Nuclear  Plant 
Decommissioning Fund 

  Reasonable profit 

  Other justified costs as provided by 

Legislation. 

The  PSRC  or  the  Licensee  can  request  a  tariff  review  every  six  months.  Once 
requested,  a  tariff  review  request  must  be  submitted  within  90  days.  The  PSRC  is 
authorized  to  set  long-term  tariffs  for  more  than  six-months  if  it  is  considered 
necessary  to  provide  investment  security.  Once  a  tariff  is  set,  licensees  cannot 
appeal  the  size  of  a  tariff.  The  only  recourse  for  altering  an  assigned  tariff  is  to 
petition  the  PSRC’s  tariff  methodology.  Table  2.1  shows  power  company  tariffs  in 
Armenia from 2009 to 2013.  

Table  2.1.  Power  Company  Tariffs  in  Armenia,  2009-2012  (AMD/kWh)  (excluding 
VAT) 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

Hrazdan-5 

Yerevan CCGT 

Hrazdan TPP 

Yerevan TPP 

N/A 

N/A 

22.559 

22.520 

Sevan-Hrazdan 

5.802 

Vorotan 

ANPP 

1.448 

7.525 

Generation 

N/A 

N/A 

38.851 

29.379 

4.983 

1.868 

7.963 

Transmission 

N/A 

11.657 

43.997 

N/A 

3.866 

4.35 

8.428 

21.65 

5.328 

41.219 

N/A 

4.56 

4.778 

9.658 

33.4 

20.07 

59.47 

N/A 

6.581 

7.914 

10.830 

HVEN 

0.891 

0.710 

0.827 

0.3322 

1.0657 

Distribution 

ENA 

10.134 

11.200 

11.152 

9.338 

11.786 

Source: Public Services Regulatory Commission of the Republic of Armenia (PSRC), “Calculation of 

Electricity Tariffs,” 2009-2012. 

20 

 
  
 
 
 
 
In  2007,  the  PSRC  set  renewable  energy  feed-in  tariffs  to  stimulate  private 
investment  in  renewable  energy.  New  generating  plants  sign  15-year  power 
purchase agreement (PPA) under which ENA is obliged to pay the generator for all 
the  power  produced.  According  to  the  feed-in  tariff  methodology,  the  PSRC  must 
adjust feed-in tariffs annually in line with changes in inflation and the USD to AMD 
exchange  rate.  Table  2.2  shows  current  feed-in-tariffs  for  all  renewable  energy 
systems in Armenia.  

Table 2.2. Feed-in-Tariffs for Renewable Energy Systems, 2013 (excluding VAT) 

RE Technology 

Wind 

Biomass  

Small hydro-power built on “natural water systems” 

Small hydro-power built on irrigation systems 

Small hydropower built on “drinking water supply systems” 

Source: PSRC 

Feed-in Tariff 

AMD/kWh  US$/kWh 

34.957 

38.856 

20.287 

13.523 

9.017 

0.08 

0.09 

0.05 

0.03 

0.02 

The  PSRC  also  sets  tariffs  for  end-users.  End-user  tariffs  are  time-differentiated 
tariffs in which users pay different day-time and night-time rates. In July of 2013, the 
PSRC  increased  end-users  tariffs  for  the  first  time  since  2009.  Table  2.3  shows 
current end-user tariffs in Armenia. 
Table 2.3: End-User Tariffs, VAT inclusive 

Residential 

0.4 kV 

6 (10) kV  

35+ kV 

Day 

38 

38 

35 

29 

(AMD/kWh) 

Night 

28 

28 

25 

25 

Source: Public Services Regulatory Commission of the Republic of Armenia (PSRC), “Electric Power 

Tariffs,” accessed 3 July 2013. http://www.psrc.am/en/?nid=213 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Renewable Energy Sector Context  

3 
Armenia  has  significant  indigenous  renewable  energy  resources,  and  an  educated 
workforce  with  extensive  scientific  and  engineering  expertise.  Furthermore,  the 
Government has taken proactive steps in recent years to craft laws and regulations 
designed  to  reform  the  power  sector  to  enable  private  sector  involvement  in 
renewable energy technology development. However, Armenia’s renewable energy 
sector  faces  a  number  of  important  barriers  to  renewable  energy  deployment, 
primarily  related  to  the  availability  of  financing,  the  regulatory  framework  for 
renewable  energy,  the  high  cost  of  renewable  energy  technologies  and  public 
awareness of the potential benefits of renewable energy technologies. 

This  section  describes  Armenia’s  renewable  energy  sector,  and 
includes  an 
assessment of the potential for different renewable energy options, a description of 
Armenia’s  business  environment  for  renewable  energy,  as  well  as  a  description  of 
the barriers facing renewable energy development in Armenia. 

3.1  Analysis of Renewable Energy Options 
An  assessment  of  available  data  on  renewable  energy  resources  in  Armenia  was 
carried  out  to  support  the  preparation  of  the  IP.  This  section  details  the  results  of 
that  assessment  and  describes  progress  to  date  on  deploying  renewable  energy 
technologies in Armenia.  

Table  3.1  shows  the  total  estimated  technical  potential  for  renewable  energy  in 
Armenia. 

Table 3.1: Renewable Energy Resource Potential in Armenia by Technology. 

Technology 

Capacity (MW) 

Generation (GWh/yr) 

Wind 

Utility scale solar PV 

Concentrating solar power 
(CSP) 

Distributed solar PV 

Geothermal powerb 

Landfill gas 

Small hydropower 

Biogas 

Biomass 

Total (electricity)c 

Solar thermal hot water 

Geothermal heat pumps 

Total (heat) 

300  

830 – 1,200a 

1,200 

1,300 

650 

1,700 – 2,100a 

2,400 

1,800 

at least 150 

at least 1,100 

2 

100 

5 

30 

20 

340 

30 

230 

3,800 –4,300 

7,400 – 8,700 

n/a 

n/a 

260 

4,430 

4,690 

a The resource potential depends on which solar PV technology is deployed: Fixed PV, Single-Axis 

Tracking PV or Concentrating PV 

22 

 
 
b Assumes flash technology is used. The actual capacity cannot be known without exploratory drilling. 

The geothermal capacity estimates are based on results of estimates for three potential 
sites, for which some geo-technical information was available. The potential can be 
significantly larger given several other potential sites, which have not been explored at all. 

c Solar PV and CSP were evaluated as options for development in the same areas. Therefore, the total 
resource potential includes only the generating potential for one of these technologies (Solar 
PV). For this reason, the total is not the same as the sum of the resource potential listed for 
each technology. 

3.1.1  Small Hydropower 

Small hydropower is the most widespread renewable energy technology deployed to 
date  in  Armenia  except  for  large  hydropower.  Small  hydropower  contributes 
approximately 6 percent of Armenia’s annual electricity generation. As of April 2013, 
Armenia had 136 small hydropower plants (small HPPs) with a total capacity of 221 
MW  and  annual  generation  of  665  GWh.  Roughly  60  percent  of  this  capacity  has 
been  added  since  2008.  Additionally,  the  PSRC  has  licensed  the  construction  of  77 
new  projects,  which  could  potentially  add  approximately  168  MW  of  small  HPP 
capacity and 592 GWh of annual generation.19 

Over  90  MW  of  undeveloped  small  hydropower  projects  with  a  potential  for 
generating almost 300 GWh have been identified throughout Armenia in addition to 
the operating and licensed projects. 

3.1.2  Wind 

Armenia has a number of areas with promising wind resources. The most promising 
areas  that  have  been  identified  and  characterized  to  date  are  Zod  Pass,  Karakach 
Pass,  Pushkin  Pass,  Sisian  Pass  and  the  Fontan  region.  Together  these  sites  are 
estimated  to  have  150  MW  of  developable  resource  potential,  with  estimated 
capacity factors ranging from 21 to 31 percent, depending on the site.20 

The private companies Zodwind and Arenergy have completed feasibility studies for 
wind plants in Armenia. Two other private companies, SolarEn and MVV-Decon, have 
conducted wind measurement projects. However, to date no private companies has 
moved forward with wind plant development in Armenia. 

Armenia’s only operating wind project is the 2.64 MW Lori 1 plant. Lori-1 was built in 
in  December  2005  under  a  grant  from  Iran.  The  plant  has  a  capacity  factor  of 
approximately 11 percent and generates 2.5 GWh per year.21  

3.1.3  Geothermal Power 

Armenia has no installed geothermal power plants, but comprehensive geo-technical 
studies suggest that geothermal resources suitable for power production  may exist 
at a number of sites, including the most promising Karkar, Jermaghbyur, and Grizor 

19  Public  Services  Regulatory  Commission  of  Armenia,  “Construction  of  small  hydro  companies  operating 
indicators” and “Main Indicators of Producing small hydroelectric power companies operating” April 1, 2014 

20 R2E2, “Renewable Energy Roadmap for Armenia Task 4 Report,” May 2011 
21 USAID, “Wind Energy In Armenia: Overview of Potential and Development Perspectives,” March 2010 

23 

 
 
                                                      
confirmed 

sites, as well as along the Armenian-Georgian border. In 2009-2011, comprehensive 
surface investigation works were conducted for Karkar site, including field scouting, 
magneto-telluric  sounding  (MT),  independent  interpretation  of  MT  results,  three-
dimensional (3D) MT sounding, independent interpretation of the results of 3D MT 
sounding  as  well  as  early-stage  economic  and  financial  appraisal.  Evidence  from 
these activities indicates that a geothermal resource exists at the site, and can only 
be 
conclusions  and 
recommendations  of  those  studies  were  also  reviewed  by  a  third  party  –  Iceland 
Geosurvey  (ISOR),  which  confirmed  the  robustness  of  the  methodology  for  the 
above studies and the key conclusion that exploratory drilling is needed to confirm 
the  resource  and  its  characteristics.    The  World  Bank/ESMAP  Global  Geothermal 
Development  Plan  TA  Program  supported  the  Government  to  prepare  a  drilling 
program for Karkar site, including test well options, drilling and associated consulting 
services required, contracting arrangements, and costs. 

through  exploratory  drilling.  The 

key 

The  Total  geothermal  resource  potential  of  three  geothermal  sites  that  were 
explored to some extend has been estimated to be at least 150 MW. However, it is 
important to note that because of the limited exploratory activities and information 
about Armenia’s geothermal resources, this  is a very rough estimate, which relates 
only  to  three  potential  sites  for  which  information  was  available,  and  the  actual 
geothermal resource potential could be much larger. 

3.1.4  Solar PV 

Armenia  has  good  solar  PV  resources,  with  annual  average  global  horizontal 
irradiation (GHI) ranging from 1,490 kWh/m2 to over 2,100 kWh/m2. By comparison, 
average  annual  GHI  in  Europe  is  1,000  kWh/m.2  The  total  resource  potential  for 
utility-scale solar PV is over 6,500 MW.  

Assuming polycrystalline solar PV modules mounted at a fixed angle to the sun are 
deployed  in  ground-mounted  utility-scale  plants,  solar  PV  systems  could  achieve 
capacity  factors  of  20  to  24  in  Armenia  (dependent  on  location).  If  single-axis 
tracking  solar  PV  technology  is  deployed,  capacity  factors  could  be  as  high  as  30 
percent. 

In  addition  to  utility-scale  solar  PV,  distributed  solar  PV  mounted  on  building 
rooftops could also be deployed throughout Armenia, although these plants would 
likely have higher costs and lower capacity factors than large-scale, ground-mounted 
plants. 

Solar  PV  deployment  in  Armenia  to  date  has  been  limited  to  relatively  small-scale 
rooftop-based installations at schools, hospitals, office buildings and municipal sites 
throughout Armenia.22 It is estimated that less than 100 kW of solar PV is currently 
operational.23 

22  USAAA/US  Embassy/EcoTeam/UNDP/GEF,  “Use  of  Renewable  Energy  Sources  in  the  World  and  Armenia 

Through Innovations to Clear Technologies,” 2010 

23 Preparation of Renewable Energy Development Roadmap for the Republic of Armenia Task 2 Report,” February 

2011 

24 

 
                                                      
3.1.5  Concentrating Solar PV and Concentrating Solar Thermal Power  

Although Armenia has good resources for solar PV, Armenia receives relatively low 
direct  normal 
locations  where 
irradiation  (DNI)  compared  to  most  of  the 
concentrating solar thermal power (CSP) is successfully deployed.24 Armenia’s annual 
DNI ranges from 1,410 kWh/m2 to 2,453 kWh/m2. The minimum DNI level threshold 
for viability for CSP plants that is generally accepted in the industry is 2,200 kWh/m2. 
Only  one  area  in  the  South-Eastern  corner  of  Lake  Sevan  receives  DNI  above  this 
threshold. However, overall Armenia has rather poor resources for CSP and for this 
reason this technology is not considered a viable option for development. 

Concentrating  solar  PV  (CPV)  also  does  not  appear  to  be  a  favorable  technology 
option in Armenia compared with the other available solar PV technologies. Like CSP, 
CPV  also  takes  advantage  of  DNI  resources.  An  analysis  of  the  theoretical 
performance  of  CPV  plants  deployed  in  Armenia  revealed  that  CPV  is  expected  to 
have lower capacity factors than flat-plate solar PV installations (fixed axis or single-
axis  tracking),  and  CPV  is  also  expected  to  have  higher  capital  costs  than  these 
technologies. 

3.1.6  Biomass 

Armenia’s  biomass  resources  that  could  potentially  be  used  for  power  generation 
consist  of  forestry  residues  (fallen  wood  and  sanitary  cuttings)  and  crop  residues 
from grain farming. Dedicated energy crops have also been considered as a potential 
biomass  resource  in  Armenia,  but  preliminary  estimates  suggest  that  cultivating 
crops for fuel would be very high-cost. 

The biomass resource assessment suggests that there are sufficient forestry residues 
to  support  a  4  MW  power  plant  in  Armenia  and  sufficient  grain  crop  residues  to 
support a 25 MW power plant. However, it would be necessary to transport forestry 
and crop from all around the country to central locations and there is currently no 
established  infrastructure  to  do  this.  Therefore,  it  is  expected  that  it  would  be 
logistically difficult to collect biomass resources for power generation, and that the 
collection costs from transporting the fuel would make fuel costs very high. 

3.1.7  Biogas 

Armenia has the potential for biogas-based power production at livestock farms, at 
the  Nubarashen  landfill  (in  the  city  of  Yerevan)  and  at  the  Aeratsia  wastewater 
treatment  plant  (in  the  city  of  Yerevan).  In  2010,  the  GEF/UNDP  identified  three 
livestock  farms  as  potential  candidates  for  biogas-to-energy  projects,  with  a 

24 Direct Normal Insolation (DNI) is energy that travels directly from the sun without interruption. Rays of direct 
insolation  are  parallel,  and  concentrating  solar  collectors  (both  concentrating  PV  and  concentrating  solar 
power) collect the parallel rays onto a receiver. Solar energy which is not direct is called diffuse insolation, and 
it is carried by rays which have been scattered or reflected. Concentrating solar collectors are unable to collect 
these  oblique  rays  of  diffuse  insolation,  but  flat  plate  collectors  (solar  PV)  can  absorb  both  DNI  and  diffuse 
insolation and convert them to usable energy. The DNI is relatively low in Armenia compared to other parts of 
the world where concentrating solar is being deployed. This means that in Armenia more of the energy of the 
sun is scattered by clouds or haze before it can hit a solar collector. Additionally, Armenia’s latitude causes the 
sun to stay lower in the sky than in other parts of the world. The lower sun means that the direct insolation 
must pass through more atmosphere and so the energy is ’diluted’ by striking the solar collector at an angle. 

25 

 
                                                      
 
combined  resource  potential  of  3.3  MW.  These  plants  would  be  similar  to  the 
Lusakert  biogas  plant,  which  is  Armenia’s  only  operating  industrial-scale  biogas-to-
energy plant, located at the Lusakert poultry farm. 

In  2001,  a  consortium  of  Japanese  companies  began  studying  the  potential  for  a 
landfill  gas-to-energy  plant  at  the  Nubarashen  landfill.  Although  eventually  the 
consortium  installed  a  methane  gas  flare  plant  instead  of  an  energy  project,  more 
recent assessments have identified the potential for building up to a 2.5 MW landfill 
gas-to-energy plant at the facility.  

The other potential source of biogas energy in Armenia is the Aeratsia wastewater 
treatment plant. The plant is currently dilapidated and largely non-functioning, but if 
the  plant  were  to  undergo  significant  rehabilitation  and  anaerobic  digesters  are 
installed  at  the  facility,  it  is  expected  that  a  3  MW  cogeneration  plant  could  be 
constructed at the facility. 

3.1.8  Geothermal Heating/Cooling Technologies 

Armenia  has  significant  potential  for  geothermal  heating  and  cooling  in  residential 
buildings.  If  land  is  available,  geothermal  heat  pumps  could  theoretically  be 
deployed anywhere and could cover a large portion of Armenia’s space heating and 
cooling  load.  Furthermore,  Armenia  is  estimated  to  have  high  quality  geothermal 
resources. The coefficient of performance (COP) for geothermal heating in Armenia 
is reportedly 5.0 to 6.0. By comparison, the average COP in Russia is around 3.5.25 

Only  one  existing  large-scale  geothermal  heating  project  has  been  implemented  in 
Armenia. In 2009, an 860 kW geothermal heat pump was installed at a commercial 
building in Northern Avenue in Yerevan. 

3.1.9  Solar Thermal Heating Technologies 

There  is  significant  potential  for  solar  thermal  hot  water  heating  technologies  in 
Armenia.  This  technology  has  been  deployed  in  a  number  of  demonstrations  over 
the past decade, but the total penetration is small (less than 4 MW of total installed 
capacity)  and  the  technology  has  yet  to  gain  widespread  commercial  acceptance.26 
Recent  solar  thermal  heating  projects  in  Armenia  include  the  implementation  of 
GEF-funded systems at a housing development and a school in the Shirak region.27 

3.2  Costs of Renewable Energy 
The comparative cost of renewable energy technologies is an important factor when 
determining  their  viability  and  attractiveness  for  inclusion  in  Armenia’s  energy 
portfolio.  This  section  presents  supply  curves  that  show  the  levelized  energy  costs 

25  The  coefficient  of  performance  is  the  ratio  of  the  amount  of  energy  recovered  from  a  geothermal  heating 
system to the amount of energy input to the system to operate it. A higher coefficient of performance means 
that a geothermal system more efficiently transfers heat from the ground to an indoor space. 

26  USAAA/US  Embassy/EcoTeam/UNDP/GEF,  “Use  of  Renewable  Energy  Sources  in  the  World  and  Armenia 

Through Innovations to Clear Technologies,” 2010 

27 The GEF Small Grants Programme, “SGP Armenia Supports the Use of Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency 
Practices,” 2010; The GEF Small Grants Programme, “Transferring Experience on Practical Implementation of 
Low-Carbon Technologies in Basen Community of Shirak Region,” 2013 

26 

 
                                                      
(LECs)  of  the  various  renewable  energy  technologies  assessed  in  Armenia  for  the 
preparation  of  the  Investment  Plan  under  different  sets  of  financing  assumptions. 
The financing assumptions used are shown in Table 3.2. Additional assumptions are 
shown in Annex F. 

Table 3.2: Concessional, Commercial and SREP/Commercial Financing Assumptions 

Concessional 

Commercial 

SREP/Commercial Mixed 

Debt/equity split (%) 

Debt rate (%) 

Equity return (%) 

Debt term (years) 

100/0 

3.00 

N/A 

20 

70/30 

10.69 

18 

20 

70/30 

3.72* 

18 

40 

* Synthetic debt rate used to model a financing structure in which 35 percent of project capital costs 
are financed with commercial debt at 10.69 percent interest (and a 15-year loan tenor), and 
35 percent of project capital costs are financed with SREP capital contributions at 0.25 
percent interest and with a 40-year loan tenor and a 10-year grace period. 

Figure 3.1 shows a supply curve of renewable power resources in Armenia with LECs 
of less than US$0.10/kWh, assuming concessional financing assumptions.  

Figure  3.1:  Renewable  Energy  Supply  Curve  for  Armenia,  Concessional  Financing 
Assumptions, LEC of Less Than US$0.10/kWh 

*Assumes Fixed PV 

Figure 3.2 shows a supply curve of renewable power resources with LECs of less than 
US$0.20/kWh, assuming commercial financing assumptions. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  3.2:  Renewable  Energy  Supply  Curve  for  Armenia,  Commercial  Financing 
Assumptions, LEC of Less than US$0.20/kWh 

* Assumes Fixed PV 

Figure  3.3  shows  a  supply  curve  of  the  cost  of  renewable  power  resources  in 
Armenia  assuming  concessional,  commercial  and  a  combination  of  SREP  and 
commercial  financing  assumptions.28  This  demonstrates  the  effect  of  different 
financing assumptions on the levelized energy cost of renewable energy resources, 
and  the  magnitude  of  the  effect  of  SREP  capital  contributions  on  levelized  energy 
costs. 

28 Note that the relative position of certain renewable energy options with respect to each other in the supply 
curve is different in the commercial and concessional supply curves. This is because the effect of changes to 
financing  assumptions  is  different  for  different  technologies,  dependent  on  the  proportion  of  each 
technology’s LEC that comes from capital costs and the proportion that comes from operating costs. When the 
capital cost of a technology makes up a particularly large portion of that technology’s LEC, increases in the cost 
of  capital  increases  that  technology’s  LECs  more  than  it  does  the  LECs  of  technologies  for  which  operating 
costs are a higher proportion of their LECs. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Figure  3.3:  Renewable  Energy  Resources  Supply  Curve  for  Armenia,  Commercial, 
Mixed Commercial/SREP and Concessional Financing 

* Assumes fixed PV 

Figure 3.4 show the average LEC of renewable energy resources in Armenia over the 
life of each energy project assuming mixed SREP/commercial financing assumptions, 
as well as the range of estimates of the cost of generation in 2026, when the a new 
nuclear plant would need to come on line to replace the Metsamor nuclear power 
plant. 29 This figure is intended to provide a more general picture of the comparative 
costs of different renewable power technologies in Armenia. 

29 The range reflects different assumptions about the size of the new nuclear plant, and whether concessional or 

commercial financing is used to finance it. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Figure 3.4: Renewable Energy Resources Average Supply Curve for Armenia (Mixed 
Commercial/Concessional Financing) 

Note that there are several uncertainties associated with the data presented in the 
figures. The geothermal energy resource potential shown in this supply curve has not 
yet been proven to exist, and the size of the resource potential shown here is largely 
speculative.  Furthermore,  the  potential  for  wastewater  treatment  plant  (WWTP) 
energy is contingent on the completion of upgrades to the Aeratsia WWTP, the costs 
of which are not included here. Finally, the cost of transportation for biomass fuels is 
highly uncertain, and the costs provided above might not accurately reflect this. 

It  is  also  important  to  note  that  only  the  fixed-axis  PV  technology  is  shown  in  the 
supply  curves  above,  but  the  potential  for  three  other  solar  technologies  was  also 
assessed:  single-axis  tracking  solar  PV,  concentrating  solar  PV  and  concentrating 
solar  thermal  power.  These  technologies  were  assumed  to  be  deployable  in  the 
same areas—each solar technology was treated as a technology option that could be 
used  to  take  advantage  of  a  certain  amount  of  solar  resource.  Fixed  PV  was  the 
lowest  cost  of  all  these  technologies,  so  it  is  the  only  technology  included  in  the 
supply  curves  above.  Table  3.3  shows  the  comparative  minimum,  average  and 
maximum  levelized  energy  costs  for  each  of  the  utility-scale  solar  technologies 
assessed in Armenia. 

30 

2012 average cost of generation = US$0.04/kWhLower range of avggeneration cost = US$0.08/kWhHigher range of avggeneration cost = US$0.19/kWh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table  3.3:  Levelized  Energy  Cost  Ranges  of  Various  Solar  Power  Technologies  in 
Armenia, Assuming Mixed SREP/Commercial Financing 

Technology 

Minimum 

Average 

Maximum 

Levelized Energy Cost, US$/kWh 

Fixed PV 

Tracking PV 

Concentrating PV 

Concentrating solar 
thermal power 

0.13 

0.14 

0.22 

0.43 

0.14 

0.15 

0.26 

0.54 

0.16 

0.17 

0.35 

0.79 

The LECs of each solar technology vary depending on the location where the technology would be 

deployed, which determines the solar resource and therefore each technology’s theoretical 
capacity factor 

Figure 3.5 shows the cost of renewable heating technologies in Armenia compared 
with the cost of heating with electricity, natural gas, firewood and coal. 

Figure  3.5:  Comparative  Cost  of  Renewable  and  Non-Renewable  Heating 
Technologies 

3.3  Barriers to Renewable Energy Projects 
Armenia faces  numerous  barriers to the further  development  of  renewable  energy 
systems  despite  the  country’s  significant  renewable  energy  resource  potential  and 
history  of  past  success  in  the  development  of  a  robust  domestic  hydropower 
industry.  Table  3.4  describes  some  of  the  most  significant  barriers  hindering  the 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
development  of  renewable  energy  in  Armenia.  For  each  barrier,  there  is  also  a 
corresponding discussion of possible mitigation options.  

32 

 
Table 3.4. Barriers to Renewable Energy Development and Mitigation Options 

Barrier 

Mitigation Options 

Costs 

High costs of the first utility-scale solar and 
geothermal projects in the-country will likely not 
be cost-competitive with conventional energy 
generating technologies and Armenia’s current 
power generation mix. Therefore, the 
implementation of renewable energy technologies 
can make energy unaffordable for consumers in 
this environment if the full cost of these 
technologies is passed on to consumers. 

Support the Armenian renewable energy industry 
for a short period of time with funding and low-cost 
financing to help the domestic industry gain 
experience with these technologies and thereby 
drive their costs down in Armenia in the long-term 

Legal and Regulatory 

Poor coordination between authorities makes 
getting all necessary permits for RE technologies 
cumbersome and results in little transparency in 
procedures, long lead-times and high project 
costs.  

Environmental Regulation and Enforcement is not 
uniform for all RE technologies and responsibilities 
for enforcing regulations is not clearly defined 
within the Government 

  Streamline procedures for issuing permits 
  Improve coordination between Government 
authorities (i.e. PSRC and Ministry of Natural 
Protection (MoNP)) 

  PSRC and MoNP need to work out cooperative 
rules for uniform and effective monitoring and 
enforcement 

Wind  SHPPs  Others 

Solar 
PV 

Geo-
thermal 
Power 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barrier 

Mitigation Options 

  Create a fast-track for smaller projects, which 
will be especially important if smaller solar 
plants are to be implemented 

Solar 
PV 

Geo-
thermal 
Power 

Wind  SHPPs  Others 

 

 

Some regulatory approvals are the same for all 
sizes of plants, in particular, for licensing, land use, 
EIAs, and water use. Therefore, the cost and time 
required to obtain approvals for a relatively small 
project can be large relative to that projects cost 
and construction timeframe and disincentivize the 
development of small projects 

Power Purchase Agreements (PPA) are not issued 
until construction of SHPPs and wind plants are 
complete 

PPA terms are limited to 15 years, leaving 
investors uncertain about the remaining 4-5 years 
of the plant life in the case of wind, 10 years in the 
case of solar, and 15 years in the case of 
geothermal  

VAT laws current legislation for wind plants allow 
payment of VAT to be postponed for 3 years, but 
having to pay back VAT 3 years later is a cash-flow 
burden for renewable energy projects, relatively 
early in the life of the project 

There is currently no mechanism to guarantee 
remuneration for solar PV or geothermal projects 

  Move issuance of PPAs to the time that the 
development permit is granted (this would 
require provisions in the PPA in case of major 
project delays, cancellations, etc.)  

  Extend PPA terms to match the life of given RE 
technologies (25 years for solar and geothermal 
projects, 20 years for wind projects) 

 

 

 

 

  Extend the period by which the VAT must be 

paid back for all renewable energy technologies 

 

  Use data from SREP analysis of renewable 

 

 

energy resources in Armenia to implement a FiT 
or other financial support mechanism for solar 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barrier 

Mitigation Options 

Solar 
PV 

Geo-
thermal 
Power 

Wind  SHPPs  Others 

PV and geothermal power 

Inflation and exchange rate adjustments in FiTs 
only happen once a year, and based on previous 
year’s data. Inflation based on CPI, which is not 
always same rate faced by investors in RE projects, 
where a producer price index (PPI) may be more 
appropriate. 

  Make currency and FX adjustments more 

frequent, and based on more recent data or 
credible market forecasts 

  Include “extraordinary adjustment” clauses in 

PPAs if rates go beyond agreed range 

Availability of Financing 

 

 

Local commercial banks do not have technical 
capacity to assess non-SHPP RE projects. The 
success of the SHPP program is owed, in part, to 
good quality of technical assessments by local 
commercial banks. They do not currently have 
experts to assess other types of RE projects 

  Support domestic commercial banks with 

 

 

 

 

technical assistance to help educate them on 
appropriate underwriting criteria and due 
diligence assessments for solar PV, geothermal 
power and solar/geothermal heating 
technologies 

  Project development facility/fund for RE projects 
to make it easier for local commercial banks to 
assess technical aspects of projects 

Domestic Project Development Capacity 

Lack of experience with renewable energy 
technologies makes property owners and energy 
users skeptical of these technologies.  

  Actively support demonstration projects and 

 

 

 

outreach campaigns to help market the benefits 
of renewable energy technologies to the public 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barrier 

Mitigation Options 

Solar 
PV 

Geo-
thermal 
Power 

Wind  SHPPs  Others 

  Support domestic commercial banks with 

technical assistance to help educate them on 
appropriate underwriting criteria and due 
diligence assessments for solar PV, geothermal 
power and solar/geothermal heating 
technologies 

  Project development facility/fund for RE projects 
to make it easier for local commercial banks to 
assess technical aspects of projects 

Limited capacity for equipment acquisition and 
installation limits the expansion of solar PV or hot 
water, large scale geothermal, geothermal heat 
pumps, biomass or biogas. There is little 
experience with these technologies in Armenia. 

There is a lack of sufficient, good quality data on 
solar and geothermal resources. Additional studies 
will need to be done to accurately assess 
achievable potential. 

  Finance pilots with the requirement that there 

 

 

 

be knowledge transfer to local partners 
  Provide funding for training workshops for 

installers 

  Fund the preparation of more comprehensive 
resource assessments for these technologies 

 

 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4  Government Strategy for the Renewable Energy Sector 
The  Government’s renewable  energy  strategy  is  driven  by the overarching  goals  of 
improving  energy  security,  ensuring  affordable  energy  supply,  and  maximizing  the 
use  of  Armenia’s  indigenous  energy  resources.  As  described  in  Section  2.1,  several 
key strategic documents—the 2013 National Energy Security Concept, the Armenian 
Development  Strategy,  and  the  National  Security  Strategy—specifically  call  for  the 
development of indigenous renewable energy resources. 

In  the  past  few  years  the  Government  has  acted  on  its  commitment  to  deploy 
renewable  energy  technologies  by  implementing  the  Feed-In  Tariff  for  certain 
technologies: wind, biomass, and hydropower. The Government has also undertaken 
regulatory  reforms  and  amendments  to  tax  laws  that  have  streamlined  the 
renewable  energy  project  development  process.  For  instance,  in  recognition  of  the 
fact that Water Use Permits and PSRC operating licenses had different durations and 
this  was  causing  uncertainty  among  developers,  a  process  has  been  created  to 
obtain  a  Water  Use  Permit  with  the  same  duration  as  the  PSRC  permit.30  The 
Government  also  enables  wind  energy  developers  to  postpone  VAT  payments  for 
imported equipment for three years.31 

Table  3.5  shows  Government’s  targets  for  various  renewable  energy  technologies. 
Excluding  output from the  large  hydroelectric  plants,  renewable  energy generation 
represented  roughly  6  percent  of  total  generation  in  2012.  Government’s  target  is 
for  such  generation  to  represent  21  percent  of  total  generation  by  2020,  and  26 
percent by 2025. 

Table  3.5:  Renewable  Energy  Generation  Capacity  and  Production  Targets  2020-
202532 

Small Hydro 

Wind 

Geothermal 

PV 

Total  

Capacity installed (MW) 

Generation (GWh) 

2020 

2025 

2020 

2025 

377 

50 

50 

40 

492 

397 

100 

100 

80 

677 

1,049 

1,106 

117 

373 

88 

232 

745 

176 

1,627 

2,259 

The  targets  shown  in  Table  3.5  update  the  2011  Renewable  Energy  Roadmap  for 
Armenia,  developed  in  cooperation  with  R2E2,  with  the  support  of  the  Global 
Environmental Facility (GEF) and the World Bank. Targets have been updated in this 
IP because a number of factors, global and local to Armenia, have changed since the 

30  USAID,  “Small  Hydropower  Sector  Framework,  Status,  Development  Barriers  and  Future  Development  2012 

Update,” March 2012 

31 USAID, “Wind Energy Development in Armenia: Legal, Regulatory, Tax and Customs Regulations,” April 2010 
32 Excludes generation from the large hydro cascades. 

37 

 
  
 
 
                                                      
development  of the  Roadmap.  There  is, for example,  more  information  now  about 
the  solar,  geothermal,  and  wind  resources  in  Armenia  than  there  was  when  the 
Roadmap  was  produced.  Wind  resources,  in  particular,  have  shown  to  have  lower 
capacity factors the previously thought, making them more expensive on a levelized 
energy cost (LEC) basis. Solar PV has, in contrast become more attractive. The capital 
costs of utility-scale solar PV projects have declined substantially over the past few 
years, shifting more of the technically viable solar potential toward financial viability. 
As  a  consequence,  Government’s  priorities  in  the  years  to  come  are  likely  to  shift 
away from wind and toward solar PV. 

3.5  Role of the Private Sector 
Armenia has been successful in attracting substantial private sector participation in 
the  renewable  energy  sector.  For  renewable  energy  projects,  this  participation  has 
primarily  been  through  small  hydropower  projects.  However,  there  are  also  a 
number  of  private  companies  that  manufacture  and  install  solar  thermal  heaters, 
geothermal heating and cooling equipment and distributed solar PV in Armenia.  

There  are  also  several  examples  of  successful  private  sector  participation  in  non-
hydropower renewable energy projects. The Lusakert biogas plant was developed by 
a  consortium  of  organizations,  some  of  which  were  private  Armenian  companies. 
The methane capture and flare gas plant at the Nubarashen landfill  was funded by 
foreign donors, but it is currently operated by an Armenian company. A number of 
small solar thermal hot water and solar PV projects have been developed by private 
companies in Armenia over the years. Recently, a private company developed an 860 
kW  geothermal  heat  pump  system  in  a  large  commercial  building  on  Northern 
Avenue in Yerevan. 

A  number  of  commercial  banks  support  renewable  energy  projects  in  Armenia  by 
providing  loans  to  project  developers.  As  mentioned  above,  the  lack  of  long-term 
financing  at  attractive  interest  rates  is  one  major  barrier  to  the  development  of 
privately-owned renewable energy projects in Armenia and the expansion of existing 
financing programs for renewable energy would encourage growth in the sector. 

3.6  On-going and Planned Investments by Development Partners 
Several  multilateral  and  bilateral  donors  are  actively 
in  promoting 
renewable energy in Armenia. The following subsections describe these donors and 
their areas of involvement. 

involved 

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) 

EBRD is actively involved in Armenia’s energy sector promoting energy efficiency and 
renewable energy. Current and recent activities include: 

  Rehabilitation  of  Sevan-Hrazdan  HPP.  EBRD  is  co-financing  the  rehabilitation  of 

the Sevan-Hrazdan cascade with ADB’s PSOD. 

  Development of small hydropower plants (HPPs). EBRD provided US$7 million to 
Cascade  Bank  (now  America  Bank)  for  on-lending  to  Armenian  companies 
developing  SHPPs  under  the  Renewable  Energy  Project.  These  funds,  combined 
with  a  World  Bank  loan  of  US$5  million,  US$3  million  equity  investment  from  a 
private  investor,  and  US$13  million  co-financing  from  project  developers,  which 

38 

 
enabled  to  develop  25  SHPPs  with  total  installed  capacity  of  45  MW.33  The 
Renewable  Energy  Project  included  also  US$3  million  GEF  grant  to  help  create 
enabling  environment  for  development  of  renewable  energy.    Specifically,  the 
GEF grant helped to: (a) improve the regulatory environment for renewables; (b) 
develop and adopt technical standards for renewable energy and regulations for 
dispatching  and  load-regulation  of  grid-connected  renewable energy  plants;  and 
(c)  remove  information  barriers  to  investments  in  renewable  energy,  including 
creation  of  GIS  database  of  RE  resources,  SHPP  scheme,  feasibility  studies  and 
resource  assessments  (e.g.  competitive  advantage  of  Armenia  in  solar  PV  value 
chain, assessment of technical and economic viability of biofuels, etc.), 

  Regulatory  support  to  promote  renewable  energy.  EBRD  provided  technical 
support  to  the  PSRC  on  feed-in  tariffs  (FiT)  and  third  party  access  (TPA) 
regulations. 

KfW 

KfW’s engagement in Armenia’s energy sector currently focuses on developing and 
maintaining renewable energy resources and financing transmission investments to 
support  regional  cooperation.  Specific  areas  of  recent  and  potential  investment  in 
the field of renewable energy include: 

  Construction  and  rehabilitation  of  SHPPs.  KfW  provides  financing  and  advisory 
support  for  construction  and  rehabilitation  of  privately-owned  SHPPs.  Under 
Phase  1,  KfW  supported  14  SHPPs  through  several  commercial  banks.  Phase  2, 
currently  under  implementation,  is  expected  to  finance  up  to  20  SHPPs  with  a 
total capacity of 45 MW. Phase 3, currently in the planning stage, will include up 
to EUR 40 million in financing and may be expanded to cover financing for wind 
projects. 

World Bank/International Finance Corporation (IFC) 

  The  World  Bank  Group has  two  decades  of engagement  in  supporting  power 
sector  reforms  and  clean  energy  development  in  Armenia.  The  World  Bank’s 
and  IFC’s  recent  engagements  in  Armenia’s  energy  sector  have  focused  on 
development of renewable energy resources and promoting energy efficiency 
through  rehabilitation  of  transmission  infrastructure  and,  more  recently, 
demand-side  efficiency  measures.  As  mentioned  above,  IFC  provided  US$15 
million  to  Ameriabank  CJSC,  resulting  in  the  development  of  12  SHPPs  with 
over  40  MW  capacity.  More  recently,  the  World  Bank  provided  a  US$  1.5 
million  to  fund  technical  field  investigation  studies  for  potential  geothermal 
sites in Armenia. 

Global Environment Facility (GEF) 

The  GEF’s  Small  Grants  Programme  (SGP)  provided  grants  for  two  solar  thermal 
heating projects in the Shirak region of Armenia. 

  Solar  Thermal  Heating  System  in  a  Housing  Development.  In  2010,  the  GEF 
provided  a  grant  for  US$30,970  to  complete  energy  efficiency  upgrades  and 

39 

 
                                                      
 
the installation of a solar thermal heating system at a housing development. In 
the  first  winter  of  its  implementation  the  project  reduced  natural  gas 
consumption by 40 percent. 

  Solar  Thermal  Heating  System  in  a  Kindergarten.  Starting  in  2013,  the  GEF 
provided a grant for US$33,920 to develop a multi-purpose solar thermal hot 
water system to provide heated water to a kindergarten. As part of the project 
a  solar  thermal  heating  system  will  be  installed  at  a  greenhouse  next  to  the 
building. The intention is that this project will serve as a demonstration of the 
potential for using solar thermal technologies to heat greenhouses. 

40 

 
 
 
4 
Prioritization of Renewable Energy Technologies 
The  Government  of  Armenia,  led  by  the  MENR  and  supported  by  the  MDBs,  has 
identified four areas for strategic investment that would lead to scale-up. 

The areas were identified through a participatory process involving a wide range of 
government  agencies,  non-governmental  organizations,  academic  institutions,  and 
the private sector. The participatory process included many one-on-one meetings, a 
workshop with the Government’s SREP working group, as well as an open forum. 

The  subset  of  “technically  viable”  resources  was  selected  from  those  described  in 
Section  3.  These  were  geothermal  and  solar  thermal  heating,  utility-scale  solar  PV, 
geothermal power, small HPPs, agricultural biogas, landfill gas, wind and distributed 
PV. These resources were evaluated against five criteria on a scale of 1 to 4, with 1 
indicating  that  the  resource  met  the  criteria  best  of  all  resources  and  4  indicating 
that  it  met  the  criteria  worst  of  all  resources.  The  five  criteria  reflect  the 
Government’s  strategic  objectives,  and  the  clear  recognition  that  SREP  funding 
should be used to have a transformative impact on the renewable energy sub-sector. 

The criteria considered were: 

  Potential for scale-up of the technology. The amount of developable resource 
potential  relative  to  the  other  technologies,  as  measured  by  production 
potential (GWh). Resources with higher production potential were given higher 
priority. 

  Market  maturity/immaturity.  The  extent  to  which  the  technology  is  used  or 
the  resource  is  already  exploited  in  Armenia,  or  there  is  financing  already 
available  from  other  donor  programs.  Resources  or  technologies  which  are 
already well-known and well-developed in Armenia (such as small hydropower 
generation),  were  given  lower  priority  because  they  already  had  sufficient 
support  or  private  sector  interest.  Resources  or  technologies  which  already 
have  financing  available  through  other  donor  programs  (such  as  geothermal 
heat pumps, solar thermal heating and rooftop solar PV) were also given lower 
priority  because  there  is  already  financing  available  through  other  MDB 
programs (such as financing available through local banks from EBRD and IFC). 

  Cost-effectiveness.  The  cost  of  the  electricity  or  heat  generated  by  the 

technology, as measured by the levelized energy cost (LEC).34 

  Potential  for  job-creation.  The  extent  to  which  use  of  a  technology  or 

exploitation of a resource creates jobs. 

  Effect on power grid stability. The extent to which certain technologies had a 
negative  or  positive  impact  on  system  operation  and  dispatch.  Technologies 
with  no  impact,  or  a  positive  impact  on  grid  stability  were  prioritized  over 
those with a negative impact. 

34 The LEC is the present value of capital and operating costs for each technology, on a kWh basis. 

41 

 
                                                      
Table  4.1  shows  the  quantitative  rankings  assigned  to  each  technology  under  each 
criterion.  The  rankings  were  used  as  a  rough  guide  for  discussion  only,  using  the 
assumption that each criterion had an equal weight. Ultimately, some of the highest-
ranking  resources  (geothermal  heat  pumps  and  solar  thermal,  for  example)  were 
rejected  because  stakeholders  recognized  that  substantial  financing  for  such 
technologies  already  existed  under  MDB-financed  programs  or  because  (as  is  the 
case for SHPPs) substantial private sector activity already exists). 

Table 4.1: Ranking of Renewable Technologies Against Selection Criteria 

Technology 

Selection Criteria* 

Power 
grid 
stability 

Cost-
effectiveness 

Potential 
for job 
creation 

Scale-up 
potential** 

Market 
immaturity 

Average 
score 

Geothermal 
heat pumps 

Utility-scale 
solar PV 

Geothermal 
power 

Solar thermal 
heating 

Small HPPs 

Ag. biogas 

Landfill biogas 

Wind 

Distributed 
solar PV 

2 

3 

2 

2 

1 

2 

2 

2 

3 

1 

2 

2 

3 

1 

1 

1 

2 

4 

1 

2 

2 

1 

2 

3 

3 

3 

1 

1 

2 

3 

2 

3 

4 

4 

3 

2 

2 

1 

1 

2 

3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1.4 

2.0 

2.0 

2.0 

2.0 

2.2 

2.2 

2.2 

2.4 

* A lower score indicates that a technology is determined to be more suitable for SREP funding 

according to the chosen selection criteria. A score of 1 indicates that a technology meets the 
criteria very well, and a score of 4 indicates that a technology meets the criteria worst of all 
technologies.  

** Technologies were put scored on scale-up potential as follows: 10,000+ GWh/yr = 1, 1,000-10,000 

GWh/yr = 2, less than 1,000 GWh/yr = 3, less than 100 GWh/yr = 4 

Three  investment  priorities  emerged  from  the  analyses  and  discussions  with 
stakeholders.  These  were:  (1)  geothermal  power,  2)  utility-scale  PV  and  3) 
geothermal heat pumps and solar heating. Table 4.2 provides brief explanations for 
why each technology received a particular ranking on each criterion. 

42 

 
 
 
 
Table 4.2: Ranking of Renewable Technologies Against Selection Criteria 

Technology 

Selection Criteria 

Power grid stability 

Cost-effectiveness 

Potential for job 
creation 

Scale-up potential  Market immaturity 

Geothermal heat 
pumps 

Can consume energy 
at peak times with 
pumps 

One of the lowest 
cost of those 
assessed 

Potential for 
creation of an 
entire industry 

Very large  

Solar thermal 
heating 

Can consume energy 
at peak times with 
pumps 

Relatively high-cost  Potential for 

Large  

creation of an 
entire industry 

Somewhat mature. Only one commercial-
scale geothermal heating facility exists in 
Armenia, but financing for such projects 
could is available through local banks under 
existing EBRD and IFC-financed programs 

Somewhat mature. There are a few 
operating STH facilities in Armenia, and 
financing is available through local banks 
under existing EBRD and IFC-financed 
programs 

Very immature. No utility-scale solar PV 
plants operate in Armenia 

Moderate cost 

Potential for 
creation of an 
entire industry 

Large  

Utility-scale solar 
PV 

Geothermal power 

Can be used during 
daytime hours to 
preserve stored 
hydropower for 
evening and morning 
peaks 

Provides stable, base-
load power  

Very low cost if 
resource is high-
temperature 

Not labor 
intensive, low 
potential 

Currently small; 
however several 
sites warrantee 
further exploration  

Very immature. No geothermal power plants 
operate in Armenia 

Small HPPs 

Provides diurnally 
stable, but seasonally 

Very low cost 

Labor intensive, 
but low potential 

Many of the best 
sites have already 

Very mature. Most widespread renewable 
energy technology deployed to date 

43 

 
Technology 

Selection Criteria 

Ag. biogas 

Landfill biogas 

Wind 

Power grid stability 

Cost-effectiveness 

Potential for job 
creation 

Scale-up potential  Market immaturity 

variable power 

been developed, so 
potential is small 

Provides stable, base-
load power 

Very low cost 

Labor intensive, 
but low potential 

Very small  

Immature. Only one commercial-scale 
facility exists. 

Provides stable, base-
load power 

Lowest cost 
technology assessed 

Labor intensive, 
but low potential 

Very small  

Very immature. No LFG power plants 
operate in Armenia 

A variable generation 
resource, therefore, 
it must be managed 

Moderate cost  

Not labor 
intensive, 
moderate 
potential 

Moderate  

Immature. Only one commercial-scale 
facility exists 

Distributed solar PV  A variable generation 
resource, therefore it 
must be managed 

Very high cost 

Potential for 
creation of an 
entire industry 

Large 

Somewhat mature. Just a few small 
installations, but financing is available 
through local banks under existing EBRD and 
IFC-financed programs. 

44 

 
 
Program Description 

5 
The prioritization exercise described in Section 4 has led to the selection of two focus 
areas:  geothermal  power  and  utility-scale  solar  PV.  In  order  to  overcome  existing 
barriers  to  renewable  energy  deployment  and  to  catalyze  future  investment  and 
scale-up  of  the  selected  technologies  in  Armenia,  the  SREP  investment  program  is 
built around the following five objectives: 

1.  Provide  the  Armenian  renewable  energy  industry  with  a  “window  of 
opportunity” during which renewable energy project costs can be reduced 
through  first-projects  without  significantly  affecting  the  affordability  of 
energy to consumers. This will enable future projects to be developed at 
lower cost without donor support. 

2.  Build  capacity  among 

local  banks  to 

finance  renewable  energy 

technologies and develop their abilities to do this in the future. 

3.  Build  capacity  among  local  industry  to  procure,  deploy  and  make  equity 

investments in renewable energy technologies. 

4.  Build public confidence in renewable energy technologies to create market 

demand 

5.  Encourage  further  reforms  among  regulatory  agencies  to  support 
renewable energy scale-up after SREP funding/donor financing is gone. 

This  section  describes  the  proposed  projects,  the  transformational  impact  of  each 
project,  the  activities  envisioned  for  each,  and  the  expected  co-benefits  and 
environmental and social risks associated with each technology. 

Program Objective 

The  objective  of  the  SREP  Armenia  IP  is  to  catalyze  private  investment  in 
technologies which, for lack of experience, high capital costs and a variety of other 
reasons, have not previously been considered as options in the country. SREP funds 
will  be  used  to  do  first-projects  in  utility-scale  geothermal  power  and  utility-scale 
solar PV. In the process of developing these first projects, local capacity will be built 
in  the  financial  and  project  development  communities  that  will  be  crucial  for  the 
is  expended. 
scale-up  of  these  technologies  after  SREP  and  donor  funding 
Furthermore,  the  demonstration  effect  of  these  first  projects  will  serve  to  educate 
consumers on the benefits of renewable energy technologies. 

SREP  support  can  help  to  gradually  introduce  geothermal  power  and  utility-scale 
solar  PV  by:  (i)  absorbing  some  of  the  project  development  risk  on  geothermal 
power,  through  subsidization  of  exploratory  wells,  and;  (ii)  helping  the  finance  the 
country’s  first  utility-scale  solar  PV  projects  to  attract  private  investors  while 
minimizing the tariff-impact. 

Expected Outcomes 

The main results expected from the SREP Armenia IP are as follows: 

  Better  security  of  supply  and  reliability  by  increasing  the  proportion  of 

domestic renewable energy in the energy mix 

45 

 
  The  creation  of  a  utility-scale  solar  sector  and  geothermal  power  sector 

attractive to private investors. 

  Develop  the  first  utility-scale  solar  PV  projects,  which  through  gradual  tariff 
increases (as the tariff levels in the country gradually increase to reflect long-
run  supply  costs)  will  eventually  become  commercially  viable  without 
SREP/MDB support. These first projects will be so small as to have only a very 
minor  impact  on  the  overall  cost  of  generation  in  Armenia,  but  could  have  a 
catalytic effect on the market for solar PV through: 

–  Lower solar installation costs that will result as a domestic industry develops 

around it; 

–  Lower  financing  costs  as  lenders  become  more  comfortable  with  the 

technology; and  

–  Potential further reductions in the global costs of PV panels.  

The foreseen increase in thermal generation costs in Armenia will move solar 
toward  financial  viability.  Armenia’s  new  thermal  plants  will  require 
substantially higher tariffs than many of the existing plants, because they are 
fully (or near fully) depreciated and no longer recover depreciation charges. 
Moreover,  existing  plants  do  not  require  debt  service  through  their 
generation tariffs, whereas new plants will require such provision. 

  Contribution  to  reduction  of  impending  supply  capacity gap  to  meet  forecast 
demand. As noted above, Armenia will need roughly 170 MW of new capacity 
by 2018 and 830 MW of capacity when the nuclear plant is retired in 2026. 

  Improvement to the enabling environment for renewable energy technologies. 
The  first  utility-scale  solar  PV  and  geothermal  projects  will  provide  an 
opportunity  for  PSRC  to  streamline  administrative  procedures  and  fiscal 
policies  to  encourage  investment  in  a  wider  range  of  renewable  energy 
technologies. 

  Creation  of  jobs  related  to  the  construction/installation,  operation  and 
maintenance  of  renewable  technologies.  Education  of  the  workforce  in  the 
deployment  of  these  technologies.  An  indication  of  possible  job  creation  in 
Armenia is provided in Annex D. 

  Promotion of local R&D in a technology which has traditionally been a focus of 

researchers and academicians in Armenia 

  Reduced  greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  emissions  as  compared  to  the  business-as-
usual scenario, under which Armenia will likely continue to expand the use of 
natural gas for power generation and heating. 

The  details  of  the  three  projects  to  be  carried  out  are  described  in  more  detail 
below. 

5.1  Geothermal Power Exploration and Development 
SREP resources would be used for further exploration of Armenia’s  most promising 
geothermal  site  -  Karkar.  Prior  studies  suggest  the  existence  of  a  geothermal 
resource at the site, but it is necessary to carry out exploratory drilling to confirm the 

46 

 
availability  and  quality  of  the potential  geothermal  resource  for  power generation. 
The  typical  signs  of  a  high  temperature  geothermal  area  are  not  present  on  the 
surface,  however,  the  very  low  resistivity  anomaly  in  the  layer  between  500-1,000 
meters is an indication of a possible high temperature hydrothermal alteration. The 
real nature of the resource, whether high, low or intermediate temperature and its 
potential for power generation can only be confirmed through exploratory drillings. 

By using SREP support for this activity, the Government can help reduce the risk of 
developing the site for the private sector. If a geothermal resource exists at the site, 
this support can help make geothermal power a financially attractive investment for 
private investors and an affordable source of electricity for Armenia’s grid.  

The  support  can  also  serve  to  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  geothermal  power  in 
Armenia. A first successful project can build domestic capacity in the development of 
additional  geothermal  resources 
in  Armenia  at  Armenia’s  other  prospective 
geothermal  sites.  It  will  also  build  investor  confidence  that  geothermal  is  a  viable 
and profitable investment opportunity in Armenia. 

5.1.1  Priority activities 

The geothermal power project would include the following activities: 

  Exploratory Drilling at Karkar Geothermal Site. This step requires carrying out 
exploratory  drilling  at  the  site  to  determine  whether  or  not  power  could  be 
produced from the resource. 

  Feasibility Study for Karkar site. If the presence of a resource is confirmed, a 
full  feasibility  study  will  need  to  be  prepared  to  recommend  the  type  of 
geothermal  technology/plant  to  be  constructed,  reassess  the  economic  and 
financial viability, compliance with environmental and social safeguards, and to 
complete  legal  and  regulatory  due  diligence.  The  legal  and  regulatory  due 
diligence will include recommendations on the need for a feed-in tariff specific 
to  geothermal  or  a  recommended  structure  and  method  for  procuring  as  a 
public private partnership in a way that determines the tariff through bidding 
(for  example,  a  reverse  auction).  It  will  also  be  necessary  to  evaluate  the 
potential for grid interconnection at the chosen site, and whether or not grid 
upgrades  will  be  necessary  for  the  potential  geothermal  power  plant  to  be 
connected to the grid.  

  Transaction Advisory Services. The Government would procure the project as 
a Public Private Partnership (PPP). Therefore, advisory services will be needed 
to  help  structure  the  PPP  (for  example,  as  a  Build-Operate-Transfer  or  Build-
Own-Operate contract) and procure a private investor and operator. The exact 
commercial  arrangement  will  need  to  be  developed  through  further 
consultation  within  government,  with  donor  partners,  and  with  potential 
investors.  However,  the  arrangement  currently  envisaged  would  involve  a 
private  operator  having  a  BOT  or  BOO  agreement  under  which  they  finance, 
build and operate the power plant and have a power purchase agreement with 
the  distribution  company.  The  Government  would  own  the  steam  fields, 
thereby taking risk on the resource availability. 

47 

 
  Development of Geothermal Power Plant. As noted above, it is expected that 
the private sector will make the capital investment required for generation of 
electricity (the power plant itself). This investment plan assumes a plant with 
installed capacity of 28.5 MW, based on the average size of geothermal plants 
elsewhere. The actual size of the plant will depend on the resource potential 
identified in earlier activities. 

5.1.2  Parallel activities to be funded by other parties 

It is expected that the World Bank (IBRD), ADB or the commercial lenders within the 
MDBs  (IFC  in  the  World  Bank  Group,  PSOD  at  ADB,  or  EBRD)  as  well  as  other 
commercial financial institutions may be able to finance some of the capital costs of 
the project as a way of making it more attractive to private investors. 

The  Government  contributions  may  include,  for  example,  land  or  co-financing  of 
taxes.  The  MDB  support  may  also  include  concessional  lending  to  the  Government 
for the transmission lines, or other infrastructure required at the site. 

5.1.3  Environmental, social and gender co-benefits 

The development of a geothermal power project at the Karkar site in Armenia would 
have a number of environmental, social and gender co-benefits. These are likely to 
be  somewhat  similar  to  the  co-benefits  of  most  of  other  renewable  power 
generation technologies, with some important exceptions. For instance, geothermal 
power  provides  base  load  generation,  which  does  not  require  as  much  “back  up” 
generation as variable renewable energy sources.  

The geothermal project is expected to create the following environmental, social and 
gender co-benefits: 

  Minimized  land-use  for  energy  generation.  Compared  with  other  renewable 
energy  generating  technologies,  such  as  solar  and  wind,  geothermal  power 
uses a relatively small land area. 

  Reduction of pollutant emissions. A geothermal power plant has the potential 
to  reduce  greenhouse  gas  as  well  as  local  particulate  matter  emissions  from 
gas-fired  power  generation  in  Armenia.  Although  the  majority  of  Armenia’s 
energy  generation  is  from  nuclear  and  hydropower  sources,  there  is  still  the 
potential  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions  from  Armenia’s  operating 
natural gas-fired power plants by offsetting their generation with energy from 
a geothermal power plant. 

  Job  creation.  Potential  short-term  job  creation  during  exploration  of  the 
geothermal site. Potential for both short and long-term job creation during the 
development and operations of a geothermal plant. Given the remote location 
of  the  Karkar  site,  the  project  could  help  reduce  rural  unemployment  in  the 
surrounding areas. 

  Targeted  job  creation  for  women.  Potential  for  operational  agreements  for 
the  renewable  energy  projects  to  target  the  encouragement  of  jobs  for 
women. For example, the concession contract with the private operator could 
include set-asides for women to make up a certain percentage of local staff. 

48 

 
  Energy security. By replacing existing electricity generation resources, a large 
portion  of  which  relies  on  imported  fuel  that  is  subject  to  price  fluctuation, 
geothermal power could act as a hedge against future natural gas and uranium 
price increases. This could help minimize the effect of these price fluctuations 
on  domestic  electricity  tariffs  and,  thereby,  help  keep  electricity  service 
affordable for all consumers. 

5.1.4  Environmental and social risks 

The development of a utility-scale geothermal project at the Karkar site in Armenia is 
expected  to  have  relatively  limited  environmental  and  social  risks,  especially 
compared  with  conventional  and  even  other  renewable  energy  technologies. 
However,  significant  gaps  exist  in  the  environmental  and  social  risk  analyses  that 
have been conducted to date and the site should be studied in greater detail before 
the project implementation. Having said that, a preliminary review of available data 
related to the potential site and an analysis of the generic risks that face this type of 
project  development  suggest  that  the  project  will  have  relatively  limited  negative 
environmental and social risks. The impacts of this project are expected to be akin to 
those  from  any  other  large  infrastructure  project  that  takes  place  in  a  rural  area, 
although  with  some  notable  exceptions.  Specifically,  the  geothermal  project  is 
expected to face the following environmental and social risks: 

  Environmental risks 

–  Land  subsidence 
groundwater). 

(compaction  of  rock  due  to  the  withdrawal  of 

–  Increased micro-seismic activity near the local area, including increased risk 
laying  of 

landslides  though  excavations  for  geothermal  well  and 

of 
associated infrastructure and transmission networks.  

–  Altered groundwater recharge/extraction regime if groundwater is used for 
energy generation (such as for steam generation or emissions cleaning) and 
is not later returned to the aquifer. 

–  Water use during operations, which causes surface water abstraction, run-
in  river  flows  and 

localized  changes 

leading  to 

off  and  discharge 
morphology. 

–  The  potential  for  localized  geological  damage  though  excavations  for 
geothermal  well  and  laying  of  associated  infrastructure  and  transmission 
networks. 

–  During the construction stage, the project is expected to produce emissions 
due  to  material  transportation  and  on-site  plant  movements  (e.g.  vehicle 
emissions, particulate matter and dust).  

–  Construction  activities  have  the  potential  for  causing  soil  erosion  and 
compaction.  Localized  erosion,  compaction,  salinization,  sealing  and/or 
contamination  from  site  alteration  and  project  activities  could  wash  away 
fines  and  change  the  soil's  properties.  Furthermore,  excavations  for  land-
grading and foundations could mobilize previously contaminated soils.  

49 

 
–  Localized land-take from footprint of energy generation infrastructure. This 
could  have  footprint  impacts  upon  species  due  to  construction  of  power 
plant and related infrastructure. 

–  Transformation of landscape. 

  Social risks 

–  Lack of a local workforce with the knowledge and skills capable to operate 
and maintain the plants. This might mean that it is necessary to import labor 
to the region to develop and operate the plant. 

–  Impacts to traffic patterns during construction and operation (not expected 
near the site, as there is limited road infrastructure, but rather expected on 
the way to the site). 

5.2  Utility-Scale Solar PV Project Development 
SREP resources would be used to  finance the development of 40-50 MW of utility-
scale  solar  PV.  The  rapid  decline  in  solar PV  costs  in  recent  years  has made  utility-
scale  solar  PV  more  affordable  and  more  competitive  with  the  other  power 
generation options  available  to  Armenia.  SREP  support  would help  catalyze  private 
investment in a first new plant (or plants), and show the potential for deploying solar 
PV on a commercial basis. Given recent trends in solar PV costs, solar PV is expected 
to  become  even  more  cost-competitive  in  Armenia  and  a  demonstration  project 
would enable the country to take advantage of this technology in the future when it 
becomes more cost-competitive with other technologies. SREP funds would be used 
in  much  the  same  way  that  MDB  funds  were  used  to  successfully  jump-start  the 
small hydropower industry in Armenia nearly a decade ago.  

5.2.1  Priority activities 

The utility-scale solar PV project would include the following activities: 

  Project  preparation,  feasibility  studies,  site  measurement  and  monitoring. 
SREP  grant  funds  would  first  be  used  to  fund  more  detailed  resource 
assessments,  and  identification  of  possible  sites  and  possible  projects.  As 
described  in  Section  3.3,  relatively  coarse  resolution  solar  data  are  publicly 
available for Armenia. Given the nature of solar energy resources, these coarse 
data are generally acceptable for understanding the nature of the resource and 
conducting  a  high-level  financial  analysis.  However,  a  feasibility  study  will  be 
needed  to  characterize  the  solar  resource  potential  in  the  areas  targeted  for 
solar development in more detail. Furthermore, it will be necessary to evaluate 
the potential  for  grid  interconnection at  the  chosen  site,  and  whether  or  not 
grid upgrades will be necessary before the project is interconnected. As for the 
geothermal power project, the feasibility study will also reaffirm the economic 
and  financial  viability,  compliance  with  environmental  and  social  safeguards, 
and to complete legal and regulatory due diligence. 

  Transaction advisory. Transaction advisors would be hired to help government 
tender  for  the  projects  identified  in  the  feasibility  studies.  Private  operators 
would  be  procured  through  competitive  tender.  Bidders  would  be  selected 
based on technical and financial criteria, the financial criteria being the level of 

50 

 
tariff  required  or,  alternatively,  the  level  of  concessional  support  required.35 
Developers offering lower tariffs or requiring less concessional support would 
receive higher scores.  

  Investment in 40-50 MW project or projects. Government would on-lend SREP 
funds at concessional rates to private operators bidding on the projects being 
tendered. The private operators would contribute equity and also source loans 
from  commercial banks and  from  the  commercial  lending  arms  of the  MDBs. 
Government  estimates  that,  given  current  capital  costs  for  utility-scale  solar 
PV, SREP funds could be used with these other sources of financing to support 
roughly 40-50 MW of solar. As noted in Section 3, initial studies indicate that 
Gegharkunik Marz has some of the highest solar PV potential in Armenia, and 
would be considered as a first potential area for development. This could be a 
single  plant,  or  several  plants  with  a  total  capacity  of  40-50  MW,  as 
development of solar is often more effective if there are multiple sites, in areas 
with  different  solar  profiles  (to  provide  more  stability  by  diversifying 
generation profiles). 

5.2.2  Parallel activities to be funded by other donors 

As  noted  above,  it  is  foreseen  that,  in  addition  to  SREP  support,  the  commercial 
lending  arms  of  the  MDBs  will  be  willing  to  provide  co-financing  for  the  solar 
projects. 

As  for  the  geothermal  power  project,  Government  can  also  be  expected  to 
contribute  in  ways  that  reduce  the  overall  capital  expenditure  required  for  the 
project (by providing land, for example or waivers of taxes). 

5.2.3  Environmental, social and gender co-benefits 

The  development  of  a  utility-scale  solar  PV  project  could  have  a  number  of 
environmental,  social  and  gender  co-benefits.  These  are  likely  to  be  somewhat 
similar  to  the  co-benefits  of  other  renewable  power  generation  technologies.  The 
solar PV project is expected to create the following social, environmental and gender 
co-benefits: 

  Reduction of pollutant emissions. A solar PV plant has the potential to reduce 
greenhouse  gas  as  well  as  local  particulate  matter  emissions  from  gas-fired 
power  generation  in  Armenia.  Although  the  majority  of  Armenia’s  energy 
generation is from nuclear and hydropower sources, there is still the potential 
to  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions  from  Armenia’s  operating  natural  gas-
fired power plants by offsetting their generation with energy from a solar PV 
power plant. Solar PV plants generate most of their energy during the middle 
of the day, during some of the higher hours of energy consumption in Armenia. 
Solar  PV  could  be  used  to  offset  the  need  to  dispatch  hydropower,  saving 
hydropower  generation  to  serve  peaks  in  the  mornings  and  evenings  when 
otherwise more expensive thermal plants would be needed.  

35 Bidders will be offered, as part of the conditions of tender, access to SREP capital contributions. 

51 

 
                                                      
  Job  creation.  Potential  short-term  job  creation  during  the  development  and 
operations of the plant. More importantly, there is considerably research and 
development  (R&D)  and  interest  in  solar  PV  within  Armenia’s  academic 
institutions.  A  solar  PV  project  could  catalyze  further  research  and 
development  and  facilitate  the  transfer  of  capacity  for  manufacturing, 
installation and operation to the local market. 

  Targeted  job  creation  for  women.  Potential  for  operational  agreements  for 
the  renewable  energy  projects  to  target  the  encouragement  of  jobs  for 
women. 

  Energy security. By replacing existing electricity generation resources, much of 
which relies on imported fuel that is subject to uncontrollable price fluctuation, 
solar power could act as a hedge against future natural gas and uranium price 
increases.  This  could  help  minimize  the  effect  of  these  price  fluctuations  on 
energy  tariffs  and  thereby  help  keep  electricity  service  affordable  for  all 
consumers. 

  Reduced water resource use. Solar PV does not require cooling water, which is 
required for most combustion-based energy sources including thermal plants. 
Unlike hydropower resources, solar PV does not divert or interrupt the flow of 
natural  water  courses.  In  general,  development  of  solar  PV  will  result  in  less 
disturbance  and  consumption  of  Armenia’s  water  resources  than  most  other 
energy  technologies  currently  used  in  Armenia,  and  some  other  renewable 
energy technologies. 

5.2.4  Environmental and social risks 

The  development  of  a  utility-scale  solar  PV  plant  in  Armenia  is  expected  to  have 
relatively 
limited  environmental  and  social  risks,  especially  compared  to 
conventional power generation technologies. For instance, the utility-scale solar PV 
projects  are  expected to  have  negligible  emissions  compared  with fossil-fuel-based 
generation.  However,  there  are  no  site-specific  feasibility  studies  or  other 
documents that could have been drawn up on to provide a more detailed description 
of  environmental  and  social  impacts  of  potential  solar  PV  project.  A  detailed 
environmental and social impact assessment, including mitigation measures, will be 
conducted as part of the preparation of each site-specific project. 

Many of  the  environmental  and  social  risks  expected to  arise from this project  are 
site-specific. But, unlike the geothermal project, the site for this project has not yet 
been  chosen.  The  fact  that  large  swaths  of  Armenia’s  land  have  reasonably  high-
quality  solar  energy  resources  suggests  that  there  are  many  locations  where  this 
project could be implemented, and therefore it is expected that at least some of the 
environmental  and  social  risks  detailed  here  could  be  avoided  by  choosing  a  site 
where these risks would be minimized. Based on an analysis of the generic risks that 
are typically related to this type of projects, the solar PV project is expected to face 
the following environmental and social risks: 

  Environmental risks 

–  Construction-stage air emissions due to material transportation and on-site 

plant movements (e.g. vehicle emissions, particulate matter and dust). 

52 

 
–  Vegetation  clearance  during  construction  and  placement  of  generating 
equipment  and  ancillary  facilities  in  floodplains  could  increase  catchment 
flooding potential. 

–  Impacts  from  construction  of  power  transmission 

lines  to  evacuate 

electricity generated by solar PV plants. 

–  Footprint/land-take  for  solar  generation  infrastructure.  Limited  habitat  re-
growth  potential  due  to  presence  of  PVs.  Fragmentation  of  ecosystems 
from footprint, access roads and transmission networks. 

–  Disturbance  of  habitat  during  construction.  Land-take  footprint  impacts 

upon terrestrial species.   

–  Disposal  of  obsolete  solar  PV  modules  upon  their  decommissioning  is  a 
significant  environmental  issue,  largely  due  to  the  presence  of  toxic 
chemicals in the discarded modules. Recycling methods for PV panels are in 
place within the industry and further developments are planned for future 
PV panels. However, if the used PV panels are not appropriately handled or 
recycled, then their disposal could cause environmental pollution with toxic 
waste and become a considerable risk in Armenia. 

  Social risks 

–  Given that solar PV is a new technology in Armenia, it is possible that there 
will  be  a  lack  of  local  labor  supply  to  deploy  the  technology,  and  workers 
and  supplies  might  need  to  be  imported  to  the  project  site  from  outside 
If  this  happens,  this  would  minimize  the  economic  and 
Armenia. 
employment benefits of deploying this technology. 

–  Solar PV plants have a large footprint relative to the amount of energy they 
generate.  Thus,  the  deployment  of  a  large-scale  solar  plant  will  impact 
landscapes  over  large  areas.  Local  impacts  on  landscape  character  and 
visual  amenity  might  also  be  associated  with  ancillary  development 
(buildings and pylons). This might affect property values if the plant is built 
near  populated  areas,  or  might  have  visual  and  land  access  impact  on 
recreational  activities  such  as  hiking,  eco-tourism,  fishing  and  hunting. 
Impacts to landscape character might also lead to the loss of aesthetic value 
for  areas  with  tourism  potential  and  cause  associated  impacts  on  local 
tourism services. 

–  Potential  disruption  due  to  noise  and  dust  during  construction,  such  as 

operational noise and vibration. 

–  If  the  plant  is  built  in  an  area  where  there  is  the  potential  for  other  land 
uses  such  as  mineral  extraction,  agriculture,  or  industry,  then  these 
alternative  land  uses  will  not  be  able  to  occur  or  will  need  to  be  delayed 
because of the presence of the solar facility. 

–  Transportation  of  people  and  equipment  might  impact  traffic  patterns 

during construction near the project site.  

53 

 
 
 
Financing Plan and Instruments 

6 
Table 6.1 presents a plan for financing the projects described in Section  5. It shows 
the  proposed  credits  and  grants  from  SREP  as  well  as  estimates  of  the  amounts 
anticipated from MDBs and the private sector.  

As the table shows, roughly US$ 40 million of SREP funding is expected to catalyze 
roughly 4.5 times as much investment, most of it from the private sector (as equity 
or debt), and the commercial lending windows of the MDBs. 

The  financing  modalities  will  be  determined  at  the  time  of  appraisal,  but  it  is 
expected that: 

  The geothermal exploratory drilling project will be funded through: (i) an SREP 
grant to government, or (ii) a guarantee to private sector entities, which might 
want  to  undertake  the  drilling  as  part  of  early  site  development.  If  suitable 
resource  potential  is  found,  the  site  would  be  financed  by  a  private  sector 
developer  whose  remuneration  would  be  based  on  a  feed-in-tariff  or  on  the 
terms  of  a  power  purchase  agreement.  It  is  assumed  that  the  private  sector 
would use a mix of debt and equity for the investment. 

  For the utility-scale solar project, it is foreseen that Government would on-lend 
SREP funds at concessional rates to private operators bidding on  the projects 
being tendered. A reverse auction would be used to tender for bidders.36 The 
private  operators  would  contribute  equity  and  also  source  loans  from 
commercial  banks  and  from  the  commercial  lending  arms  of  the  MDBs. 
Government  estimates  that,  given  current  capital  costs  for  utility-scale  solar 
PV, SREP funds could be used with these other sources of financing to support 
roughly 40-50 MW of solar. 

36 In a reverse auction, the lowest tariff bid or lowest required subsidy bid (if the tariff does not recover the full 

cost of service) is the principal deciding factor in selecting the winning bidder. 

54 

 
                                                      
Table 6.1: Indicative Financing Plan 

SREP Project 

Geothermal Development 

Project Preparation 

Geothermal Resource Confirmation 
Transaction Advisory Services (structuring of PPP for 
power plant)  

Investments in 28 MW plant 

Subtotal: Geothermal Development 

Development of Utility-Scale Solar PV 

Grant for Project Preparation, Feasibility studies, site 
measurement and monitoring 

Transaction Advisory Services 

Investments in power plants (total of 40-50 MW) 

Subtotal: Development of Utility-Scale Solar PV 

Grand Total 

SREP Leverage 

SREP 

MDB 
Responsible 

Government 
of Armenia 

World Bank/ Asian 
Development Bank 

(Million US$) 

Private 
Sector 
(Equity) 

Commercial/ 
Private arms 
of MDBs 

tbd 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

tbd 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

30.00 

27.50 

Total 

0.4 

11.3 

0.9 
10637 

118.6 

2.5 

0.6 

99.4 
22.5 

30.00 

27.50 

125.0 

0.1 

2.3 

0.2 

tbd 

2.5 

0.5 

0.1 

4.4 
2.5 

7.5 

tbd 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

20.00 
10.00 

30.00 

10.00 

30.00 

30.00 

27.50 

243.6 

0.3 

9.0 

0.7 

10.0 

WB (IBRD) 

2.0 

0.5 

ADB 

17.5 
10.0  WB (IBRD) 

30.0 

40.0  

5.1  

37  Assuming Flash cycle design of the potential plant. Source of capital cost estimate: “Economic and Financial Appraisal of the Potential Geothermal Power Plant at Karkar ,” Nov. 2012; 

GeoFund 2: Armenia Geothermal Project. 

55 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
                                                      
Responsiveness to SREP Criteria 

7 
The  Investment  Plan  developed  for  Armenia  is  responsive  to  most  of  the  SREP 
criteria. One of the SREP criteria, related to energy access, is not relevant to Armenia 
as nearly all Armenians have access to energy supply (electricity and gas). 

Table 7.1: Summary of Projects’ Responsiveness to SREP Criteria 

Criteria 

Geothermal Power 
Development 

Utility-Scale Solar PV 
Development 

Increased installed 
capacity from renewable 
energy sources 

Increased access to 
energy through renewable 
energy sources 

Low Emission 
Development 

Affordability and 
competitiveness of 
renewable resources 

from 

Armenia plans to increase 
geothermal 
installed 
capacity 
to 
0 
resource 
(pending 
availability)  100  MW  by 
2025. 
SREP-funded 
investments represent the 
first  25  MW,  planned  for 
2020. 

Armenia plans to increase 
installed 
solar  capacity 
from 0 to 80 MW by 2025. 
SREP-funded  investments 
will represent the first 40-
50 MW. 

Armenia is unique among other SREP applicants in that 
it  has  nearly  100  percent  access  to  electricity. 
Therefore, Armenia’s IP is not about access to modern 
energy  services,  but  about  using  renewables  to 
improve energy security and reliability, and reduce the 
future  cost  of  supply.  In  particular,  Armenia  has 
impending  power 
capacity  gap.  Thus, 
geothermal  power  and  utility-scale  solar  PV  will  help 
to reduce it meanwhile improving energy security. 

supply 

Geothermal 
plants 
produce  negligible  carbon 
dioxide emissions and will 
displace  some  of  the  gas-
electricity 
fired 
generation. 

The  supply  curves  shown 
in Section 3.2 confirm that 
geothermal 
is 
with 
competitive 
thermal 
Armenia’s 
alternatives 
generation 

power 

Solar  PV  produces  no 
carbon  dioxide  emissions 
and  will  displace  some  of 
the  gas-fired  electricity 
generation. 

The  supply  curves  shown 
in  Section  3.2  show  that 
utility scale solar PV is not 
yet  cost  competitive  with 
thermal 
existing 
generation  options 
in 
Armenia.38  SREP  financing 

38  As  noted  earlier  in  the  paper,  however,  the  combination  of  several  factors  could  make  solar  more  cost-
competitive  in  the  near  future.  The  factors  include:  (i)  new,  higher-cost  thermal  plants  being  built  to  serve 

56 

 
                                                      
 
Criteria 

Geothermal Power 
Development 

Utility-Scale Solar PV 
Development 

(gas and nuclear). 

will  help  kick-start  the 
industry,  while 
limiting 
the  impact  on  tariffs  of 
the 
since 
first  plants 
auction 
reverse 
mechanism  for  tariff  will 
be  used  to  select  the 
winning bidder 

Productive use of energy  Geothermal 

provides 
base-load  supply  and  will, 
therefore, enhance supply 
adequacy  and  reliability, 
helping  to  reduce  the  risk 
with 
lost 
of 
significant 
economic 
costs. 

load 

PV 

Solar 
generates 
electricity  during  high-
demand  daytime  periods 
and  will  similarly  enhance 
supply 
and 
reliability during the hours 
of  the  day  in  which  the 
value  of 
is 
lost 
typically the highest. 

adequacy 

load 

Economic, social and 
environmental 
development impact 

The development of geothermal power has a number 
of economic, social and environmental benefits, which 
are  described  in  detail for  each  technology  in  Section 
5. 

Economic and financial 
viability 

power 

The  supply  curves  shown 
in Section 3.2 confirm that 
geothermal 
is 
and 
economically 
financially 
viable, 
provided  the  resource  is 
confirmed. 

The  supply  curves  shown 
in Section 3.2 confirm that  
solar may be economically 
and financially viable over 
time  with  the  support  of 
low-cost  SREP  financing, 
and  given 
future 
increase  in  the  long-run 
in 
generation 
Armenia. 

cost 

the 

Leveraging of additional 
resources 

Investments  from  the  private  sector,  MDBs,  and 
government  are  estimated  to  leverage  4.5  times  the 
amount contributed by SREP. 

demand in Armenia; (ii) lower solar installation costs that will result as a domestic industry develops around it; 
(iii) lower financing costs as lenders become more comfortable with the technology, and (iv) potential further 
reductions in the global costs of PV panels. SREP support can help Armenia nurture its solar industry so that, as 
these  factors  converge,  Armenia  can  look  to  utility-scale  solar  as  a  commercially  viable  alternative  to  some 
thermal power generation. 

57 

 
                                                                                                                                                        
Criteria 

Gender 

Geothermal Power 
Development 

Utility-Scale Solar PV 
Development 

Women  will  equally  benefit  from  better  security  and 
reliability  of  supply.  Each  project  also  offers  possible 
opportunities for targeted job creation for women (for 
example,  requirements  that  the  geothermal  or  solar 
plant operators provide earmarked jobs for women. 

Co-benefits of renewable 
energy scale-up 

There  are  a  number  of  co-benefits  associated  with 
each  plant.  These  are  described  in  more  detail  in 
Section 5 and Annex D. 

Additional Development Activities 

8 
The  Government  has  carefully  designed  an  IP  that  is  complementary  to  the  other 
activities of the MDBs, private sector, financial institutions and other donors. The IP 
builds  on  Armenia’s  successful  commitment  to  introducing  a  high  level  of  private 
sector  participation  in  the  energy  sector,  and  uses  SREP  resources  to  leverage 
further participation. 

The geothermal power project builds on the extensive preparatory work done by the 
Armenian  government  and  the  R2E2  Fund,  much  of  it  funded  by  the  GEF/World 
Bank.  More  specifically,  the  GEF/World  Bank  provided  a  US$1.5  million  to  finance 
technical field investigation studies for two potential geothermal sites in Armenia. 

The utility-scale solar PV project recognizes the extensive research and development 
activities of Armenian academics in the field of solar, and the move in the generation 
sector to private financing and operation, rather than government ownership. 

The modality of financing the utility-scale solar project leaves open the possibility for 
EBRD,  IFC  or  ADB’s  Private  Sector  Operations  Department  (PSOD)  as  well  as  other 
financial institutions to provide commercial debt financing that can be blended with 
the private operator’s equity and other commercial financing. Government can rely 
on  the  R2E2  Fund  to  help  manage  the  additional  work  required  to  identify  and 
prepare viable solar projects, and attract possible investors. 

The  modality  of  procuring  the  geothermal  and  solar  projects  can  further  benefit 
from  additional  technical  advisory  services,  potentially  financed  by  MDBs,  to  help 
structure, tender, and negotiate the contracts with private investors and operators.  

Lastly,  but  not  least  important,  the  IP  builds  on  the  successful  sector  reforms 
supported  by  donors  over  the  past  two  decades.  It  recognizes  the  importance  of 
scaling  up  renewable  energy  using  commercial  principles,  and  with  transparent 
regulation that ensures accountability of service providers. 

58 

 
 
9 
Implementation Potential with Risk Assessment 
The implementation risk of the IP in Armenia is low to moderate. The most serious 
risks are related to the fact that the priority RE technologies in the IP are relatively 
new  to  Armenia,  and  had  not,  until  recently,  been  considered  as  options.  For 
example, utility-scale solar PV only recently became an option because of the rapid 
decline  in  capital  costs  (driven  by  changes  in  prices  of raw materials  as well  as  the 
dynamics of supply and demand for the technology itself). 

Because  the  technologies  had  not  previously  been  seriously  considered,  there  is 
some  risk  related  to  the  legal  and  regulatory  environment,  and  the  resource 
potential,  as  the  data  on  geothermal  and  solar  resource  potential  are  still  being 
collected.  

Table  9.1  lists  and  describes  the  principal  risks  associated  with  Armenia’s  IP, 
describes  how  to  mitigate  those  risks,  and  evaluates  the  residual  level  of  risk  after 
the proposed mitigation measures are implemented. 

Table 9.1: Risk Assessment of the SREP Program in Armenia 

Risk 

Description 

Mitigation 

Residual 
Risk 

Moderate 

Legal 
regulatory risks 

and 

Institutional 
capacity risks  

and 

other 

The  regulatory  framework  in 
Armenia  is  robust  relative  to 
many  other  countries  in  the 
region 
SREP 
countries. There is, however, a 
risk  that  the  current  or  future 
Governments will feel pressure 
to  keep  end-user  tariffs  low. 
This could jeopardize efforts to 
tariffs 
establish  generation 
(either  through  FiTs  or  PPAs) 
for  solar  or  geothermal  that 
are 
to  private 
investors. 

attractive 

the 

into 

Government 

clearly 
The 
committed  through  formalized 
policy statements and strategies 
(Energy  Security  Concept  of 
its 
integrating 
2013)  to 
long-term  energy  strategy  the 
technologies 
SREP 
in 
program,  namely:  Utility-scale 
solar PV and geothermal power. 
MDB technical assistance will be 
the 
used 
to 
set 
Government  efforts 
levels 
generation 
investors 
attractive  to  private 
while 
vulnerable 
customers  through  Armenia’s 
well-established 
social 
support mechanism, the Poverty 
Family Benefit Program (PFBP). 

tariffs  at 

protecting 

support 

and 

to 

energy 

Armenia’s 
sector 
institutions (MENR, R2E2 Fund, 
PSRC, the Energy Institute, and 
commercial  bank  partners,  for 
example)  have  a  long  history 
experience 
of 
working 
with 
donors to implement technical 
assistance  and  capital  works 
projects.  

effectively 

successful 

Low 

The 
institutional  capacity  of 
specific  implementing  agencies 
will be assessed before appraisal 
of 
identified  specific  projects 
and,  where  necessary,  SREP  will 
contribute  to  capacity  building. 
Such  capacity  building  may 
include support in procurement, 
financial 
management, 
safeguards and technical aspects 
of  utility-scale  solar  PV  and 
geothermal projects.  

59 

 
Risk 

Description 

Mitigation 

Residual 
Risk 

Low 

Technology risks  

Environmental 
risks  

Social risks  

solar 

Utility-scale 
PV, 
geothermal exploratory drilling 
and  generation  technologies 
are  relatively  well-established 
and well-known globally. There 
is, however some technical risk 
the 
associated 
technologies 
Armenia 
because they are not  yet  used 
in  the  country.  In  particular, 
exploratory geothermal drilling 
is novel to Armenia.  

with 
in 

risks. 

industrial-scale 
Any 
assumes 
development 
environmental 
For 
example, the  selected projects 
construction-
might 
have 
related  air  emissions, 
limit 
land  use,  cause 
alternative 
alteration  of 
land  drainage 
the 
characteristics, 
clearance  of  vegetation  and 
soil,  cause 
compaction  of 
vibrations 
downwash 
and 
during construction. 

require 

in  Armenia 

The social impacts of the SREP 
are 
program 
limited.  There  are  some  risks 
associated 
limiting 
alternative  land  use,  impacts 
traffic  patterns  during 
to 
construction,  

with 

There 
is  also  the  risk  that, 
given  their  cost  relative  to 
in 
current  generation  tariffs 
Armenia,  the  new  RE  plants 
will 
of 
the 
generation  and  ultimately,  the 
end-user tariff. 

raise 

cost 

60 

the 

SREP 

supporting 

The  technology  risks  will  be 
partially  mitigated  through  the 
technical  assistance 
targeted 
and  capacity  building  planned 
under 
program. 
Moreover,  the  World  Bank  is 
the 
currently 
Government with preparation of 
geothermal 
project, 
including  recommendations  on 
types  of  exploratory  wells  to  be 
drilled,  determination  of  the 
precise  location  of  test  wells, 
procurement  and  contracting 
civil 
structure, 
works  required  for  geothermal 
exploratory  drilling  project  at 
Karkar. 

preparatory 

drilling 

Low 

Low 

comply 
of 

Site-specific 
environmental 
impact  assessments  will  be 
carried  out 
for  all  projects 
implemented under SREP. These 
assessments will ensure that the 
with 
projects 
Government 
Armenia 
requirements  as  well  as  donor 
policies. 
safeguards 
Furthermore,  by  ensuring  that 
projects  are  sited  away  from 
particularly 
environmentally 
sensitive  areas,  environmental 
risks  can  be  minimized.  This  is 
especially  relevant  for  utility-
scale  solar  PV  projects,  which 
provide more flexibility in terms 
of siting. 

social 

Site-specific 
impact 
assessments  will  be  carried  out 
for  all  projects 
implemented 
under  SREP.  These  assessments 
will  ensure  that  the  projects 
comply  with  Government  of 
Armenia requirements as well as 
donor safeguards policies 

The  end-user  tariff  is  not  likely 
to  increase  substantially  as  a 
result  of  the  new  projects  given 
that 
average 
generation  cost  for  Armenia  is 
significantly 
to 
estimated 
increase 
larger 
generation  plants  are  built  to 

estimated 

new 

as 

 
Residual 
Risk 

Moderate 

Moderate 

Risk 

Description 

Mitigation 

meet the forecast demand . 

refer 

Please 
measures 
for 
regulatory, and resource risk. 

to  mitigation 
and 

legal 

to  determine 

The exploratory drilling at Karkar 
geothermal  site  is  the  final  step 
required 
the 
existence  and  quality  of  a 
resource. If the drilling shows no 
resource,  or  an  insufficient  or 
low  quality  resource,  remaining 
funds  can  be  reallocated  to 
other 
SREP 
the 
the  exploratory 
program. 
drilling  does  show  a  resource 
worth  exploiting,  then  a  tender 
will  be  launched  to  construct 
and operate a geothermal plant. 

areas  of 

If 

solar 

site-specific 

higher-
The 
insolation 
resolution 
measurements 
be 
conducted  to  confirm  the  solar 
resources  before  launching  any 
tender.  

will 

Financial risks  

Renewable 
resource 
uncertainty 

As  described  earlier 
in  this 
document,  Armenia’s  energy 
sector  is  largely  privatized  and 
therefore  must  operate  on  a 
full-cost recovery basis.  

There  is  some  risk  that  Karkar 
geothermal  site  may  not  be 
suitable  for  power  generation 
despite  comprehensive 
field 
investigation  works  conducted 
advanced 
the 
considering 
international  experience 
in 
comprehensive surface studies 
for potential geothermal fields.  

The  assessment  of  potential 
for  utility-scale  solar  PV 
is 
based on fairly coarse resource 
data  and  very 
limited  site 
monitoring. 

61 

 
 
 
 
10  Monitoring and Evaluation 
A monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be established by the Government, 
in cooperation with the MDBs and other donor partners, for the purpose of tracking 
and reporting on progress in reaching SREP impacts and outcomes. 

The  M&E  framework  will  be  coordinated  by  the  R2E2  Fund  and  involve  the 
participation  of  MENR,  PSRC,  the  National  Statistical  Service  (Armstat),  and 
commercial lenders with RE projects. 

Table  10.1  summarizes  the  proposed  monitoring  and  evaluation  (M&E)  framework 
for Armenia’s SREP IP.39 Armenia is unique among other SREP applicants in that it has 
nearly 100 percent access to electricity. Armenia’s IP is therefore not about access to 
modern energy services but about using renewables to improve energy security and 
reliability, and reduce the future cost of supply.  

Whereas  Armenia  may  not  benefit  from  substantially  expanded  access  to  modern 
energy  services,  it  will  however  benefit  from  the  reduced  use  of  hydrocarbons  for 
electricity production. 

39 The indicators in the results framework are based on the SREP Revised Results Framework from June 1, 2012. 

62 

 
                                                      
Table 10.1: Results Framework for the SREP Program in Armenia 

Result 

Indicators 

Baseline 

Targets  

SREP Transformative Impacts 

Means of 
Verification 

MENR, PSRC 

No output 

1,600 GWh 
by 2020; 
2,300 by 
2025 

Less than US$1 million 
in annual investments 

US$45 million 
in annual 
investments 

R2E2 Fund, 
MENR, PSRC 

Support low-carbon 
development pathways 
by increasing energy 
security. 

SREP Program Outcomes 

Increased supply of 
renewable energy 

Electricity 
output from 
(non-large 
hydro) RE in 
GWh per year 

Increased 
annual public 
and private 
investments 
(USD) in 
targeted 
subsector(s) per 
year 

Increased 
annual 
electricity 
output (GWh) as 
a result of SREP 
interventions 

Geothermal electricity 
output: 0 GWh 
Utility-scale solar PV 
output: 0 GWh 

Geothermal 
electricity 
output: 373 
GWh by 
2020; 745 
GWh by 
2025;  
Utility-scale 
solar PV 
output: 88 
GWh by 
2020; 176 
GWh by 2025 

5.1 

SREP 
Project’s 
M&E system 

SREP 
Project’s 
M&E system 

New and additional 
resources for renewable 
energy projects 
(US$244 million) 

0 

Leverage factor: 
USD financing 
from other 
sources 
compared to 
SREP funding 

63 

 
 
 
Annex A: Project Concept Briefs 
A.1  Geothermal Power Project 
Problem Statement 

Armenia  has  no  proven  oil  or  natural  gas  reserves  and  imports  all  of  its  fuel  for 
thermal generation from Russia and Iran. The country relies on imported natural gas 
to generate roughly 30 percent of its power and most of its heat. Nuclear fuel, which 
is  used  to  generate  another  30  percent  of  electricity  in  Armenia,  is  also  imported. 
The remaining electricity is generated by a series of hydropower plants in the Sevan-
Hrazdan  and  Vorotan  cascades,  more  than  130  small  hydropower  plants,  and  one 
small wind farm.  

Armenia’s dependence on imported fuels creates security of supply risks as well as 
affordability problems for customers. The sector is highly susceptible to fuel supply 
interruptions and price volatility. Between 1991 and 1996—because of disruptions in 
gas  supply—customers  suffered  through  several  of  Armenia’s  brutal  winters  with 
little more than two hours of electricity supply per day. Meanwhile, the import price 
of natural gas has continued to increase. The increases of the price of imported gas 
meant  steady  increases  in  end-user  tariffs  for  natural  gas  and  electricity.  Between 
2005  and  2013,  the  end-user  natural  gas  tariff  increased  by  170  percent.  End-user 
residential tariffs for electricity increased 52 percent during the same time period. 

Therefore,  geothermal  energy  can  become  an  affordable  source  of  base-load 
electricity  that  is  generated  utilizing  indigenous  resources,  thus,  contributing  the 
country’s  energy  security.  Private  investors  are  typically  not  willing  to  assume  the 
resource  risk  and  do  not  finance  exploratory  drilling.  With  SREP  support,  the 
Government  can  confirm  the  resource  and,  if  the  resource  is  confirmed,  pursue 
development of the geothermal power plant with private sector involvement. 

Project Objective 

The  overarching  objective  of  the  Geothermal  Power  Project  is  to  construct  a 
geothermal power plant at Karkar site. The specific objectives are to: (a) confirm the 
availability of geothermal resource suitable for power generation; (b) if the resource 
is  confirmed,  then  support  feasibility  study  for  the  Karkar  geothermal  power  plant 
and transaction advisory services to implement a PPP.  

Scope of Work 

The  geothermal  power  project  would  include  the  activities  described  below.  The 
SREP resources will be used to support Tasks 1-3 below. 

Task 1: Exploratory Drilling at Karkar Geothermal Site: 

This step requires carrying out exploratory drilling at the site to determine whether 
or not power could be produced from the resource. The exploratory drilling project 
involves the below key steps: 

  Confirming the test well locations: This will require additional soil gas diffusion 
measurements  and  GeoRadar  study  to  determine  the  precise  location  of  the 
test wells drawing  on recommended approximate locations of two test wells 
implemented 
following  comprehensive  geo-technical 

investigation  works 

64 

 
under  the  GeoFund  2:  Armenia  Geothermal Technical  Assistance  Project.  The 
Government plans to complete the above studies by September 2014. 

  Environmental  and  social  impact  assessment.  This  will  include  assessment  of 
including 

impacts  of  the  exploratory  drilling, 

environmental  and  social 
development of mitigation measures and management plan. 

  Preparatory  civil  works.  This 

includes  construction  of  an  access  road, 

preparation of the rig site, and securing access to sufficient water supply. 

  Drilling.  This  will  include  drilling  of  two  exploratory  wells  to  depths  of  up  to 

1,800 meters. 

  Well  logging  and  mud  logging.  This  will  include  analyses  of  the  cuttings  from 
the borehole, hole temperature and pressure measurements and gathering of 
essential data (such as drilling progress, circulation losses, changes in flow line 
temperatures, pump pressure data, etc.), both as the drilling progresses and at 
the  end  of  each  drilling  stage.  This  is  for  the  purpose  of  having  the  best 
information  at  hand  for  decision  making  and  problem-solving,  as  well  as 
gathering  all  the  information  on  the  formation  being  drilled  and  estimating 
rock/brine temperatures. When the drilling is finished, an injection test will be 
performed to estimate if the permeability of the well is sufficient or not. 

  Flow  testing,  chemical  sampling  and  analysis:  This  will  include  an  assessment 
of:  (a)  the  possible  power  output  of  the  well,  the  ratio  between  brine  and 
steam, and (b) enthalpy. It will also include sampling of the brine to analyze the 
resource as well as estimation of possible problems during power production, 
such as scaling and/or corrosion. This will assist in deciding what kind of power 
conversion techniques should be used and if any additional installation, such as 
inhibitors, will be needed. 

  Technical supervision: This will include hiring of a technical expert to be on site 
during the entire duration of the drilling to collaborating on daily basis on the 
site to ensure adherence of the drilling contractor to the requirements of the 
contract  and  making  decisions  on  behalf  of  the  Government  in  order  to 
prevent costly delays in the project.  

Task 2: Feasibility Study for Karkar Site 

If  the  presence  of  a  resource  is  confirmed,  a  full  feasibility  study  will  need  to  be 
prepared to recommend the type of geothermal technology/plant to be constructed, 
reassess  the  economic  and  financial  viability,  compliance  with  environmental  and 
social safeguards, and to complete legal and regulatory due diligence. The legal and 
regulatory  due  diligence  will  include  recommendations  on  the  need  for  a  feed-in 
tariff specific to geothermal or a recommended structure and method for procuring 
as  a  public  private  partnership  in  a  way  that  determines  the  tariff  through  bidding 
(for  example,  a  reverse auction).  It  will  also be necessary  to  evaluate the  potential 
for grid interconnection at the chosen site, and whether or not grid upgrades will be 
necessary for the potential geothermal power plant to be connected to the grid. 

Task 3: Transaction Advisory Services 

The  Government  would  procure  the  project  as  a  Public  Private  Partnership  (PPP). 
Therefore, advisory services will be needed to help structure the PPP (for example, 

65 

 
as  a  Build-Operate-Transfer  or  Build-Own-Operate  contract)  and  procure  a  private 
investor and operator. The exact commercial arrangement will need to be developed 
through  further  consultation  within  government,  with  donor  partners,  and  with 
potential investors. However, the arrangement currently envisaged would involve a 
private  operator  having  a  BOT  or  BOO  agreement  under  which  they  finance,  build 
and  operate  the  power  plant  and  have  a  power  purchase  agreement  with  the 
distribution company. The Government would own the steam fields, thereby taking 
risk on the resource availability. 

Task 4: Development of Geothermal Power Plant 

As  noted  above,  it  is  expected  that  the  private  sector  will  make  the  capital 
investment  required  for  generation  of  electricity  (the  power  plant  itself).  This 
investment plan assumes a plant with  net installed capacity of 28.5 MW, based on 
the  average  size  of  geothermal  plants  elsewhere.  The  actual  size  of  the  plant  will 
depend on the resource potential identified in earlier activities. 

It is also expected that the MDBs, including their private arms (IFC in the World Bank 
Group, PSOD at ADB, or EBRD), may be able to provide financing to the project as a 
way  of  making  it  more  attractive  to  other  private  investors.  Support  from  public 
sector MDBs may include concessional lending to Government for the transmission 
lines, roads or other infrastructure required at the site. 

Implementation Readiness 

Armenia has  no  installed  geothermal  power plants,  but  preliminary  surface  studies 
suggest  that  geothermal  resources  suitable  for  power  production  may  exist  at 
several  sites,  including  the  following  four  promising  sites:  Karkar,  Jermaghbyur, 
Grizor,  and  along  the  Armenian-Georgian  border.  In  2009-2011,  comprehensive 
surface investigation works were conducted for Karkar site, including field scouting, 
magneto-telluric  sounding,  three-dimensional  magneto-telluric  sounding  as  well  as 
early-stage economic and financial appraisal. Evidence from these activities indicates 
that a geothermal resource may exist at the site, and can only be confirmed by the 
drilling of an exploratory wells.  

The proposed geothermal power project has high level of implementation readiness  
Specifically, the following activities are underway or completed: (1) the World Bank 
is  supporting  the  Government  with  preparation  of  a  detailed  exploratory  drilling 
program,  including  types  of  test  wells;  estimated  cost  of  drilling  and  associated 
services; identification of potential companies that may be interested to bid for an 
exploratory drilling project; (2) the study to determine the precise locations of test 
wells  will  be  initiated  in  May  2014  and  completed  by  July  2014;  (3)  preparation  of 
technical  inputs  for  bidding  documents  for  procurement  of  drilling  contractor;  (4) 
implementing entity with experience in implementation of donor-funded projects is 
designated, the R2E2 Fund. 

Rationale for SREP Financing 

SREP resources would be used for further exploration of Armenia’s most promising 
geothermal  site,  thereby  demonstrating  how  geothermal  power 
is  a  viable 
renewable energy resource in Armenia. Of the known potential geothermal sites in 
Armenia,  the  Karkar  site  has  been  the  most  comprehensively  assessed  through 
comprehensive surface studies and is the most promising site to date, with possible 

66 

 
output estimated at around 28.5 MW. Exploratory drilling is required to confirm the 
availability  and  quality  of  the  resource  for  power  generation.  By  using  SREP  grant 
funding for drilling, the Government can help reduce the risk of developing the site. 
If  a  geothermal  resource  exists  at  the  site,  this  support  can  help  make  geothermal 
power  a  financially  attractive  investment  for  private  investors  and  an  affordable 
source  of  electricity.  This  support  will  serve  to  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of 
geothermal power in Armenia. 

The  geothermal  project  is  compliant  with  SREP  criteria.  Table  10.2  shows  how  the 
project complies with SREP criteria. 

Results Indicators 

The main results indicators are expected to be the following:  

  Resource confirmation for the Karkar site. 

  Roughly  28.5  MW  of  additional  electricity  generation  resulting  from  the 

project, depending on resource confirmation 

  If the resource is confirmed, adoption of a legal, and regulatory framework in 

to enable future private investment in geothermal power generation,  

  If the resource is confirmed, formal government approval of the concept and 

PPP scheme for construction of a geothermal power plant. 

The results indicators will be further specified during preparation of the project. 

Financing Plan 

Table  10.2  presents  a  plan  for  financing  of  the  geothermal  power  project.  As  the 
table shows, US$10 million of SREP funding is expected to catalyze roughly 11 times 
as much investment, most of it from the private sector (as equity or debt), and the 
commercial lending windows of the MDBs. The actual amounts financed by each will 
be determined once the resources if confirmed and as the project moves head. 

The  financing  modalities  will  be  determined  at  the  time  of  appraisal,  but  it  is 
expected that the geothermal exploratory drilling project will be funded through: (i) 
an SREP grant to government, or (ii) a guarantee to private sector entities who might 
want to undertake the drilling as part of early site development. If suitable resource 
potential is found, the site would be financed by a private sector developer whose 
remuneration  would  be  based  on  a  feed-in-tariff  or  on  the  terms  of  a  power 
purchase  agreement.  It  is  assumed  that  the  private  sector  would  use  a  mixture  of 
debt and equity for the investment. 

67 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 10.2: Indicative Financing Plan for Geothermal Power Project 

MDB 
Responsible 

Govern-ment 
of Armenia 

SREP 

World 
Bank/ 
ADB 

Private 
Sector 
(Equity) 

Com-
mercial / 
private 
arms of 
MDBs 

Total 

WB (IBRD) 

0.30 

9.00 

0.70 

10.00 

10.9 

(Million US$) 

0.1 

2.3 

0.2 

tbd 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

tbd 

tbd 

tbd 

0.4 

11.3 

0.9 

106 

2.6 

- 

- 

- 

118.6 

SREP Project 
Geothermal 
Development 
Project 
Preparation 
Geothermal 
Resource 
Confirmation 
Transaction 
Advisory Services 
(structuring of 
PPP for power 
plant)  
Investments in 
28.5 MW plant 
Subtotal: 
Geothermal 
Development 

SREP Leverage 

Lead Implementing Agencies 

The project will be implemented by the World Bank as the lead MDB. The R2E2 Fund 
will be the implementing agency on behalf of the Government. 

Table  10.3  shows  an  indicative  timeline  for  the  Geothermal  Exploratory  Drilling 
Project.  This  timeline  has  taken  into  account  the  “window  of  opportunity”  for 
accessing the site (mid-May to mid-September), indicating that at least two seasons 
would be needed to complete the drilling program. The implementing entity should 
also  initiate  the  necessary  licensing  processes  as  early  as  possible,  which  would 
include carrying out the required environmental and social assessment. 

It  is  expected  that  the  project  will  be  negotiated  with  the  World  Bank  by  January 
2015  and  will  become  effective  by  March  2015.  The  project  will  be  submitted  to 
SREP Sub-committee no-objection by December 2014. 

Project Preparation Grant 

The  Government  of  Armenia  is  requesting  a  preparatory  grant  of  US$300,000  to 
prepare the project. 

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 10.3: Timeline for Geothermal Exploratory Drilling Project 

*Both for civil works and for drilling services (separate tenders). Tender documents for mud logging and flow testing could also be prepared at this time  
** Well head 

69 

 
 
 
SREP INVESTMENT PROGRAMME 

Project Preparation Grant Request 
Armenia/ Eastern 
Europe, Central 
Asia 
Geothermal Power Project 
Grant: US$10 million 

2.  CIF Project ID#: 

(Trustee will 
assign ID) 

1.   Country/Region: 

3.  Project Title: 
4.  Tentative SREP Funding Request 
(in USD million total) for Projecta at 
the time of  Investment Plan 
submission  (concept stage): 

5.  Preparation Grant Request  (in 
USD): 
6.  National Project Focal Point: 

US$300,000  

MDB: IBRD 

Ms. Tamara Babayan 

Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund 

7.  National Implementing  Agency 
(project/programme): 
MDB SREP Focal Point: 
8.  MDB  SREP  Focal  Point  and 
Gevorg Sargsyan, SREP 
Project/Programme 
Team 
Program Manager 
Leader (TTL): 
Description of activities covered by the preparation grant: 

Task 

TTL: Arthur Kochnakyan, 
Energy Economist, IBRD 

The  grant  will  cover  activities  related  to  the  preparation of 

 

Independent  review  of  gas  diffusion  and  GeoRadar  study  to  determine  precise  location  of 
test wells. 

  Environmental and social impact assessment of the exploratory drilling operation; 
  Finalization of bidding documents for exploratory drilling; 
  Detailed  designs  for  construction  of  access  road  and  water  supply  infrastructure,  and 

preparation of rig site; 

  Bidding  documents  for  construction  of  access  road  and  water  supply  infrastructure,  and  

preparation of rig site; 
Incremental operating costs of R2E2 Fund 

 

9.  Outputs: Policy Framework 
Deliverable 
Independent review of the results of gas diffusion and GeoRadar 
study 
Report on Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 

Detailed designs for access road, water supply infrastructure and 
rig site 
Final set of bidding documents for preparatory civil works and 
exploratory drilling 
10.  Budget (indicative): 
Expendituresb 
Consultants/technical assistance 
Equipment 
Workshops/seminars/trainings 

70 

Timeline 
October, 2014 

November, 2014 

December, 2014 

January, 2015 

Amount (USD) – estimates 

270,000 
0 
5,000 

 
 
 
 
 
Travel/transportation 
Others (admin costs/operational costs) 
Contingencies (max. 10%) 

Total cost 
Other contributions: 
  Government 

  MDB 

15,000 
10,000 

                          300,000 

100,000 (Government expert’s staff 
time and taxes) 

50,000 (World Bank/ESMAP 
grant for GeoRadar and Gas 
Diffusion Studies) 

  Private sector 
  R2E2 Fund 
11.  Timeframe (tentative): For World Bank: 
SREP Sub-committee approval by July 2014 
World Bank approval/Board approval by August 2014 
12.  Other partners involved in project design and implementationd: Geology Institute of the Republic 
of Armenia 

                                  - 

20,000 (staff-time) 

13.  If applicable, explanation for why the grant is MDB executed: N/A 

14.  Implementation Arrangements (including procurement of goods and services): 
The R2E2 Fund will implement the project since it has adequate capacity and significant experience in 
implementing Bank financed projects. The R2E2 Fund is a non-profit organization established by the 
Government in 2005 with the mandate to promote the development of renewable energy and energy 
efficiency markets in Armenia and to facilitate investments in these sectors. The implementation of 
the project as well as overall R2E2 Fund operations will be supervised by the Board of Trustees (BOT), 
consisting  of  representatives  of  government  agencies,  NGOs,  and  the  private  sector,  thus,  ensuring 
required professional expertise. The BOT is chaired by the Minister of Energy and Natural Resources. 
The  most  recent  assessment  conducted  by  the  World  Bank  suggested  that  the  R2E2  Fund  has 
satisfactory procurement and financial management capacity. 

a. Including the preparation grant request. 
b. These expenditure categories may be adjusted during project preparation according to emerging needs. 
c. In some cases, activities will not require approval of the MDB Board. 
d. Other local, national, and international partners expected to be involved in project design and 

implementation. 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MDB Request for Payment for  Project Implementation Services (MPIS) 

SCALING UP RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAM IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES 
World Bank Request for Payment of Implementation Services 
Costs 
Armenia/Eastern 
Europe, Central Asia 
Geothermal Power Project 

2.   CIF Project ID#: 

1.  Country/Region: 

3.  Project Title: 

(Trustee will assign ID) 

4.  Request for project funding 
(USDmill. ): 

At time  of country program  submission 
(tentative): Grant of US$10 million 

At time of project approval: 

5.  Estimated costs for MDB 
project implementation services 
(USDmill.): 

Initial   estimate   -   at   time   of   Country 
program submission: US$300,000 

MDB: IBRD 

Final   estimate   -   at   time   of   project 
approval: 

Date: January 2015 

6.  Request for payment of MDB 
Implementation Services Costs 
(USD.mill.): 

  First tranche: US$100,000 

  Second tranche: US$200,000 

7.  Project/program financing 
category: 

a - Investment financing - additional to ongoing MDB project 
b- Investment financing - blended with proposed MDB project 
c - Investment financing - stand-alone 
d - Capacity building - stand alone 
3 years 

 
 

 

costs 

8.  Expected project duration 
(no. of years): 
9.  Explanation    of  final  estimate  of 
MDB 
implementation 
services: 
10.  Justification for proposed stand-alone financing in cases of above 6 c or d: N/A 
a 
lone financing in cases of above 6 c or d: 

for 

If final estimate in 5 above exceeds the relevant benchmark range,   

72 

 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.2  Utility-Scale Solar PV 
Problem Statement 

Poor  utilization  of  energy  resources  plagues  an  otherwise  robust  and  sustainable 
Armenian energy sector. Armenia’s thermal power plants operate at low efficiency, 
hydropower  plants  have  low  reliability  and  high  operation  and  maintenance  costs, 
grid  losses  are  high,  and  export  potential  is  not fully realized.    The  sector  relies  on 
the  old  Metsamor  nuclear  power  plant,  the  decommissioning  of  which  has  been 
postponed twice, from 2016, to 2020, and recently to 2026. When decommissioned, 
Metsamor  will  leave  a  substantial  power  supply  gap.  To  address  these  concerns, 
Armenia  plans  to  increase  development  of  indigenous  energy  resources,  especially 
renewable  energy.  Solar  photovoltaic  (PV),  with  an  estimated  potential  of  over  1 
GW, has the highest potential but is not fully utilized due to high investment costs. 
Armenia’s solar research and technical experience is limited to solar water heaters, 
off-grid and small-scale PV applications. 

Utility-scale  solar  PV  is  now  cost-competitive  on  a  life-cycle  basis  with  the  other 
power  generation  options  available  to  Armenia,  given  the  technological  and 
declines 
manufacturing 
internationally.  Armenia  will  benefit  from  developing  its  capacity  to  scale-up  PV 
technology and take advantage of these cost reductions as these happen.  

combined  with 

advancements 

continued 

cost 

Current Efforts 

Armenia  has  good  solar  PV  resources,  with  annual  average  global  horizontal 
irradiation (GHI) ranging from 1,490 kWh/m2 to over 2,100 kWh/m2. By comparison, 
average  annual  GHI  is  1,000  kWh/m2  in  Europe.  The  total  resource  potential  for 
utility-scale solar PV is over 6,500 MW. However, after accounting for undevelopable 
areas, the developable resource potential is assumed to be much lower.  

Assuming polycrystalline solar PV modules mounted at a fixed angle to the sun are 
deployed in ground-mounted utility-scale plants, solar PV systems could theoretically 
achieve capacity factors of 20 to 24 in Armenia (dependent on location). If single-axis 
tracking  solar  PV  technology  is  deployed,  capacity  factors  could  be  as  high  as  30 
percent.  As  part  of  the  preparation  of  the  Investment  Plan,  nine  zones  were 
identified where large-scale, ground-mounted solar PV projects could be built. Figure 
10.1 shows the solar zones identified as part of the investment plan. 

73 

 
Figure 10.1: Solar Zones 

Project Objective 

The  objective  of  the  utility-scale  solar  project  is  to  deploy  the  first  of  a  series  of 
utility-scale  solar  PV  projects  which,  through  cost  reductions  and  gradual  tariff 
increases  will  eventually  become  commercially  viable  without  SREP/MDB  support. 
These  first  projects  will  be  so  small  as  to  have  only  a  very  minor  impact  on  the 
overall cost of generation in Armenia, but could have a catalytic effect on the market 
for solar PV through: 

–  Lower solar installation costs that will result as a domestic industry develops 

around it; 

–  Lower  financing  costs  as  lenders  become  more  comfortable  with  the 

technology, and  

The foreseen increase in thermal generation costs in Armenia will move solar toward 
financial  viability.  Armenia’s  new  thermal  plants  will  require  substantially  higher 
tariffs  than  many  of  the  existing  plants,  because  they  are  fully  (or  near  fully) 
depreciated  and  no  longer  recover  depreciation  charges  nor  debt  service  through 
their generation tariffs. 

Scope of Work 

SREP resources would be used to develop roughly 40-50 MW of utility-scale solar PV. 
SREP support would help catalyze private investment in a first new plant (or plants), 

74 

123456789 
 
 
and  show  the  potential  for  deploying  solar  PV  on  a  commercial  basis.  The  utility-
scale solar PV project would include activities described below. 

Task 1: Project Preparation, Feasibility Studies, Site Measurement and Monitoring 

SREP  grant  funds  would  first be used to fund  more  detailed  resource  assessments, 
and  the  identification  of  possible  sites  and  possible  projects.  The  activities  in  this 
task include: 

  Additional site measurement and monitoring. Relatively coarse resolution solar 
data  are  publicly  available  for  Armenia.  Given  the  nature  of  solar  energy 
resources,  these  coarse  data  are  generally  acceptable  for  understanding  the 
nature of the resource and conducting a high-level financial analysis. However, 
additional  measurement  and  monitoring  will  be  needed  to  characterize  the 
solar  resource  potential  in  the  areas  targeted  for  solar  development  in  more 
detail.  

  Evaluation  of  grid  interconnection  requirements.  It  will  be  necessary  to 
evaluate the potential for grid interconnection at the chosen site, and whether 
or not grid upgrades will be necessary before the project is interconnected. 

  Feasibility  study.  Once  a  potential  site  or  sites  have  been  identified,  a  full 
feasibility study will be needed to reaffirm the economic and financial viability 
of  the  projects,  assess  compliance  with  environmental  and  social  safeguards, 
and complete the legal and regulatory due diligence. 

Task 2: Transaction Advisory Services 

Transaction  advisors  would  be  hired  to  help  government  tender  for  the  projects 
identified  in  Task  1.  Private  operators  would  be  procured  through  competitive 
tender.  Bidders  would  be  selected  based  on  technical  and  financial  criteria,  the 
financial  criteria  being  the  level  of  tariff  required  or,  alternatively,  the  level  of 
concessional  support  required.40  Developers  offering  lower  tariffs  or  requiring  less 
concessional support would receive higher scores. 

The activities in the transaction advisory work include: 

  The  identification  of  specific  structuring  options  for  the  projects  where 

“structuring” means arrangements related to:  

–  The  detailed  allocation  of  responsibilities  between  public  and  private 
partners (design, construction, operations, and, if appropriate—financing); 

–  The  way  in  which  the  private  partner  will  be  remunerated  (for  example, 
through availability payments, tariffs payments, or some combination); 

–  The  allocation  of  risks  between  public  and  private  partners,  and 

mechanisms for mitigating such risks; 

–  The length, or term of the PPP contract, and mechanisms during the term of 
the  contract  for  cost  pass-through  or  indexation,  revenue  resets  or 
adjustments; 

40 Bidders will be offered, as part of the conditions of tender, access to SREP capital contributions. 

75 

 
                                                      
–  A strategy for procurement, including whether to tender bundle or tender 

separately for design, construction, and operations. 

  The  development  of  model 

tender  documents 

for 

the  structures 

recommended, where such model documents will include: 

–  A project information memorandum: The project information memorandum 
will  present  the  project justifications,  objectives,  scope,  information  about 
the  structure  of  the  PPP,  the  location  of  the  assets,  land  and  other 
conditions, environment, sanitation and labor safety, required permits and 
licenses,  operational 
information  on  existing  assets,  project  output, 
demand,  legal  environment,  contract  management,  monitoring  of  private 
partner’s performance, etc. 

–  A  request  for  qualifications  (RFQ)  or  request  for  expressions  of  interest 

(EoIs) 

–  A Requests for Proposals (RFP). The  RFP will describe the project proposal, 
instructions to bidders, evaluation criteria for the proposal, the timeline for 
instructions  for 
the  tender  period 
preparation of financial and technical proposals, the process and timing for 
opening  of  bids,  information  about  any  bid  security  and  guarantees,  and 
clear  procedures  for  communication  between  the  public  authority  and 
bidders.  

including  the  proposal  deadlines, 

–  A draft PPP agreement, including the necessary schedules to the agreement. 

Task 3: Power Generation Project Development 

SREP  funds  would  be  made  available  to  the  Government  of  Armenia  which  would 
on-lend SREP funds at concessional rates to private operators bidding on the projects 
being tendered. The private operators would contribute equity and also source loans 
from  commercial  banks  and  from  the  commercial  lending  arms  of  the  MDBs. 
Government  estimates  that,  given  current  capital  costs  for  utility-scale  solar  PV, 
SREP funds could be used with these other sources of financing to support roughly 
40-50  MW  of  solar.  Initial  studies  indicate  that  Gegharkunik  Marz  has  some  of  the 
highest solar PV potential in Armenia, and would be considered as a first potential 
area  for  development.  This  could  be  a  single  plant,  or  several  plants  with  a  total 
capacity of 40-50 MW, as development of solar is often more effective if there are 
multiple  sites,  in  areas  with  different  solar  profiles  (to  provide  more  stability  by 
diversifying generation profiles). 

Implementation Readiness 

Solar  PV  deployment  in  Armenia  to  date  has  been  limited  to  relatively  small-scale 
rooftop-based installations at schools, hospitals, office buildings and municipal sites 

76 

 
throughout Armenia.41 It is estimated that less than 100 kW of solar PV is currently 
operational.42 

Utility-scale solar is non-existent because, until recently, it was perceived as a high 
cost technology relative to Armenia’s alternatives. Also, while solar PV power plants 
are  quick  to  install,  considerable  time  is  required  to  gather  solar  irradiation  and 
weather  data,  to  develop  energy  yield  models  for  simulation,  prepare  bankable 
projects for financing, and to procure equipment and consulting services.  

Solar  PV  has  become  more  attractive  in  recent  years  as  the  capital  costs  of  utility-
scale solar PV projects have declined. The Government has set a target of 40 MW of 
solar PV by 2020 and 80 MW of solar PV by 2025. There is, moreover, considerable 
research and development (R&D) and interest in solar PV within Armenia’s academic 
institutions. A solar PV project could catalyze further research and development and 
facilitate the transfer of capacity for increased participation in solar PV value chain. 

Armenia’s development partners, ADB and the World Bank, have a solid track record 
and  experience  in  solar  development  in  the  region  and  have  developed  solar 
insolation maps and atlases for several countries including Armenia.  

Rationale for SREP Financing 

One of the most significant barriers to renewable energy in Armenia is the high cost 
of  investment,  therefore  higher  cost  per  kWh,  relative  to  the  currently  low-cost 
electricity  generation  mix.  The  current  low  cost  of  generation  makes  it  difficult  for 
consumers  to  understand  the  need  for  higher-cost  renewable  energy  generation 
over  the  medium  to  long  term  which  will  satisfy  –at  least  initially—only  a  small 
portion  of  demand.  There  are  also  legitimate  concerns  about  affordability.  The 
poorest quintiles of the population allocate a relatively higher share of their budgets 
to electricity than other households. These households are likely to experience more 
significant pressures on their budgets as a result of increased energy tariffs. 

SREP support would help catalyze private investment in a first new plant (or plants), 
and show the potential for deploying solar PV on a commercial basis. A utility-scale 
commercial  project  would  not  only  enable  the  country  to  take  advantage  of  this 
technology  in  the  future  when  its  costs  decline  even  further,  but  reduce  costs  for 
future projects because of learning effects, efficiency gains and competition. 

Concessional  SREP  financing  brings  down  the  cost  of  solar  PV  generation  closer  to 
grid  parity  and  addresses  both  viability  concerns  for  developers  and  affordability 
concerns for consumers.  Commercial financing is available but there is a shortage of 
qualified developers, with enough risk appetite and willingness to invest despite the 
lack  of  specific  targets  and  specific  feed-in-tariffs  for  solar  PV.  Site-specific  solar 
resource  assessments  and  institutional  capacity  are  also  non-existent.    These 
concerns  are  addressed  through  technical  and  capacity  building  assistance  and 
concessional project financing. 

41  USAAA/US  Embassy/EcoTeam/UNDP/GEF,  “Use  of  Renewable  Energy  Sources  in  the  World  and  Armenia 

Through Innovations to Clear Technologies,” 2010 

42 Preparation of Renewable Energy Development Roadmap for the Republic of Armenia Task 2 Report,” February 

2011 

77 

 
                                                      
Results Indicators 

The main results indicators are expected to be the following:  

  Roughly  40-50  MW  of  additional  electricity  generation  resulting  from  the 

project, depending on resource confirmation. 

  A legal, and regulatory framework in place to enable future private investment 
in  utility-scale  solar  PV,  including  either:  (1)  a  feed-in  tariff  for  future  utility-
scale solar PV projects; or  (2) a framework for procuring utility-scale solar PV 
on a Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis. 

The results indicators will be further specified during preparation of the project. 

Financing Plan 

As Table 10.4 shows, roughly US$30 million of SREP funding is expected to catalyze 
roughly 3 times as much investment in solar PV, most of it from the private sector (as 
equity or debt), and the commercial lending windows of the MDBs. 

The  SREP  concessional  funds  will  be  used  to  finance  private-sector  led  utility  scale 
solar  PV power plants.   The  SREP  Utility Scale  Solar  PV  Financing  Facility will  blend 
SREP  funds  with  ADB  and  World  Bank  public  sector  financing  to  provide  loans  to 
cover up to 50 percent of the total investment cost for one or two projects, the rest 
is expected to be mobilized from a combination of equity from investors/developers 
and additional project financing, as appropriate, from other financial institutions that 
may include EBRD, IFC, and ADB’s Private Sector Operations Department..  

In  its  Armenia  Country  Operations  Business  Plan  (COBP)  2014-2016,  the  ADB  has 
allocated  US$20  million  from  its  Ordinary  Capital  Resources  for  the  project  for 
approval in 2016. The World Bank may also consider allocating US$10 million for the 
potential  solar  PV  project.  The  combination  of  SREP  financing  of  $17.5  million,  IFI 
financing and project sponsors will help to finance US$75 million investments in solar 
PV  (potentially  40-50  MW  installed).  The  ADB  may  provide  additional  financing 
subject  to  receipt  of  formal  request  from  the  Government.  The  Renewable 
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund will be the implementing agency (IA) and will 
act as financial intermediary and project management office.  

SREP  will  provide  a  technical  assistance  grant  of  US$2  million  for  onsite  solar 
irradiation  and  weather  measurements,  pre-feasibility  studies  including  up  to  2 
project  feasibility  studies  and  project preparation  for  the first  solar  PV project/s to 
be auctioned.  

ADB has also allocated US$0.3 million technical assistance grant in 2015 to prepare 
the  Financial  Intermediary  Loan  for  ADB  approval  in  2016.  SREP  grant  funding  of 
US$0.5  million  is  also  expected  to  finance  transaction  advisors  to  assist  the  IA  in 
structuring  and  developing  the  PV  project  to  be  financed  under  the  SREP  Loan 
Facility.  Transaction  advisors  provide  advice  on  optimal  commercial  and  financial 
structures, conduct due diligence, prepare bidding documents and project contracts, 
marketing/roadshow, assist in bid evaluation, auctioning, and financial closing.  

A reverse auction, instead of a feed-in-tariff mechanism, will be used for setting the 
solar  PV  tariff.  The  tariff  for  a  predetermined  maximum  aggregate  PV  capacity  will 
then  be  based  on  the  lowest  qualifying  bid.  An  indicative  tariff  will  be  calculated 

78 

 
based  on  the  financing  terms  offered  under  the  SREP  Loan  Facility  and  used  as  a 
benchmark for evaluating bids. This tariff is not set officially nor declared as a ceiling 
for the auction. The auction will be announced for one or more high solar potential 
sites as assessed and prioritized through the SREP technical assistance.  

Table 10.4: Indicative Financing Plan for Utility-Scale Solar Power Project 

MDB 
Respon-
sible 

Govern-
ment of 
Armenia 

World 
Bank/ 
ADB 

Private 
Sector 
(Equity) 

SREP 

Com-
mercial / 
private 
arms of 
MDBs 

Total 

ADB 

WB 
(IBRD) 

2.0 

0.5 

17.5 

10.0 

30.0 

3.2  

0.5 

0.1 

4.4 

2.5 

- 

- 

20.0 

10.0 

- 

- 

- 

- 

30.0 

27.5 

2.5 

0.6 

99.4 

22.5 

7.5 

30.0 

30.0 

27.5 

125.0 

SREP Project 
Development of 
Utility-Scale Solar 
PV 
Grant for Project 
Preparation, 
Feasibility studies, 
site measurement 
and monitoring 
Transaction Advisory 
Services 
Investment in power 
plants (total of 40-50 
MW of projects) 
Subtotal: 
Development of 
Utility-Scale Solar 
PV 

SREP Leverage 

Lead Implementing Agencies 

The  project  will  be  implemented  as  a  joint  operation  by  ADB  and  the  World  Bank, 
and will be led by ADB. The R2E2 Fund will be the implementing agency on behalf of 
the Government. 

It  is  expected  that the project  will  be negotiated  with  ADB  and  the  World  Bank  by 
April 2016 and will become effective by June 2016. The project will be submitted to 
SREP Sub-committee no-objection by January 2016. 

SREP  funding  would  be  provided  to  Ministry  of  Finance,  which  would  on-lend  to 
developers.  

The  R2E2  Fund,  which  has  extensive  experience  implementing  donor-financed 
projects  in  renewable  energy  and  energy  efficiency,  would  be  responsible  for 
implementation of the project. 

Project Preparation Timetable 

The estimated timetable for the Utility Scale Solar PV Development program is in the 
table  below.  The  technical  assistance  may  be  proposed  as  one  TA,  but  done  in 
phases, which could start with capacity development and feasibility studies followed 
by project preparation. 

79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Table 10.5: Indicative Financing Plan for Utility-Scale Solar Power Project 

Technical Assistance (TA) and Project Processing Milestones 
Capacity Development and Project Preparation TA (CDTA) 
Advanced Procurement of Consultants 
Approval of Armenia SREP IP 
Consultant Mobilization 
Completion of solar resource mapping /modeling 
Screening of potential sites  
Procurement of on-site measurement stations  
Selection of priority solar project sites;  
Procurement of hourly time-series data for sites. 
Installation of Meteostations 

On-site measurements and data analysis 

Preparation and submission of pre-feasibility studies  
Technical,  Financial,  Economic,  Governance,  Environmental 
and Social Safeguards Due Diligence for priority sites 
Submission  of  draft  feasibility  studies  for  sites  (based  on  6 
months of measurements) 
Feasibility studies   

SREP (US$2.0 Million) 
June-July 2014 
May 2014 
July 2014 
September 2014 
September 2014 
July 2014 

October 2014 

October-November 2014 
November 2014 – November 
2015 
January-November 2015 

January-November 2015 

June 2015  

Capacity Building Program 

March 2015-December 2015 
November 
2014-January 
2016 
ADB (US$0.3 Million) 
Project Preparation TA (PPTA) 
February-May 2015 
Concept Paper Preparation and ADB Review  
March –July 2015 
Advanced Procurement of PPTA Consultant 
July 2015 
ADB Approval of PPTA 
August 2015 
Consultant Mobilization 
Project preparation 
August 2015- February 2016 
Advance procurement of Project Implementation Consultant  November 2015-March 2016 
ADB/World Bank Loan Approval 
Transaction  Advisory  Services  (February  2015-October 
2016) 
Engagement of TAS 
Preliminary Structuring and Due Diligence 
Roadshow 
Tender and Selection of Preferred Bidder 
Negotiation and Award  

February 2016 
August - January 2016 
January - March 2016 
March – May 2016 
June 2016 – August 2016 

SREP (US$0.5 Million) 

April 2016 

Project Preparation Grant 

The  Government  of  Armenia  is  requesting  a  preparatory  grant  of  US$2  million  to 
prepare the project. 

80 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SREP INVESTMENT PROGRAMME 

Project Preparation Grant Request 

Armenia/ Eastern Europe, 
Central Asia 
Utility-Scale Solar Power Project 
US$30 million 

2.  CIF Project ID#:  (Trustee will 

assign ID) 

US$2 million 

MDB: ADB 

1.   Country/Region: 

3.  Project Title: 
4.  Tentative SREP Funding 
Request (in USD million total) 
for Projecta at the time of 
Investment Plan submission 
(concept stage): 
5.  Preparation Grant 
Request  (in USD): 

6.  National Project Focal Point:  Ms. Tamara Babayan 

7.  National Implementing 
Agency 
8.  MDB SREP Focal Point and 
(project/programme): 
Project/Programme 
Task 
Team Leader (TTL): 

Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund 

MDB SREP Focal Point: 
Gevorg Sargsyan, SREP 
Program Manager 

TTL from ADB: Cindy Tiangco 
(Energy Specialist) 
TTL from IBRD: Arthur 
Kochnakyan (Energy Economist) 

Description of activities covered by the preparation grant: 

The  preparation grant  will  cover  the following key activities: 

  Solar resource mapping/modelling; 
  Screening of potential sites; 
  Preparation of feasibility studies for identified highest-potential sites; 
  Capacity building for R2E Fund, including organization of reverse auctions; 
 

Incremental operating costs of the R2E2 Fund. 

9.  Outputs: Policy Framework 
Deliverable 

Report on solar resource mapping/modelling 

Report on screening of potential sites 
Feasibility study for identified sites 

10.  Budget (indicative): 
Expendituresb 
Consultants/technical assistance 
Equipment (meteo-stations, computers, data) 
Workshops/seminars/trainings 
Vehicle/transportation 
Others (admin costs/operational costs) 
Contingencies (max. 10%) 

Total cost 
Other contributions: 

81 

Timeline 
September 2014 

September 2014 
March-December 2015 

Amount (USD) – estimates 

                       1,458,000 
355,000 
20,000 
10,000 
80,000 
77,000 

                       2,000,0000 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Government 

400,000 (Government 
experts’ time and taxes) 

  MDB 
  Private sector 
11.  Timeframe (tentative): For ADB and World Bank: 
SREP Sub-committee approval of the project: June 2014 
ADB approval: July 2014 
 12.    Other  partners  involved  in  project  design  and  implementationd:  National  Academy  of 
Sciences 

                   - 
- 

13.  If applicable, explanation for why the grant is MDB executed: N/A 

14.  Implementation Arrangements (including procurement of goods and services): 
The  R2E2  Fund  will  implement  the  project  since  it  has  adequate  capacity  and  significant 
experience in implementing Bank financed projects. The R2E2 Fund is a non-profit organization 
established  by  the  Government  in  2005  with  the  mandate  to  promote  the  development  of 
renewable  energy  and  energy  efficiency  markets  in  Armenia  and  to  facilitate  investments  in 
these sectors. The implementation of the project as well as overall R2E2 Fund operations will be 
supervised  by  the  Board  of  Trustees  (BOT),  consisting  of  representatives  of  government 
agencies, NGOs, and the private sector, thus, ensuring required professional expertise. The BOT 
is  chaired  by  the  Minister  of  Energy  and  Natural  Resources.  The  most  recent  assessment 
conducted by the World Bank suggested that the R2E2 Fund has satisfactory procurement and 
financial management capacity. 

a. Including the preparation grant request. 
b. These expenditure categories may be adjusted during project preparation according to emerging needs. 
c. In some cases, activities will not require approval of the MDB Board. 
d. Other local, national, and international partners expected to be involved in project design and 

87 

implementation. 

82 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MDB Request for Payment for  Project Implementation Services (MPIS) 

SCALING UP RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAM IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES 
ADB Request for Payment of Implementation Services Costs 

1.  Country/Region: 

3.  Project Title: 

Armenia/Eastern 
Europe, Central Asia 
Utility-Scale Solar Power Project 

2.   CIF Project ID#: 

(Trustee will assign ID) 

4.  Request for project funding 
(USDmill. ): 

At time  of country program  submission 
(tentative):  
ADB: US$20 million 

At time of project approval: 

5.  Estimated costs for MDB  project 
implementation services  (USDmill.): 

Initial   estimate   -   at   time   of   Country 
program submission: 
ADB: US$320,000 
Final   estimate   -   at   time   of   project 
approval: 

MDB: ADB  

Date:  

6.  Request for payment of MDB 
Implementation Services Costs 
(USD.mill.): 

  First tranche:  
ADB: US$100,000  

  Second tranche: 
ADB: US$220,000  

7.  Project/program financing 
category: 

a - Investment financing - additional to ongoing MDB project               b- Investment financing - blended with proposed MDB project    c - Investment financing - stand-alone  
b - Investment financing - blended with proposed MDB project                                                
c -  Investment financing - stand-alone                                                    
d - Capacity building - stand-alone                                                              
4 

   

costs 

8.  Expected project duration 
(no. of years): 
9.  Explanation    of  final  estimate  of 
MDB 
implementation 
services: 
10.  Justification for proposed stand-alone financing in cases of above 6 c or d: N/A 
a 
lone financing in cases of above 6 c or d: 

for 

  the exceptional circumstances and reasons: Not Applicable 

If final estimate in 5 above exceeds the relevant benchmark range, 

83 

 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
SCALING UP RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAM IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES 
World Bank Request for Payment of Implementation Services 
Costs 
Armenia/Eastern 
Europe, Central Asia 
Utility-Scale Solar Power Project 

2.   CIF Project ID#: 

1.  Country/Region: 

3.  Project Title: 

(Trustee will assign ID) 

4.  Request for project funding 
(USDmill. ): 

At time  of country program  submission 
(tentative):  
IBRD: US$10 million 

At time of project approval: 

5.  Estimated costs for MDB  project 
implementation services  (USDmill.): 

Initial   estimate   -   at   time   of   Country 
program submission: 
IBRD: US$320,000 
Final   estimate   -   at   time   of   project 
approval: 

MDB: IBRD 

Date:  

6.  Request for payment of MDB 
Implementation Services Costs 
(USD.mill.): 

  First tranche:  
IBRD: US$100,000 

  Second tranche: 
IBRD: US$220,000 

7.  Project/program financing 
category: 

a - Investment financing - additional to ongoing MDB project               b- Investment financing - blended with proposed MDB project    c - Investment financing - stand-alone  
b - Investment financing - blended with proposed MDB project                                                
c -  Investment financing - stand-alone                                                    
d - Capacity building - stand-alone                                                              
4 

   

costs 

8.  Expected project duration 
(no. of years): 
9.  Explanation    of  final  estimate  of 
implementation 
MDB 
services: 
10.  Justification for proposed stand-alone financing in cases of above 6 c or d: N/A 
a 
lone financing in cases of above 6 c or d: 

for 

  the exceptional circumstances and reasons: Not Applicable 

If final estimate in 5 above exceeds the relevant benchmark range, 

Annex B: Assessment of Absorptive Capacity 
Armenia  has  sufficient  absorptive  capacity  to  implement  the  projects  identified  in 
the  IP.  This  Appendix  describes  the  macroeconomic;  regulatory  and  institutional, 
technical and managerial dimensions of the country’s absorptive capacity. 

B.1  Macroeconomic Outlook 
Armenia continues to recover from the impact of the global financial crisis.  After a 
contraction of 14 percent in 2009, GDP has grown steadily. GDP grew at a rate of 2.2 

84 

 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
percent in 2010, 4.7 percent in 2011, and 7.2 percent in 2012. GDP grew 7.5 percent 
in the first quarter of 2013. 

Armenia’s  total  external  debt  is  estimated  at  67.2  percent  of  GDP  by  the  end  of 
2012, a large share of which is owed by the public sector. Public external debt has 
increased  substantially  since  2008,  but  does  not  yet  breach  indicative  thresholds. 
Public external debt was about 16 percent of GDP at end-2008, reaching 35 percent 
of GDP at end-2011. Government efforts at fiscal consolidation have been showing 
results and with continued GDP growth, are projected to lead to a gradual reduction 
in the debt-to-GDP ratio.  

Gross external financing (debt service payments) has remained around 3 percent of 
GDP over the last decade. During the recent IDA-16 Mid-Term Review, Armenia and 
a few similar countries were deemed ineligible for concessional financing under IDA-
17.43 However, Armenia applied for deferral of its graduation. 

More  recently,  inflation  has  become  a  problem  for  Armenia,  due  largely  to  higher 
energy and food prices. The 12-month inflation was 3.2 percent in December 2012, 
well within the central bank’s target range of 4±1.5 percent. However, in July 2013, 
the PSRC increased domestic natural gas and electricity tariffs to reflect an increase 
in  the  cost  of  gas  imports  from  Russia.  End-user  natural  gas  and  electricity  tariffs 
were increased by 18 percent and 27 percent, respectively. 

Legal, Regulatory and Institutional 

B.2 
A  combination  of  policy,  legal,  regulatory  and  institutional  reforms  has  helped  to 
achieve  remarkable  results 
in  the  energy  sector.  Government  has  made  a 
consistent—if  often  difficult—effort  to  create  a  legal,  regulatory  and  institutional 
environment  which  provides  good  quality,  reliable  electricity  supply  that 
is 
affordable for end-users, and conducive to private sector investment. 

Overview of Reforms 

Armenia  undertook  major  power  sector  reforms  after  the  severe  electricity  crisis 
that  followed  independence.  Between  1992  and  1996,  customers  suffered  through 
brutal winters with little more than two hours of electricity per day. By 1995, fiscal 
and  quasi-fiscal  subsidies  to  the  power  sector  had  reached  a  level  of  roughly  11 
percent of Armenia’s GDP. Cash collections were around 50 percent, and nearly 25 
and  nearly  25  percent  of  all  power  produced  disappeared  before  the  meters  as 
commercial losses (mostly electricity theft). 

The power sector included the following. 

  Unbundling  and  privatizing  the  power  system.  Efforts  began  in  1995  to 
unbundle  the  power  system  and  privatize  the  power  sector.  Armenergo,  the 
state-owned  vertically  integrated  utility,  was  separated  into  generation  and 
distribution entities. In March 1997, a Presidential Order and new Energy Law 
formalized separate generation, distribution, transmission and dispatch. During 

43 IDA (2012), “IDA16 Mid-Term Review Graduation Paper”, Concessional Finance and Global Partnership (CFP), 

World Bank, September 2012. 

85 

 
                                                      
2002-03,  ownership  of  several  major  generating  plants  was  transferred  from 
the Government in exchange for state debt forgiveness. 

  Establishing an independent regulator. The Presidential Order and the Energy 
Law enacted in 1997 established an independent energy sector regulator, the 
Armenian  Energy  Regulatory  Commission  (AERC).  The  Law  on  the  Regulatory 
Body for Public Services, enacted in 2004, changed the name of the regulator 
to  the  Public  Services  Regulatory  Commission  (PSRC)  and  expanded  its 
authority to other sectors, including water, drainage and sewage, and telecom.  

  Achieving  sectoral  financial  sustainability.  Three  steps  were  essential  to 
increase  collections,  reducing  commercial  losses  and  improving  the  overall 
financial sustainability of the sector. The steps were: 

–  Installing  meters.  Between  1997  and  1998,  twelve  thousand  new  tamper-
proof  meters  were  installed  throughout  the  power  system  at  a  variety  of 
voltage levels down to 0.4 kV. Residential customer meters were relocated 
to  public  areas.  An  Automated  Metering  and  Data  Acquisition  System 
(AMDAS) was installed in 2001 and linked to a settlement center to facilitate 
accurate meter reading at the 110 kV and above 

–  Bringing  tariffs  to  cost  recovery  levels.  In  1994,  Armenia  began  a  gradual 
transition  to  cost-based  tariffs  by  bring  household  tariffs  to  the  average 
level of other retail tariffs. A schedule was established for further household 
tariff  hikes.  Since  1999,  household  tariffs  have  remained  well  above  the 
overall average tariff 

–  Increasing transparency in collections and billing. The Electricity Distribution 
Company  (EDC)  installed  a  computerized  customer  information  system  to 
better  track  utilization  and  billing.  In  1999,  the  EDC  established  a  new 
collection  scheme  requiring  bill  payments  at  post  offices  instead  of  cash 
payments  at  local  EDC  offices,  which  reduced  opportunities  for  collusion 
between customers and EDC inspectors 

The result of the reforms are clear. Since 1996, 24-hour electricity service has been 
restored  and  gradually  customers  have  switched  to  cheaper,  more  efficient  gas 
heating.  Meanwhile,  tariff  increases  and  operating  efficiency  improvements  have 
helped  create  commercially  viable  service  providers,  technical  and  non-technical 
losses have decreased, and collections have increased. The energy sector is now one 
of the largest taxpayers in Armenia. 

Reforms targeting renewable energy 

The  reform  efforts  have  included  the  development  of  domestic  energy  resources 
that have helped to improve Armenia’s security of energy supply. Energy security is a 
central concern of the Armenian Development Strategy (ADS) and National Security 
Strategy  (NSS).  These  documents  emphasize  the  importance  of  renewable  energy 
and energy efficiency in addressing this concern. 

In  2007,  the  PSRC  set  renewable  energy  feed-in  tariffs  to  stimulate  private 
investment  in  renewable  energy.  ENA  is  obliged  to  off-take  all  of  the  power 
generated  by  the  new  plants  under  the  15-year  power  purchase  agreements 
mandated by the legislation. According to the feed-in tariff methodology, the PSRC 

86 

 
must adjust feed-in tariffs annually in line with changes in inflation and the USD to 
AMD exchange rate fluctuations (USD/AMD for SHPPs, USD/EUR for wind). The feed-
in tariff regime has been successful in attracting private investment in more than 200 
MW of small hydropower.  

B.3  Technical and Managerial 
Public and private entities in Armenia have extensive experience working with MDBs 
and implementing MDB-financed projects. 

  MENR has excellent technical staff with long-standing experience in the power 
sector  reform  process.  MENR  also  enjoys  the  support  of  the  Energy  Institute 
CJSC, a research entity with extensive experience in Armenia’s energy sector. 

  The R2E2 Fund is a non-profit organization established by the Government in 
2005 with the mandate to promote the development of renewable energy and 
energy  efficiency  markets  in  Armenia  and  to  facilitate  investments  in  these 
sectors.  The  implementation  of  the  project  as  well  as  overall  R2E2  Fund 
operations  will  be  supervised  by  the  Board  of  Trustees  (BOT),  consisting  of 
representatives  of  government  agencies,  NGOs,  and  the  private  sector,  thus, 
ensuring required professional expertise. The BOT is chaired by the Minister of 
Energy and Natural Resources.  

implementing  donor-financed 
The  R2E2  Fund  has  strong  experience 
projects.  For  the  World  Bank  it  is  currently  implementing  the  GeoFund  2: 
Armenia Geothermal Project, and in the past has implemented several World 
Bank-financed projects including the Urban Heating Project, Renewable Energy 
Project and an Electricity Supply Reliability Project. 

in 

  Private banks. As describe elsewhere in this document, there are a number of 
commercial  banks  in  Armenia  (Ameria  Bank,  Analik  Bank,  HSBC,  Byblos  Bank 
and  others)  who  have  experience  on-lending  donor  funds  for  renewable 
energy projects. 

87 

 
Annex C: Stakeholder Consultations 
Armenia’s  SREP  Investment  Plan  is  the  result  of  an  extensive  internal  and  public 
consultation  process,  led  by  the  Government  of  Armenia  and  represented  by  the 
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, to identify priorities in the development 
of  renewable  energy  technologies  for  electricity  and  heating.  The  consultations 
included a wide range of government agencies, as well as representatives from the 
private sector, civil society, and academia. Discussions were informed by the analysis 
of the Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency (R2E2) Fund and its consultants.44 
Feedback  was  sought  through  many  one-on-one  meetings,  a  workshop  with  the 
Government’s SREP working group, as well as an open forum. 

Scoping Mission (July 2-12, 2012) 

The  purpose  of  the  scoping  mission  was  to  explore  potential  areas  of  engagement 
for SREP, and discuss plans for preparing the investment plan. 

The  scoping  mission  included  discussions  with  MENR,  PSRC,  donors  and  bilateral 
agencies  (KfW,  USAID,  UNDP,  JICA,  UNIDO),  R2E2  Fund,  the  Energy  Institute  of the 
Republic of Armenia, commercial banks and several private sector entities engaged 
in renewable energy projects. A consultative workshop was also held and attended 
by  60  participants  from  the  Government,  private  sector,  donors,  and  academia.  In 
addition, the MDB team also conducted site visits to two small hydro power plants, a 
biogas power plant, and a solar water heating installation. 

First Joint Technical Mission (June 3-6, 2013) 

The  purpose  of  the  first  joint  technical  mission  was  to  get  feedback  on  the  set  of 
criteria to be used to evaluate and prioritize projects for the IP, and  to collect data 
for use in evaluating each technology or resource against the criteria. 

The  first  joint  technical  mission  included  discussions  between  MENR,  Ministry  of 
Finance, R2E2 Fund, its consultants, and the MDB team working on SREP. R2E2 Fund 
and  its  consultants  also  met  with  HVEN,  the  Armenian  Power  System  Operator,  a 
private geothermal heat pump developer, the Armenian Scientific Research Institute 
of Energy, the Institute of Geological Sciences at the National Academy of Sciences of 
Armenia,  commercial  banks,  Yerevan  Municipal Government,  and  various  technical 
experts in geothermal, solar and other technologies being considered. 

Second Joint Technical Mission (August 28-September 3, 2013 

The  purpose  of  the  second  joint  technical  mission  was  to  solicit  feedback  from 
stakeholders  on  substantive  portions  of  the  draft  IP.  The  second  joint  technical 
mission  included  discussions  between  MENR,  Ministry  of  Finance,  R2E2  Fund,  its 
consultants, the MDB team working on SREP, and other key stakeholders. 

44 Lists of stakeholders consulted during the joint missions are also available in various Aide-Memoire posted on 
website 

the 
(https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/cifnet/country/armenia). 

Investment 

Climate 

Funds 

(CIF) 

88 

 
 
                                                      
The  analytical  work  completed  in  preparing  the  IP  included  a  comprehensive 
assessment  of  renewable  energy  technologies  identified  during  the  first  technical 
mission.  The  technologies  included:  wind:  utility-scale  solar PV;  concentrating  solar 
PV,  distributed  solar  PV,  small  hydropower,  pumped  storage  hydropower, 
wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) biogas-to-power, agricultural biogas-to-power, 
landfill  biogas-to-power,  biomass  (wood/grain),  geothermal  power,  solar  thermal 
water heating, geothermal district heating and geothermal heat pumps.  

The  mission  included  two  stakeholder  consultation  workshops  to  get  feedback  on 
the analysis: 

  On August 30, 2013, the proposed priority RE technologies to be developed in 
Armenia  were  presented  to  the  multi-sectoral  task  force  established  in  2011 
for review/discussion of issues pertaining to development of renewable energy 
and  energy  efficiency  in  the  country.  The task  force  approved  the  priority RE 
technologies proposed to be supported under the SREP IP.  

   On  September  2,  2013,  the  Government  also  organized  open  public 
consultations  with  representatives  of  civil  society,  NGOs,  private  sector, 
project  developers,  research  institutions,  academia,  and  donor  organizations. 
The  participants  were  overall  supportive  of  main  findings,  conclusions  and 
recommendations  regarding  priority  RE  technologies  to  be  supported  in 
Armenia.  There  was  unanimous  support  for  development  of  utility-scale  PV, 
given  consensus  on  the  estimated  large  potential  and  increasingly  attractive 
unit  costs  of  energy  given  significant  reduction  in  module  costs  over  the  last 
several  years.  The  participants  also  suggested  to  include  in  the  priority  list 
some  RE  technologies,  which  had  low  levelized  energy  costs  (LEC)  and  other 
benefits, such as biogas, however, the Government noted the limited potential 
for scaling up those technologies in the country. 

In addition to the two workshops, the main findings of the analysis and proposed RE 
priorities were posted on the web-site of the R2E2 Fund for public comments.45 

45 On August 24, 2013. 

89 

 
                                                      
Annex D: Co-Benefits 
Section 5 highlighted some of the environmental, social and gender co-benefits likely 
to result from Armenia’s SREP IP. This section focuses specifically on the co-benefits 
tracked under SREP’s Revised Results Framework (as of June 1, 2012).  Annex Table 
D.1  lists  the  co-benefits  considered  under  SREP’s  Revised  Results  Framework,  and 
describes how those co-benefits will be achieved in Armenia.  

Annex Table D.1: Co-Benefits Associated with SREP Impacts and Outcomes 

Results 

Co-benefits 

Description 

SREP Transformative Impact 

Avoided GHG 
emissions 

Support low-
carbon 
development 
pathways by 
increasing energy 
security. 

Employment 
opportunities 

SREP Program Outcomes 

Increased 
reliability 

Increased supply 
of renewable 
energy (RE) 
New and 
additional 
resources for 
renewable energy 
projects/programs 

  As described in Section 0, all of the technologies in 
Armenia’s SREP IP could be used to offset thermal 
generation during daily dispatch, and ultimately forestall 
the need for additional thermal (nuclear or gas) generation. 
The generation government has targeted for new solar and 
geothermal plants promises to offset roughly 83,000 tonnes 
of CO2 by 2020 and 234,000 tonnes of CO2 by 2030.46 
  Potential short-term job creation during exploration of the 
geothermal site. Potential for both short and long-term job 
creation during the development and operations of a 
geothermal and utility-scale solar PV plant. Estimates from 
one study suggest that geothermal project funded by SREP 
could generate as many as 850 job-years, and the solar 
project could generation 237 job-years.47 

  Given the remote location and rural nature of the Karkar 
geothermal site and the Gegharkunic Marz solar site, the 
projects could also help reduce rural unemployment in the 
surrounding areas. 

  All of the technologies in Armenia’s SREP IP would 

ultimately improve long-term reliability of supply, by 
strengthening energy security and reducing the risk that fuel 
supply interruptions could lead to reliability problems. The 
technologies are effectively a hedge against future gas 
import price hikes. 

  The geothermal power project could, in particular, improve 
supply reliability because it represents a potential source of 
baseload generation, rather than interruptible supply. 
  Grid enhancements required to connect the solar PV and 

46 Given Armenia’s estimated Grid Emissions Factor of 181 g CO2/kWh, based on estimate by the Climate Registry 

(http://www.theclimateregistry.org/downloads/2013/01/2013-Climate-Registry-Default-Emissions-
Factors.pdf) 

47  Job-years  are  calculated  instead  of  just  calculating  “jobs”  because  each  technology  creates  both  short-term 
and long-term jobs. In order to compare each technology using just a single metric, “job-years” created over 
the life of the project are calculated. These are estimated using the costs estimated for each technology in this 
project and data from Wei M., Patadia S., Kammen D.M. (2008) ‘Putting renewables and energy efficiency to 
work: how many jobs can the clean energy industry generate in the US?’p.14. Note that job creation estimates 
presented  here  are  somewhat  uncertain  because  estimates  of  the  job  creation  potential  of  renewable 
technologies are only available for developed countries.  

90 

 
                                                      
Reduced 
costs of RE 

geothermal projects may also offer improvements in grid 
reliability. 

  SREP support for exploratory drilling at Karkar will reduce 
the generation tariff required by private investors because 
the grants (or insurance) will be used to absorb the cost of 
the riskiest stage of development of a geothermal site. 
  SREP capital contributions for utility-scale solar PV will 

reduce the generation tariff required by the first plant(s). 
More importantly, SREP support will pave the way for more 
competitive solar PV plants in the future, by giving Armenia 
some experience in utility-scale solar PV. This early 
experience will help to bring down the costs of future plants 
and improve investors’ perceptions of the risk of utility-
scale solar in Armenia. 

91 

 
 
Annex E: Existing Activities in the Field of Renewable Energy 
Existing  activities  in  the  field  of  renewable  energy  in  Armenia  involve  the  continued 
development  of  private  small  HPPs,  the  rehabilitation  of  existing  large  HPPs  and  the 
development of some new large HPPs, the exploration of the Karkar geothermal site, and the 
implementation of some small pilot renewable heating projects. This Annex describes each of 
these activities. 

Hydropower Project Rehabilitation and Development 

Small HPPs make up the vast majority of Armenia’s renewable energy industry (excluding from 
large HPPs). As of May 2013, 221 MW of small HPPs are operating, and 168 MW of SHPPs have 
received licenses for development from the PSRC. Small HPP development has been supported 
by both private, commercial banks in Armenia, as well as international development banks. KfW 
has been supporting the development and rehabilitation of small HPPs through America Bank 
and  other  commercial  banks  in  Armenia.  Through  this  program,  domestic  commercial  banks 
have been able to offer relatively low-cost, long-term capital for small HPP development. 

There  has  also  been  activity  in  the  large  hydropower  industry.  EBRD  is  financing  the 
rehabilitation of the Sevan-Hrazdan HPP and KfW is financing the rehabilitation of the Vorotan 
cascade.  Iran  is  allegedly  providing  financing  for  the  construction  of  the  Meghri  hydropower 
project,  which  is  scheduled  to  come  online  in  2021.  The  energy  from  the  Meghri  plant  is 
expected  to  go  to  Iran  for  the  first  15  years  of  its  operation  before  ownership  of  the  plant  is 
given to Armenia. 

Geothermal 

The World Bank has financed ongoing assessments of the Karkar geothermal site, including an 
economic and financial appraisal of a potential plant at the site. In September 2013, a team of 
World Bank staff and consultants traveled to the Karkar site to identify next steps for surface 
studies and exploratory drilling at the site. 

Renewable Heating 

Recently,  two  solar  thermal  heating  projects  have  been  implemented  in  the  Shirak  region  of 
Armenia,  through  the  GEF  Small  Grants  Programme.  One  of  these  projects  involved  the 
implementation  of  solar  thermal  heating  at  a  housing  complex,  and  reduced  natural  gas 
consumption  by  approximately  40  percent.  The  other  project  was  implemented  at  a 
kindergarten, and there are plans to expand the project to a nearby greenhouse. Greenhouses 
are  major  consumers  of  heat  energy  in  Armenia  and  this  project  could  provide  valuable 
demonstration benefits for this particular implementation of renewable heat technologies. 

92 

 
 
 
Annex F: Assumptions Used in Estimating Levelized Energy Costs 
Annex Table F.1: Commercial Financing Assumptions 

Assumption 

Debt percentage 

Equity percentage 

Debt interest rate 

Equity return 

Income tax rate 

Loan term 

Inflation 

Annex Table F.2: Concessional Financing Assumptions 

Assumption 
Debt percentage 
Equity percentage 
Debt interest rate 
Equity return 
Income tax rate 
Loan term 
Inflation 

Units 

Value 

% 

% 

% 

% 

% 

Years 

% 

Units 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
Years 
% 

70% 

30% 

10.69% 

18.00% 

20.00% 

20 

2% 

100% 
0% 
3% 
0% 
20.00% 
20 
2% 

Value 

93 

 
 
 
 
Annex Table F.3: Plant-Specific Assumptions 

Resource ID 

Technology 

Net 
capacity 

Capacity 
factor 

Heat 
rate 

Fuel 
type 

Asset 
life 

Capital cost 

Fixed 
O&M 

Allocation of construction cost 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Non-fuel 
variable 
O&M 

Output 
degradation
/ year 

(MW) 

(%) 

(BTU/ 
kWh) 

(Years) 

(US$/MW net 
capacity) 

(US$/k
W-yr) 

(US$/kWh) 

% 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

North 
Karakhach 

Wind 

Karakhach Pass  Wind 

Eastern 
Karakhach 

Wind 

Pushkin Pass 

Wind 

E. Pambak 
mountains 

Semyonovka 
Pass 

Areguni 
mountains 

Sotk Pass 

Fontan 

Sisian Pass 

Wind 

Wind 

Wind 

Wind 

Wind 

Wind 

Western Goris  Wind 

South Shamb 

Wind 

South Harjis 

Wind 

FPV-1 

FPV-2 

Fixed PV 

Fixed PV 

80 

100 

40 

25 

60 

35 

50 

50 

75 

100 

50 

60 

50 

20 

35 

23 

27 

21 

23 

20 

20 

19 

31 

21 

30 

19 

23 

21 

21 

25 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

25 

25 

20 

2,200,000  

20 

20 

20 

20 

2,200,000  

2,200,000  

2,200,000  

2,200,000  

20 

2,200,000  

20 

2,200,000  

2,200,000  

2,200,000  

2,200,000  

2,200,000  

2,200,000  

2,200,000  

2,500,000  

2,500,000  

20 

20 

20 

20 

20 

20 

25 

25 

94 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.0% 

33 

33 

33 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resource ID 

Technology 

Net 
capacity 

Capacity 
factor 

Heat 
rate 

Fuel 
type 

Asset 
life 

Capital cost 

Fixed 
O&M 

Allocation of construction cost 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Non-fuel 
variable 
O&M 

Output 
degradation
/ year 

(MW) 

(%) 

(BTU/ 
kWh) 

(Years) 

(US$/MW net 
capacity) 

(US$/k
W-yr) 

(US$/kWh) 

% 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

FPV-3 

FPV-4 

FPV-5 

FPV-6 

FPV-7 

FPV-8 

FPV-9 

TPV-1 

TPV-2 

TPV-3 

TPV-4 

TPV-5 

TPV-6 

TPV-7 

TPV-8 

TPV-9 

CPV-1 

CPV-2 

Fixed PV 

Fixed PV 

Fixed PV 

Fixed PV 

Fixed PV 

Fixed PV 

Fixed PV 

Tracking PV 

Tracking PV 

Tracking PV 

Tracking PV 

Tracking PV 

Tracking PV 

Tracking PV 

Tracking PV 

Tracking PV 

Concentrating 
PV 

Concentrating 
PV 

193 

200 

59 

94 

74 

79 

82 

20 

35 

193 

200 

59 

94 

74 

79 

82 

52 

91 

CPV-3 

Concentrating 

193 

23 

25 

24 

25 

25 

24 

23 

25 

30 

28 

30 

29 

31 

30 

28 

27 

12 

18 

16 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

2,500,000  

2,500,000  

2,500,000  

2,500,000  

2,500,000  

2,500,000  

2,500,000  

3,375,000  

3,375,000  

3,375,000  

3,375,000  

3,375,000  

3,375,000  

3,375,000  

3,375,000  

3,375,000  

3,250,000  

25 

3,250,000  

25 

3,250,000  

95 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

35 

35 

35 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resource ID 

Technology 

Net 
capacity 

Capacity 
factor 

Heat 
rate 

Fuel 
type 

Asset 
life 

Capital cost 

Fixed 
O&M 

Allocation of construction cost 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Non-fuel 
variable 
O&M 

Output 
degradation
/ year 

(MW) 

(%) 

(BTU/ 
kWh) 

(Years) 

(US$/MW net 
capacity) 

(US$/k
W-yr) 

(US$/kWh) 

% 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

CPV-4 

CPV-5 

CPV-6 

CPV-7 

CPV-8 

CPV-9 

CSP-1 

CSP-2 

CSP-3 

CSP-4 

CSP-5 

PV 

Concentrating 
PV 

Concentrating 
PV 

Concentrating 
PV 

Concentrating 
PV 

Concentrating 
PV 

Concentrating 
PV 

Concentrating 
solar power 

Concentrating 
solar power 

Concentrating 
solar power 

Concentrating 
solar power 

Concentrating 
solar power 

CSP-6 

Concentrating 

225 

264 

109 

74 

79 

82 

52 

91 

193 

225 

264 

109 

18 

17 

20 

19 

17 

16 

15 

25 

20 

25 

23 

27 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

25 

3,250,000  

25 

3,250,000  

25 

3,250,000  

25 

3,250,000  

25 

3,250,000  

25 

3,250,000  

35 

35 

35 

35 

35 

35 

25 

7,500,000  

100 

25 

7,500,000  

100 

25 

7,500,000  

100 

25 

7,500,000  

100 

25 

7,500,000  

100 

25 

7,500,000  

100 

96 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0.0% 

25 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

0.0% 

25 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

0.0% 

25 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

0.0% 

25 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

0.0% 

25 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

0.0% 

25 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resource ID 

Technology 

Net 
capacity 

Capacity 
factor 

Heat 
rate 

Fuel 
type 

Asset 
life 

Capital cost 

Fixed 
O&M 

Allocation of construction cost 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Non-fuel 
variable 
O&M 

Output 
degradation
/ year 

(MW) 

(%) 

(BTU/ 
kWh) 

(Years) 

(US$/MW net 
capacity) 

(US$/k
W-yr) 

(US$/kWh) 

% 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

CSP-7 

CSP-8 

CSP-9 

solar power 

Concentrating 
solar power 

Concentrating 
solar power 

Concentrating 
solar power 

Dist PV-Yerevan  Rooftop PV 

Dist PV-
Aragatsotn  

Rooftop PV 

Dist PV-Ararat 

Rooftop PV 

Dist PV-Armavir   Rooftop PV 

Dist PV-
Gegharquniq 

Rooftop PV 

Dist PV-Lori 

Rooftop PV 

Dist PV-Kotayq 

Rooftop PV 

Dist PV-Shirak 

Rooftop PV 

Dist PV-Syniq  

Rooftop PV 

Dist PV-Vayots 
Dzor  

Rooftop PV 

Dist PV-Tavush 

Rooftop PV 

74 

79 

82 

25.6 

0.64 

2.56 

3.2 

2.56 

7.68 

5.76 

5.76 

3.2 

0.64 

1.92 

26 

22 

20 

16 

16 

16 

16 

17 

13 

16 

17 

16 

17 

16 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

25 

7,500,000  

100 

25 

7,500,000  

100 

25 

7,500,000  

100 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

6,875,000  

6,875,000  

6,875,000  

6,875,000  

6,875,000  

6,875,000  

6,875,000  

6,875,000  

6,875,000  

6,875,000  

25 

6,875,000  

97 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0.0% 

25 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

0.0% 

25 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

0.0% 

25 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100 

0.7%  100
% 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resource ID 

Technology 

Net 
capacity 

Capacity 
factor 

Heat 
rate 

Fuel 
type 

Asset 
life 

Capital cost 

Fixed 
O&M 

Allocation of construction cost 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Non-fuel 
variable 
O&M 

Output 
degradation
/ year 

(MW) 

(%) 

(BTU/ 
kWh) 

(Years) 

(US$/MW net 
capacity) 

(US$/k
W-yr) 

(US$/kWh) 

% 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

3,750,000  

3,750,000  

0 

0 

0.036 

0.036 

0.0%  32% 

51 

17 

0.0%  32% 

51 

17 

Jermaghbyur 

Geothermal 

Georgian 
border 

Geothermal 

Karkar - Kalex 

Geothermal 

Karkar - ORC 

Geothermal 

Karkar - Flash 

Geothermal 

Ararat HPPs 

Small HPP 

Aratsotn HPPs 

Small HPP 

Gegharkunik 
HPPs 

Small HPP 

Kotaik HPPs 

Small HPP 

Lori HPPs 

Small HPP 

Shirak HPPs 

Small HPP 

Syunik HPPs 

Small HPP 

Tavush HPPs 

Small HPP 

Vayuts Dzor 
HPPs 

Small HPP 

Wood biomass 

Biomass 

Grain biomass 

Biomass 

25 

25 

6 

6 

28.5 

5 

3.5 

7.7 

3.6 

12.9 

1.1 

28.1 

20.8 

7.9 

4 

25 

89 

89 

84 

84 

96 

41 

41 

47 

32 

45 

51 

42 

45 

32 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

85  16,500  Wood 

biomass 

85  13,648  Grain 

biomass 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

30 

20 

20 

15,906,000   203.13 

11,687,000   203.13 

3,723,000  

70.18 

2,000,000   $33.48  

2,000,000   $30.99  

2,000,000   $32.79  

2,000,000   $27.69  

2,000,000   $35.16  

2,000,000   $36.24  

2,000,000   $31.77  

2,000,000   $33.15  

2,000,000   $26.16  

5,000,000   $250.0
0  

4,000,000   $200.0
0  

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0.0%  15% 

55 

30 

0.0%  13% 

54 

32 

0.0%  32% 

51 

17 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0.0%  25% 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

0.005 

0.0%  25% 

25 

25 

25 

0 

0 

Araks 

Biogas 

1.4 

90 

0 

20 

3,876,000   $58.00  

0 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0 

0 

0 

98 

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resource ID 

Technology 

Net 
capacity 

Capacity 
factor 

Heat 
rate 

Fuel 
type 

Asset 
life 

Capital cost 

Fixed 
O&M 

Allocation of construction cost 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Non-fuel 
variable 
O&M 

Output 
degradation
/ year 

(MW) 

(%) 

(BTU/ 
kWh) 

(Years) 

(US$/MW net 
capacity) 

(US$/k
W-yr) 

(US$/kWh) 

% 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

(%) 

Trchnafabrika 
CJSC 

Arzni Pedigree 
PBS OJSC 

Biogas 

Armavir Poultry 
Farm 

Biogas 

Nubarashen 
landfill 

LFG 

Yerevan WWTP  WWTP 

Aghbyurak HPS  Pumped storage 

Tolors HPS 

Shamb HPS 

hydro 

Pumped storage 
hydro 

Pumped storage 
hydro 

0.8 

1.1 

2.5 

3 

150 

150 

150 

90 

90 

90 

90 

57 

57 

57 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

20 

3,997,000   $85.00  

20 

2,665,000   $61.00  

0 

0 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

20 

1,500,000  

$0.00  

0.01 

0.0%  50% 

50 

0 

20 

30 

1,680,000   $70.00  

0 

0.0%  33% 

33 

33 

2,800,000   $93.33  

0.0523 

0%  33% 

33 

33 

30 

2,800,000   $93.33  

0.00523 

0%  33% 

33 

33 

30 

2,800,000   $93.33  

0.00523 

0%  33% 

33 

33 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

99 

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex G: Comments from Independent Technical Reviewer 
Mr.  Mike  Allen  provided  an  independent  technical  review  of  the  investment  plan.  He  reviewed  two 
drafts  of  the  Investment  Plan,  one  from  September  2013,  and  a  revised  draft  from  April  2014.  His 
comments on each of the drafts, and the Government of Armenia’s replies, are included below. 

Independent Technical Reviewer: Mike Allen 
Comments delivered on September 30th, 2013 

1.0     Introduction 
The review of the  Investment  Plan for  Armenia  has  been  undertaken  ahead  of the  submission  of the 
plan  to  the  SREP  Sub-Committee  of  the  Strategic  Climate  Funds,  within  the  Climate  Investment 
Funds at the World Bank. 

These notes are based on a review of the draft plan of  18th  September 2013; it should be noted that 
the reviewer has  not  visited  Armenia  nor  been involved  in the preparation  of this  plan.  The lack of  a 
visit to Armenia and direct contact with the ministries, agencies,  institutions and various stakeholders 
has  an  impact  on  some  of  the  interpretations  that  have  been  drawn  in  this  review;  the  reviewer 
has  not been  involved  with  energy  opportunities  in  Armenia  so  has  limited  familiarity  with  the  
energy situation in the region. 

It is recognised that, as stated in the IP, “Armenia’s population has nearly universal access to electricity 
and natural gas energy resources, therefore Armenia’s IP is not about access to modern energy services 
but  about  using renewables  to improve energy security  and reliability,  and reduce  the future  cost  of  
supply.  Energy security, reliability and cost are challenges that investments in renewable energy can 
help  overcome  given  Armenia’s  unique  energy  context”  and  it  is  in  this  context  that  this  review  has 
been undertaken. 

Given  the  specific  areas  of  focus  under  the  Plan,  geothermal,  utility  scale  solar  and  development  of 
geothermal heat pump and solar-thermal projects, the review first considers each of the sectors then 
summarises the overall compliance under SREP criteria. 

2.0     Specific Comments on Investment Plan 

2.1 Geothermal Power Development 

Current Situation 
Based  on  the  information  presented  in  the  report,  independent  background  work  and  brief 
correspondence  with  those  who  have  prepared  the  IP,  there  does  not  appear  to  be  a  strong  case 
to support the use of SREP funds for geothermal exploration. 

It   is   acknowledged  that  geothermal   exploration  finance  is  difficult  to  source   but  the   IP  and 
background suggest that: 

The  Karkar  geothermal  prospect  is  not  well  understood  and  exploration  data  gathered  to 
date does not appear to provide a convincing model of a resource  at a stage where drilling should be 
immediately contemplated; 

Response: The Karkar geothermal field was thoroughly studied through a number of comprehensive 
surface  studies:  (a)  field  scouting;  (b)  magneto-telluric  investigation  study  (MT);  (c)  independent 
interpretation of the results of MT study; (d) 3D MT study; and (e) independent interpretation of the 
100 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results  of  3D  MT  study.  Those  studies  were  led  by  reputable  international  consulting  firms 
specializing  on  geothermal  energy.  Moreover,  the  recommendations  and  key  findings  of  those 
studies  were  reviewed  by  the  Iceland  Geosurvey  (ISOR),  which  confirmed  that  the  methodology 
employed  for  the  surface  studies  was  robust,  the  key  results  indeed  confirm  that  the  Karkar  is  a 
geothermal site, and that the only way to confirm the suitability of resource for power generation is 
to conduct exploratory drilling.    

Assumptions  in  giving  geothermal  a  high  ranking  in  terms  of  potential  and  cost  are  not 

substantiated in the IP nor by background documents; 

Response: Geothermal power is assigned the second lowest ranking in terms of “scale-up potential.” 
However,  this  is  partially  because  of  the  fact  that  Armenia’s  geothermal  resources  have  not  been 
well-explored (except for Karkar site) and it is possible that there is more resource potential than has 
been quantified here. 

Indications  are  that  any  resource  at  Karkar  will  be  of  modest  temperatures;  all  analyses 
and cost comparisons in the IP assume a high temperature resource; lower temperatures resources are 
acknowledged in the IP as non-competitive; 

Response: The temperature of the resource cannot be known for sure until the exploratory drilling is 
conducted  and  flow  testing,  chemical  sampling  and  analyses  is  completed.  The  surface  studies  that 
were conducted for Karkar site and are described in the IP concluded that two conceptual geothermal 
models or their combination might exist for the Karkar site:  

Model A:  Model A assumes that low resistance is not present in the geothermal zones of interest. In 
such a case, Model А would provide only for a diffuse source of heat and characterizes the field as a 
reservoir of moderately warm waters (less than 100оС).    

Model  В:    Model  B  assumes  that  low  resistance  may  be  present  in  geothermal  zones  of  interest.  In 
such a case, Model В would provide for a localized high-temperature source of heat. Along with this, 
some of the layers could be characterized as a reservoir of high-temperature water (more than 250оС).  

The definitive answer on the characteristics of the geothermal resource can be obtained only after 
exploratory drilling. 

The costs are presented in the IP for a high-temperature resource because it is assumed that project 
development  will  only  occur  if  a  high-temperature  resource  is  identified  at  the  site  through  the 
exploratory well drilling. 

The  assumption  that  with  this  background  that  an  IPP  can  be attracted  to  contribute 
as indicated  is  probably  unrealistic  meaning  that  additional  public  funds  would  be  required  to move 
any successful project forward. 

Response:  It  is  recommended  that  SREP  funding  supports  these  exploration  activities  and  IPP 
investment is assumed to follow if successful exploration is carried out. Therefore, it is assumed that 
an IPP will not be attracted with the background information available in the IP, but rather with a 
confirmed geothermal resource that has been identified through exploratory drilling. 

101 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Near Term Consideration of Geothermal 
Accepting that the geothermal potential may be limited, if there is a consensus that the case for further 
investment  is  unclear,  the  use  of  limited  funds  from  SREP  to  convene  a  focused  peer  review  of 
current status could be considered. 

It is not suggested that the allocation of a larger portion of SREP funds be predicated on the outcome 
of  such  a  review  but  more  that  it  may  be  reasonable  to  use  funds  (less  than  suggested  for  the 
feasibility  study)  to  attempt  to  provide  a  more  definitive  assessment  of  the  Karkar  resource.  If  the 
review were to provide a convincing argument to consider the next stage of exploration at Karkar then 
it could be used to seek alternative funding. 

Response: We are confident that any additional study for Karkar site will generate marginal amount 
of  useful  information  and  data.  Therefore,  we  are  convinced  that  exploratory  drilling  is  the 
warranted next step to be undertaken to confirm the resource. As mentioned above, all of the above 
studies conducted for Karkar concluded that exploratory drilling is warranted. The need for and the 
justification  for  exploratory  drilling  was  also  confirmed  by  the  independent  reviewers  (ISOR  from 
Iceland)  of  the  key  conclusions  and  recommendations  of  the  geo-technical  studies  conducted  for 
Karkar. 

Recommendation on Geothermal Power 
At this stage it is not recommended that SREP funds be directed into geothermal power development, 
other than in supporting a review as outlined above. 

Response: We do not think that the level of knowledge about the Karkar site will benefit from further 
reviews as outlined above.  

2.2 Utility Scale Solar 

General compliance 
While there is limited solar PV experience at any large scale, the potential has been identified and the 
construction  of  commercial,  grid  connected  units  reflects  international  experience.  It  is  noted  that 
there are nationally based companies engaged in this field and that there is a strong R&D background 
in the field within Armenian academia. 

It  is  understood  that  to  encourage  private  sector  participation  that  part  of  the  SREP  funds  may  be 
made  available  to  help  buy  down  the  initial  capital  costs,    Help  is  being  sought  to  develop  an 
acceptable FIT and also to work with the government in agreeing how private sector participation will 
be structured. 

Capacity to execute and technical assessment of proposed approach 
There are a number of barriers that have been recognised as hampering the growth in the sector  and 
these have been identified within the Plan.   It is suggested that these are manageable; the technology 
risk  is  largely  one  of  lack  of  familiarity  coupled  with  a  lack  of  education  amongst  the  population 
about the benefits they can bring. 

Although  the  market  has  been  opened  up,  and  success  in  attracting  IPPs  noted  in  the  small  hydro 
power sector, it is also noted that there are administrative and regulatory issues that may hamper quick 
uptake by the private sector of other technologies. 

102 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Plan is non-specific about which institutions will address these issues but it paints a positive picture 
of  government  activities  in  the  sector  and  its  privatisation  over  recent  years.    It  is  noted  that  at  all 
stages  SREP  will  be  consulted  as  strategies,  structures  and  plans  are  being  prepared  and  adequate 
monitoring and evaluation will be mutually important to ensure success. 

Impact 
The plan outlines the use of funds to provide support to a broader MDB and donor funded programme 
which is envisaged will provide utility solar electricity of some 30 MW in total capacity. This is based on 
obtaining a total of $70.75m (SREP $24.5m; MDBs $24.5m and $21m from private sector / commercial 
banking  sources).  The  securing  of  these  additional  funds  and  the  active  engagement  of  the  private 
sector is obviously critical to the level of impact that will be achieved. 
Use of investment; capturing and dissemination of lessons learned; stakeholder engagement 
This is all  a new venture and so there is  no  real history of  such development in Armenia to draw on. 
It  will  be  important  that  there  be  an  open  and  transparent  sharing  of  information  and  experiences 
as the project is planned and implemented. 

Social considerations 
It  is  recognised  that  the  challenge  for  Armenia  is  to  build  security  of  supply  as  all  have  access  to 
energy  but  the  geo-political  and  energy  supply  dependency  of  the  country  are  the  key  issues  to  be 
addressed  with  the  focus  on  renewables.    The  normal  benefits  of  renewables  in  terms  of  emission 
reductions will of course apply. 

Attraction of additional investment 
The  programme  proposed  for  the  utility  solar  project  is  heavily  dependent  on  access  to  investment 
from  a  number  of  groups  as  noted  above.  It  is  unclear  what  the  level  of  commitments  from  other 
sources is at this stage.  There is however a provision for support with transaction services that should 
help  overcome  recognised  bottlenecks  but  project  implementation  will  only  be  achieved  to  the  level 
that available funds allow. 

Overall Summary 
The utility solar programme is aggressive but appears to offer one of the better options for Armenia in 
looking towards  growth in renewables.   Tackling solar  PV  on a  larger  scale  basis  should  offer  quicker 
growth in this  sector  and  the  combination  of  SREP, MDB and  private  financing provides  a  potentially 
balanced  scenario  for  this  growth.  The  project  is  a  mix  of public  demonstration  of  commercial 
viability of this opportunity and  then  the  securing of  financing from MDB and private  sector sources; 
increasing  the  scale  of  activities  and  drawing  all  the  elements  of  the  programme  together,  while 
addressing  the  issues  that  have  been  seen  as  bottlenecks  in  the  past,  will  require  strong  strategic 
planning and on-going review to ensure that the anticipated growth target can be met. 

2.3     Geothermal Heat Pump and Solar-Thermal Projects 

General compliance 
To date there have been limited developments utilising geothermal  heat pumps and/or solar thermal 
installations.      However  given  the  heating  needs  within  Armenia  and  the  opportunity  that  these 
approaches  may  give  to  displace  the  use  of  gas,  this  programme  appears  appropriate.  Small  scale 
projects  (supported  by  GEF)  have  helped  begin  to  demonstrate  the  viability  of  solar  thermal 
installations. 

The structure of this project suggests that the intention is to hold this largely within the public sector 
with financing predominantly from MDB resources. 

It is noted that there are nationally based companies engaged in these fields. 

103 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capacity to execute and technical assessment of proposed approach 
As with solar PV, there are a number of barriers that have been recognised as hampering the growth in 
the  sector  and  these  have  been  identified  within  the  Plan.    It  is  suggested  that  these  are 
manageable;  the  technology  risk  is  largely  one  of  lack  of  familiarity coupled  with  a  lack  of  education 
amongst the population about the benefits they can bring. 
Impact 
The  plan  outlines  the  use  of  funds  to  prepare  proposals  to  gain  support  from  MDBs.  It  is  suggested 
that  obtaining a  total  of  $45m from MDBs would  allow dissemination of these  technologies  in  public 
buildings  ($15m)  and private  facilities  ($30m).  The  securing of  these  funds  and  an  active  programme 
outside the public sector is obviously critical to the level of impact that will be achieved. 

Use of investment; capturing and dissemination of lessons learned; stakeholder engagement 
This is all  a new venture and so there is  no  real history of  such development in Armenia to draw on. 
As with the solar PV, it will be important that there be an open and transparent sharing of information 
and experiences as the projects are planned and implemented. 

Social considerations 
It  is  recognised  that  the  challenge  for  Armenia  is  to  build  security  of  supply  as  all  have  access  to 
energy  but  the  geo-political  and  energy  supply  dependency  of  the  country  are  the  key  issues  to  be 
addressed  with  the  focus  on  renewables.    The  normal  benefits  of  renewables  in  terms  of  emission 
reductions will of course apply. 

Attraction of additional investment 
The  programme  proposed  for  the  geothermal  heat  pump  and  solar  thermal  project  is  heavily 
dependent  on  access  to  investment  from  MDBs  as  noted  above.  It  is  unclear  what  the  level  of 
commitments from these sources is at this stage. 

Overall Summary 
The  geothermal  heat  pump  and  solar  thermal  programme  is  aggressive  but  appears  to  offer  a 
constructive  option  for  Armenia  in  looking  towards  growth  in  the  non-electric  use  of  renewables. 
Developing  both  technologies  on  a  larger  scale  basis  should  offer  quicker  growth  in  this  sector  but 
access to MDB financing is clearly critical. 

3.0     Compliance with SREP 
Key  focuses  within  the  SREP  programme  can  be  summarised  under  the  following  headings;  the 
response of the  Plan to each of these  aspects  is noted in the following comments.   The exception to 
use of funds for geothermal is noted again. 

Catalyse increased investments in renewable energy: 
The plan outlines how it is anticipated that SREP investments and programme support will help attract 
other  public  and  private  funding.    This  is  explained  in  some  detail.  What  is  less  clear  is  which 
government  agencies  will  provide  the  leadership  during  implementation.  Overall  there  is  no 
information on the governance of the SREP programme as such. 

Response:  This  comment  is  well-noted.  Additional  description  of  implementation  modalities  will 
follow in a subsequent draft. 

Enabling environment 
The  plan  acknowledges  that  there  are  a  number  of  remaining hurdles  to  renewable  implementation; 
there are however no clear strategies or allocation of responsibilities to particular agencies to address 
these.   It  is  assumed  that  a  more  definitive  strategy  will  be  developed  ahead  of  the  release  of  SREP 

104 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
funding.  The  proposal  to  assist  with  transactional  services  in  the  solar  sector  should  offer  additional 
encouragement for private sector participation. 

Response:  This  comment  is  well-noted.  Additional  description  of  strategies  for  improving  the 
enabling environment in specific agencies will follow in a subsequent draft. 

Increase energy access: 
As  noted,  access  to  energy  is  not  an  issue  for  Armenia;  the  focus  of  SREP  supported  activities  is  the 
development of a reliable, cost effective and secure supply of national energy going forward. 

Implementation capacity: 
The  IP  explains  that  the  entity  responsible  for  facilitating  renewable  energy  development  in  Armenia 
is  the  R2E2  Fund.  The  R2E2  Fund  was  formed  in  2006  as  part  of  the  Law  on  Energy  Efficiency  and 
Renewable Energy. It is an independent organization that facilitates investments in renewable energy 
by  sponsoring  renewable  energy  studies  and  projects,  and  supporting  local  renewable  energy 
companies  and  stakeholders.  Its  role  in  hydro,  geothermal  and  solar  is  briefly  described  but  no 
additional  information  is  provided.   It  is  assumed  that  it  would  be  a  key  organisation  in  proving  the 
governance over the SREP activities. 

Improve the long-term economic viability of the renewable energy sector: 
The  renewable  energy  sector  in  Armenia  appears  to  be  in  a  nascent  stage.   The  existing  sources  of 
energy do provide a relatively low cost source of electricity and heat and so the growth in renewable 
sector  and  the  national  benefits  that  it  may  offer,  in  terms  of  energy  security,  may  require 
subsidisation to some extent.  It is noted that there are a number of existing businesses supporting the 
industry and the SREP activities should be managed to ensure that the national benefits are maximised 
wherever possible 

Transformative impact: 
The  targeted  nature  of  the  proposed  SREP  investments  is  seen  as  a  pragmatic  approach.   As  noted 
above,  the  renewable  sector  is  relatively  immature  so  it  is  unlikely  that  there  will  be  major 
transformations  in  the  market  through  SREP  alone  but,  well  managed,  a  focused  programme  around 
will add to the emerging strengths within the sector. 

4.0     Recommendations 
With  the  exception  of  the  concerns  around  the  geothermal  power  developments,  the  Investment 
Plan as presented is well prepared. 

There is limited detail on  how SREP funds would be managed, by whom  and under what  governance 
structure, and it is suggested that clarification on these points be sought. 

If it is agreed that funding proposed for  geothermal power development not be offered as requested 
then  there  is  a  clear  opportunity  to  revisit  the  priorities  under  the  Plan;  this  might  provide  for  an 
extension  of  the  other  programme  areas  or  the  introduction  of  an  additional  sector.   This  decision 
needs consideration by those closer to the preparation of the Plan. 

Overall the Plan responds to the SREP criteria. 

This  report  and  these  recommendations  have  not  been  discussed  with  those  who  prepared  the 
Plan, and so should be treated as interim comments; it is hoped that  a discussion can be arranged in 
due course. 

105 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDENDUM 

Summary 
Drilling Proposal 

of  Comments  re 

Inclusion  of  Geothermal 

Comments 
As  raised  in  various  communications  earlier,  there  is  a  concern  about  the  emphasis  given  to 
committing  almost  50%  of  the  SREP  funds  to  geothermal  exploration  drilling.    A  review  of  the 
various  reports  provided  and  the  IP  itself  do  not  substantiate  that  geothermal  should  be  of  high 
priority.  This viewed is based on the following: 

    The  ranking  of  options  in  Table  4.1  shows   that  geothermal  (power  generation)  is  considered  to 
rank  a  “3”  for  Scale  Up  Potential  and  yet  all  other  data  suggests  that  the  anticipated  geothermal 
potential is minimal in comparison to other sources – even if this were a “2”, the geothermal average 
would drop to 1.8.   Costs effectiveness (“2”) assumes a high temperature resource (flash technology) 
which is not able to be demonstrated with confidence. 

Response: It appears there is a misunderstanding of the scoring system that has been put forth in the 
IP. The scoring system has caused confusion for several reviewers, so it is clear that we should change 
it to be more intuitive, or explain it more explicitly. According to the current scoring system, a score of 
“3” for “Scale-up potential” actually indicates relatively low scale-up potential. 

Table 0.1: Ranking of Renewable Technologies Against Selection Criteria 

Technology 

Selection Criteria 

Power 
grid 
stability 

Cost- 
effectiveness 

Potential for 

Scale-up 
potential 

Market 
immaturity 

Average 
score 

job creation 

Geothermal    heat 
pumps 

2 

Solar 
heating 

thermal 

Utility-scale 
solar PV 

Geothermal 
power 

Small HPPs 

Ag. biogas 

Landfill biogas 

Wind 

Distributed  solar 
PV 

2 

3 

2 

1 

2 

2 

2 

3 

1 

3 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1.2 

1.8 

2 

2 

2 

2.2 

2.2 

2.2 

2.2 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

3 

3 

1 

2 

2 

3 

3 

4 

4 

3 

2 

106 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 T h e   report  “Economic  and  Financial  Appraisal  of  the  Potential  Geothermal  Power  Plant  at Karkar 
Final Report, November 2012, by Denzel Hankinson” makes a number of assumptions and  is  essentially 
a  generic  review  of  geothermal  costs.   Comments  in  the  report  on  likely production temperatures, 
the  understood  geological  setting in  Karkar  and  notes  in  response  to earlier  queries, tend  to suggest 
that  a  conservative  view  would  be  that  the  temperatures  will  be  modest.      However  all  support  for 
geothermal  is  based  on  a  costing  that  utilises  a  flash  technology  –    implying  high  geothermal  fluid 
temperatures. 
   By  the  analysis  in  Hankinson’s  report  it  is  acknowledged  that  if  flash  technology  cannot  be used 
the geothermal utilising ORC would be non-competitive with other alternatives. 
    Based  on  the  assumption  that  the  KarKar  resource  may  be  of  modest  temperature,  it  would 
therefore not rank as competitive 
   Acknowledging  that  there is  no  geothermal  development  background  in  Armenia, the  IP  does not 
demonstrate  a  full  understanding of  the  challenges of  geothermal  development.  While  it  is accepted 
that  drilling  will  in  the  end  be  required  to  prove  the  quality  of  any  resource,  moving  to  a  drilling 
programme  would  not  normally  be  considered  until  many  of  the  uncertainties  expressed  in  the 
geothermal studies to date have been addressed. 
    Specific  geothermal  studies  have  not  been  reviewed;  it  is  not  known  what  depth  of  practical 
geothermal  experience  those  who  have  undertaken  the various  studies  have  had,  but  it  may  be that 
engaging  a  peer  review  by  groups  with  extensive  practical  exploration  and  development  experience 
would allow a more concrete decision on the geothermal viability. 
   Geothermal  exploration  and  development  is  by  its  very  nature  a  capital  intensive  exercise. 
There  is  a  concern  that,  without  a  clear  upside  and  identified  resources  to  take  any  geothermal 
development forward should exploration drilling confirm an  exploitable resource, the investment into 
an exploration drilling programme at this stage may be wasted. 
    Available  tariffs,  the  small  scale  of  any  project  and  the  conservative  assumption  that  resource 
temperatures  will  be  modest,  suggest  that  it  may  be  difficult  to  attract  private  investment  into 
geothermal.   This would then imply that adequate public funding would have to be found to 
take any project through to completion. 

Response:  the  reviewer’s  comments  are  noted  and  his  expertise  is  useful  and  appreciated  for  this 
process. 

Summary of Correspondence and Responses: 

In  working  through  the  IP  I  am  having  a  fundamental  problem  understanding  why  the priorities 
have been chosen as they have. In looking at Table 3.1 it appears that the estimates suggest  that  the 
most  significant  potential  contributions  are  from  geothermal  heat  pumps, solar PV and wind in that 
order?  Geothermal power generation is less than 8% and limited likely upside potential? 

Response: The total resource potential was one of the criteria used to choose RE projects for inclusion 
in  the  SREP  IP  (see  table  4.1  for  the  full  set  and  scoring  by  technology).  You  are  correct  that 
geothermal power has significantly lower assessed resource potential than wind and solar resources. 
But  this  technology  scored  relatively  high  on  the  other  criteria  used  to  prioritize  technologies  for 
inclusion in the SREP  IP, and for this reason it was included. Furthermore, geothermal is a relatively 
unexplored resource in Armenia, and there very well might be more potential that is not known about. 
Because of the way that geothermal resource potential is evaluated (compared with wind and solar) 
only a small amount has been assessed at this point, but there could be more potential that is not yet 
known about. By funding exploration, SREP can help kick-start the process of identifying geothermal 
resources in Armenia. 

107 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I  can’t  find  much  reference  to  the  geothermal  sources  in  Armenia  (have  requested  your  recent 
info/report);  what  I  have  found  implied  that  the  resources  may  be  very  deep  (6000m?)  and modest 
temperature  hot  water  – is this what  is  currently understood? The cost  / kWh  for geothermal  at  full 
(LEC)  rates  is  shown  as  around  US$  Cents  8.5  (?)  which  looks  low  given  the  plant  is  small,  first 
project,  potentially  lower  temperature  etc.   The  report  mentions  that this   assumes   a   flash   plant  
which   would   imply   a   high   temperature   (volcanic   source) resource.   If  a  binary  unit  is  considered 
then  typically  the  costs  will  be  higher.  It  may  work with SREP underwriting for 40 years but this won’t 
open up follow on IPP engagement unless heavy subsidisation is continued? 

Response: The emperature of the geothermal resource at Karkar site cannot be known for sure until 
exploratory  drilling  is  done.  The  comprehensive  surface  investigation  works  suggest  that  there  is 
geological  anomaly,  the  site  is  geothermal  in  nature,  and,  thus,  test  drilling  is  warranted.  Please 
note that  the  geological studies  suggest  that  test wells with the depth  of  1500-2000 m are  needed 
and not 6000 m. The resource could be either a high-temperature resource (i.e. at which a Flash plant 
could be deployed) OR a low temperature resource (i.e. at which a binary plant could be deployed). If 
the  Karkar  site  has  a  high  temperature  resource,  then,  according  to  an  assessment  conducted  in 
2012 (see the report attached), the Flash plant could have an LEC of around US$0.0864/kWh (under 
commercial financing terms). This assessment also evaluated the cost of a binary cycle plant, the LEC 
of energy will be significantly higher. The only way to really find out the nature of the resource is to 
do  test  drilling,  and  this  is  why  the  first  stage  of  the  proposed  geothermal  project  under  SREP 
involves exploratory drilling. 

In  looking  at  comparative  costs  the  Hzardan  TPP  is  referenced;  Table  2.1  shows  that  it  has  an 
exceptionally  high  tariff,  between  2.8  x  and  3.8  x  of  the  average  (incl/excl  Hzaradan).    Can  you 
please  explain  why  this  has  been  chosen  as  the  reference?   If  the  current  average  cots were the 
reference the picture for RE could look rather different. 

Response: The Hrazdan TPP is the marginal cost plant on the Armenian system, and it was included 
in the  supply  curves  for  comparison  purposes,  not  as  a  threshold  below  which  resources  would be  
considered  viable. Also,  please  note  that  in  Figure  3.5  we  compare  the  cost  of  all renewable 
energy options to the 2012 average cost of generation (US$0.03/kWh), as you suggest. To be clear: 
we did not use the Hrazdan TPP to analyze the best renewable energy options,  but  rather  show  the 
cost  of  that  resource  just  to  demonstrate  that  many  renewable energy options are  cheaper  than 
the  current  highest  cost  generating plant  on  the  system. Perhaps    we    should    add    as   reference  
points   the   lower-cost   and   more   frequently   used generation plants (i.e. the new, efficient CCGTs) 
to the charts in the next draft of the plan. 

As before, I acknowledge I am coming in without the background on in-country visits and meetings and 
familiarity with the market but would expect others to challenge the IP on this basis. 

Overall the report appears to document the situation quite well; however there is repeated reference 
to the difficulty in attracting IPP engagement in RE due to low pricing and this is not really addressed 
this?
  What 
(other 

expectations 

potential 

around 

risk). 

than 

the 

are 

as 

a 

108 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109 

 
 
 
 
Independent Technical Reviewer: Mike Allen 
Comments delivered on April 15th, 2014 (on a later draft of the Investment Plan) 

There  are  a  number  of  issues  which  are  obviously  very  pertinent  to  the  potential  of 
renewables in Armenia and that should perhaps be reiterated:  

1.       The current cost for electricity is very low – “average cost of generation in Armenia is 
roughly US$ 0.035/kWh”.  This is noted as having a significant impact on the opportunity to 
introduce new generation capacity, whether renewable or conventional.  

Response: The current cost of electricity reflects that fact that several of Armenia’s major 
power  plants  are  fully  depreciated  and  therefore  do  not  have  fixed  charge  in  the  tariff 
associated  with  their  capacity  (in  other  words,  the  tariff  reflects  operating  and 
maintenance costs only). As noted in the revised investment plan, this is going to change 
soon, as investment in a new thermal plant (nuclear or gas), and rehabilitation of existing 
plants, will increase tariffs substantially. Gas import prices are also forecast to continue 
to increase substantially, which will drive up the cost of gas-fired generation in Armenia. 

2.       The cost of renewable options remain relatively expensive given the current cost/tariff 
structure for electricity. 

Response: As noted above, the average cost of generation in Armenia is likely to increase 
substantially in the coming years.  

3.           The  renewable  options  are  important  but  not  a  significant  portion  of  likely  future 
generation capacity.  Medium term targets suggest small hydro has the most potential (380 
MW)  with  wind,  geothermal  and  PV  offering  only  a  combined  140MW.   The  revised  IP 
suggests that the wind potential may be lower than earlier anticipated.  

Response: The current operational SHPP capacity is around 240 MW, so the SHPP capacity 
is  expected  to  increase  by  140  MW  by  2020.  The  Government  targets  for  solar, 
geothermal  and  wind  by  2020  are  only  140  MW  combined  because:  (a)  the  scale-up 
potential for wind is estimated to be lower than for solar and geothermal; thus, not much 
of wind capacity is expected to be developed; and (b) construction of geothermal power 
plant(s)  is  not  likely  to  begin  earlier  than  2016  given  the  time  needed  for  exploratory 
drilling to confirm the resource. 

4.       It appears that geothermal heat pump options have been removed from the IP; it is 
not clear why this has occurred. 

Response: The geothermal heat pump, solar thermal and distributed thermal investments 
have  been  removed  after  government  reconsidered,  in  discussion  with  development 
partners,  its  priorities  and  the  likely  availability  of  financing  for  such  priorities. 
Geothermal  heat  pumps,  solar  thermal  heating  and  rooftop  solar  PV  already  have 
financing  available  through  existing  donor  programs  and,  therefore,  were  given  lower 
priority than technologies, which did not yet benefit from support. 

5.       There is no additional information provided on the geothermal status / recent reviews; 
on  this  basis  my  original  recommendation  would  stand  that  no  drilling  should  be 
contemplated until an independent peer review, by those who have significant geothermal 

110 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience, has been undertaken. There is mention of a review / planning for drilling but no 
detail has been provided. 

Response: The IP was revised to clearly indicate that under the World Bank/GEF funded 
GeoFund 2: Armenia Geothermal Project several geo-technical investigation works were 
conducted for Karkar geothermal site and the results/recommendations of those studies 
were independently reviewed. 

6.           Table  1.3  appears  quite  optimistic  in  terms  of  longer  term  scale  up  given  the  very 
limited experience with most technologies to date in Armenia.   

Response:  It  is  true  that  the  targets  reflect  a  faster  pace  of  capacity  growth  than  in  the 
past, but Government has also now placed greater priority on the expansion of RE capacity 
than  in  the  past,  highlighted  by  the  recently  adopted  “Concept  on  National  Energy 
Security” for Armenia. 

7.       As noted earlier, costs for new generation appear low given the limited experience or 
first  development  situation  with  many  of  them.   For  geothermal  the  assumption  of  a  high 
temperature resource appears contrary to much of the dialogue in the report. 

Response: The exact temperature of the resource at Karkar site cannot be known until the 
exploratory  drilling  is  conducted  and  flow  testing,  chemical  sampling  and  analyses  is 
completed.  The  surface  studies  that  were  conducted  for  Karkar  site and are  described  in 
the IP concluded that two conceptual geothermal models or their combination might exist 
for the Karkar site:  

Model A:  Model A assumes that low resistance is not present in the geothermal zones of 
interest.  In  such  a  case,  Model  А  would  provide  only  for  a  diffuse  source  of  heat  and 
characterizes the field as a reservoir of moderately warm waters (less than 100оС).    

Model  В:    Model  B  assumes  that  low  resistance  may  be  present  in  geothermal  zones  of 
interest. In such a case, Model В would provide for a localized high-temperature source of 
heat.  Along  with  this,  some  of  the  layers  could  be  characterized  as  a  reservoir  of  high-
temperature water (more than 250оС).  

8.       The use of FITs needs to be very carefully considered as it implies ongoing subsidy that 
has to be funded from central government if not passed in part or total to consumers. 

Response:  Agreed.  As  noted  in  the  revised  investment  plan,  the  Government  is  also 
considering—for  utility  scale  solar  PV,  in  particular—a  reverse  auction  approach  to 
determining the appropriate level of tariff in order to minimize the cost to government and 
customers. 

9.       The success of small scale hydro should be encouraged and supported as needed to 
ensure that this sector does not suffer where other RE resources are being considered. 

Response:  Agreed,  but  substantial  financing  already  exists  for  small  scale  hydro  from 
private  banks  (under-written  by  financing  from  development  partners).  In  sum,  the 
industry  is  already  commercially  viable.  It  is  the  Government’s  view  that  small  hydro 
capacity can continue to grow without additional concessional financing. 

111 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
