United Nations Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for Project Services DP/DCP/ALB/3 Distr.: General 6 July 2021 Original: English Second regular session 2021 30 August–2 September 2021, New York Item 5 of the provisional agenda Country programmes and related matters Country programme document for Albania (2022–2026) Contents I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ................ II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….… III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….…………………… Annex Results and resources framework for Albania (2022–2026) ……………………… ... ….…………… Page 2 4 6 6 8 21-09396X (E) 150721 *2109396* DP/DCP/ALB/3 I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 1. Albania, with its population of 2.9 million, is an upper-middle-income country with a high Human Development Index of 0.791,1 Gender Development Index of 0.967 and Gender Inequality Index of 0.181. Women hold half of senior government positions. The economy is stable but underperforming, dependent on consumption and remittances, with low productivity and a limited tax base. Unemployment is structural and long-term at 11.8 per cent2 with a gender pay gap of 6.6 per cent.3 According to official figures,4 38.3 per cent of the population suffer severe material deprivations and 23.4 per cent are at risk of falling into poverty (2018). 2. Albania faces multiple challenges that drive vulnerabilities, including weaknesses in rule of law, uneven institutional capacity, service gaps, limited investments in social services, degradation of natural resources and few labour opportunities. 3. The November 2019 earthquake and coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic highlighted the need to address disaster risk management and the socioeconomic impact of these events, particularly on vulnerable groups and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. The pandemic deepened gender inequalities, disproportionately affecting women, their livelihoods and access to essential health services, and increased incidents of gender-based violence. 4. In March 2020, the European Union opened accession negotiations. The country’s vision of sustainable development, the key drivers for reforms and political and public priorities,5 are accession to the European Union, sustainable economic growth and inclusive prosperity. The National Strategy for Development and Integration (NSDI) III is under preparation with interim nationalized Sustainable Development Goal indicators and targets.6 5. This country programme reflects the comparative advantages of UNDP in supporting national reforms and upholding values of justice, human rights, equity and gender equality, through coordinated multisectoral approaches that facilitate systemic reforms. Drawing on its reputation as a United Nations system “integrator” for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and trusted impartial partner, UNDP will continue to liaise with the Government, donors and international institutions to mobilize financing to support economic transformation and eradication of multidimensional poverty; and establish systems that address risks, disasters and social injustice within the Sustainable Development Goals. Work at the local level and partnerships within the United Nations and across society position UNDP well to support aspirations to join the European Union and attain the outcomes of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF). 6. The summary7 of the previous country programme’s performance concluded that UNDP support to development remains highly relevant in Albania. It is viewed as an innovative thought leader drawing on international experiences, with the ability to convene different stakeholders underpinning its integrator role for the 2030 Agenda through: (a) technical expertise, offering integrated and cross-sectoral solutions, combining policy and regulatory advice with capacity development; (b) a strong and agile operational presence; (c) established multi-stakeholder partnerships on priorities for European Union accession and the Sustainable Development Goals; and (d) trusted relations with all institutions. __________________ 1 UNDP, 2020, Human Development Report (link). 2 INSTAT Labour Force Survey 2020. 3 Ibid. 4 INSTAT Income and Living Conditions Survey, 2018. 5 Common Country Analysis, 2020. 6 Voluntary National Review on Sustainable Development Goals, June 2018 (link). 7 UNDP Albania country programme performance summary 2017-2021 (link). 2/17 21-09396 DP/DCP/ALB/3 7. The theory of change underpinning the country programme is that innovative approaches to inclusive, climate-friendly, gender-sensitive, sustainable growth in new competitive sectors, coupled with transparent, accountable governance systems, will boost jobs and businesses, identify investment opportunities, increase resilience and address interconnected vulnerabilities of climate, health and social injustice. UNDP will focus on local-level actions that together with national datasets and research, will inform national strategies and build forward better, particularly for those left behind. 8. Those left behind include women, children from low-income households, single parent households, persons with disabilities, the Roma and Egyptian communities, refugees, migrants, isolated rural communities, the elderly and bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex persons. Women who work in the care economy and in addition belong to minority groups and lack education, are the most vulnerable.8 Discrimination, stigmatization and gender-based violence are prevalent. Through a portfolio approach, UNDP will target these groups and increase social cohesion and social protection, in partnership with national and local governments, United Nations agencies and civil society. UNDP will partner with United Nations agencies on joint programmes related to leaving no one behind, strategic policy options for Sustainable Development Goal financing and ending violence against women. 9. The UNDP integration offer includes innovation, thematic expertise and financing for renewables and energy efficiency in line with Government’s plans to provide safe, affordable and clean energy to citizens; and for raising the national ambitions to combat climate change and increase resilience to natural and human-induced risks. UNDP will promote nature-based solutions to climate change adaptation and mitigation, not only tackling the climate crisis, inequality, poverty and food insecurity, but also providing incentives for new jobs in the maritime, blue and eco-circular economies. Partnering with United Nations agencies, UNDP will implement programmes on a green circular economy and sustainable economic development. 10. Economic growth is too low9 to converge with European Union living standards and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. With United Nations agencies, UNDP will support employment measures for vulnerable groups, integrate small and medium-sized enterprises in global value chains, and support civil society to increase women’s access to careers in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. There are few incentives for adoption and innovation in digital technology, but a national digital data strategy and increasing digitalization are critical to accelerating the fourth industrial revolution. UNDP will focus on integrated solutions that address cross-cutting problems, i.e., identifying nature- based solutions that support the transition to a clean green economy, promote ecotourism and create new jobs in competitive sectors within the Western Balkan Regional Economic Area. 11. Key barriers to effective and efficient provision of services and that impact public trust are the lack of integrity and accountability of public institutions, slow progress on judicial reforms and corruption. Building on previous successes, UNDP will work with civil society and the government to improve human capacities and data systems for performance, transparency and planning. UNDP will work on the quality of services and rule of law, in close collaboration with United Nations partners. 12. With Albania positioning itself as a unifying actor for regional cooperation, security and stability, and taking the initial steps to establish the national disaster risk management system as a requirement to join the European Union Civil Protection Mechanism, UNDP will continue to promote knowledge-sharing and relevant practices across the subregion. To the extent possible, UNDP will promote South-South and triangular cooperation in support of these efforts. __________________ 8 Common Country Analysis, 2020. 9 INSTAT Income and Living Conditions Survey 2018. 21-09396 3/17 DP/DCP/ALB/3 13. The report of the United Nations mainstreaming, acceleration and policy support mission to Albania and the United Nations country team reached consensus on three highly effective solutions for policy and programming to accelerate progress towards European Union accession and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals: (a) human capital development and social inclusion; (b) sustainable, resilient and green economic growth and resource management; (c) effective, people-centred governance, human rights, rule of law and gender equality. These are translated into four UNSDCF outcomes, fully adopted by UNDP and underpinned by five cross-cutting principles of human rights; gender equality; inclusion and equality; transparent civic participation; and innovation. 14. The vision, value proposition and theory of change, which consolidates a number of past programmatic investments and proposes new transformative areas of action, were developed in consultation with over 200 partners representing civil society, private sector, academia, local and national governments, development partners and United Nations agencies, and validated in a meeting with over 17 Deputy Ministers. II. Programme priorities and partnerships 15. This country programme reflects the country’s development priorities as articulated in the NSDI and the UNSDCF 2022-2026. In addition, it is aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan and contributes to different European Union acquis chapters.10 The Sustainable Development Goal targets and indicators and national datasets are integral to programme outcomes and outputs. UNDP will contribute to these priorities, and application of its six signature solutions will help the country accelerate structural transformations. Specifically, UNDP will assist the country in the three main areas described below. 16. Human capital development and social inclusion. Albania needs well-functioning, fully operational and funded social inclusion and protection policies. UNDP will work with national partners to promote social cohesion and strengthen social protection systems, services and financing mechanisms to increase coverage and quality for vulnerable groups. With United Nations agencies, UNDP will ensure civic engagement and capacities for dialogue and implementation of social care plans. 17. COVID-19 generated a sense of urgency to operationalize national policies, strengthen local government capacities and design and fund inclusive, gender-responsive and evidence- based services. To reach those most left behind, UNDP will expand services at municipal and national levels in education, health, social care, employment, vocational training and housing. UNDP, with the European Union, will continue investments in the education sector affected by the 2019 earthquake, adopting European Union standards and expanding information and communication technology measures as a post-COVID-19 recovery strategy. UNDP will technically lead implementation of the United Nations COVID-19 socioeconomic recovery plan. 18. Sustainable, resilient and green economic growth and resource management. UNDP will support policies that accelerate an inclusive, productive and sustainable economy, enhance climate resilience and adaptation planning, and transition into a clean green economy, in line with the Government’s national strategies. This will be done through: (a) strengthening governance mechanisms to address climate change, biodiversity loss, pollution and land degradation; (b) promoting ecotourism and circular bioeconomy; (c) promote a “source-to-sea” approach, and strengthen transboundary cooperation for water resources management in the Drini River Basin; (d) address the skills mismatch of youth and women for innovation and digitalization; and (e) support value chains of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, decent jobs and inclusive employment, particularly for persons with disabilities and women. UNDP will support industries to become more energy-efficient, increase the potential of the forestry sector for removal of greenhouse gasses, and support __________________ 10 8, 11-13, 18-20, 23-24 and 27. 4/17 21-09396 DP/DCP/ALB/3 the country’s green growth trajectory. UNDP will support promotion of nature-based tourism that sustains livelihoods and protected areas, while improving ecosystem services and financial sustainability. 19. UNDP will support entities to have improved systems and capacities to design and implement innovative policies, particularly in relation to qualitative skills development that promotes a digital economy, entrepreneurship and competitive green businesses. UNDP will focus on integrated multisectoral solutions that provide: the necessary skills, vocational education and training; access to decent jobs and innovative technology; sustainable livelihoods; and business opportunities. With young people (aged 15-24) comprising 25 per cent of the population, UNDP will continue to promote youth as productive human capital and partner with labour-market stakeholders to boost employment and entrepreneurship. UNDP will consolidate reforms, strengthen capacities, address skills mismatch and increase labour force participation especially for women and young people, persons with disabilities, Roma and Egyptian communities and the long-term unemployed. 20. With inclusive growth being a key driver for reducing vulnerability and building resilience, particularly for the poor and most disadvantaged, UNDP will continue to support policies and measures leading to an expedited economic recovery and increased competitiveness and productivity of (female-led) micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. UNDP will work towards improved environments for digital innovation through support for data-driven innovations, bringing higher education closer to the labour market and supporting new course curricula for future skills. Increasing vocational education and training to match labour market demands and integrating small and medium-sized enterprises in global value chains are additional strategies. A vision and road maps for green growth and a blue economy will be formulated, thus ensuring growth that protects natural resources. 21. To contribute to a strengthened risk and disaster management system, UNDP will assist the Government in driving policies and actions that focus on prevention and reduction of disaster-related risks, increasing resilience of infrastructures, ecosystems and society, and enabling adaptive capacities, all as a means to reduce the long-term vulnerability of the population and protect development investments, particularly in at-risk areas. With a “knowing better, losing less” approach, UNDP will focus on local-level risk assessments, utilizing data and knowledge in parallel with prevention measures. Raising the national ambition to combat climate change, increasing resilience to natural and human-induced risk, and gender-responsive disaster strategies remain priorities. 22. Effective, people-centred governance, human rights, rule of law and gender equality. UNDP will broaden partnerships for a stronger good governance framework, in line with the National Public Administration Reform Strategy. UNDP will foster a citizen- centred, gender-sensitive, inclusive approach, while further developing institutional capacities in policymaking and implementation, promoting a culture of participation and dialogue for development, and increasing transparency, integrity and accountability. Based on its initial successful experiences in rolling out integrity planning in municipalities, UNDP will build national capacities to bring to scale and monitor this initiative. 23. Innovation and digitalization will be explored to establish robust, modernized and efficient service delivery. UNDP will support integrated citizen-centred services and further expand municipal one-stop-shop networks to reach remote, mostly rural areas. 24. UNDP will support legal, policy and institutional reforms related to human rights commitments and civic engagement; capacity development for policymaking and monitoring; and access to justice for vulnerable people. UNDP will continue to support the People’s Advocate, and the Commissioners for Information and Data Protection and Protection from Discrimination. UNDP will continue to work towards ending all forms of domestic, sexual and gender-based violence and unfavourable social norms and gender stereotypes, supporting coordinated referral mechanisms and integrated services, safe accommodation and accessible emergency and specialized support. It will continue to 21-09396 5/17 DP/DCP/ALB/3 support the Government to address structural and systemic barriers to gender equality and women’s empowerment in policy formulation and implementation, and to generate quality gender-disaggregated data for targeted, informed investments and quantifying of results. 25. The programme will support data availability and a more data-driven culture for strengthened sectoral analysis, evidence-based policymaking and promotion of a culture of accountability and performance assessment. Policy analysis and formulation will include a gender equality focus and gender-disaggregated data. UNDP will engage gender champions and support increased civic engagement and dialogue platforms. 26. UNDP will continue to work closely with existing donors, vertical funds and United Nations agencies, diversifying funding sources by partnering with new donors including on an integrated national finance framework, while broadening engagement with the private sector, academia, civil society, national human rights institutions and the media. III. Programme and risk management 27. This country programme document (CPD) outlines UNDP’s contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework. 28. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. 29. UNDP will participate in joint Government–United Nations coordination mechanisms. Programme and project boards will be established in line with the social and environmental standards and accountability mechanism. 30. The main risk to the programme relates to the ongoing impact of COVID-19 and an unforeseen impact on the capacity to implement the programme or achieve its results. Possible changes in the process and requirements for European Union accession may impact national development policies. Natural or man-made hazards, with insufficient institutional and local preparedness to respond, can impact the ability of UNDP to support Albania in delivering its development priorities. 31. Risks will be managed through coordination and partnerships; advocacy and policy dialogue; regular monitoring of risks, project and results; and updating of contingency plans for the country office and national emergencies. IV. Monitoring and evaluation 32. The monitoring and evaluation plan will be implemented following endorsement of the CPD by the Executive Board. The results framework is aligned with indicators related to European Union accession, the NSDI and the national indicator framework for the Sustainable Development Goals. This demonstrates a clear linkage between the support provided by UNDP, the programme outcomes and sustainable development results. 33. The planned evaluations will contribute to accountability, learning and achievement of strategic results. They meet all the required criteria, provide sufficient and balanced coverage of the programme’s areas of engagement and emphasize national ownership and capacity development. Planned project evaluations relate to ongoing projects. Results of new projects will be captured in the midterm review or in future project evaluations added during yearly 6/17 21-09396 DP/DCP/ALB/3 reviews of the evaluation plan. Socioeconomic, political and environmental risks were considered during the formulation of the evaluation plan. Ethical practices and lessons learned shape policy advice, advocacy and project design and implementation. An independent country programme evaluation will be conducted in 2025. 34. UNDP will employ national monitoring systems, official statistical data and reports from line ministries, development partners and research institutions to measure its contribution to national results. Other data, perception surveys and reports will be used to assess results and behavioural change. The National Statistical Office and other partners will receive support to continue improving data quality. Data for baselines and targets will be disaggregated by sex, geography and income and increasingly identify those left behind. The programme will reinforce innovative tools to manage data collection and analysis at the country programme outcome and output levels. 21-09396 7/17 DP/DCP/ALB/3 Annex. Results and resources framework for Albania (2022-2026) NATIONAL PRIORITY: NSDI II Pillar 3. Investing in human capital and social cohesion. SDGs: 1, 5, 10, 16. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME: By 2026 there is increased and more equitable investment in people, removing barriers and creating opportunities for those at risk of exclusion. RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1. Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), BASELINES, TARGET(S) Indicator: Number of (i) households; (ii) persons with disabilities (PwD); (iii) percentage of refugees and persons granted temporary protection covered by social protection system, by sex and age (SDG 1.3.1) Baseline: (i) 66,629 (ii) 72,711 (iii) 2.3% Target: (i) 65,000 (ii) 70,000 (iii) 15% Indicator: Socioeconomic gaps between Roma and non- Roma, by sex (reflected in rates of employment, registration and access to services) Baseline: (i) Employment Non-Roma: 27%; Roma: 18%; Roma females:11% (ii) Possession of identity cards Non-Roma: 97%; Roma: 90%; Roma females: 91% DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME ($) • Ministries (Health and Social Regular: 450,000 Other: 55,702,260 Protection, Finance and Economy, Education, Youth and Sports, Reconstruction) • INSTAT • Albanian School of Public Administration (ASPA) • State Social Services • People’s Advocate • Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination • Donors (European Union, Governments of Switzerland, Sweden, Austria, Croatia,) • CSOs • United Nations agencies • Local Government Units (LGUs) Albanian Institute of Statistics (INSTAT) UNESCO Regional Roma Survey Output 1. Social care and inclusion: Social protection systems and mechanisms are strengthened to increase the coverage, quality, and monitoring of monitoring of social services and social inclusion for vulnerable men and women is enhanced. Indicator 1.1: Number of men and women at risk of exclusion Baseline (2020): PwD 2,000; Risk of exclusion 1,600. Target (2024): PwD 4,000; Risk of exclusion 4,000. Data source: UNDP; State Social Service; Ministry of Health and Social Protection (MoHSP) Indicator 1.2: Number of local governments and subnational authorities with enhanced capacities to plan, budget, implement and monitor local social care and inclusion policies (including social housing) for vulnerable groups designed in a collaborative, evidence- based and gender-sensitive manner. Baseline (2020): 24 LGUs; subnational authorities 3; professional staff 100 Target: 40 LGUs;7 subnational authorities; professional staff 250 Data source: State Social Service, MoHSP, UNDP Indicator 1.4: Level of implementation of Roma and Egyptian equality, inclusion and participation action plan and measures. Baseline: 3.68 (2019) Target: 3.8 Source: MoHSP 8/17 21-09396 DP/DCP/ALB/3 (iii) Youth (18-24) not in employment, education or training Non-Roma: 42%; Roma: 78%; Roma females: 90% (iv) Use of preventive health care Non-Roma: 68%; Roma: 44%; Roma f:49% Target: Gap decreased by at least 2% Output 2. Education: Educational institutions have improved infrastructure, services and tools to offer inclusive learning and skills to boys and girls, especially from vulnerable groups. Indicator 2.1: No. educational facilities repaired and reconstructed according to European Union standards; No. children and students (boys and girls) benefiting from improved services in education sector. Baseline: 0 Target (2023): 58 Source: Certificate of acceptance of works Baseline: 0 Target (2023): 20,000 Source: Regional directorate of education Output 3. Gender-inclusive community engagement: Communities and CSOs enjoy greater capacities and working mechanisms to participate in planning, (pro- poor) service delivery and monitoring to enhance quality of services and improve access to vulnerable groups. Indicator 3.1: No. of supported initiatives of civil society organizations representing women, PwD, refugees, migrants, and Roma and Egyptian minorities that promote participation, human rights, social cohesion and volunteerism. Baseline (2020): 8 Target: 34 Source: UNDP NATIONAL PRIORITY: NSDI II Pillar 2. Economic growth through enhanced competitiveness and innovation; NSDI II, Pillar 3: Investing in human capital and social cohesion; NSDI II Pillar 4. Growth through sustainable use of resources. SDGs 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME: By 2026 innovative and integrated policy solutions accelerate sustainable, productive, and inclusive economic development, enhancing climate change adaptation and mitigation and transition to a green and blue economy. RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 3. Build resilience to shocks and crises. Indicator: Labour force participation rates, by sex, age (SDG 8.5.2; 8.6.1) INSTAT Baseline: 21-09396 Output 1. Environment and Climate Change: Implement existing legislation more effectively, new commitments, measures targets, and governance mechanisms to address climate change, biodiversity loss, waste, pollution, and degradation strengthening systems • Prime Minister’s Office • Ministries (Tourism and Environment, Infrastructure and Energy) Regular: 700,000 Other: 38,072,908 9/17 • National agencies (Water Resources Management, Protected Areas, Environment Protection, Forestry, Tourism) • LGUs • Academia • INSTAT • ASPA • CSOs • Donors (Governments of Norway, Italy, Sweden, vertical funds, development banks, European Union) • Private sector • United Nations agencies DP/DCP/ALB/3 Total: 69.6% (2019) Male: 77.6% Female: 61.6% Young people (15-24) Total: 37% Male: 43%; Female: 30% Target: Total: 69.7% Male: 77.7% Female: 61.6% Young people (15-24) Total: 38% Male: 44%; Female: 31% Proportion of youth (aged 15– 24 years) not in education, employment, or training, by sex (SDG 8.6.1) Baseline: Total: 26% Male: 26% Female: 25% Target: Total: 21.4% Male: 21% Female: 22% Indicator: Availability of enhanced nationally determined contributions (NDCs) to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (based on Energy and Climate Plan targets) (Y/N) (SDG13.2.1) and national adaptation plan adapt to climate change. Baseline (2015): NDC Target: Yes Indicator: No. of new or amended laws, policies, regulations approved for 10/17 of protected areas and natural capital to promote ecotourism and circular bioeconomy. Indicator 1.1: Strategic and policy interventions developed through inclusive and transparent process. Baseline: NDC submitted in 2016 Target: Revised NDC informs development of integrated climate and energy policies/plan/sectors Source: UNFCCC, European Union Energy Community Secretariat Indicator 1.2: Interventions implemented to ensure effective performance of protected areas system and nature protection. Baseline: Management Effectiveness tracking system in place for all protected areas Target: up to three National Parks are capacitated to deliver on business plans; all protected areas to manage their financial effectiveness Source: Ministry of Tourism and Environment and National Agency of Protected Areas Output 2. Disaster risk reduction: Strengthening government efforts on climate proofing, resilience building, prevention and preparedness for a solid disaster management system empowering women and bringing together citizens in all their diversity, with national, regional, local authorities, civil society and private sector working closely. Indicator 2.1: Disaster risk management system in place, supported by strategic policies and planning documents and coordinated platform for preparedness and response in line with best practices and European Union requirements includes women and men and gender- disaggregated disaster needs assessments Baseline: New agency of civil protection in place, existing studies, and assessments on some risks Target: Disaster Risk Management Strategy, National Civil Protection Plans and National Coordination Platform in place, as well as standard methodologies for local DRR strategies and civil protection developed and implemented in at least 7 municipalities, Advanced preparations for accession to the European Union Civil Protection Mechanism Source: Ministry of Defence and National Agency of Civil Protection INSTAT Government and United Nations Government and United Nations 21-09396 DP/DCP/ALB/3 environmental protection and sustainable green and blue growth incorporating gender equity considerations and sex- disaggregated data Baseline (2020): 3 Target: 9 Indicator: Proportion of the country covered by protected areas and under improved management for conservation and sustainable use (SDG15.1.2, proxy and SDG 14) Baseline: 18.5% Target: 23% Indicator11: Availability of (i) National disaster risk reduction strategy; updated national emergency plan; and (ii) Proportion of municipalities with disaster risk reduction strategies in line with Sendai Framework incorporating gender equity and child rights considerations and sex-disaggregated data (Yes/No) (SDG 11.b.1) Baseline (2020): (i) No (ii) TBD National Agency for Protected Areas Government and United Nations World Competitiveness Report, World Economic Forum Indicator 2.2: Climate change adaptation planning and preparedness influences investments, including on nature-based solutions. Baseline: National climate change strategy and legal framework in place Target: National climate adaptation planning includes climate finance options; funding partnerships Source: Ministry of Tourism and Environment Output 3. Water resource management and blue growth: Promote source-to-sea approach for sustainable water resources management and strengthened transboundary cooperation while tapping into the potential of blue growth. Indicator 3.1: Blue economy programme with a long- term vision Baseline: No programme or strategy on blue economy/blue growth Target: Blue economy programme developed; new interventions project fiches developed for implementation in main subsectors Source: Office of the Prime Minister and line ministries Indicator 3.2: implementation of priority interventions in Drini River basin in line with Drini Strategic Action Plan. Baseline: Transboundary Diagnostic Analysis and Strategic Action Programme in place for Drini Target: # measures implemented in Drini Source: Ministry of Tourism and Environment and National Water Resources Management Agency Output 4. Employment and Skills Development: Government institutions increased capacities to strengthen policies and services addressing skills mismatch and increase labour force participation and decent work, especially for young people, vulnerable groups, the long term unemployed. • Prime Minister’s Office • Parliament • Ministries and Institutions (Finance and Economy, Education, Youth and Sports, __________________ 11 UNSDCF outcome indicator being agreed with the Government. 21-09396 11/17 DP/DCP/ALB/3 Target (2026): (i) Yes (ii) TBD Indicator: Research and development index score (World Economic Forum) Baseline (2019): 17.2/100 Target (2026): 35/100 Health and Social Protection, Protection of Entrepreneurship) • National agencies (Youth, Employment and Skills, Vocational Education, Training and Qualifications) • National Councils (Labour, Vocational Education Training) • INSTAT • Financial Supervisory Authority • Investment Promotion Agency • Investment Council • General Department of Taxation • National Business Centre • LGUs • Chambers of Commerce • United Nations agencies • Regional Youth Cooperation Office • European Investment Fund • Donors (European Union, Governments of Switzerland, Italy, Netherlands, United Kingdom, Sweden, EIB, EBRD) • NGOs • Private Sector • Diaspora • Higher education institutions • World Economic Forum Indicator 4.1: The national strategic document to guide the employment and skill development sector formulated and adopted. Baseline: Current strategy 2019-2022 Target: Yes, 2023-2030 Source: Official Gazette Indicator 4.2: No. employment promotion programmes designed and implemented for vulnerable groups Baseline (2021): 5 Target (2026): 9 Source: Official Gazette Indicator 4.3: % of vocational education and training providers accredited or in the process of accreditation. Baseline (2021): 0% Target (2026): 100% Source: Ministers Orders published by the National Agency for Vocational Education and Training and Qualifications Output 5. Economic Development: Policies and programme measures developed to promote digital economy, entrepreneurship and growth of competitive SMEs. Indicator 5.1: No. MSMEs benefiting from improved business advisory support; share of those led by women, youth. Baseline (2020): 15 Target (2026): 500 (at least 100 women-led businesses) Source: UNDP Indicator 5.2: No. policy initiatives in support of increased resilience in the private sector. Baseline: 0 Target: At least two policy initiatives drafted and approved Source: Ministry of Finance and Economy Output 6. Innovation: Data-driven innovations lead to financial solutions for the achievement of SDGs. 12/17 21-09396 DP/DCP/ALB/3 Indicator 6.1: Integrated national financial framework (INFF) for SDG achievement is drafted and approved through an inclusive process Baseline: INFF not in place Target: INFF approved Source: Government of Albania, Parliament Indicator 6.2: No. innovative approaches, including behavioural insights and design thinking, tested and scaled up with public and private institutions Baseline: 0 Target: At least three innovation prototypes and one scaled up Source: UNDP NATIONAL PRIORITY: NSDI Fundamental Principle - Good Governance, Democracy and Rule of Law; NSDI II Pillar 3. Investing in human capital and social cohesion; NSDI II Priority. Delivery of innovative, citizen-centred public services (Improving the quality of life and the environment for all; Strengthening governance and the government’s capability to deliver). SDGs 5, 10, 11, 16. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME: By 2026, governance is more transparent and accountable, enabling people (women and girls, men and boys, and persons at risk of exclusion), to enjoy quality, inclusive services, enhanced rule of law and access to justice in line with Albania’s human rights commitments. RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development. Trust in Governance Survey (UNDP) (Annually) Ibid Output 1. Good Governance, Participation and Voice: Governance processes are made more effective, accountable, transparent, and compliant to rule of law, by promoting a participatory culture, making use of technological advancements, and developing capacities for inclusive and equitable policy formulation and implementation. Indicator 1.1: No. of civil society organization initiatives addressing community needs which are funded (disaggregated by sex and vulnerable target groups to extent possible). Baseline (2021): 123 Target (2024): 180 Source: European Union and UNDP Indicator 1.2: No. public calls for CSOs performed by local governments Baseline (2021): 36 Target (2024): 58 • Prime Minister's Office • Ministries (Interior, Justice, Health and Social Protection) • National agencies (Delivery of Regular: 700,000 Other: 12,701,933 Integrated Services, Information Society) • INSTAT • Commissioners (Right to Information and Data Protection, Protection from Discrimination) • People’s Advocate • LGUs • Donors (European Union, Governments of Austria, Sweden, Switzerland, Italy) • Albanian Associations of Municipalities • Institute for Mediation and Democracy • CSOs Indicator: Proportion of population who believe institutional transparency (T) and accountability (A) are satisfactory, by sex, age, disability and population group (disaggregated by central/local level) (SDG 16.6.1 proxy) Baseline (2020): Central: T: 35%, A: 35% Local: T: 37%, A: 37% Target (2026): Central: T: 50%, A: 60% Local: T: 50%, A: 60% Indicator: Proportion of population who believe there are sufficient opportunities to participate in the decision- 21-09396 13/17 Ibid DP/DCP/ALB/3 making processes of public institutions (disaggregated by sex, age group, central/local level) (SDG 16.7.2, proxy) Baseline (2020): Central: 28% Local: 39% Target (2026): Central: 40% Local: 50% Indicator: Proportion of persons who paid a bribe to a public official or were asked for a bribe by those public officials, during the previous 12 months (disaggregated by sex, age group, central/local level) (SDG16.5.1) Baseline (2020): Central: 32 Local: 32 Target (2026): Central: 10 Local: 15 Source: Local budgets of partner local government, European Union and UNDP • United Nations agencies Indicator 1.3: Adoption of integrity planning and implementation instruments at local and central level. Baseline (2021): 7 Target (2024): 30 Source: UNDP reports, National Anticorruption Strategy reports Indicator 1.4: No. of regular surveys by year Baseline (2021): 1 Target (2026): 2-3 every year, starting from 2022 Source: UNDP Output 2. Data and Evidence: Cooperation Framework partners increased capacities to generate quality disaggregated data to strengthen policies and programmes, based on the Integrated Planning System in Albania (IPSIS) system Indicator 2.1: No. of municipalities using IPSIS as performance system. Baseline (2020): 0 Target (2023): 5 Source: UNDP and municipal reports Indicator 2.2: No. of women and men using the one-stop- shop services. Baseline (2020): 26% W, 74% M Target (2023): 40% W, 60% M Source: UNDP, One-Stop-Shop Information System (OSSIS) Business Intelligence Indicator 2.3: Municipalities making use of OSSIS data to improve service delivery and staff performance Baseline (2020): 10 Target (2023): 30 Source: UNDP and municipal reports Indicator 2.4: Knowledge-sharing platform for enhancing system approach in central and local level is established Baseline (2020): 0 14/17 21-09396 DP/DCP/ALB/3 Target (2024): Platform operational at central and local levels Source: UNDP Output 3. Public sector accountability and quality services: Institutions at national and municipal level enhanced capacities and systems to deliver quality, responsive, efficient, transparent, inclusive and accessible services that meet the increasing social demand and perception of corruption in the public sector. Indicator 3.1: Level of citizens’ perception and satisfaction on public servants’ equal professional and ethical public (administrative) service delivery. Baseline (2020): 68% Target (2023): 74% Baseline (2020): 73% Target (2023): 82% Source: Annual Trust in Government Opinion Poll Indicator 3.3: No. of target local governments and administrative units providing services through one-stop- shop offices. Baseline (2020): 48 Target (2023): 250 Source: UNDP, OSSIS Business Intelligence Indicator 3.4: Monthly average of applications through one-stop-shopping per municipality Baseline (2020): 52 Target (2024): 250 Source: UNDP, OSSIS Business Intelligence Indicator 3.5: Level of accountability of central and local government. Baseline (2020): Central Government 35%; Local Government 37% Target (2023): Central Government 40%; Local Government 42% Source: Annual Trust in Government Opinion Poll Output 4. Human rights and access to justice: Parliament, national human rights institutions, and justice institutions strengthened capacities and 21-09396 15/17 DP/DCP/ALB/3 mechanisms to protect human rights, increase access to justice and remove structural barriers to gender equality and women's empowerment. Indicator 4.1: No. of vulnerable women and men benefitting from free legal aid services and reached .out through awareness and public legal education on human rights and protecting mechanisms. Baseline (2020): 4,372 Target (2026): 4,800 (annually) Source: MoJ Directorate of Free Legal Aid Baseline (2020): 1,700 Target (2026): 1,800 (annually) Source: UNDP NATIONAL PRIORITY: NSDI II: Cross NSDI - Delivery of innovative, citizen-centred public services; NSDI II Pillar 3. Investing in human capital and social cohesion. SDGs: 1, 5, 10, 11, 16. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME: By 2026, gender responsive governance strengthens equality and non-discrimination, promotes women’s empowerment and human rights, and reduces violence against women and children. RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development. INSTAT (Annually) Indicator: Proportion of women aged 18-74 years subjected to (i) intimate partner domestic violence;( ii) non-partner violence; (iii) sexual harassment in the previous 12 months (SDG 5.2.1; 5.2.2) Baseline: (i) 33.7 (ii) 2.4 (iii) 8.5 Target: (i) 32 (ii) 2 (iii) 8 Indicator: Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments and local governments (SDG5.5.1) and national dialogue mechanisms 16/17 Regular: 387,000 Other: 2,965,100 Output 1. Legal, policy and institutional reforms enhanced to remove structural barriers to gender equality and women's empowerment and prevent and respond to all forms of violence and discrimination against women and girls. Indicator 1.1: No. of cases of violence against women and girls handled through coordinated referral mechanisms. Baseline (2020): 450 Target (2026): 500 (annually) Source: Recording Violence in Albania online system Indicator 1.2: No. legal and policy initiatives developed in line with international treaties and standards on advancing gender equality and ending violence against women and girls • Ministries (Health and Social Protection, Education, Youth and Sports) • INSTAT • ASPA • State Social Services • People’s Advocate • Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination • Governments of Switzerland, Sweden, Austria) • CSOs • United Nations agencies • LGUs MoHSP (Annually) National human rights institutions’ reports (Biannually) United Nations reports (Annually) Baseline (2020): 9 laws and policies Target (2026): 14 laws and policies Source: Council of Ministers, UNDP Indicator 1.3: No. municipalities supported to provide emergency services to victims of domestic and sexual violence 21-09396 Baseline (2019): 29.5% Target: 40% Government and United Nations reports Baseline (2020): 8 Target (2026): 15 Source: UNDP DP/DCP/ALB/3 21-09396 17/17 