Table of Contents:
I. Programme rationale .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management . . .: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation .: Page: 7
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
 
I.  Programme rationale  
 
1.  Ethiopia is building on an impressive foundation of development progress. The country’s Human 
Development Index rose to 0.470 in 2018, an increase of 35.8 per cent in less than a generation.  Annual 
real growth of gross domestic product (GDP) averaged 9.5 per cent during the period 2010 to 2018, one 
of the highest rates globally, leading to a six-fold increase in per capita income but without a dramatic 
increase in income inequality: the Gini coefficient rose from 0.28 to 0.33 between 2005 and 2016.1 The 
incidence of poverty  declined from 38.7 per cent in 2005 to 23.5 per cent in 2016,2 equivalent to lifting 
15 million people out of poverty. The multidimensional poverty index fell in absolute terms from 0.545 
to 0.489 between 2011 and 2016, with deprivations receding across all 10 indicators and regions (except 
Somali). The under-five mortality rate declined by over 55 per cent between 2005 and 20193 and net 
primary school enrolment reached 100 per cent in 2018.4 At the same time, infrastructure investments 
have, among other things, lifted the rate of access to electricity from 14 to 43 per cent between 2005 and 
2018.5   
2.  Despite a generally positive development trajectory, significant structural challenges, reflecting a 
country in transition, will determine future development potential and achievement of the  Sustainable 
Development  Goals.  The  first  key  challenge  is  demographic,  with  multiple  facets:  an  impending 
demographic transition, with a potential demographic dividend;6 a youth bulge, with over 70 per cent of 
the  population  below  30  years  of  age,  that  makes  the  task  of  human  capital  development,  achieving 
higher labour productivity and job creation difficult; and accelerating urbanization, starting from a low 
base, with a doubling of the urban population expected between 2013 and 2035, affecting both growth 
potential and sustainability.   
3.  A  second  structural  challenge  has  to  do  with  gender  inequality.  Ethiopia  has  made  substantial 
progress  in  reducing  maternal  mortality,7  narrowing  gender  disparity  in  primary  education8  and 
increasing women’s representation in national parliament and the Federal cabinet. Yet Ethiopia scores 
0.846  on  the  Gender  Development  Index,  one  of  the  lowest  in  the  world,  and  stands  at  117  of  129 
countries in the Sustainable Development Goals Gender Index. Women have markedly lower access to 
essential productive inputs and services: only 51 per cent of women farmers are estimated to have access 
to agricultural extension services;9 8 per cent have access to credit;10 and just 40 per cent of married 
women own land with only 19.5 per cent holding a land title. These disadvantages are compounded by 
negative social norms that hold back women’s voice and participation in community life and traditional 
practices such as child marriage and female genital mutilation.    
4.  A  third  structural  challenge  emerges  from  the  State-led  development  model  pursued  in  the  past 
which  has  yielded  important  gains  in  human  development  and  infrastructure  but  also  inhibited  the 
emergence of a thriving private sector playing a leading role in job creation, productivity growth and 
diversification  of  the  economic  and  export  base.  This  is  evident,  among  other  things,  in  a  ‘missing 
middle’ of active small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs). Private sector development is stymied as 
well  by  a  range  of  other  factors:  macroeconomic  imbalances,  originating  in  part  from  debt  service 
obligations, which have limited access to vital foreign exchange; a small  capital market and banking 
 
1  Planning and Development Commission, Poverty and Economic Growth in Ethiopia (1995/96 – 2015/16), 2019. 
2  Ibid.   
3  Ministry of Health and United States Agency for International Development, Ethiopia Demographic and Health Mini 
Survey Report, 2019. 
4  Ministry of Education, Education Statistics Annual Abstract, 2016/17. 
5  Government of Ethiopia, Home-Grown Economic Reform Programme (2019-2022). 
6  Central Statistical Agency (CSA), Population Projections of Ethiopia, unpublished, 2013.  
7 CSA, Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey, 2016. 
8 Ministry of Education, Education Statistics Annual Abstract, 2016/17. 
9  Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Ethiopia National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural 
Livelihoods, 2019. 
10 United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women) and CSA, Ethiopia Gender 
Statistics Report, 2017. 
2 
 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
sector; low skill levels in the labour force; absence of an innovation ecosystem; and lack of access to 
energy.  
5.  A fourth structural challenge stems from the current governance model, albeit on the cusp of change, 
which faces significant stresses on issues of voice and participation, identity, justice and the rule of law, 
transparency and integrity, and the nature of the Federation, especially the appropriate balance between 
the centre and regions. Furthermore, even as regions begin to play a stronger role, their capacities, for 
example, to plan for and deliver services and local development, are very limited.  All of these factors 
can cause latent tensions to emerge as violence and displacement and could play out strongly as Ethiopia 
heads into elections in 2020, a pivotal step in its transition to a democratic polity.   
6.  Finally, the long-term and wide-ranging impacts of climate change pose a growing and structural 
risk to poverty eradication and sustainable development, not least given a high level of dependency on 
rain-fed agriculture and forests for food security, livelihoods and access to energy. As much as 10 per 
cent of GDP may be lost annually due to climate change11 as increasing natural disasters, loss of water 
resources,  forests  and  biodiversity,  and population displacement,  especially  from  ecologically  fragile 
lowlands, take their toll. Impacts on social cohesion and peace are also likely to be considerable.   
7. 
In every aspect, there is the additional factor of dynamics in the Horn of Africa and beyond, whether 
on  peace  and  security,  management  of  natural  resources,  infrastructure  development  or  trade  and 
investment.  The  onset  of  the  coronavirus  disease  (COVID-19)  poses  a  new  challenge  with  profound 
implications.   
8.  National development policy is responding proactively to these structural challenges and COVID-
19. The Homegrown Economic Reform Programme (HGER) calls for building a resilient and diversified 
middle-income economy, driven by the private sector; eradicating extreme poverty and hunger; building 
human  capabilities;  creating  a  modern  policy  and  institutional  framework;  and  creating  an  efficient, 
resilient  and  well-functioning  financial  market.  The  HGER  will  implement  a  forthcoming  10-Year 
Perspective Plan which is based on five strategic pillars: macroeconomic stability; quality of economic 
growth; productivity and competitiveness; implementation capacity at all levels; and a resilient green 
economy.   Underpinning both, a national jobs plan aims to create 14 million jobs by 2025 by building 
a vibrant local private sector, especially SMEs. Major action is also underway to address COVID-19. 
    
9. 
In  step  with  the  Government,  UNDP  needs  to  address  structural  challenges  and  promote 
transformational change if it is to remain relevant in Ethiopia. The evidence demonstrates that it is well 
positioned  to  do  so.12  During  the  previous  programme,  UNDP  demonstrated  particular  strengths  in 
creating an enabling environment and/or advancing action in three key areas: job creation; environmental 
sustainability;  and  democratic  governance.  UNDP  advised  on  the  creation  of  Ethiopia’s  flagship 
industrial parks and was an early investor and pioneer in job creation through youth-led entrepreneurship; 
supported  formulation  of  the  national  Climate  Resilient  Green  Economy  (CRGE)  strategy;  helped 
establish  a  CRGE  facility  that  has  already  mobilized  over   $200  million;  and  emerged  as  the  largest 
channel of Global Environment Facility (GEF) funding, building a  $90 million portfolio.  UNDP was 
also a first mover in the area of democratic governance, a decision that has paid off in deep relationships 
with key institutions and rapid response to new reforms.  Fresh opportunities have emerged in electoral 
support13 and peacebuilding, where UNDP has quickly established a strong presence.      
10.  Future work, however, also requires learning from the past. Multiple evaluations and a portfolio 
review14 have shown that UNDP engagement requires a clearer  focus and logic and a higher level of 
 
11 Government of Ethiopia, Climate Resilience Strategy, 2015. 
12UNDP,  Independent  Evaluation  Office,  Independent  Country  Programme  Evaluation,  2019.  Terminal  Evaluation, 
Mainstreaming Incentives for Biodiversity in Climate Resilient Green Economy of Ethiopia , 2019; Midterm Review, Creating 
Opportunities  for  Municipalities  to  Produce  and  Operationalize  Solid  Waste  Transformation ,  2019;  Midterm  Review, 
Implementing  Climate  Resilient  and  Green  Economy  Plans  in  Highland  Areas,  2019;  Midterm  Review  of  United  Nations 
Development Assistance Framework, 2018. 
13 With the Government of the United Kingdom as the anchor contributor in a coalition with 12 other donors.  
14 Op. cit. footnote 12; UNDP Ethiopia, Country Portfolio Review, 2019.   
3 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
 
ambition  commensurate  with  the  scale  of  changes  underway  in  Ethiopia.  The  portfolio  has  become 
fragmented,15  with  insufficient  connection  among  related  interventions.  The  sustainability  of  results 
varies, and not enough attention has been paid to scaling-up and exit strategies. UNDP remains focused 
on federal institutions but stronger partnership with regions is now essential. Systematic use of data and 
evidence is another key area for improvement. All of these issues, in turn, go to the heart of delivering 
on the UNDP role as integrator of the United Nations development system. 
II.   Programme priorities and partnerships  
11.  Aligned fully with the HGER and guided by the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, the emerging 
UNDP  strategic  offer  for  Africa  and  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation 
Framework (UNSDCF),  the next programme will assist Ethiopia to overcome its structural challenges 
as  it  strives  to  become  a  democratic,  peaceful  and  prosperous  middle-income  country.  UNDP  will 
support a successful transition to democratic governance, address drivers of conflict to consolidate and 
build peace, foster enabling conditions for expanded job creation by the private sector (especially SMEs) 
and  accelerate  the  transition  to  a  green  economy  resilient  to  climate  change.  Gender  equality  and 
women’s  empowerment  will  be  embedded  across  all  areas  of  work.  These  priorities  capitalize  on 
strengths  demonstrated  under  the  past  programme  while  adapting  to  new  realities  and  opportunities, 
retaining an ability to respond flexibly to COVID-19 and other unforeseen developments. 
12.  Across all of its priorities, UNDP will apply principles drawn from the human-rights based approach 
that are strongly embedded in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, namely: 
(a)  Inclusion,  targeting  those  left  behind,  as  defined  in  the  Common  Country  Analysis,    especially 
women and youth (15-30 years) and among them, those below the national poverty line who are 
unemployed,  exposed  to  violence,  displaced,  facing  discrimination,  have  a  disability  or  are 
marginalized in civic and political spaces. Location targeting will  focus on poorer secondary and 
tertiary urban settlements and rural zones in three to four regions, identified with the Government, 
that are representative of the highlands, rift valley and lowland pastoralist areas. 
 
(b)  Resilience  of  individuals,  especially  women  and  youth,  (female-headed)  households  and 
communities, emphasizing increased capacities to foresee, prepare for and bounce back stronger 
from a wide variety of shocks.  
 
(c)  Sustainability, ensuring that any development gains made are within the capacity and resources of 
the country and do not compromise prospects for future generations. 
 
A.  To support a peaceful transition to a democratic polity, UNDP will contribute to an enabling 
framework,  deepening  of  critical  capacities,  strengthening  of  norms  and  practices  and  greater 
voice and empowerment of those left behind, especially women. 
 
13.  UNDP will help entrench democratic governance and protection of human rights at both federal and 
regional  levels,  focusing  on  core  institutions.  This  effort  will  target  effective  oversight  and 
accountability;  increased  transparency;  continued  policy,  legal  and  regulatory  reform  that  is  gender-
responsive; follow-through on electoral support; implementation of the Civic Engagement Policy; and 
strengthening of federal-regional linkages. Supporting institutional reform and renewal will be critical 
to  delivering  on  these  transformational  objectives.  In  addition,  UNDP  will  target  research,  skills 
development and outreach initiatives to increase the influence of women and youth on public policies 
and legal frameworks. 
 
14.  UNDP will pursue a step change in the rule of law and access to justice, based on a sector-wide 
approach that triggers a comprehensive change process delivering major advances within four to five 
years, with clear benefits accruing to women. To this end, UNDP will build upon the recommendations 
of  a  proposed  justice  sector  assessment  to  be  conducted  jointly  by  Government  and  United  Nations 
agencies.  UNDP  will  emphasize  research,  strengthening  of  core  systems  and  civic  education  and 
 
15 Ibid. Over 50 projects in the portfolio at present, ranging in size from  $100,000 to $40 million.  
4 
 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
outreach.  It will partner with  civil society organizations (CSOs) and universities to provide legal aid 
services for underserved groups (such as women) and areas of the country.  
 
15.  UNDP will improve the transparency, accountability and integrity of public institutions to support 
the fight against corruption. It will develop a biennial corruption perception survey to identify policy 
priorities that can be reflected in the national anti-corruption strategy and will help set up the legislative 
and policy framework for a national whistle-blower system. In parallel, UNDP will enable review and 
modernization  of  the  Civil  Service  Code  of  Conduct  with  integrity  as  a  core  principle;  support 
strengthening of systems and mechanisms for transparency and asset declaration; and promote citizen 
monitoring.  
 
16.  UNDP will respond to changing federal-regional dynamics through a local governance programme 
designed  to  strengthen  presence,  capacity,  civic  engagement  and  accountability  of  local  institutions.  
UNDP  will  help  develop  the database  for  development planning  at  local  level,  working closely  with 
sister  agencies/entities.  It  will  also  strengthen  and,  where  needed,  develop  participatory  planning, 
budgeting, management and monitoring standards and processes, building in a strong element of public 
input and engagement, especially of women and youth,  ensuring that capacities built are  sustainable.  
UNDP  will  test  South-South  partnerships  to  offer  timebound  ‘surge’  expertise  in  priority  areas.  
Underpinning the above, analysis will look at expanding fiscal space at regional level, extending ongoing 
work on the estimation of regional GDP. 
 
17.  UNDP will integrate social cohesion and peacebuilding in its work on democratic governance, to 
mitigate  risks  and  where  needed  respond  effectively  to  conflict  and  sustain  peace,  addressing  the 
humanitarian-development-peace  nexus.  UNDP  will  provide  policy  advice  and  technical  support  to 
articulate  a  gender-responsive  national  peacebuilding  strategy,  based  on  a  comprehensive  and 
participatory conflict analysis, and help design and set-up a national peace architecture bringing together 
state and non-state institutions at federal and regional levels. A key consideration will be the roll-out of 
a  national  youth  service.  Another  will  be  to  collaborate  with  CSOs  to  enable  groups  such  as  ethnic 
minorities,  women  and  youth  to  become  agents  of  change  and  to  build  the  capacities  of  community 
leaders to resolve disputes peacefully, promote dialogue and build trust.  
 
18.  Given the dynamic context in Ethiopia, UNDP will retain the flexibility to respond to emerging 
needs.  Three  are  on  the  horizon:  a  targeted  institutional  development  programme  supported  by 
development partners; support to the Prime Minister’s Office, potentially based on a  shared platform 
with foundations; and e-governance.   
 
B. To help achieve shared prosperity, UNDP will narrow its focus to financial inclusion and 
the  ecosystem 
female 
entrepreneurs. 
targeting  youth,  especially  young 
for  entrepreneurship, 
 
19.  UNDP will offer market-based solutions for growth and development of SMEs in six dimensions: 
policy advice; skilling; business development services; enterprise development; project preparation and 
development; and finance. The focus will be on connecting elements of the ecosystem into one whole 
and transforming them. This component will tackle credit rationing for SMEs, ensuring that women gain 
access  to  financing.  Special  attention  will  be  paid  to  linkages  with  supply  chains  connected  to  large 
industrial  and  agro-industrial  parks.  Much  of  this  work  will  happen  in  partnership  with  the  United 
Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) and link with complementary support from international 
financial institutions and bilateral donors, creating scope for new partnerships to scale up and accelerate 
action. South-South cooperation is expected to play a key role. 
     
20.  The same partnership with UNCDF will involve a major push on digital finance as a launchpad for 
financial 
in 
telecommunications, and the Government’s focus on innovation, the partnership will take an ecosystem 
development approach to unlock policy and regulatory challenges, work with providers to tackle network 
and distribution infrastructure challenges, and tackle demand-side issues like access to phones, digital 
and financial literacy and behavioural change. This work will have a strong focus on innovations that 
inclusion.  Taking  advantage  of  impending  liberalization  processes,  particularly 
5 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
 
foster inclusivity and reduce the digital divide for young female entrepreneurs, migrants and smallholder 
farmers, among others.  
 
21.  Two broader initiatives on the innovation ecosystem and innovative finance will underpin the work 
on  entrepreneurship  and  digital  finance.  UNDP  will  deepen  its  partnership  with  national  institutions, 
MASHAV (Israel Agency for International Development Cooperation), Korea International Cooperation 
Agency  (KOICA),  sister  agencies  and  local  incubators/accelerators  to  strengthen  the  innovation 
ecosystem  by  addressing  policy,  regulatory  and  institutional  gaps,  enhancing  linkages  among 
stakeholders and improving access to finance and government services. An innovative finance lab will 
target research and policy advocacy, model development and small-scale experimentation to facilitate 
introduction and application of innovative sources of financing, including insurance. 
   
C. To sustain development gains and increase resilience, UNDP will promote leapfrogging 
to a green economy and faster adaptation to climate change. 
 
22.  UNDP  will  support  efforts  to  adapt  to  and  mitigate  the  impacts  of  climate  change  and  build 
resilience through piloting, learning and scaling-up of tested adaptation practices in the ecosystems of 
the  highlands  and  lowlands  that  address  the  poverty-environment  nexus.  Strategies  will  include  the 
integrated  landscape  approach  for  natural  resource  management  and  food  security,  use of  innovative 
models and tools for monitoring and gender mainstreaming, and integration of climate resilience into 
policies  and  strategies.  UNDP  will  continue  to  engage  in  implementation  of  gender-responsive 
community action plans to ensure integrated adaptation and mitigation responses that simultaneously 
tackle sustainability and poverty. Support will be provided for upscaling weather index-based and risk 
insurance  systems.  At  a  broader  level,  UNDP  will  help  update  Ethiopia’s  nationally  determined 
contribution  as  part  of  the  Climate  Promise  Initiative,  and  support  preparation  of  the  third  national 
communication  under  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  and  biennial 
reports. 
 
23.  UNDP will sustain and scale up its assistance for natural resource management and conservation of 
biodiversity.  UNDP  will  support  implementation  of  the  Government’s  10-year  Forest  Sector 
Development Plan (FSDP), the REDD-plus mechanism and strengthening of forest sector institutions to 
enhance conservation and development of forests for multiple benefits, building on partnerships with the 
Governments  of  Denmark,  Norway  and  Sweden.  Preventing  forest  loss,  promoting  restoration  and 
integrating  sustainability  into  major  commercial  crops  such  as  coffee  will  be  priorities  to  raise 
productivity, boost livelihoods and reduce poverty. UNDP will partner closely with regional and city 
administrations  on  implementation  of  the  FSDP  and  intensify  private  sector  engagement  in  the 
sustainable  use  of  forest  resources  for  value  addition  and  job  creation,  utilizing,  among  things,  an 
emerging partnership with KOICA to tap Ethiopia’s major bamboo forests. UNDP will support measures 
to improve conservation of biodiversity resources and sustainably  manage protected areas. Action on 
combating desertification, a growing threat, will be accelerated.   
 
24.  UNDP will focus on access to renewable, affordable and clean energy as a major catalyst for the 
transition to a jobs-rich green economy, ensuring that women and  female-headed households benefit 
from  this  investment.  UNDP  will  work  at  the  three  levels of  policy  analysis,  advocacy and  advisory 
services  to  de-risk  and  create  an  enabling  environment  for  the  emergence  of  a  market  at  scale  for 
renewable  energy  services;  prototyping  of  business  models  and  technologies  with  private  sector 
participation; and development of bankable projects to crowd-in investment.  Partnerships with sister 
agencies will be emphasized as will South-South cooperation, tapping ongoing collaboration with the 
Government of China and others. 
 
25.  UNDP  will  build  up  its  portfolio  on  sustainable  urbanization,  continuing  work  on  urban  waste 
management, combining livelihoods improvement, development of urban greenery and climate change 
mitigation. Building on continued support to the Beautifying Sheger Project in Addis Ababa, a Smart 
Cities  Hub  will  focus  on  solutions  using  digital  and  analogue  technologies  to  boost  inclusion, 
sustainability and resilience, with a special focus on the role of women in advancing the New Urban 
Agenda. 
 
6 
 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
26.  UNDP will invest in early warning and risk management systems to deal with the rising threat of 
natural disasters.16 Early warning systems will be developed in vulnerable regions, linked to contingency 
planning.  UNDP  will  support  the  generation  of  gender-disaggregated,  multi-hazard  disaster  risk 
assessments and information products with increased emphasis on hazard specifics and calculation of 
associated damage and loss potential vis-à-vis various risk scenarios. UNDP will generate a climate and 
disaster  risk  governance  baseline  and  strengthen  disaster  risk  governance,  including  for  recovery; 
integrate disaster risk reduction into national planning, budgeting and accounting systems; promote and 
support tracking of disaster risk management investments; and draw attention to gender-differentiated 
impacts and responses.   
 
III. Programme and risk management  
27.  This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as 
the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned 
to the programme at country level.  Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter 
levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations 
policies and procedures and internal control framework.  
 
28.  The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced by 
direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure. The harmonized 
approach to cash transfers will be used to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. The government 
coordinating authority will be the Ministry of Finance. 
 
29.  Programming  by  UNDP  will  emphasise  its  integrator  role  entailing  a  comprehensive  approach: 
policy  analysis  and  research  that  bridges  gaps  between  sectors  and  backs  advice  and  action  with 
evidence;  cross-sectoral  development  planning,  dialogue  and  coordination  that  applies  a  ‘whole-of-
economy’ and ‘whole-of-society’ lens; solutions that are integrative in design and partnership-building;17 
innovation across policy and interventions; capacity development for institutional transformation; and 
cross-border collaboration. 
 
30.  Successful implementation of the country programme will  be affected by several  risks: potential 
disruptions  linked  to  the  2020  elections  and  COVID-19;  an  uncertain  macroeconomic  environment; 
public  sector  capacity  challenges;  weak  integration  of  work  between  federal  and  regional  levels; 
exposure to natural disasters; and potential conflict and displacement.   
 
31.  To manage risk, UNDP will promote greater risk analysis using its policy research effort; develop 
early-warning mechanisms in addition to maintaining project-specific and portfolio-level risk logs and 
contingency plans; undertake risk-informed programming; apply the UNDP social and environmental 
safeguards  and accountability mechanisms; increase flexibility by reserving up to 5 per cent of its annual 
Trac1 allocation in a ‘rapid response facility’; and expand its presence at regional level. 
 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
 
32.  Key references will be the Government-United Nations national monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
guideline and programme implementation manual and the results and resources framework. UNDP will 
rely primarily on country-level data sources and the gender marker will be used systematically. UNDP 
will set aside a minimum of 5 per cent of project budgets for M&E, aiming to strengthen systems in 
partner institutions rather than establish parallel arrangements. The approved evaluation plan will be the 
 
16 In line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2015 -2030.   
17 For example, the New Way of Working and Durable Solutions Initiative and partnerships that bring together non-traditional 
actors from the Gulf and elsewhere in the Middle East, foundations, the tech sector and volunteer community (through 
United Nations Volunteers (UNV)).   
7 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
 
basis for decentralized evaluations, the next independent country programme evaluation and input into 
the midterm and final evaluations of the UNSDCF. 
 
33.  A key shift will be to invest in better country statistics. UNDP will work with sister agencies and 
development partners to strengthen the national statistical system to significantly improve coverage as 
well as to strengthen the granularity, quality, reliability and timeliness of data, e.g., by age, sex, location 
and  characteristics  such  as  disability,  in  order  to  create  a  stronger  foundation  for  tracking  those  left 
behind and refine targeting in programmes and projects. UNDP has already committed to supporting the 
development of a comprehensive M&E system for the 10-Year Perspective Plan and the existing Aid 
Management Platform.  
8 
 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Ethiopia (2020-2025) 
Home-Grown Economic Reform Programme ((HGER) PRIORITY: Building an emerging market economy level policy and 
institutional framework.   
UNSDCF OUTCOME:  By 2025, all people in Ethiopia live in a cohesive, just, inclusive and democratic society.  
Strategic Plan (SP) OUTCOME:  Accelerate structural transformations for inclusive and sustainable development.  
UNSDCF 
outcome 
indicator(s), 
baselines, 
target(s) 
Data source 
and frequency 
of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities 
Major 
partners / 
partnerships 
frameworks 
Estimated 
cost by 
outcome 
($) 
Indicative country programme outputs  
1.1  Voter turnout 
Output 1.1   
Constitution and law-making, electoral and parliamentary 
processes strengthened to promote inclusion, gender equality, 
transparency and accountability.  [modified Integrated Results 
and Resources Framework (IRRF) 2.2.2] 
Regular: 
$24.61 
million 
Central 
Statistical                  
Agency 
(CSA), 
Ethiopian 
Broadcasting 
Authority 
(EBA), 
Ethiopian 
Human 
Rights 
Commission 
(EHRC), 
Federal Anti-
Corruption 
Commission 
(FEAC), 
House of 
Federation 
(HoF), House 
of People’s 
Representativ
es (HoPR), 
Ministry of 
Finance 
(MoF), 
Ministry of 
Peace (MoP), 
Office of the 
Attorney-
General 
(OAG), Prime 
Minister’s 
Office 
(PMO), 
 
disaggregated by 
sex, (SP 2.3) 
 
 
 
 
Baseline 
(2005):18 82.6% 
(Male 53.3%; 
Female 46.7%) 
Target: 85% 
(Male 50%; 
Female 50%) 
Other: 
$64.34 
million  
Source:  
National 
Electoral Board 
of Ethiopia 
(NEBE) 
Frequency: 5-
 
Indicators 
1.1.1 
Extent to which the NEBE has core capacities to 
conduct inclusive, credible and peaceful elections 19 
(IRRF 2.2.2.1) 
 
•  Baseline (2019):1 
• 
Target: 2 
year 
 
 
election cycle  
 
1.1.2  Women’s participation in elections: (IRRF 2.2.2.2) 
 
1.2   Conflict-related 
(a)  proportion of women in the voter registry 
 
deaths 
disaggregated by 
sex (SP 3.4) 
•  Baseline (2015): 48% 
• 
 
Target: 50 % 
 
(b)  proportion of women on the governing mechanism 
 
 
of the electoral management body 
•  Baseline (2019): 40%   
• 
 
Baseline: TBD 
Target: TBD 
 
Target: 45%  
 
(c)  proportion of seats held by women represented at 
Source: TBD  
Frequency: 
TBD 
Federal and Regional parliaments 
•  Baseline (2015): Federal 38.8% Regional 28%  
• 
Target:  Federal - 40%; Regional 35% 
 
  
For both 1.1.1 and 1.1.2.1 
Source: HoPR, NEBE, EBA, planned UNDP capacity 
assessments 
Frequency: annual, 5-year election cycle  
 
1.1.3 
Extent to which representative bodies at federal and 
regional levels have improved capacities to undertake 
inclusive, effective, accountable, transparent and 
gender-responsive law-making, oversight and 
representation (in specified functional areas) 20 
(modified IRRF 2.2.2.3) 
•  Baseline (2019):1  
 
18 Data from 2005 have been used exceptionally as this was the most recent competitive election.    
19 A country- and institution-specific rating scale will be developed with Government to measure three levels of core 
capacities: 1= Low, 2 = Medium, 3 = High.    
20 A country- and institution-specific rating scale will be developed with Government to measure three levels of core 
capacities: 1= Low, 2 = Medium, 3 = High.    
9 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
 
• 
Target: 2 
NEBE,  
Planning and 
Development 
Commission 
(PDC), 
Regional 
Bureaux for 
Finance and 
Economic 
Development 
(BoFEDs) 
Source: HoPR, Regional Councils 
Frequency:  annual  
 
Output 1.2   
Capacities, functions and financing of rule of law and national 
human rights institutions and systems strengthened to promote 
and protect human rights, expand access to justice and combat 
discrimination, with a focus on women and other marginalized 
groups.  [modified IRRF 2.2.3] 
 
Indicators 
1.2.1 
 
Number of strengthened institutions and systems 
supporting fulfilment of nationally and internationally 
ratified human rights obligations (modified IRRF 
2.2.3.1) 
 
Governments 
of Austria, 
Canada, 
Denmark, 
Finland, 
Ireland, 
Japan, 
Luxembourg,  
Netherlands, 
New Zealand, 
Norway, 
Sweden, 
Switzerland,  
United 
Kingdom. 
•  Baseline (2019): 2  
• 
Target: 6 
Source: EBA, EHRC, NEBE, OAG, PMO  
Frequency:  annual 
 
1.2.2  Extent of strengthened capacities for governance and 
oversight of justice and rule of law institutions 21 (IRRF 
2.2.3.3) 
•  Baseline (2019): 1 
• 
Target: 2 
Source: OAG, Supreme Court, NEBE, MoP 
Frequency:  annual 
 
Output 1.3  
Institutions and systems enabled to address awareness, 
prevention and enforcement of anti-corruption measures across 
sectors  [modified IRRF 1.2.3] 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 
1.3.1 
Number of policy, legislative or regulatory measures 
developed and/or adopted to mitigate and remedy 
corruption risks at federal and regional levels 
•  Baseline (2019): Federal – 2 , Regional - 0 
• 
Target: Federal – 4; Regional - 2  
Source: FEAC, OAG 
Frequency: annual 
 
Output 1.4  
Capacities of federal and regional institutions strengthened to 
promote gender-responsive, inclusive and sustainable local 
development.  [modified IRRF 1.2.1] 
 
Indicators 
1.4.1 
Extent to which federal and regional institutions have 
improved capacities for participatory local development 
planning, budgeting and monitoring22 (modified IRRF 
1.2.1.1) 
 
21 Ibid. 
22 A country- and institution-specific rating scale will be developed with Government to measure three levels of core 
capacities: 1= Low, 2 = Medium, 3 = High.    
10 
 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
•  Baseline (2019): Federal and Regional - 1 
• 
Source: PDC, Regional BoFEDs 
Frequency: annual  
Target:  Federal – 3; Regional - 2 
 
1.4.2       Level of participation of women and youth groups in 
local development planning, budgeting and 
monitoring23 
Baseline (2019): 1 
Target: 2 
Source:  BoFED, MoF, PDC, CSA 
Frequency:  annual 
 
Output 1.5  
Federal, Regional and subregional capacities strengthened for 
reintegration, reconciliation, prevention and peaceful 
management of conflicts.  [IRRF 3.2.1] 
 
Indicators 
1.5.1 
Extent to which a gender-responsive and risk-informed 
national peacebuilding strategy, adopted with UNDP 
support, is under implementation 24 (modified IRRF 
3.2.1.2) 
•  Baseline (2019): 0 
• 
Target: 2 
Source: MoP  
Frequency:  annual  
 
1.5.2 
Existence of operational infrastructures for peace at 
federal, regional and subregional levels with UNDP 
support25  (modified IRRF 3.2.1.3)   
•  Baseline (2019): No 
• 
Target: Yes  
Source: MoP  
Frequency:  annual  
 
1.5.3     Number of women’s and youth networks with 
strengthened capacity for conflict prevention and 
peacebuilding as a direct result of UNDP support  
•  Baseline (2019): 2 
• 
Target: 5 
Source: MoP, HoF, HoPR  
Frequency:  annual 
HGER PRIORITY: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger.   
UNSDCF OUTCOME: By 2025, all people in Ethiopia benefit from an inclusive, resilient and sustainable economy.   
SP OUTCOME:  Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions.  
 
23 Ibid.   
24 A rating scale will be developed with Government to measure three levels of implementation: 1= Low, 2 = Medium, 3 = 
High.    
25 A binary indicator. 
 
11 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
 
2.1  Proportion of 
 
Regular 
$46.52 
million 
BoFEDs, 
CSA, 
Development 
Bank of 
Ethiopia 
(DBE), 
Ethiopia 
Investment 
Commission 
(EIC), Job 
Creation 
Commission 
(JCC), 
Ministries of 
Trade and 
Industry 
(MoTI) and 
of Innovation 
and 
Technology 
(MiNT), 
National 
Bank of 
Ethiopia 
(NBE) 
Output 2.1  
Capacities developed across the whole of government to integrate 
the  2030  Agenda,  the  Paris  Agreement  and  other  international 
agreements  in  development  plans  and  budgets  and  to  analyse 
progress  towards  the  Goals  using  innovative  and  data-driven 
solutions [IRRF 1.1.1] 
Sustainable 
Development 
Goals aligned 
with national 
development 
plan (modified 
SP 1.10) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other 
$44.36 
million 
Source: PDC 
Frequency: 
every 5 years   
  
 
Indicators 
Baseline (2017): 
70% 
Target: 80% 
 
2.1.1 
Existence of development plans and budgets that 
integrate the 2030 Agenda across the whole-of-
government: (modified IRRF 1.1.1.1) 
•  Baseline (2019): Yes - partial  
• 
 
 
 
 
 
Target: Yes - full  
 
2.2  Unemployment 
rate, by sex26 
(Goal 8.5.2) 
Source:  BoFED, CSA, PDC 
Frequency:  annual, biennial 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.2 
Number of federal and regional institutions with data 
collection/analysis mechanisms providing disaggregated 
data to monitor progress towards the Goals: (modified 
IRRF 1.1.1.3) 
Source: JCC 
Frequency: 
annual  
Baseline (2018): 
19.1% (urban), 
27% (Female)  
 
•  Baseline (2019):  Federal:3; Regional: 2    
• 
 
Target:    Federal: 5; Regional: 8  
Target: 10% 
(Urban) 10% 
(Female) 
Source:  BoFED, CSA, PDC 
Frequency:  annual 
 
 
Output 2.2  
Marginalized groups, particularly the poor, women, persons with 
disabilities and displaced are empowered to access 
entrepreneurship services and financial and non-financial assets 
and services to build productive capacities and benefit from 
sustainable livelihoods and jobs.  [modified IRRF 1.1.2] 
 
 
Governments 
of China, 
Germany, 
Israel, Qatar, 
Republic of 
Korea, 
UNCDF 
Local 
accelerators 
 
Indicators 
2.2.1 
Number of gender-responsive policy, legal, regulatory 
and institutional measures adopted at federal and 
regional levels, with UNDP support to improve the 
enabling environment for MSMEs (IRRF 1.1.2.3) 
•  Baseline (2019): 3 
• 
 
Target: 6 
Source: EIC, JCC, MoTI, NBE 
Frequency:  annual 
 
2.2.2 
Proportion and number of people accessing financial 
and non-financial services, disaggregated by sex (IRRF 
1.1.2.2) 
               Financial 
•  Baseline: 35% (i.e., with accounts in a formal 
financial institution)   
Target: 50%  
• 
               Non-financial 
•  Baseline: 90,000 people with access to 
business development services (45% female) 
Target: 200,000 (50% female, 5% with 
disabilities)  
• 
 
26 Ethiopia does not have a single measure of overall unemployment that is disaggregated by sex. The closest proxy is the 
urban unemployment rate. 
12 
 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
Source: DBE, JCC, NBE, World Bank   
Frequency:  annual  
 
Output 2.3  
Institutional capacities strengthened through UNDP support to 
design and implement innovative and gender-responsive 
solutions for sustainable development  
 
Indicator 
2.3.1. 
Existence of a comprehensive national innovation 
ecosystem  
•  Baseline (2019): No 
• 
Source: MiNT 
Frequency:  annual 
Target: Yes 
HGER PRIORITY:  Build a resilient and diversified middle-income economy. 
UNSDCF OUTCOME:  By 2025, all people in Ethiopia live in a society resilient to environmental risks and adapted to climate 
change. 
SP OUTCOME: Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises. 
3.1  Number of 
Regular 
$8.96 
million 
Output 3.1  
Integrated and gender-responsive climate and disaster risk 
governance systems strengthened to reduce risks and 
vulnerabilities, improve early warning systems (EWS) and enable 
rapid recovery.  [modified IRRF 2.3.1]        
DBE, 
Environment, 
Forest and 
Climate 
Change 
Commission 
(EFCCC), 
Ministries of 
Construction 
and Urban 
Development 
(MoCUD), 
Finance 
(MoF), Water, 
Irrigation and 
Energy 
(MoWIE), 
National 
Disaster Risk 
Management 
Commission 
(NDRMC)  
 
people that are 
covered by early 
warning 
information 
through local 
governments or 
through national 
dissemination 
mechanisms 
(disaggregated 
by sex).  (SP 
3.1) 
 
 
 
Other 
$86.21 
million 
 
 
                                   
Indicators 
 
 
 
3.1.1 
Number of Federal and regional institutions 
incorporating gender risk-informed and integrated 
solutions in their development and investment plans to 
reduce disaster risks and enable climate change 
adaptation and mitigation.  (IRRF 2.3.1.1) 
•  Baseline (2019) Federal - 12; Regional - : 4 
• 
Source:  NDRMC 
Frequency:  annual 
 
 
Source: 
NDRMC 
Frequency: 
annual 
 
Baseline (2019): 
8 million 
Target: 48 
million 
Target: Federal - 20; Regional - 7 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.2  Number of federal and regional institutions with multi-
 
 
sectoral EWS and contingency to limit the gender-
differentiated impact of natural hazards (modified IRRF 
3.3.1.1) 
•  Baseline (2019) Federal - 9; Regional - 1 
• 
Source:  NDRMC 
Frequency:  annual 
 
3.2  Number of 
sectors that have 
communicated 
the 
establishment or 
operationalizatio
n of an 
integrated 
policy/strategy/p
lan which 
increases their 
ability to adapt 
and mitigate to 
 
 
Target: Federal - 15; Regional - 5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Governments 
of Denmark, 
Norway, 
Sweden,  
GEF, REDD+ 
 
3.1.3  Level of women’s leadership and participation in crisis 
 
prevention, recovery planning and action 27 (modified 
IRRF 3.6.1.1) 
 
 
•  Baseline (2019): 1 
• 
 
Target: 2  
 
27 A rating scale will be developed to measure three levels of leadership and participation:  1= Low, 2 = Medium, 3 = High.    
 
13 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
 
the adverse 
impacts of 
climate change, 
and foster 
carbon neutral, 
climate resilient 
and becoming 
middle income 
country by 2025.   
(SP 2.7) 
Source: NDRMC 
Frequency: Annual 
 
  
 
 
 
Output 3.2 
Gender-responsive  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks,  policies  and 
institutions  strengthened,  and  solutions  adopted 
to  address 
conservation,  sustainable  use  and  equitable  benefit  sharing  of 
natural  resources  in  line  with  international  conventions  and 
2.4.1] 
national 
 
 
Source: 
EFCCC 
Frequency: 
annual 
legislation. 
[IRRF 
 
 
 
 
Baseline (2019): 
12 
Target: 20 
Indicators 
 
 
 
3.2.1  Number of gender-responsive measures in place for 
 
conservation, sustainable use, and equitable access to and 
benefit sharing of natural resources, biodiversity and 
ecosystems (IRRF 2.4.1.1) 
•  Baseline (2019): 1 
• 
Target: 7  
Source:  EFCCC 
Frequency:  annual 
 
 
3.3  (a) Proportion of 
 
important sites 
for terrestrial 
and freshwater 
biodiversity that 
are covered by 
protected areas 
(SP 2.9) 
 
 
Source: 
EFCCC 
Frequency: 
annual 
 
3.2.2. Existence of national legal codes for sustainable 
management of forests  
 
 
Baseline (2019): 
23.4% 
Target: 82.8%  
 
•  Baseline (2019): No 
• 
Target: Yes 
Source:  EFCCC 
Frequency:  annual 
 
 
 
 
(b)  Proportion 
of population  
with primary 
reliance on clean 
fuels and 
technology.  (SP 
1.7) 
 
 
 
3.2.3  Number of woreda-level gender-responsive integrated land 
use plans prepared and implemented with UNDP support 
•  Baseline (2019): 12 
• 
Source:  EFCCC 
Frequency:  annual 
Source: 
MoWIE 
Frequency: 
annual 
Target: 54  
 
Baseline (2019): 
37% 
Target: 55% 
 
Output 3.3 
Solutions adopted to increase access to clean, affordable and 
sustainable energy.  [modified IRRF 1.5.1] 
 
 
Indicators 
3.3.1  Volume of investment leveraged from public and private 
sources through UNDP and partner support (modified 
IRRF 2.5.1.1) 
•  Baseline (2019): $1.4 million 
• 
Source: MoWIE, EFCCC, DBE 
Frequency: annual 
Target:  $20 million 
 
3.3.2 
Number of households benefiting from solutions applied 
at scale to accelerate transition to improved energy 
efficiency and clean energy. (modified IRRF 2.5.1.1) 
•  Baseline (2019): 500,000 (30% female-headed) 
• 
Source: MoWIE, EFCCC, DBE 
Frequency: annual 
Target: 1 million (40% female-headed) 
14 
 
DP/DCP/ETH/4 
 
 
3.3.3 
Number of women-led enterprises supported to engage in 
the production and distribution of improved energy 
technologies. 
•  Baseline (2019): 289 
• 
Target: 500 
Source: MoWIE 
Frequency: annual   
 
Output 3.4 
Action on climate change adaptation and mitigation scaled-up, 
funded and implemented across sectors. 
 
Indicators 
 
3.4.1  Number of sectors that verify application and follow-
through of the nationally determined contribution 
•  Baseline (2019): 7  
• 
Target:  12  
Source:  EFCC, MoF 
Frequency:  annual 
 
3.4.2  Number of measures adopted with UNDP support to 
make cities and towns sustainable and resilient to climate 
impact  
•  Baseline (2019): 6 
• 
Source:  EFCCC, MoCUD 
Frequency: annual 
Target: 12  
 
3.4.3 
Existence of an operational national Smart City Hub 
•  Baseline (2019): No 
• 
\Source: MoCUD, Addis Ababa City Administration 
Frequency:  annual 
Target:  Yes 
 
 
15 
