The schools of the City of Buenos Aires Incorporate citizen science into the
classrooms | Programa De Las Naciones Unidas Para El Desarrollo     Pasar al
contenido principal
Argentina
Quiénes somos
Qué hacemos
Nuestro impacto
Involúcrate
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Quiénes somos
Qué hacemos
Nuestro impacto
Involúcrate
Locations                 Home Argentina Blog         The schools of the City of
Buenos Aires Incorporate citizen science into the classrooms
The schools of the City of Buenos Aires Incorporate citizen science into the
classrooms      A program that seeks to promote the integration of different
subjects, teachers and students in interdisciplinary projects, capable of
challenging girls, boys and adolescents to become active members of the research
processes.    8 de Noviembre de 2023                 Escrito por
María Verónica Moreno                 Jefa de Mapeo de Soluciones. Laboratorio
de Aceleración de PNUD Argentina/ Head of Solutions Mapping UNDP Argentina
Accelerator Lab                 Citizen science, which is based on the premise
that we can all contribute to the building of knowledge in a participatory and
collective manner, has great potential in the educational field. Why? Because
citizen science can favor a didactic approach to science (concepts, processes,
etc.), awaken scientific vocations early on, foster culture and curiosity for
science, promote critical and creative thinking as well as socio-environmental
awareness, and encourage a project-based learning approach where teachers
facilitate the research process, and students produce knowledge in a
participatory manner. This approach favors the integration of different
subjects, teachers, and students in medium- to long-term multidisciplinary
projects, capable of challenging children and teenagers to become -in the
present- active members of the research process. For all these reasons, UNDP
allied with the Ministry of Education of the Government of the City of Buenos
Aires to promote the emergence of Programa de Ciencia Ciudadana en la Escuela
(Citizen Science in Schools Program), together with the Sea and Atmosphere
Research Center (CIMA, by its Spanish acronym), the National Scientific and
Technical Research Council (CONICET, by its Spanish acronym), the University of
Buenos Aires (UBA, by its Spanish acronym), the Institute of Chemistry, Physics
of Materials, Environment and Energy (INQUIMAE, by its Spanish acronym - CONICET
- UBA) and the Physics Department of the School of Exact and Natural Sciences of
the University of Buenos Aires, which shows that many of us (and counting…) are
convinced of its potential. This Program deploys three citizen science projects
in 57 schools in order to work with more than 100 teachers and 1 000 students to
measure the City's air quality using passive tubes installed in schools
strategically distributed throughout the City; monitor, forecast and generate
weather alerts linked to hydrometeorological events; and map the earth's
magnetic field through a mobile application. However, the “Citizen Science in
Schools Program” is being implemented on a daily basis by teachers and students.
It is precisely within these spaces that processes take place that allow us to
reinforce the reason why we work so that citizen science continues to grow in
Argentina. As an example, a technical school designed a project to inform and
raise awareness about the various components present in the air. To this end, it
developed its own low-cost air quality measurement sensor. Others are looking at
how to build homemade rain gauges with everyday items, so children can take this
activity home and do it as a family. Along the way, the Program also promoted an
experimental attitude where teachers and students used homemade rain gauges of
different sizes (cans, trays, etc.) to see if there are differences in the
measurements generated, among other possibilities. In short, we are witnessing
different processes of technology appropriation. In addition, we have
participated in workshops with professional scientists and teachers where the
implementation of this Citizen Science Program was discussed with enthusiasm.
One of the issues addressed was the possible errors in temperature measurements,
which were actually within the expected range, given that they were taken inside
a school, without being able to meet all of the international protocols for this
type of measurement. What was interesting was the opportunity to identify that
this restriction did not take away the value of the data collected. In fact, it
is often recognized that, by gathering large volumes of data through citizen
science, it is possible to obtain similar results than those reached through
traditional approaches. Bringing citizen science to schools also facilitated the
bridging between the learning community and the scientific community, from a
group of students who visited the School of Exact and Natural Sciences to
understand how reagent data were analyzed in the laboratory, to another who gave
a presentation on magnetic fields at the National Institute of Geography. These
experiences of knowledge exchange will surely become lasting memories for their
protagonists. In short, citizen science provides students with valuable
participatory and practical experiences that lead to learning based on the
curiosity about their environment. And there we discover nothing new: any child
or young person can ask questions, observe, collect data, discuss them with
others and communicate their findings. A curious mind is inherent to human
beings, and citizen science comes to remind us of that.  
Noticias Producción agrícola sustentable en Misiones: un proyecto del PPD
produce alimento para la biodiversidad de la región a partir de larvas Leer más
Noticias Reunión con el Observatorio de la Deuda Social Argentina (ODSA-UCA)
Leer más  Noticias Abordaje Comunitario: firma de convenio con el Ministerio de
Capital Humano para el proceso de adquisición de alimentos Leer más  Noticias
Día Internacional de la Mujer y la Niña en la Ciencia: un liderazgo para la era
de la sostenibilidad Leer más  Noticias Aprobación de fondos del GEF para la
acción ambiental urgente en todo el mundo: serán $916 millones de dólares para
proyectos e iniciativas  Leer más    Search           Found  0  results.
Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Fecha This site All
UNDP Programa de las Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo
Quiénes somos                                                      Sobre
nosotros                                                            Nuestro
equipo                                                            Financiamiento
y ejecución                                                            Marco
legal                                                            Procedimientos
para programas y proyectos PNUD de implementación nacional
Qué hacemos                                                      Objetivos de
Desarrollo Sostenible
Nuestro trabajo                                                      Nuestro
impacto                                                      Centro de prensa
Publicaciones
Proyectos                                                            Blogs
Involúcrate                                                      Empleo
Adquisiciones
Contacto                              Informar fraude, abuso, mala conducta
Presentar denuncia social o ambiental Alerta de fraude Términos de Uso x-twitter
facebook instagram linkedin youtube © 2024 Programa de las Naciones Unidas para
el Desarrollo