ARE Annual Report 2022 - The Alliance for Rural Electrification Become a member
About About us Team Governance Contact us Membership Our Members Why become a
Member? What our Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our Partners Why
partner with us? What our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic Pillars
Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub Markets for
Electrification Hub Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre
Discover DRE Publications Project database Job platform News & Events News
Events Media kit Member login About About us Team Governance Contact us
Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our Members say Become a Member
Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What our Partners say Become a
Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for
Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub Sustainability for
Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE Publications Project database
Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit Member login Become a member
Download
Publication 8 June, 2023 ARE Annual Report 2022 2022 has been a demanding yet
remarkable period filled with a multitude of achievements and challenges. Once
again, energy supply and energy access remained the main concern for millions of
people around the world. Addressing the energy access and energy transition
challenges, ARE has deepened its leading role in the DRE sector, bringing
innovation and experience under one roof. Diverse activities through new
campaigns, events, webinars, trainings and publications have resulted in
enhanced cooperation and synergies among the public and private sectors, which
is key to greener and sustainable future. In 2022, ARE and its Members continued
to address some of the greatest challenges of our time: electricity access for
all (SDG-7), job creation (SDG-8) and climate mitigation & adaptation (SDG-13),
by tapping into the potential of clean energy resources. ARE strived to build
bridges and connect the dots between the public, philantropic and private sector
to help overcome these challenges while specifically focusing on Africa, Asia,
and Latin America. In 2022, ARE expanded exponentially and is now over 200
Members strong, hence reaching yet another milestone on the journey to federate
and bolster the entire sector in the pursuit of universal access to clean
energy. A snapshot of 2022 40 new Members 5 new Board Members 7,592 participants
and 715 B2B meetings at ARE events 50 interventions 24 partnerships 4
publications 8 campaigns   Statutes Terms & conditions Privacy Policy Alliance
for Rural Electrification Renewable Energy House Rue d'Arlon 63-67 1040 Brussels
Belgium are[at]ruralelec.org +32 2 400 10 00 Follow along Facebook Twitter
LinkedIn YouTube Flickr Newsletter Get in-depth analyses, market intelligence &
insights from the rural electrification sector in your inbox every second month.
For free. Subscribe
©2024 Alliance for Rural Electrification
Made by  Novel We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By
browsing this website, you agree to our use of cookies. Accept