Brand Watch: Europe turns up heat under chemicals industry to clean up its
climate act | Reuters Events | Sustainable Business Log In Username or e-mail  *
Password  * Forgotten Password?   Subscribe Close log in window  Whitepapers
Promotion Facilities Research Reports Editorial Calendar       More from Reuters
Events  Whitepapers Editorial Calendar Channels  Climate and Energy Natural
Capital Social Equality Stakeholder Engagement Reporting and Finance
Communications & Engagement Ethics and Governance Events Digital Magazines
Sustainable Business Review Ethical Corporation On Demand Editorial Calendar
Advertise Newsletter     Log In          Home Climate and Energy Natural Capital
Social Equality Reporting and Finance Communications & Engagement Ethics and
Governance On demand     Navigation  Brand Watch: Europe turns up heat under
chemicals industry to clean up its climate act             By  Oliver Balch  on
Feb 7, 2023   Brussels has published a transition pathway for the $4.7-trillion-
a-year sector, which accounts for 5.8% of global emissions. Oliver Balch reports
Certain images tend to dominate when thinking about the worst sectors of the
modern economy for climate change: flaring oil wells, gas-guzzling SUVs, smoke-
belching factories, and, as the science now shows, methane-expelling ruminants. 
Rarely, however, does the chemical industry spring to mind. It should. Of all
leading industrial sectors, only steel and cement production have a larger
carbon footprint. Including petrochemicals, estimates put its  total emissions
at 5.8%  of the global total.  As a business-to-business industry, the average
consumer can be forgiven for not having chemical brands in the forefront of
their minds. Yet, the products of this $4.7-trillion-a-year industry find their
way into almost  every segment  of the consumer goods market, from the sulphates
in your shampoo to the microfibers in your polyester T-shirt.  Regulators have
been more vigilant. Last September, for example, the U.S. Senate endorsed a
global climate treaty geared towards a dramatic “ phasedown ” of
hydrofluorocarbons (or HFCs), a major source of greenhouse gases. Regulators in
Australia, meanwhile, recently introduced a new  environmental management
standard  for its domestic chemical industry.      The issue for chemical
manufacturers is less the end goal than the practical steps required to arrive
there But nowhere is the pressure higher than in Europe. In October 2020, the
European Commission laid down a marker for the global chemicals industry,
arguing that only with the “ right chemistry ” could the trading bloc’s ambition
for a climate-neutral economy be met.  The details of the EU’s chemical strategy
for sustainability are still being worked out, but the industry has, at least in
its public statements, welcomed the move towards a greener, less carbon-
intensive future.  In an interview, Marco Mensink, director general of Cefic,
the European chemical sector’s main trade body, is at pains to express the
industry’s commitment to climate neutrality by 2050. The issue for chemical
manufacturers is less the end goal than the practical steps required to arrive
there.  “Let’s not debate the ‘what?’ Let’s discuss the ‘how?’ ” he says. “How
do we get there? Which measures can we take, and how do we sequence those
measures?”  Chemical firms are turning to renewable energy to reduce their
overall emissions. (Credit: Piroschka van de Wouw/Reuters)    Never slow to spot
a business opportunity, the world’s largest management consultancies are queuing
up to help point the way forward. Deloitte, McKinsey, Accenture and BCG are just
some of the advisory firms weighing in with advice on transition strategies for
the chemicals sector.    In late January, the European Commission published its
own “ transition pathway ” for the industry. The 75-page report seeks to set out
the economic advantages of a shift to lower-carbon chemicals (chiefly in terms
of future competitiveness), as well as describing its contribution to such a
transformation (e.g. strategic funding, regulation, infrastructure, skills, and
so forth).  The take-away messages are broadly similar: start by setting clear,
science-based reduction goals; adopt eco-efficient processes; design for reuse
and circularity; and, above all, invest heavily in the research and development
of new, low-carbon solutions.  At a strategic level, it makes for sound (albeit
generic) advice. Moreover, proof that it works is slowly emerging. According to
Cefic, emissions from the production processes of European chemical brands has
reduced by 65%  over the last three decades, largely thanks to significant
reductions  of nitrous oxide emissions (down 92.5%) and fluorinated gas
emissions (down 89%). Lowering energy-related emissions is a relatively easy win
compared with other carbon-cutting measures Individual case studies of good
practice can also be found. Many focus on energy reduction. This makes sense.
Not only is the chemical sector the world’s largest industrial energy consumer
but lowering energy-related emissions is also a relatively easy win compared
with other carbon-cutting measures, such as inventing new green chemistries,
say, or reformulating carbon-intensive staple products.  BASF is one of those
making much of its sustainable energy efforts. Like many of its competitors, the
German chemical giant has invested heavily in renewables, including a long-term
power purchase agreement with Danish energy firm Orsted to take the output of
its 186 megawatt wind farm in the North Sea (due for completion in 2025).  It
also counts a new subsidiary,  BASF Renewable Energy , which it launched last
year to oversee electricity trading in Europe, as well as to increase the supply
of clean energy for its parent company. Shifting the chemical industry’s energy
mix takes some doing, mind. The reactions required to make the basic “building
block” chemicals on which the sector depends (sulphuric acid, ethylene, sodium
hydroxide, propylene and nitrogen) require far higher temperatures than is
customary for electricity-run facilities.  BASF’s steam cracker furnace at its
Ludwigshafen site in Germany. (Credit: BASF SE)    To address this challenge,
BASF is currently experimenting with a large-scale, electrically heated  steam
cracker furnace  at its Ludwigshafen site. Located in the German state of
Rhineland-Palatinate, the demonstration plant will seek to reach the 850 degrees
Celsius needed to break down hydrocarbons into usable organic compounds.  “The
idea is to get to the root of the problem and focus on tackling the areas in
chemical production where the most carbon is produced, rather than reformulating
this product or that product – although we’re also doing that,” says Thomas
Nonnast, a spokesperson for BASF. Energy reduction is not the only
decarbonisation measure with a potential system-wide impact. Examples include
greater plastic recycling and reuse, a more targeted use of chemical
fertilisers, and the adoption of lower-carbon raw materials (such as renewable
biomass in plastic production).  Many of the most exciting ideas, however,
remain unproven at scale – either because the technology or infrastructure have
yet to develop or because the economics do not add up. Green hydrogen is one
such widely tipped development. Others include ammonia-based shipping fuel,
methanol from carbon capture  and bio-based jet fuels.  There is a reticence
amongst the financial community to take that leap of faith and invest in these
technologies New ideas are being added to this list all the time. In a  new
study , the London-based consultancy firm Systemiq suggests that emerging
depolymerisation technologies could open the door to the increased reuse of
hard-to-recycle PET packaging and polyester textiles (75% of which currently
ends up in landfill or incinerators in Europe).  The study builds on a major
report released by Systemiq published last September entitled “Planet positive
chemicals”. The report maintains that a ratcheting up of proven technologies can
put the chemicals industry on a net-zero footing by 2040. The snag is the cost:
around $100 billion a year.  “At the moment, a lot of these technologies cost
more, which creates a slight premium, says Peter Goult, programme director at
Systemiq. “As a result, there is a reticence amongst the financial community to
take that leap of faith and invest in these technologies as they still don't
know who is going to buy these chemicals.”  Despite such market jitters, the
European Commission is sticking to its conviction that the future of chemicals
is determinedly green. To that end, it is hosting an inaugural workshop to
highlight leading applications of its so-called  safe and sustainable by design
(SSbD) strategy.  Officially adopted in December, the SSbD framework sets out
criteria to guide the sustainable design, development, production and use of
chemicals. To illustrate the framework’s value, the commission’s Joint Research
Centre is planning to unveil case studies relating to plasticisers, surfactants
and flame retardants.  The choice of topics is already raising eyebrows among
environmental groups, who worry that the initial focus on plasticisers (which
are added to the common polymer PVC to make it more flexible) suggests a less-
than-radical trajectory.  “As PVC in itself is not very sustainable, it makes
little sense to see if the plasticisers that are added to it would pass the
(SSbD) assessment,” reasons Henrik Edin, policy adviser at the International
Chemical Secretariat, a governmental funded group focused on improving
regulation. More broadly, Jean-Luc Wietor, deputy policy manager for chemicals
and sustainable production at the  European Environmental Bureau, a Brussels-
based network of 170 environmental organisations, echoes concerns about
vagueness and a lack of an “overall concept” among European policymakers.  The
transition pathway offers a welcome impetus to industry efforts to decarbonise
That said, he shares the wider view that the transition pathway, which was
developed in close consultation with the industry’s biggest players, offers a
welcome impetus to industry efforts to decarbonise.  What counts now, he argues,
is how chemical companies respond: “If the chemical industry and the EU match
words with actions, this will be a useful document.”  How this scenario plays
out will depend in no small part on the pressure placed on chemical companies by
the consumer brands that buy their products and keep them solvent.  In as much
as demand-side pressure does exist, its focus has been on persuading chemical
producers to remove toxic substances. Why? Because they threaten consumer
health. The same could easily be said for the industry’s carbon footprint.  Main
picture credit: Nacho Doce/Reuters    This article is part of the February 2023
issue of Sustainable Business Review. See also: Policy Watch: Europe beefs up
green deal in bid to parry Biden's climate subsidies Society Watch: Drive to
make ecocide an international crime gathers momentum ESG Watch: How the 'global
stocktake'  will force investors to pull up their socks on climate  
hydrofluorocarbons                                chemical industry 
EU transition pathway                                BASF 
green hydrogen                                PET  
Related Reads Will the energy transition be a casualty of Putin'...   How
Australia could help Europe solve its green energy ...   ‘Here comes the
cavalry’ as brands vow to help acce...   The race to clean up the world’s most
heavily emittin...     Please enable JavaScript to view the  comments powered by
Disqus . comments powered by  Disqus       Latest News   Holcim and Danone swept
up in rising tide of climate litigation Posted on Feb 7, 2023 In this month's
issue of The Sustainable Business Review we also look at Europe's answer to the
Inflation Reduction Act, momentum behind making ecocide an international crime,
the UNFCCC's Global Stocktake, Europe's crackdown on the chemicals industry,
'nature-positive mining', and why taxing the super-rich is necessary to avoid
social breakdown       Brand Watch: Europe turns up heat under chemicals
industry to clean up its climate act Posted on Feb 7, 2023 Brussels has
published a transition pathway for the $4.7-trillion-a-year sector, which
accounts for 5.8% of global emissions. Oliver Balch reports       The five-year
search for the right recipe to save forests from cocoa  Posted on Jan 11, 2023
Despite its lofty ambitions, the Cocoa & Forests Initiative has so far failed to
turn the tide on commodity-driven deforestation in Ghana and Ivory Coast. Terry
Slavin reports         Editor's Picks   Policy Watch: Europe beefs up Green Deal
in bid to parry Biden’s climate subsidies Posted on Feb 7, 2023 Angeli Mehta
reports on how Europe is treading a thin line as it tries to boost incentives
for low-carbon technologies without distorting its internal market       Holcim
and Danone swept up in rising tide of climate litigation Posted on Feb 7, 2023
In this month's issue of The Sustainable Business Review we also look at
Europe's answer to the Inflation Reduction Act, momentum behind making ecocide
an international crime, the UNFCCC's Global Stocktake, Europe's crackdown on the
chemicals industry, 'nature-positive mining', and why taxing the super-rich is
necessary to avoid social breakdown       The five-year search for the right
recipe to save forests from cocoa  Posted on Jan 11, 2023 Despite its lofty
ambitions, the Cocoa & Forests Initiative has so far failed to turn the tide on
commodity-driven deforestation in Ghana and Ivory Coast. Terry Slavin reports
Latest Tweets   Reuters Events Sustainable Business Brands put brakes on
#bioplastics over #biodiversity and recyclability concerns. Read feature by
@catearly76  lookin…  https://t.co/CYKF9nUJKy 7 months 2 weeks  ago Reply
Retweet   Favorite       Reuters Events Sustainable Business 'We need to unlock
the power of people in the future energy system' Read oped from Izzy Woolgar of
@OctopusEnergy …  https://t.co/ohawX72BFf 7 months 2 weeks  ago Reply   Retweet
Favorite       Reuters Events Sustainable Business Great news. EU Parliament
passes nature law after political backlash  https://t.co/SyYCSMo70c 7 months 2
weeks  ago Reply   Retweet   Favorite     Follow us on Twitter
Reuters Events is part of Reuters News & Media Ltd, 5 Canada Square, Canary
Wharf, London, E14 5AQ. Registered in England and Wales: 2505735. © Reuters
Events 2024 |  TERMS OF USE  |  PRIVACY POLICY  |  ABOUT US  | +44 0207 375 7212
|