By 2030 EVs represent more than 60% of vehicles sold globally, and require an
adequate surge in chargers installed in buildings – Analysis - IEA IEA Close
Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation
Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology
or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport
Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon
Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics
Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary
Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's
War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy
Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the
energy system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium
Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland
Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports By 2030 EVs represent more than 60% of
vehicles sold globally, and require an adequate surge in chargers installed in
buildings By 2030 EVs represent more than 60% of vehicles sold globally, and
require an adequate surge in chargers installed in buildings
Part of Technology and innovation pathways for zero-carbon-ready buildings by
2030                                                          Overview
About this report This analysis is part of a series from our new report,
Technology and innovation pathways for zero-carbon-ready buildings by 2030 , and
provides the strategic vision of experts from the IEA Technology Collaboration
Programmes (TCPs) on how to help achieve some of the most impactful short-term
milestones for the buildings sector outlined in the  IEA’s Net Zero by 2050
Roadmap ; each report’s title reflects one of these milestones. Learn more about
the  report  and  explore the TCPs . Published September 2022 License CC BY 4.0
Share Cite         Highlights      Sales of new internal combustion engine (ICE)
automobiles are halted in 2035 in the  Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario  (NZE
Scenario). In parallel, the share of EVs in total sales needs to reach  around
60% by 2030  to stay the course and reach net zero CO 2  in 2050. At the end of
2021, the number of electric cars on the road exceeded  16.5 million . The
global electric car stock expands to almost 350 million vehicles by 2030, but
future growth  will hinge on efforts to diversify battery manufacturing and
critical mineral supplies to reduce the risks of supply bottlenecks and higher
prices.  Mass adoption of EVs will require regulatory support that advances
installation of chargers in residential and commercial buildings, as well as
workplaces. The deployment of charging infrastructure, especially in densely
populated urban areas, will be driven by city codes and local policies. Building
codes and regulations will require the installation of EV chargers in new
constructions and renovations, where feasible.          Relevance
Electrifying road transport offers numerous benefits, including not only
reducing greenhouse gas emissions but also lessening the dependence on fossil-
fuel-based sources. It also plays a significant role in facilitating the
transition towards more sustainable energy systems (e.g. demand response with EV
charging).  For instance, in June 2022, members of the European Parliament voted
to support the  ban on the sales of diesel and petrol cars  starting in 2035.
Since EVs are currently the most promising technology to replace ICE vehicles,
charging infrastructure needs to expand substantially to meet projected growth
in demand. Private passenger use is one of the most advanced EV markets, and
buildings play an important role in supporting this organic shift through the
investment in charging infrastructure. Approximately 89% of global EV charging
stations are private, located in places where access is the most convenient,
such as at home or office buildings. To make EV chargers more accessible and
affordable, urban planners, building developers, and electrical-equipment
suppliers must integrate charging infrastructure into standard building design
plans.         Current state      The location of charge points will continue to
expand beyond single-family homes to all types of buildings. It will be crucial
to include or increase charging points in buildings such as apartment complexes,
offices, parking lots or commercial centres. Recharging at home and at work is
generally the most convenient and least expensive option for EV owners. Although
massive deployment of electric vehicles will eventually lead to the need for
investments in transmission and distribution grids (due to increased demand),
time-of-use electricity tariffs or ideally real-time electricity pricing would
nudge users to take the advantage of electricity demand flexibility that EVs
have. When distributed energy sources are deployed and used for EV charging, the
negative impact on grids could be limited (even though special attention has to
be paid to monitoring and balancing with high number of prosumers). Growing
stock of EVs will see sales of chargers rise in tandem. In 2021, China led the
electric car market with 3.3 million. When analysing the building charging
infrastructure, alternate current (AC) Level 1 (L1) and Level 2 (L2) chargers
are the dominant technologies. L1 chargers are standard equipment of EVs
supplied by automobile manufacturers. L2 chargers might frequently be purchased
directly from car manufacturers and, in some  cities , it is a necessity in new
or renovated buildings. L1 is the slowest type of charging equipment; it plugs
directly into a standard  120 V or 240 V  AC outlet. L2 chargers can either
operate on single-phase or three-phase AC, thus the voltage can vary based on
region from 120 V to 240 V, and from 380 V to 480 V, respectively. It is
expected that by 2030, L1 and L2 charging will remain dominant in the building
EV charger market.         Challenges      In addition to the high upfront
costs, many EV users have the added expense of investing in charging
infrastructure in their homes or buildings. Moreover, costly grid connections
for parking lots in buildings are currently one of the biggest barriers to
faster EV adoption. New initiatives, where the chargers are building assets,
would decrease the investment needed to enable home or office EV charging.
Furthermore, the possible smart charging, including V2G/V2B (vehicle to
grid/vehicle to buildings), is a potential energy asset and new business models
as aggregation could alleviate the total cost of ownership (TCO). In addition,
to enable the maximum impact of transport electrification, EVs should be
considered a distributed energy resource. The batteries inside the cars give the
opportunity to increase the renewable penetration, by coordinating energy
generation and demand, and to exploit the flexibility with grid services ( V2G )
or aggregation policies. These new paradigms and business models should be
accompanied by the necessary regulatory changes and electricity market
adaptation. To allow for an EV to be designated as a distributed energy
resource, the charging point should be integrated in the building energy
management system.  Challenges also exist at the technology level. While L1 and
L2 chargers are expected to continue providing most of the energy powering
electric cars, several new technologies and challenges are arriving:  Dynamic
power management of charging events necessitates the need to manage a mass
deployment of electro mobility, which uses electric powertrain technologies and
connected infrastructures to enable the electric propulsion of vehicles and
fleets, and to avoid peak power or congestion issues.  Identification, payment,
interoperability are essential to facilitate the charging to the users, with
user-centric solutions.  New protocols like the Open Charge Point Protocol
(OCPP) and communication standards such as ISO 15118 are in place, and cars and
chargers need to adapt to them to allow all enabled functionalities.  V2B and
V2H chargers that allow vehicles being discharged to the home/building are
required, enabling flexibility, exploitation and grid services.  Wireless
charging and other new charging technologies that will arrive in the next
several years and could enter into the building charger market. 
Innovation themes covered by the IEA TCPs      Research  on building energy
management systems for aggregating EV loads and  provide flexibility services.
Demonstration of  V2B/V2H/V2G  controls systems to allow their mass deployment.
Investigate and test new business models that decrease total cost of ownership
for EV owners.  Define interoperability standards and protocols development.
Develop integration of EV chargers in building codes.         Policy
recommendations      Strategies Policy recommendations Market creation and
standards   Include requirements for EV chargers pre-equipment in buildings
regulation Building codes.    Include EV and/or plug loads in the calculation
boundary for zero-carbon-ready buildings (ZCRB) codes.   Building regulations.
Adoption of regulations that require new or renovated buildings to include the
obligation for allowing parking spots for EV chargers. Review regulation to
include EV as distributed energy resource Regulations.    Enable the aggregation
of EVs as a distributed energy source, and the participation in energy markets
and flexibility services. Planning instruments   Integrate EV charging spatial
planning within local energy planning Planning and development.    Develop plans
to coordinate increased EVs with chargers’ diffusion by easing the procedure for
installation in buildings.  Local authorities should support the cabling for
residential and office buildings in all parking slots. Economic and financial
instruments   Develop business models New business models.    Provide regulatory
and financial resources needed to support EV and building integration for  new
business models.  Time-of-use or real-time electricity pricing Tariff
structures.  Smart tariff design means pricing both energy and network services
to serve EV customers. Adopt and apply dedicated tariff structures for EV
charging and require time-varying tariffs. Smart charging technology Deployment
of smart infrastructure.   Set criteria to fund charging infrastructure
deployment based on minimum smart management requirements.         Related
content      All results circle-arrow Technology and Innovation Pathways for
Zero-carbon-ready Buildings by 2030 A strategic vision from the IEA Technology
Collaboration Programmes                     Technology report — September 2022
The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events
delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other
newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore
Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect
Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  By 2030 EVs represent
more than 60% of vehicles sold globally, and require an adequate surge in
chargers installed in buildings , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/by-2030-evs-represent-more-than-60-of-vehicles-sold-
globally-and-require-an-adequate-surge-in-chargers-installed-in-buildings,
Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on
Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn
Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close
dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking
the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.