ClimateWorks’ 2022 Annual Report: Materializing Real-World Change in 2022 -
ClimateWorks Foundation     Services Global Intelligence Global Collaborations
Global Grantmaking Grants database Programs Carbon Dioxide Removal Cooling Clean
Cooling Collaborative Food & Agriculture Forests & Land Use Climate and Land Use
Alliance Menu spacer Governance & Diplomacy Independent Global Stocktake
Industry Power Sustainable Finance Transportation Aviation Maritime Shipping
Road Transportation Resources Reports Blog Events Press Releases In the News
Media center Impact About People Board Staff Careers Partners Funding partners
Grantee partners Regional partners Justice, equity, diversity, & inclusion
Contact us Financial information   Search for:   All Resources Report
ClimateWorks’ 2022 Annual Report: Materializing Real-World Change in 2022
ClimateWorks’ 2022 Annual Report: Materializing Real-World Change in 2022 2022
was a year of great learning and stepped-up action across the climate landscape.
Despite formidable headwinds, 2022 was a year of significant climate wins and
real-world progress. ClimateWorks’ 2022 Annual Report brings these wins and
challenges to light – detailing the remarkable ways our community of climate
funders and implementing partners are actualizing a sustainable and equitable
future. Climate philanthropy occupies a unique and critical role in keeping a
safe and habitable climate within reach. From its focus on impact, to its
flexibility, to its tolerance for risk, philanthropy can respond quickly to
emerging opportunities, leverage the strength of innovative partnerships, and
support work that leads to positive outcomes for people and the planet. We are
proud to present the myriad ways climate philanthropy  helped materialize real-
world change  in 2022, shifting the perception of what’s possible and breaking
down barriers to a sustainable future for all. The progress we saw in 2022 is a
new beginning in the fight to create a thriving planet. Renewables boomed.
Landmark policies like the  U.S. Inflation Reduction Act  set new trajectories
for deep emissions reductions. And a new administration in Brazil committed to
ending deforestation in the Amazon (already, the country has realized a  34%
drop in deforestation rates  during the first six months of 2023). Still, the
urgency to act has never been greater.  In this look back on our collective work
and progress, one thing is clear:  we can and must do more  to work toward the
future we wish to see and deliver a thriving planet for all living beings. The
vital and transformative action we achieved alongside our funders, grantees, and
partners in 2022 is foundational in realizing our most ambitious climate goals.
Share                                      Close modal Share this story
Published August 21, 2023 Downloads                   Annual report
Related Resources Blog Post iGST The COP28 Global Stocktake outcomes you didn’t
hear about The UN Climate Change Conference (COP28) in Dubai marked a historic
step forward when the final text of the Global Stocktake included language on
fossil fuels. The Global ...  Read More Feb 22, 2024 Blog Post Cooling Achieving
clean cooling for all in a warming world As climate change continues to drive
record-breaking temperatures and heat waves, the safety and livelihoods of
billions of people are increasingly at risk. Currently, mor...  Read More Feb
12, 2024 Blog Post How philanthropy is accelerating transformative climate
solutions Imagine what the world could look like in 2050. Our power grids run on
renewable energy. Everyone has access to the energy they need to cook, light
their homes, and stay c...  Read More Feb 7, 2024                 Get the latest
news from ClimateWorks              Subscribe                     Services
Global Intelligence Global Collaborations Global Grantmaking Programs Carbon
Dioxide Removal Cooling Food & Agriculture Forests & Land Use Governance &
Diplomacy Industry Power Sustainable Finance Transportation Grants database
Resources Reports Blog Events Press releases In the news Media center About us
People Partners Justice, equity, diversity, & inclusion Whistleblower policy
Privacy policy Contact us   ©2024 ClimateWorks Foundation, all rights reserved.