Coal transition and the need for a system-wide approach | The Carbon Trust
Skip to main content      Europe (English) Global Europa (Deutsch) Africa
(English) Latin America (English) Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国 Main
Menu Who we are Overview Our experts Our history Our values and commitments Our
career opportunities Overview Internships What we do Overview Strategy, delivery
and reporting Overview Avoided emissions Beyond value chain mitigation Climate
action and Net Zero planning Climate change risks, opportunities and TCFD
alignment Decarbonisation strategy Footprinting Implementation planning and
execution Organisational verification Plastic Packaging Framework Route to Net
Zero Standard Supply chain engagement Sustainability Reporting Sustainable
finance Target setting The Carbon Trust Standard for Zero Waste to Landfill
Assurance and labelling Overview Carbon neutral verification Footprint label –
certified organisations PAS 2080 Product carbon footprint label Market
transformation Overview Acceso a energía limpia Buildings and construction Clean
hydrogen Climate policy Electromovilidad Energy efficiency Energy Energía
renovable terrestre Heat decarbonisation Heat networks Industry Mining and
metals Offshore wind Sustainable cooling Transport Venture acceleration Our work
and impact Overview Impact stories Guides, reports and tools Overview
从英国能源技术清单（ETL）看英国节能技术推广 News and insights News Events Insights Contact Europe
(English) Global Europa (Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America (English)
Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国 Search Search Who we are Overview Our
experts Our history Our values and commitments Our career opportunities Overview
Internships What we do Overview Strategy, delivery and reporting Overview
Avoided emissions Beyond value chain mitigation Climate action and Net Zero
planning Climate change risks, opportunities and TCFD alignment Decarbonisation
strategy Footprinting Implementation planning and execution Organisational
verification Plastic Packaging Framework Route to Net Zero Standard Supply chain
engagement Sustainability Reporting Sustainable finance Target setting The
Carbon Trust Standard for Zero Waste to Landfill Assurance and labelling
Overview Carbon neutral verification Footprint label – certified organisations
PAS 2080 Product carbon footprint label Market transformation Overview Acceso a
energía limpia Buildings and construction Clean hydrogen Climate policy
Electromovilidad Energy efficiency Energy Energía renovable terrestre Heat
decarbonisation Heat networks Industry Mining and metals Offshore wind
Sustainable cooling Transport Venture acceleration Our work and impact Overview
Impact stories Guides, reports and tools Overview 从英国能源技术清单（ETL）看英国节能技术推广 News
and insights News Events Insights Contact Europe (English) Global Europa
(Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America (English) Latinoamérica (Español) Asia
(English) 中国 Breadcrumb Home Insights                       Coal transition and
the need for a system-wide approach                              Insights Coal
transition and the need for a system-wide approach The IEA’s Coal in Net Zero
Transitions published last month reinforces the message that coal transition
needs to be at the top of the international agenda.  16 December 2022 Image
Melanie Stephen Senior Associate, Energy Transition, The Carbon Trust Image
Nancy Zhuang Senior Associate, The Carbon Trust Share Image   Coal remains
responsible for over a third of global electricity generation and is the largest
source of energy related emissions 1 . To limit global temperature rises to
1.5˚C, coal generation must be reduced by 80% of 2010 levels by 2030 2 . To
achieve the IEA’s Net Zero emissions by 2050 scenario, all unabated coal
generation will have to end by 2040 3 .  It's clear that large-scale action is
needed to accelerate the coal-to-clean transition. Fortunately, momentum is
building. The Glasgow Climate Pact, agreed at COP26, saw 197 countries commit to
phasing down unabated coal 4 . Coal transition initiatives have been established
over the past year, including the recent notable announcement of the Indonesia
Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP), which aims to mobilise £17bn over the
next three to five years to accelerate a just energy transition.  We know that
coal must go, but what considerations are needed to ensure the transition is
successful? The energy landscape is complex and multi-dimensional and the
system-wide impacts must be understood. The Carbon Trust is driving strategic
thinking and developing frameworks to understand and address the complex
interconnections between the energy system, policy, economic and social
dimensions of the coal transition. We believe that this system-wide approach is
critical to unlocking the finance needed to accelerate the transition.  Our Net
Zero Intelligence Unit’s post on enabling conditions for achieving Net Zero
discusses system-wide considerations in full .   The following section
summarises the key challenges that must be considered by governments, utilities
and other stakeholders looking to accelerate their coal transition journey:  The
energy system challenge:   The global energy crisis has brought the issue of
energy security into sharp focus. Understanding the wider energy system in a
country or region is the first step to understanding the mechanisms of how it
could move away from coal. At national or regional level, the current and
forecasted capacity of alternative energy generation must be understood. While
renewable technologies are becoming increasingly available, they must be
supported by dispatchable energy solutions to meet demand peaks. Energy storage
development and measures to manage electricity demand must also be considered.
At plant level, considerations must be taken around whether a plant should be
retired or repurposed. Retiring plants is preferable but repurposing may also be
appropriate. e.g., using the site for renewable generation, co-firing
alternative fuels, or retrofitting emission reduction technologies.  The
economic and policy challenge:   Energy markets are fundamentally shaped by
government policies, some of which aim to remove coal, while others support its
continuity. Despite commitments to transition towards cleaner energy, the wider
economic role of coal, through taxes, royalties, state owned assets and
employment, can result in counterproductive policies such as fossil fuel
subsidies, capacity payments, long-term contracts and compliance exemptions.
Understanding this wider role is critical to planning an effective policy
transition. While government commitments to carbon reduction are a key driver,
comprehensive policy overhaul will often be necessary to address policy
conflicts. Policy tensions could include unbalanced subsidy regimes that
superficially support renewables but offer far greater support to coal, fiscal
arrangements that offer coal an indirect subsidy, or planning policies that
facilitate coal whilst hindering renewables. Where policies impacting coal are
in conflict, the coal transition will stumble.   The social challenge:   The
coal transition will inevitably impact livelihoods and communities. Global coal
mining jobs currently total 4.7 million, and indirect employment is extensive 5
. Employees and informal workers will face displacement at all levels, and plant
closures will threaten the resilience of communities dependent on these assets.
Closures will also impact tax revenues, local infrastructure, and energy
affordability.   Transition planning must aim to minimise the risks of adverse
effects on communities, workers, and other impacted stakeholders, while
maximising opportunities to develop local green industries and improve community
resilience. At minimum, transition plans should address jobs and skills gaps
through reskilling programmes and financial support for example, assisting
workers to find decent alternatives, sustained work and to minimise
displacement. Wider community support should include social services,
investments in education and training for green jobs, and initiatives aimed at
diversifying the local economy and accelerating clean energy production. There
is no simple solution for ensuring an equitable energy transition. The risks and
opportunities are dependent on each country’s geographic, political, social, and
economic context, so a place-based approach is critical. Planning for the
transition requires early, inclusive, meaningful engagement with stakeholders
affected, the recognition of unequal impacts, and should strive for an equitable
distribution of costs and benefits.   The financing challenge:   In many
markets, the cost of renewable energy is competitive with the cost of coal
generation and is continuing to decrease. By 2025, uncompetitive coal plants
worldwide are estimated to reach 78% 6 . However, despite the environmental and
economic pressure, transition away from coal as a dominant power producer has
been slow. As awareness of the need for early retirement of coal asset has
increased, so too has the conversation around coal transition mechanisms (CTMs).
CTMs, which apply innovative finance mechanisms to accelerate the coal
transition, represents a promising solution to mobilise significant capital to
advance the coal-to-clean transition. Building on the momentum generated by
COP26, the Coal Asset Transition Accelerator (CATA) has been developed to
accelerate the application of CTMs to enable affordable and equitable early
retirement, or repurposing of CFPPs, and accelerate coal to clean transition.
Through our collaborative work on CATA and our wider energy transition
initiatives, the Carbon Trust is working to navigate and provide solutions to
the complex system-wide challenges that have been found to impede a rapid
transition away from coal. We have developed a coal plant prioritisation
framework which assesses energy system, policy, and social aspects of the coal
transition to ensure future plant-level transactions deliver impact across all
dimensions. Working with local partners, we are currently carrying out fleet-
level analysis in South Africa and Pakistan to identify opportunities to
accelerate the decommissioning or repurposing of individual coal plants. In
addition, we are responding to feedback from a range of stakeholders to further
assess how energy system, social, policy and financial considerations should be
taken within country-level transition planning.   IEA, 2022. Coal in Net Zero
Transitions. Available at:
https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/4192696b-6518-4cfc-
bb34-acc9312bf4b2/CoalinNetZeroTransitions.pdf Climate Analytics, 2019. Global
and regional coal phase-out requirements of the Paris Agreement: Insights from
the IPCC Special Report on 1.5˚C. Available at:  Coal_Report_September-Formatted
(climateanalytics.org) .  https://www.iea.org/fuels-and-technologies/coal  
World Economic Forum, 2021. Five things you need to know about the Glasgow
Climate Pact. Available at:  COP26 explained: What does The Glasgow Climate Pact
mean? | World Economic Forum (weforum.org) .  World Bank, 2022. Global
Perspective on Coal Jobs and Managing Labour Transition Out of Coal. Available
at  https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/extractiveindustries/publication/global-
perspective-on-coal-jobs-and-managing-labor-transition-out-of-coal    RMI, The
Carbon Tracker Initiative & The Sierra Club, 2020. How to Retire Early: Making
Accelerated Coal Phaseout Feasible and Just. Available at:
rmi_how_to_retire_early.pd f.  Stay updated Receive the latest news, insights
and events from the Carbon Trust directly to your inbox. Subscribe Contact us
Get in touch to see how our experts can help you. Contact us © 2024 The Carbon
Trust Careers Contact us Privacy notice Cookies notice Website terms Modern
slavery statement Sitemap