COP28 Side Event: Accelerating Vietnam’s Electric Vehicle Transition | United
Nations Development Programme     Skip to main content
Viet Nam
Who we are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Locations                 Home Viet Nam         COP28 Side Event: Accelerating
Vietnam’s Electric Vehicle Transition                       COP28 Side Event:
Accelerating Vietnam’s Electric Vehicle Transition      Written by Phan Huong
Giang, UNDP Viet Nam    December 5, 2023           Dubai, 5 December 2023  –
Viet Nam, in collaboration with the Ministry of Transport (MOT) and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), hosted a significant side event at COP28
titled "Green Transition in Road Transport." This gathering showcased Viet Nam's
ongoing efforts and forward-looking strategies in the electric vehicle (EV)
sector, marking a significant leap towards reducing emissions in transportation
and enabling electric mobility. Mr. Tran Anh Duong, Deputy Director of the
Department of Science, Technology, and Environment at MOT eloquently outlined
the transformation of Viet Nam's public transport services towards greener
alternatives. Emphasizing the pivotal role of the private sector in the ongoing
net-zero transition, he highlighted contributions to the production of EVs,
development of charging infrastructure, and the creation of a robust ecosystem
to foster this transformational shift. Mr. Duong underscored a pivotal
governmental decision, No. 876/QĐ-TTg, issued on July 22, 2022, approving the
Action Program for Transition to Green Energy and Mitigation of Carbon Dioxide
and Methane Emissions from Transportation. which is catalyzing the green energy
transition within the transport sector through its objective to substantially
reduce carbon and methane emissions. Since the implementation of this decision,
Viet Nam has experienced a noteworthy surge in EV adoption – from a modest 138
in 2019 to over 28,000 battery electric and 3,557 hybrid cars as of September
2023, alongside more than two million electric two-wheelers. After more than a
year of implementation, the Decision o. 876/QĐ-TTg has since proven itself as a
linchpin for the development of a green transportation system, driving proactive
participation of businesses and international support in enabling the
electrification of various road transport vehicles within Viet Nam. Industry
leaders such as VinFast have been instrumental in this transformation, driving
domestic manufacturing of EVs, spearheading the development of nationwide
charging infrastructure, and setting new benchmarks in ESG practices. A
multitude of other domestic and international manufacturers have also actively
participated in Viet Nam's green transport transition, contributing to its
burgeoning success.       Mr. Dao Xuan Lai, UNDP Head of Climate Change,
Environment, and Energy Unit in Viet Nam highlighted the organization's
comprehensive approach in supporting this transformative shift. Partnering with
the Government of Japan, UNDP has been instrumental in supporting policy
formulation, initiating pilot projects in urban areas, and running awareness
campaigns, all aligned with Viet Nam's updated Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs). "Within Viet Nam's updated NDC, the country committed to
reducing total GHG emissions by 15.8% unconditionally compared to business-as-
usual (BAU) and by up to 43.5% conditionally with international support by 2030.
It is vital to transform the transport sector to contribute meaningfully to Viet
Nam's pledged mitigation targets. To meet these GHG emissions reduction targets,
the transport sector must reduce emissions by 12% and 22% from BAU for
unconditional and conditional contributions, respectively by 2030. The Action
Program for green energy transition is key to realizing mitigation goals and
achieving net zero emissions of Viet Nam’s transport sector by 2050," emphasized
by Mr. Dao. UNDP will continue to play a critical role in fostering sustainable
transportation and widespread EV adoption in Viet Nam. Including collaboration
with the Government of Japan, these efforts involve supporting the development
of national technical standards for charging infrastructure, solutions for EV
battery recycling, and a green job assessment. At the city level, UNDP's
initiatives, such as providing concessional loans for EV uptake and introducing
electric refuse trucks for waste collection are demonstrative of UNDP’s support
to accelerate the EV transition.  The COP28 side event brought together
representatives from various countries, such as Japan, International Financing
Institutions (Asian Development Bank), national authorities (Hue PPC), CSO/NGO
(Green ID), private sectors (Nippon Koie), National Institute (TDSI), experts,
attended the event.   Related content Press Releases UNDP-MARD Drive Sustainable
Dragon Fruit Farming Read more  Stories Digitalization finds fertile soil in the
eco-friendly dragon fruit farms of Binh Thuan Read more  Stories Transforming
Viet Nam's Agriculture for Climate Resilience Read more  Stories ‘Now we’ve
learned a better approach’: how dragon fruit farmers in Binh Thuan are embracing
sustainability in the race to reach global markets Read more  Press Releases
Winners of the “I Draw the Blue Ocean – Home of Marine Life” contest announced
Read more    Search           Found  0  results.            Did you mean   ?
Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development
Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                            Our team
Legal framework
Funding and delivery
Our partners                                                      What we do
Our focus                                                            Sustainable
Development Goals                                                      Our
Impact                                                      News centre
Publications                                                            Projects
Stories                                                            Blog
Get Involved                                                      Careers
Procurement                                                            Contact
us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit social or
environmental complaint Scam Alert Terms of Use twitter facebook linkedin
instagram youtube © 2024 United Nations Development Programme