Coping with the Crisis: Increasing Resilience in Small Businesses in Europe
through Energy Efficiency – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News
Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron
down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels
Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy
Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation
Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand
the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global
Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global
Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency
Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and
Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by
country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia
Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea
Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic
Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Coping with the Crisis: Increasing
Resilience in Small Businesses in Europe through Energy Efficiency Coping with
the Crisis: Increasing Resilience in Small Businesses in Europe through Energy
Efficiency                                 Proposed Energy Saving Strategies
Download pdf                             Overview
About this report Today’s global energy crisis has driven up the cost of fuels
and electricity, creating shortages and hurting consumers, businesses and entire
economies. Small to medium enterprises (SMEs) are some of the most exposed
economic players, lacking the margins, economies of scale, and support staff
that allow larger companies to mitigate the impact of the crisis. At the same
time, SMEs are the backbone of economies around the world, making their survival
essential. To help smaller businesses overcome these perilous challenges and to
sustain European economies, the European Commission and the International Energy
Agency have teamed up to raise the awareness of governments, businesses and
related stakeholders about the available options to empower and protect SMEs.
These include EU support measures currently available to SMEs that can be
tailored to meet their specific needs. They also include steps that businesses
can take themselves to use energy more efficiently and wisely, making them more
resilient and secure – both in the short and in the long term. In this document,
the sections on setting the scene, what the European Union can do, and what
national governments can do were prepared by the European Commission. The
section on what small businesses can do was prepared by the International Energy
Agency. Published October 2022 License CC BY 4.0 In collaboration with European
Commission Share Cite Download image Download image         Setting the scene
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are the backbone of Europe's economy
and add value in every sector. They represent 99% of all businesses in the EU,
employ over 80 million people and account for more than half of Europe’s gross
domestic product. With many small businesses already reeling from the impact of
the coronavirus pandemic, the current high energy prices and supply uncertainty
are creating further pressure on their survival.  How the EU supports SMEs Since
the start of the energy crisis, the European Commission has come forward with
several initiatives  that aim at supporting not only households but also small
businesses. Already in October 2021, the Commission published a  toolbox of
measures  that EU countries can use to help businesses, such as income support,
energy vouchers, rebates on bills or financial support for energy efficiency and
renewable energy measures. More recently, an  emergency tool  was agreed
stipulating that EU countries may temporarily set a price for the supply of
electricity to SMEs to further support those struggling with high energy prices.
Besides helping them to reduce their energy consumption, which is one of the
most effective ways to support SMEs in mitigating energy costs and supply risks,
the EU operates several  support schemes focused on SMEs  that include
financing, innovation and advice services. Increasingly, these schemes address
the clean energy transition as a priority.  COSME , the programme for the
Competitiveness of Enterprises and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, funds
many initiatives that help small businesses access finance and improve their
business conditions. Programmes such as the Innovation Fund, InvestEU Fund – SME
window and Cohesion funds also support SMEs with tailored solutions and
contribute to enhancing their sustainable growth and competitiveness, while
fostering job creation within them. Market transformation and innovation
programmes such as  LIFE CET  and  Horizon Europe  contribute to supporting the
transition towards an energy-efficient, renewable energy-based and climate
neutral EU economy, while making companies more climate and environmentally
friendly, resilient, competitive and smarter. Support networks also play a key
role to help businesses innovate and grow on an international scale. Through
targeted advice services, the  Enterprise Europe Network , which is the world’s
largest support network for small and medium-sized enterprises, helps companies
increase their resilience and support SMEs in their transition to more
sustainable and digital business models. The  Covenant of Companies , a
Commission’s pilot initiative, also encourages SMEs to step up their
contribution to a clean energy transition by providing assistance related to
energy audits, the implementation of targets for the reduction of emissions and
the identification of technologies, methods and financing mechanisms that
companies can use to implement their energy targets.          What national
governments can do      National and local governments are best placed to assist
small businesses on their territory. Many support programmes and structures are
already in place, including through financial support (via grants, loans,
subsidies, tax relief or a combination of measures), information/advice services
(via awareness raising, guidance, training, networks), regulation (e.g.,
supplier obligations and standards) and national plans or strategies.  National
or  regional  energy agencies also play a key role in supporting EU small
businesses, as they are often the first point of contact for companies looking
for advice to reduce their energy consumption and switch to renewable energy.
Despite the structures already in place, governments can take the following
measures to further support SMEs: Extend existing subsidy schemes for small
businesses . Wherever possible, this should focus on investments that
structurally reduce energy consumption such as the implementation of energy
audit recommendations, replacement of equipment/appliances with more efficient
ones, process insulation, etc.; Support energy audits and advice services.
Proactively reaching out to businesses offering them energy audits and advice is
a very concrete way to quickly identify opportunities for reducing their energy
consumption; Mandate the implementation of audit recommendations.  Where
possible companies should be obliged to implement the most cost-effective
recommendations coming from energy audits. This should be underpinned by
financial support. Support the implementation of an energy management system
(where appropriate), including energy and CO 2  related key performance
indicators, and including them in the company’s strategic decision-making
process; Strengthen the energy services market,  for example by increasing
awareness, reducing transaction costs and providing guarantees; Provide
financial guarantees  for energy efficiency investments to facilitate access to
finance; Communicate the multiple benefits of energy transition measures  within
companies, such as productivity increase through better indoor conditions for
people and machines, risk reduction due to energy cost fluctuations, employer
attractiveness, etc.; Support the switch away from fossil fuels  towards
electrification, connections to central steam production (where available) and
the use of heat pumps and excess heat for the supply of low-temperature
processes; Support employee-led initiatives and behavioural campaigns  to
motivate people to reduce energy use in the workplace (and in the home) through
the inclusion of employees in their energy saving initiatives. Facilitate
networking  of multiple companies to simultaneously develop their energy audits
or energy management systems, sharing best practices, joint training, etc.;
Ensure easy access to relevant information , for example on funding
opportunities, advice services, business networks, where appropriate in
collaboration with trade associations. There is an important role for national
or regional energy agencies in supporting small businesses. Often, they are the
first point of contact for companies looking for advice on how to reduce energy
consumption and switch to renewable energy. An overview of all European energy
agencies can be found through the Network of European Energy Agencies ( Members
– European Energy Network (enr-network.org) ) and on the ManagEnergy website:
ManagEnergy .         What small businesses can do      Understand your energy
use A better understanding of where, how and why energy is used can help a
business unlock multiple opportunities for both immediate savings and longer-
term efficiency improvements. An analysis of energy bills and processes can be
the first step, followed by increased monitoring of management systems for
continuous improvement.  Smart meters and controls - when used to identify
energy saving opportunities and manage energy use - can reduce energy use by up
to 40% at little or no extra cost.  Energy audits play a crucial role and have
most impact when they include a method to certify the savings achieved. They
have been proven to provide potential average savings of 18% of total energy
use. Energy Management Systems that set out achievable targets for energy use
and action plans to reach targets and measure progress can lead to an average
reduction in annual energy use of between 10% to 17%. Involve your workforce
Employees are valuable resources, uniquely placed to understand the
organisation’s energy use, identify efficiency opportunities and undertake
energy saving actions. Actively engaging the work force on measures to increase
energy efficiency and savings has been shown to benefit both the employee and
the organisation. Energy training and awareness campaigns, with the appointment
of energy officers and an energy team, have been shown to deliver almost 6%
annual energy savings, which increases to 21% when combined with technological
support and expertise. Introduce efficient technologies Replacing inefficient
equipment, even before the end of their useful life, with new best-in-class
efficient equipment can lead to immediate energy savings, typically with short
payback times, and can reduce reliance on unsecure fossil fuel sources. Lighting
- LED lights last up to five times longer than traditional bulbs and use up to
90% less energy. Motors and motor systems - The energy cost of the typical
electric motor over 20 years of service is 50 times its purchase price. For
every euro invested in improving the energy efficiency of motor-driven systems,
at least seven will be saved in energy use over the lifetime of the equipment
Boilers and Heaters – For most space heating and processes in small enterprises,
an efficient heat pump is four times more efficient than a traditional fossil
fuel boiler and reduces the business’ reliance on unsecure fossil fuel sources.
Compressors - Energy accounts for more than 75% of the ownership cost of a
compressor. Correct sizing of the compressor load can reduce the energy
consumption of a compressed air system by over 1/3.  EU businesses, citizens and
public authorities can consult the  European Product Registry for Energy
Labelling  (EPREL) to obtain information and compare the energy efficiency and
other details about a wide range of products. Good housekeeping and maintenance
provide immediate savings An average small business could reduce its energy bill
by up to 30% by implementing good housekeeping and maintenance measures. Heating
and Cooling: Heating costs increase by around 8% for every 1 o C increase. Smart
programmable thermostats can cut heating costs by between 5% and 15%. Additional
low cost measures such as lowering boiler flow temperatures and
insulating/draught proofing doors and windows can deliver immediate savings
Refrigeration: Refrigeration can represent up to 50% of electricity costs for
some businesses. Maintenance alone can decrease refrigeration energy use by up
to 10%. Compressed air: Compressed air can be responsible for 10% of an
enterprise’s energy bill, and half of which can be due to easily repaired leaks.
Furthermore, reducing air pressure by just 10% can lead to 5% energy savings.
Motors and Drives: Increased control over motor operating parameters can reduce
energy use by 15%-40%. Replacing a conventional motor driven pumping system with
an energy efficient system can result in a 57% reduction in energy use.
Lighting: Lighting can be responsible for up to 40% of a building’s electrical
use, and using lighting controls has been shown to reduce lighting energy use by
over one third. Insulation: Simply insulating pipework has been found to reduce
energy losses by over 75% while maintaining comfort levels. Additional resources
Action and measures on energy prices circle-arrow Coping with the crisis -
Increasing resilience in SMEs through energy efficiency circle-arrow
Entrepreneurship and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) circle-arrow
Energy efficiency circle-arrow EPREL - European Product Registry for Energy
Labelling circle-arrow The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news,
analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample
Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system
Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries
Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east
Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024
Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Coping with the
Crisis: Increasing Resilience in Small Businesses in Europe through Energy
Efficiency , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/coping-with-the-crisis-
increasing-resilience-in-small-businesses-in-europe-through-energy-efficiency,
Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on
Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn
Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close
dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking
the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.