Emissions from Oil and Gas Operations in Net Zero Transitions – Analysis - IEA
IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip
navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel,
technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels
Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and
Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore
all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's
50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical
Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy
Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable
Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries
Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or region Member countries
Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany
Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand
Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands
Türkiye United Kingdom United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa
Rica Israel Latvia Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India
Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All
Countries and Regions Data Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data
Data explorers Understand and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and
trackers Data explorers Data sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy
system available for download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or
planned government policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access
every chart published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports
Chevron down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February
2024                     Fuel report — February 2024
Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast to 2026                     Fuel report —
January 2024                  World Energy Outlook 2023
Flagship report — October 2023                  Net Zero Roadmap: A Global
Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Emissions from Oil and Gas Operations in Net
Zero Transitions Emissions from Oil and Gas Operations in Net Zero Transitions
A World Energy Outlook Special Report on the Oil and Gas Industry and COP28
Download pdf This report is part of  World Energy Outlook 2023
Overview
Related files                                                              1
About this report Today, oil and gas operations account for around 15% of total
energy-related emissions globally, the equivalent of 5.1 billion tonnes of
greenhouse gas emissions. In the International Energy Agency’s Net Zero
Emissions by 2050 Scenario, the emissions intensity of these activities falls by
50% by the end of the decade. Combined with the reductions in oil and gas
consumption in this scenario, this results in a 60% reduction in emissions from
oil and gas operations to 2030.  Fortunately, oil and gas producers have a clear
opportunity to address the problem of emissions from their activities through a
series of ready-to-implement and costeffective measures. These include tackling
methane emissions, eliminating all non-emergency flaring, electrifying upstream
facilities with low-emissions electricity, equipping oil and gas processes with
carbon capture, utilisation and storage technologies, and expanding the use of
hydrogen from low-emissions electrolysis in refineries.  Upfront investments
totalling USD 600 billion would be required to halve the emissions intensity of
oil and gas operations globally by 2030. This is only a fraction of the record
windfall income that oil and gas producers accrued in 2022 – a year of soaring
energy prices amid a global energy crisis. This report aims to inform
discussions on these issues in the run-up to the COP28 Climate Change Conference
in Dubai in November and is part of a broader World Energy Outlook special
report to be released later in 2023 focusing on the role of the oil and gas
industry in net zero transitions. Published May 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Press
release Share Cite The production, transport and processing of oil and gas
resulted in 5.1 billion tonnes (Gt) CO 2 -eq in 2022. These “scope 1 and 2”
emissions from oil and gas activities are responsible for just under 15% of
total energy-related greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The use of the oil and gas
results in another 40% of emissions. In this report, we look at the changes and
measures needed to reduce the emissions intensity of oil and gas operations in
the IEA’s Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE) Scenario. The work brings together,
expands and updates analysis from previous IEA work to inform discussions in the
run up to COP28 in Dubai. It is part of a broader World Energy Outlook Special
Report to be released in 2023 focussing on the role of the oil and gas industry
in net zero transitions. The NZE Scenario maps out a way to limit the global
average temperature rise to 1.5°C alongside achieving universal access to modern
energy by 2030. This scenario sees a rapid decline in oil and gas demand, which
is sufficiently steep that it can be satisfied in aggregate without developing
new oil and gas fields. There is also an immediate, concerted effort by all the
oil and gas industry to limit emissions from its activities. In the NZE
Scenario, the global average emissions intensity of oil and gas supply falls by
more than 50% between 2022 and 2030. Combined with the reductions in oil and gas
consumption, this results in a 60% reduction in emissions from oil and gas
operations to 2030. Total emissions of oil and gas operations in the Net Zero
Scenario, 2022-2030 Open expand Emissions intensities of oil and gas operations
in the Net Zero Scenario, 2022-2030 Open expand Five key levers are used to
achieve this reduction in emissions intensities: tackling methane emissions,
eliminating all non-emergency flaring, electrifying upstream facilities with
low-emissions electricity, equipping oil and gas processes with carbon capture
utilisation and storage (CCUS), and expanding the use of low-emissions
electrolysis hydrogen in refineries. No offsets are used to achieve the
reductions in emissions in the NZE Scenario.  Tackling methane emissions is the
single most important measure that contributes to the overall fall in emissions
from oil and gas operations, followed by eliminating flaring and
electrification. Scaling up CCUS and expanding the use of low-emissions hydrogen
play complementary roles but have significant potential for positive spillovers
into other aspects of energy transitions, by accelerating deployment and
technology learning for these technologies. Cost and savings in the Net Zero
Scenario, 2030 Open expand Emissions reductions in the Net Zero Scenario, 2030
Open expand Tackling scope 1 and 2 emissions from oil and gas is one of the most
viable and lowest cost options to reduce total GHG emissions from any activity
to 2030. Around USD 600 billion upfront spending is required over the period to
2030 to achieve the full 50% reduction in the emissions intensity of oil and gas
operations. This is 15% of the windfall net income the industry received in
2022. Many of the measures also lead to additional income streams by avoiding
the use or waste of gas meaning they can quickly recoup the upfront spending
required. . For facilities implementing these measures, the average cost of
producing oil and gas would increase by less than USD 2/boe. A number of
companies have to date announced targets to reduce their scope 1 and 2
emissions. These vary markedly in their scope and timelines for implementation.
Only a fraction of these commitments matches the pace of decline seen in the NZE
Scenario and most plan to use offsets to achieve their targets. Forward‑leaning
companies need to recognise the need to move faster than the global average
reduction in emissions and build a broader coalition of companies willing to
play their part. To build public confidence in actions being taken, a consistent
approach is needed to monitor, report, and verify emissions from oil and gas
activities. This should be based on robust measurements to improve the accuracy,
availability, and transparency of emissions data.         Related files
Download the chart file                                  Download "Download the
chart file" Documentation         Related content      All results circle-arrow
Net Zero by 2050 A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector
Flagship report — May 2021                  The Energy Mix Get updates on the
IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error
Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries &
regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About
News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east
Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube
instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA
(2023),  Emissions from Oil and Gas Operations in Net Zero Transitions , IEA,
Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/emissions-from-oil-and-gas-operations-in-net-
zero-transitions, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close
dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.