Solar energy to power water supply in remote desert villages | United Nations
Development Programme     Skip to main content
Turkmenistan
WHO WE ARE
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English
Русский Türkmençe   Global
Nav toggle                                                          Search
WHO WE ARE
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English Русский Türkmençe Locations                 Home Turkmenistan Stories
Solar energy to power water supply in remote desert villages
Solar energy to power water supply in remote desert villages   October 14, 2021
People living in the heart of Karakum desert are mainly involved in sheep and
camels breeding.  To water their livestock, shepherds collect precipitation and
transport water by cars. Rainwater is collected from rooftops, accumulated and
kept in special containers besides each house. The prolonged storage of water
leads to deterioration of its taste and sanitary qualities, which over time
negatively affects human health. There are also difficulties in supplying
electricity in these villages, as existing diesel generators in each of the
villages are run only for a few hours a day. The joint project of UNDP and the
State Committee on Water Management of Turkmenistan “Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy for Sustainable Water Management in Turkmenistan” funded by the
Global Environment Facility (GEF) aims at introducing the innovative
technologies in the development of water management, energy efficiency and
reducing greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere. As part of one of its
components, the project has installed solar power supply systems for pumping and
purifying water in remote desert villages Yel, Bashkak and Kelleli villages of
the Ak Bugday district of Akhal region. Consequently, the project has installed
solar photovoltaic (PV) power systems with total electric capacity of 10 kW to
demonstrate the use of renewable energy sources and to encourage local
communities to use “clean energy” instead of diesel generators and thereby
reduce CO 2  emissions associated with water pumping. Today, about 1200 people
are benefitting from the pilot plots, including women and girls, who constitute
half of the local population. Constant water supply helps to improve the
sanitary and hygienic conditions in these villages. The electrification of
remote desert settlements through harnessing solar energy has allowed local
people to get access to clean water and electricity, which in turn has led to
the improvement of quality of their life. “Now, my children can drink clean
water and watch TV”- says one of beneficiaries of this important initiative from
Bashkak village. According to preliminary projections, it is expected that
installed PV systems during their 15 years-long lifetime will lead to reduction
of GHG emissions by 383 tons of CO 2  equivalent. This initiative has a high
replication potential considering the large number of remote villages scattered
across the desert, where diesel-based engine generators are the main source of
electricity for the population and water pumping.       Related Content Press
Releases UNDP Turkmenistan partners with the largest private Media portal of
Turkmenistan to achieve SDGs   The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
one of the largest development partners of Turkmenistan and “Turkmenportal”, the
country’s biggest private media ... Read more  Press Releases Encouraging
children to protect the oceans and seas Within the framework of the Conference
"The Caspian Sea - the Sea of Friendship and Harmony", organized on the occasion
of the Caspian Sea Day by the Ministry of ... Read more  News UNDP and the
Nature Protection Society of Turkmenistan leads a beach clean-up exercise  UNDP
in Turkmenistan, together with the Nature Protection Society of Turkmenistan
(NPST) has marked the World Environment Day, June 5, 2022, by cleaning up the
Ca... Read more  Press Releases UNDP reaches out to children in “Dayanch” summer
camp to mark the World Environment Day   The UNDP Office in Turkmenistan
together with the Nature Protection Society of Turkmenistan held an Educational
session themed "Only One Earth" for children of th... Read more  Press Releases
UNDP and the British Embassy in Turkmenistan convened the third coordination
meeting of the Climate Group of Development Partners  Today, UNDP and the
British Embassy in Turkmenistan in a hybrid format convened the Development
Partners Climate Group Coordination meeting aimed at continuing th... Read more
Press Releases UNDP promotes renewable energy and energy efficiency in
Turkmenistan Within the framework of the joint project of UNDP and the Ministry
of Agriculture and Environmental Protection of Turkmenistan "Sustainable Cities
in Turkmenistan... Read more    Search           Found  0  results.
Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All
UNDP United Nations Development Programme                         WHO WE ARE
About us                                                            About
Turkmenistan                                                            Our team
Legal framework
Partners                                                            Funding and
delivery
Accountability                                                      What we do
Sustainable development goals
Our focus                                                            GENDER
DEŇLIGI                                                            Gender
Equality                                                            Гендерное
равенство                                                      Our impact
News centre
Publications                                                            Blogs
Projects                                                            Stories
Get involved                                                      Contact us
Careers                                                            Procurement
Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit social or environmental complaint Scam
Alert Terms of Use instagram twitter facebook youtube © 2024 United Nations
Development Programme