Fossil Fuels Consumption Subsidies 2022 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Fossil Fuels Consumption Subsidies 2022
Fossil Fuels Consumption Subsidies 2022                             Overview
About this report The IEA has been tracking fossil fuel subsidies for many
years, examining instances where consumer prices are lower than the market value
of the fuel itself. Our systematic analysis highlights the magnitude of these
subsidies, and the potential benefits of their removal for energy markets,
climate goals and government budgets. This report provides our first estimates
for 2022, which show that global fossil fuel consumption subsidies doubled from
the previous year to an all-time high of USD 1 trillion. The Glasgow Climate
Pact emphasized that phasing out fossil fuel subsidies is a fundamental step
towards a successful clean energy transition. However, today’s global energy
crisis has also underscored some of the political challenges of doing so. This
report suggests lessons for energy subsidy reform from today’s energy crisis.
Published February 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite Global fossil fuel
consumption subsidies Prices for fossil fuels were extraordinarily high and
volatile in 2022 as energy markets grappled with the strains caused by Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine – in particular the sharp cuts in Russian natural gas
deliveries to Europe. In many countries, though, the prices actually paid by
consumers for these fuels remained at a much lower level. A range of policy
interventions insulated consumers from ballooning prices, but with the adverse
effect of keeping fossil fuels artificially competitive with low-emissions
alternatives. In 2022, subsidies worldwide for fossil fuel consumption
skyrocketed to more than USD 1 trillion, according to the IEA’s latest estimate,
by far the largest annual value ever seen. The IEA has been tracking fossil fuel
subsidies for many years, examining instances where consumer prices are less
than the market value of the fuel itself (adjusted for transport costs and VAT,
as applicable). Our first estimates for 2022 show that subsidies for natural gas
and electricity consumption more than doubled compared with 2021, while oil
subsidies rose by around 85%. The subsidies are mainly concentrated in emerging
market and developing economies, and more than half were in fossil-fuel
exporting countries. Fossil fuel consumption subsidies by fuel, 2010-2022 Open
expand In addition to these consumption subsidies, the IEA has tracked more than
USD 500 billion in extra spending to reduce energy bills in 2022, mainly in
advanced economies, with around USD 350 billion of this in Europe. This spending
is not necessarily captured in our methodology as a fossil fuel consumption
subsidy because average end-user prices are still sufficiently high to cover the
value of the market fuel in question 1 . In Europe, preliminary analysis shows
that average end-user prices were close, in some cases, to the market reference
values 2 . Nonetheless, spending to bring down energy bills represents a
significant fiscal burden for governments and, as is often the case with such
measures, these interventions have not always been well targeted. Furthermore,
it risks diminishing the incentive to use energy efficiently or to switch to
cleaner fuels. Government consumer measures to reduce energy bills during the
energy crisis Open expand In November 2021, the  Glasgow Climate Pact  called on
countries to “phase-out … inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, while providing
targeted support to the poorest and most vulnerable”. Our analysis shows that,
over the last year, many new government measures were implemented that limited
the passing on of high international fossil fuel prices to consumers. Some of
these measures can be defended as social or political necessities, given the
hardship that full exposure to market-driven prices could have caused. But the
scale of these interventions is still a worrying sign for energy transitions.
While many other measures taken by governments are serving to accelerate
transitions, these price interventions worked in the opposite direction by
favouring the incumbent fuels.  In this report, we explain how we approached the
subsidy calculations in the exceptional circumstances seen in 2022, consider the
various responses by governments, and assess the broader implications for energy
transitions.  What was the "market price" for fuels in 2022? Establishing the
international market value of oil and coal is typically quite simple, as there
are well-recognised international price markets for different fuel types and
qualities that are closely correlated. However, a lot of the usual relationships
between price markers broke down in 2022. Following Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine, Russian crude oil was trading at a significant discount to other crude
types, as some buyers opted not to purchase it, either voluntarily or because of
sanctions. This segmentation of the crude market was accompanied by a dramatic
increase in the price differentials between crude oil and oil products, as
product markets continued to run up against a shortage of global refining
capacity. For the purposes of this estimate, we used regionally distinct prices
for the final oil products and coal qualities. Prices for Brent, Urals crude and
diesel in Northwest Europe, 2021-2022 Open expand Establishing a reference
market price for natural gas is always more complicated than for oil or coal
because there are large regional differences between different gas markets and
transportation costs are significant. But as trade in liquified natural gas
(LNG) has grown and as more prices are set by gas-to-gas competition, a typical
year would see the differentials in traded prices in North America, Europe and
Asia reflect the costs of moving gas between these markets, with North American
prices being the lowest. However, 2022 was far from a typical year, with markets
coming under incredible pressure because of the cuts in Russian deliveries to
Europe. Long-term contract prices linked to oil remained relatively low and this
enabled some importing countries – especially in Asia – to sidestep some of the
market turbulence. But anyone buying gas on international markets that reflected
the actual scarcity of gas faced a major escalation in price levels.
Infrastructure constraints played a part in the wide range of prices seen
worldwide, as supply could not be reallocated in sufficient volumes to close
price gaps despite the attractive opportunities for price arbitrage. These
factors complicate the task of establishing indicative prices for key markets;
our estimates aim to reflect a balance of different sources of gas. The figure
below highlights how much gas prices changed year-on-year, with knock-on effects
also on electricity prices. Average benchmark prices of natural gas for selected
region and countries, 2020-2022 Open expand Our assessment for fossil fuels does
not take into account environmental externalities such as carbon prices. As we
have shown in  another analysis , incorporating a carbon price in the assessment
of the ‘true value’ of these fuels would increase the reference values and, all
else being equal, push up the estimate of fossil fuel subsidies.  Did consumers
see the market price? Prices for end-consumers rarely move in lockstep with
international prices because of various buffers, contractual provisions or other
mechanisms to smooth volatility. In many cases, estimated subsidy levels
increased in 2022 simply because of the gap between fixed end-user prices and
the international reference levels. This was the case in many countries in the
Middle East . But in the exceptional circumstances of 2022, governments found
multiple ways to avoid passing on high and volatile prices to consumers. In some
instances, these measures involved direct allocations from national budgets; in
other cases (notably among the fossil fuel exporters), our subsidy estimates
reflect income that is foregone by keeping domestic prices much lower than
international benchmarks. Tax exemptions and reductions have a similar effect. 
These interventions (not all of which would be picked up as fossil fuel
consumption subsidies by our methodology) can be categorised as follows: Fixing
prices or capping price increases, e.g.: The  Peruvian  government decided in
April 2022 to temporarily include a number of transport fuels in the State Fuel
Price Stabilization Fund to reduce the rise in prices.   Thailand  introduced a
diesel price cap of THB 30 (USD 0.85) per litre. El Salvador  introduced price
caps for gasoline and diesel products. Egypt  extended the period for
subsidising electricity, while it had previously been planning to stop doing so
by the end of the fiscal year 2021-2022. France  enacted a "tariff shield" that
initially froze electricity and gas retail tariffs for households and then
limited the possibility for increases in price. Exemptions from various taxes
and levies, e.g.:  The  South African  government froze the general fuel levy on
petrol and diesel from February 2022, and reduced it by of ZAR 1.50 (USD 0.9)
per litre from April to June 2022. Guyana  removed the excise tax on gasoline
and diesel in March. The  United Kingdom  cut fuel duty, and  Belgium  reduced
the VAT on electricity bills from 21% to 6%. Easing payment terms or banning
disconnections for non-payment: Japan  has eased gas and electricity payment
terms for those struggling to pay. In  Spain , a “vital minimum supply”
obligation for utilities was enacted from September 2021, ensuring vulnerable
households unable to pay their electricity bills would still get supplied for a
period of 10 months. Compensation mechanisms for different affected groups of
consumers, including households, businesses and industrial consumers: In  India
, the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana-subsidy scheme, which supports access to LPG
for the poorest segments of the population, saw its cost reach USD 820 million. 
In  Germany , the government implemented several additional payments to help
vulnerable communities pay their heating bills (households on housing benefits,
apprentices and students with student loans).  In  Korea , vouchers for energy
expenses – including electricity, gas, LPG and heating – were provided to around
1.2 million vulnerable households in 2022, and the voucher amounts were
increased twice during the year. Some of the actual budgetary expenditures were
very large. For example, in Malaysia, MYR 5 billion (about USD 1 billion and
equivalent to 2% of national fiscal revenue) was spent in June 2022 alone, and
the government is planning to reform its gasoline subsidy to be more targeted in
2023. In Thailand, the elimination of excise tax on diesel and bunker oil for
electricity generation has been extended and will continue to March 2023. In
Europe, Germany has decided to spend nearly EUR 100 billion to reduce energy
bills for the first four months of 2023 with EUR 56 billion for gas and district
heating as well as EUR 43 billion for electricity. Governments also spent
considerable sums on recapitalisation, debt suspension and support for energy
companies or key energy-intensive industries. For example, the Peruvian
government authorised an exceptional injection of capital, as well as a loan
guarantee, to state-owned Petroperú. France fully renationalised EDF to
reinforce its financial position during the crisis and to ensure its ability to
complete planned and unplanned maintenance work on its nuclear fleet. And
Germany provided a EUR 13 billion credit line to Uniper, which operates thermal
power generation assets, to secure the company's short-term liquidity. Lessons
for energy subsidy reform from today’s energy crisis Phasing out fossil fuel
subsidies is a fundamental ingredient of successful clean energy transitions, as
underscored in the Glasgow Climate Pact. However, today’s global energy crisis
has also highlighted some of the political challenges of doing so.  In an energy
crisis, governments prioritise shielding consumers from damaging price impacts
over commitments to phasing out subsidies. This was very visible in 2022 and
resulted in a sharp rise in fossil fuel consumption subsidies and other measures
to limit the impacts on energy bills. This reduced hardship but diminished the
incentive for consumers to save or to switch to alternative – and cleaner –
sources of energy, thereby delaying a lasting resolution of the crisis. It also
drained public funds that could have been spent in other areas, including on
clean energy transitions.  The jump in fossil fuel consumption subsidies in 2022
brings some important lessons on the prospects for orderly and people-centred
transitions. Fossil fuel prices are not the best way to drive clean energy
transitions.  Imbalanced or poorly sequenced approaches to transitions, in which
fuel supply is cut ahead of demand, create clear risks of further price spikes,
and there is no guarantee that such episodes are unambiguously good for
transitions. As noted in the  World Energy Outlook 2022 , “high fossil fuel
prices are no substitute for climate policies”. In practice, concerns about
affordability can reduce the attention and money that policymakers devote to
clean energy. They can also in some cases (as seen in 2022) prompt higher use of
more polluting fuels, i.e. a switch from gas to coal. And the inflationary
pressures push up borrowing costs to the detriment of capital-intensive clean
energy investments.  High fossil fuel prices hit the poor hardest, but subsidies
are rarely well-targeted to protect vulnerable groups and tend to benefit
better-off segments of the population . This was demonstrated again in 2022, as
the political priority to respond quickly often overrode the more painstaking
task of directing support where it was needed most. Effective targeting requires
prior investment in better data collection and in setting up effective cash
transfer mechanisms. Better to spend on structural changes than on emergency
relief . Resources are best deployed in promoting changes that provide lasting
protection against volatile fuel prices. This means anchoring market-based
prices in a broader suite of policies and measures that enable cleaner choices
by households and industries. This should make high-efficiency and low-emissions
equipment and services readily available, and help poorer consumers to manage
the upfront costs of these investments. The global energy crisis pushed fossil
fuel consumption subsidies to an all-time high in 2022 Read the commentary
circle-arrow References In order to calculate subsidy levels, there are three
typical methods (Sovacool, 2017; Koplow, 2018), including: - Program-specific
estimation is an  inventory approach  used to identify and quantify the sources
of energy subsidies - A  price-gap analysis  – an approach that tries to
identify the gap by comparing reference prices with end user prices for
consumers; this is the approach used in this commentary:  By combining the
aforementioned two methods, total support estimates aim to determine the total
consumer and producer support levels. This is the approach used in the  joint
OECD/IEA work . This analysis will be refined as more data on end-user prices
becomes available. In other advanced economies, the situation is more clear-cut.
In Japan, for example, the average end-user price for natural gas in 2022 was
around USD 35/Mbtu; whereas market reference prices including distribution costs
and VAT were about USD 25/Mbtu. Reference: Sovacool, B. (2017), “Reviewing,
reforming, and rethinking global energy subsidies: Towards a political economy
research agenda”, Ecological Economics, Vol. 135, pp 150–163. Reference: Kolpow,
D. (2018), “Defining and measuring fossil fuel subsidies”, in The Politics of
Fossil Fuel Subsidies and Their Reform, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Reference: Taylor, Michael (2020), Energy subsidies: Evolution in the global
energy transformation to 2050, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.
Reference 1 Close dialog In order to calculate subsidy levels, there are three
typical methods (Sovacool, 2017; Koplow, 2018), including: - Program-specific
estimation is an  inventory approach  used to identify and quantify the sources
of energy subsidies - A  price-gap analysis  – an approach that tries to
identify the gap by comparing reference prices with end user prices for
consumers; this is the approach used in this commentary:  By combining the
aforementioned two methods, total support estimates aim to determine the total
consumer and producer support levels. This is the approach used in the  joint
OECD/IEA work . Reference 2 Close dialog This analysis will be refined as more
data on end-user prices becomes available. In other advanced economies, the
situation is more clear-cut. In Japan, for example, the average end-user price
for natural gas in 2022 was around USD 35/Mbtu; whereas market reference prices
including distribution costs and VAT were about USD 25/Mbtu. Reference 3 Close
dialog Reference: Sovacool, B. (2017), “Reviewing, reforming, and rethinking
global energy subsidies: Towards a political economy research agenda”,
Ecological Economics, Vol. 135, pp 150–163. Reference 4 Close dialog Reference:
Kolpow, D. (2018), “Defining and measuring fossil fuel subsidies”, in The
Politics of Fossil Fuel Subsidies and Their Reform, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge. Reference 5 Close dialog Reference: Taylor, Michael (2020), Energy
subsidies: Evolution in the global energy transformation to 2050, International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.         Related content      All results
circle-arrow Fossil Fuel Subsidies in Clean Energy Transitions: Time for a New
Approach? A "price gap-plus" approach could bring carbon prices and
environmental costs into the equation.                     Report — February
2023                  The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news,
analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample
Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system
Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries
Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east
Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024
Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  Fossil Fuels
Consumption Subsidies 2022 , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/fossil-
fuels-consumption-subsidies-2022, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share
this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook
Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print
Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can
unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.