Fossil Fuel Subsidies in Clean Energy Transitions: Time for a New Approach? –
Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre
IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system
by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission
Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and
Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore
all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's
50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical
Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy
Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable
Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries
Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or region Member countries
Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany
Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand
Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands
Türkiye United Kingdom United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa
Rica Israel Latvia Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India
Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All
Countries and Regions Data Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data
Data explorers Understand and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and
trackers Data explorers Data sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy
system available for download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or
planned government policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access
every chart published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports
Chevron down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February
2024                     Fuel report — February 2024
Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast to 2026                     Fuel report —
January 2024                  World Energy Outlook 2023
Flagship report — October 2023                  Net Zero Roadmap: A Global
Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Fossil Fuel Subsidies in Clean Energy
Transitions: Time for a New Approach? Fossil Fuel Subsidies in Clean Energy
Transitions: Time for a New Approach?                                 A "price
gap-plus" approach could bring carbon prices and environmental costs into the
equation.                                                          Overview
About this report The IEA has long described fossil fuel subsidies as a
‘roadblock’ on the pathway to clean energy systems and provided data and advice
to support their removal. The methodology is a “price gap approach” where we
establish a market reference price and then compare it with the price paid by
consumers. When the end-user price is lower than the reference price, it is
counted as a subsidy. But this approach does not reflect the environmental costs
of fossil fuels such as carbon prices. To deal with this issue, this report
suggests “price gap-plus approach”, which explores whether, and how, it might be
possible to incorporate environmental aspects into the calculation of fossil
fuel subsidies. We conducted analysis for six countries that are the negotiating
parties for a new international Agreement on Climate Change, Trade and
Sustainability (ACCTS) – Norway, Iceland, New Zealand, Switzerland, Costa Rica
and Fiji. Our analysis underscores that adding a carbon price to the reference
price is more likely to reveal fossil fuel consumption subsidies, even though
are no agreed standards for carbon pricing. This issue becomes more sensitive
during periods of high and volatile fuel prices, when governments opt to take
actions to protect consumers. Published February 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Share
Cite The IEA's efforts to monitor fossil fuel Subsidies with a "price-gap The
IEA has long described fossil fuel subsidies as a ‘roadblock’ on the way to a
clean energy system and provided data and advice to support their removal. The
methodology that we use establishes a market reference price for different
fossil fuels – and for electricity produced from these fuels – and then compares
that with the price paid by consumers. Where the end-user price is lower than
the reference price, that is counted as a subsidy (called a fossil fuel
consumption subsidy). The results of our most  recent analysis  show a startling
rise in such subsidies in 2022. This approach, which is call the ‘price-gap
approach’, does not capture all the fossil fuel subsidies that are out there.
There may be government interventions that tip the playing field in favour of
fossil fuels but that do not affect end-user prices; production subsidies are a
case in point. That is why the IEA works closely with the OECD – which tracks
other types of subsidies – to produce a broader  joint assessment . There are
ways to amplify and expand the definition of fossil fuel subsidies that the IEA
uses. One very important variable is the market reference price. As things stand
under the IEA methodology, this refers simply to the prevailing price at which
various fuels are sold on the international market, with adjustments to reflect
transport and distribution costs to consumers. But this approach does not
include any adjustment to reflect the environmental costs of fossil fuels such
as carbon prices. This article explores whether, and how, it might be possible
to incorporate environmental aspects into the calculation of fossil fuel
subsidies. Bringing a carbon price into the subsidy methodology The IEA has been
collecting data for international fuel markets and retail prices for more than a
decade. The price gap between reference fuel prices (which include international
market prices, international transport costs and domestic distribution costs)
and end-user fuel prices indicates how and to what extent governments are
intervening in price formation. Governments are deemed to be subsidising
consumers if the end-user prices are lower than the reference prices. Analysis
using the IEA’s “price-gap approach” provides an annual estimate of fossil fuel
consumption subsidies worldwide (see our  Fossil Fuel Subsidies Database ). Our
latest analysis indicates that global fossil fuel subsidies for end-users
reached more than USD 1 trillion, by far the largest value that we have ever
seen. This is five times higher than in 2020, a year in which countries saved on
subsidy outlays due to the historically low fuel prices during the pandemic. It
is often very difficult to fully quantify the level of subsidies issued for
fossil fuels, as there are many avenues for the distribution of support.
However, the IEA’s "price-gap approach” provides a uniform measure of subsidies
to fossil fuel consumption by applying the reference and end-user prices.
Governments face conflicting priorities when it comes to energy prices. On the
one hand, they are keen to avoid or mitigate the effects of price shocks and
volatility, as these can have damaging effects on economies, households and
business, with the worst effects often concentrated among poorer and more
vulnerable communities. On the other hand, there is widespread recognition that
prices should reflect not only market value but also the externalities
associated with the underlying product, such as pollution and detrimental health
impacts. In the case of fossil fuels, this points towards introducing carbon
pricing. Such carbon prices are already implemented in a variety of ways. About
23% of global emissions  are covered by carbon price schemes explicitly. In many
other cases, countries impose general levies or specific charges on the use of
fossil fuels. These may not be directly linked to the carbon content of the
fuels but instead encourage efficiency and fuel substitution in favour of less
polluting sources of energy – and therefore push in the same direction as carbon
prices. The conceptual idea behind a revised “price gap-plus approach” is to
incorporate an allowance for carbon prices in the reference price, and therefore
to apply a higher and more sustainable benchmark for global end-user prices.
Price gap-plus approach Open expand                                     Price
gap-plus approach                                  Close dialog Download image
Download image This approach raises a few important practical questions about
the level at which this notional carbon price should be set, and whether it
should be differentiated across countries at different stages of development.
There are no internationally agreed disciplines regarding appropriate levels of
energy taxation or carbon prices. Moreover, carbon prices co-exist in practice
with other energy taxes, so the addition to our reference price can be covered
in practice by a variety of levies or charges that may or may not have an
environmental purpose. As for the level of carbon prices to apply, practice
around the world offers a huge range. Some  68 carbon pricing initiatives  are
implemented in different countries. The price levels in these initiatives range
from USD 1 to 130 per tonne of carbon dioxide (USD/t CO 2 ), and the median
value is around USD 30 t CO 2 . The price level depends on the purpose of the
tax and trading system, reflecting the country or region’s economic conditions
and policy priorities. It is extremely difficult to define the “proper” level of
a carbon price. The debate over the social cost of carbon is illustrative of
this difficulty, although many countries sidestep this issue by focusing instead
on a carbon price that is consistent with their emissions reduction goals. We
conducted analysis for six countries that are the negotiating parties for a new
international Agreement on Climate Change, Trade and Sustainability (ACCTS) –
Norway, Iceland, New Zealand, Switzerland, Costa Rica and Fiji. We took two
approaches to the level of carbon price examined. The first distinguishing
between different economic profiles, and the second imposing a uniform high
level. For the first, we followed the tiered pricing in a recent  International
Monetary Fund study , which assumed a carbon price of USD 75 t CO 2  for
advanced economies, USD 50 t CO 2  for high-income emerging economies (China,
etc.) and USD 25 t CO 2  for low-income emerging economies. So in our first
case, a carbon price of USD 75 t CO 2  is assumed for Norway, Iceland, New
Zealand and Switzerland. For Costa Rica and Fiji, it is assumed to be USD 50 t
CO 2 . In our second case, a carbon price of USD 100 t CO 2  is uniformly
applied to all six countries. The key indicator for this analysis is whether the
price gap is positive or negative. Positive values indicate that end-user prices
are higher than the reference values, meaning that no consumption subsidy is in
place. We looked at two fuels, gasoline and diesel, and applied two approaches
to carbon pricing to each of them. Difference between reference and end-user
prices for gasoline by selected countries, 2017-2021 Open expand In case 1,
using a differentiated carbon price, the gaps are all positive values. End-user
prices cover the additional costs equivalent to the USD 75 t CO 2  carbon price
in Norway, Iceland, New Zealand and Switzerland, and USD 50 t CO 2  in Costa
Rica and Fiji. Iceland has the largest price gap, varying from USD 1.3 to 1.6
litre depending on the year. The smallest gaps are observed in Fiji, where they
range from USD 0.2 to 0.4 litre. The countries with larger price gaps, Norway,
Iceland, New Zealand and Switzerland, comfortably cover the additional costs
equivalent to USD 75 t CO 2 . Fiji and Costa Rica have smaller price gaps,
highlighting that the addition of a carbon price brings the reference price very
close to the actual end-user prices. If end-user prices are regulated, this
suggests that any additional fuel price spike – as seen in 2022 – could easily
tip this calculation over into an indication of a subsidy. It also underlines
the close linkages between the focus of this analysis and the affordability of
energy, especially in developing economies where governments are watchful of the
implications of high prices for vulnerable categories of consumer. In case 2,
the uniform high price means that the price gap shrinks considerably but is
still positive in all cases. For Norway, Iceland, New Zealand and Switzerland,
the gaps are much larger than the maximum yearly change in individual values
over the past five years. For Costa Rica and Fiji, the gaps are close to or even
less than the maximum yearly change. This implies that, in a case where the
international oil price surges but domestic end-user prices do not change
accordingly, it becomes more challenging for countries to cover the additional
costs equivalent to USD 100 t CO 2  of carbon prices.  Difference between
reference and end-user prices for diesel by selected countries, 2017-2021 Open
expand Conclusions The results indicate that the gasoline price gaps in the six
selected countries are all positive values (meaning that the end-user price
covers the additional costs equivalent to carbon prices) even in the case of a
uniform carbon tax of USD 100 t CO 2 . These findings hold up well during
periods when international market conditions are relatively stable but will be
tested during times of turbulence and price volatility, especially in emerging
and developing economies. If the international oil price rises but regulated
domestic end-user prices do not change accordingly, it will be challenging in
some cases for end-users to cover the additional costs implied by adding carbon
prices to the reference price. This will be particularly challenging for diesel,
which is cheaper and more carbon intensive. In fact, end-user diesel prices did
not cover the additional costs on several occasions in our analysis, and there
were more cases for diesel than for gasoline in which the gaps were close to
zero. Getting price signals right is essential for clean energy transitions,
creating incentives to use polluting fuels efficiently, to switch to cleaner
ones, and to invest in efficient and low-emissions technologies. Governments
need to harness these market signals effectively and supplement them with
regulation and standards to enable more sustainable choices. These can include
ensuring that more efficient equipment is available on the market and that
consumers receive help with the upfront costs of change.  Our analysis
underscores that adding a carbon price to the reference price is more likely to
reveal fossil fuel consumption subsidies because the benchmark, that is the
reference price, becomes higher with the addition of the carbon price. At the
same time, much depends in practice on where the notional carbon price is set,
and there is no agreed standard on this issue. This issue is made all the more
sensitive at times of high and volatile fuel prices, when many governments are
taking urgent actions to protect consumers. This analysis was conducted on fuel
prices in 2021. Doing the same exercise for 2022 would reveal even more strains,
especially if it encompassed natural gas markets where prices have been
extremely high during the global energy crisis.         Related content      All
results circle-arrow Fossil Fuels Consumption Subsidies 2022
Policy report — February 2023                  The Energy Mix Get updates on the
IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error
Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries &
regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About
News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east
Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube
instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA
(2023),  Fossil Fuel Subsidies in Clean Energy Transitions: Time for a New
Approach? , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/fossil-fuel-subsidies-in-
clean-energy-transitions-time-for-a-new-approach, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to
clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on
Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on
Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing.
You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.