Government Energy Spending Tracker – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Government Energy Spending Tracker
Government Energy Spending Tracker                                 June 2023
update                                                          Overview
Related files                                                              4
About this report The IEA  Government Energy Spending Tracker , formerly the
Sustainable Recovery Tracker , provides periodic updates on the latest approved
policies and their expected fiscal contributions to energy. The latest update,
issued in June 2023, focuses on tracking two types of spending policies: Clean
energy investment support, including measures to support investment in energy
infrastructures, renewables, electrification, efficiency, and supply chains in
the energy sector; and Short-term energy affordability measures, which are aimed
to help shield consumers and industries facing soaring energy prices. The latest
update to the  Government Energy Spending Tracker  policies database  tracks
almost 1 600 government financial measures from 68 countries, all of which are
available in the  IEA’s Policies and Measures (PAMS) database .  This report is
part of the IEA’s support of the first global stocktake of the Paris Agreement,
which will be finalized in the run up to COP28, the next UN Climate Change
Conference, at the end of 2023. Find other reports in this series on the IEA’s 
Global Energy Transitions Stocktake  page. Published June 2023 License CC BY 4.0
Supported by Clean Energy Transitions Programme Press release Share Cite Key
findings The June 2023 update of the IEA Government Energy Spending Tracker
finds USD 1.34 trillion allocated by governments for clean energy investment
support since 2020.  Government spending has played a central role in the rapid
growth of clean energy investment since 2020,  which rose nearly 25% from 2021
to 2023 , outpacing growth in fossil fuels in the same period. Around USD
130 billion of new government spending to support clean energy investments were
announced in the last six months – among the slowest periods for new allocations
since the pandemic. This slowdown may be short-lived, however, as a number of
additional policy packages are being considered in the European Union,
Australia, Brazil, Canada and Japan. The newest outlays identified are
predominately aimed at boosting mass and alternative transit modes, low-carbon
electricity generation projects and low-carbon vehicle sales. Among all measures
tracked since 2020, direct incentives for manufacturers aimed at bolstering
domestic manufacturing of clean energy now total to around USD 90 billion. Since
the start of the global energy crisis,  governments have also allocated USD 900
billion to short-term consumer affordability measures , additional to pre-
existing support programmes and subsidies. Around 30% of this affordability
spending has been announced in the past six months, and despite calls to better
target households and industries most in need, only 25% of affordability
measures are targeted towards low-income households and most-impacted
industries. The European Union is responsible for two-thirds of government
affordability support worldwide , having borne some of the steepest increases in
electricity and gas prices in 2022. Levels of consumer support spending have
also increased in emerging and developing economies, largely through governments
compensating energy companies for operating losses borne by keeping prices
stable during the energy crisis. As a result, governments in emerging market and
developing economies have dedicated to date more to consumer affordability
measures (USD 140 billion) than to clean energy investment support (USD 90
billion) since 2020. Emergency measures played an important role in  shielding
consumers from energy price spikes , but weighed heavily on government balance
sheets, as fossil fuel subsidies reached  an all-time record high in 2022 . This
could threaten some countries’ ability to balance short-term relief with
parallel efforts to address energy security and affordability through improved
energy efficiency and clean energy investment. This balance is particularly
difficult in emerging market and developing economies due to pre-existing
financial strains. Accordingly, the vast majority of spending on both
affordability and clean energy remains concentrated in advanced economies, which
now account for 93% of total government clean energy investment support and 85%
of consumer affordability support tracked to date. Explore the policies database
Browse more than  1 600 national government financial measures , spanning more
than 68 countries, underlying the IEA Government Energy Spending Tracker. Over
the last 6 months, the global energy crisis has prompted a continued rise in
emergency spending to manage affordability Since the start of the global energy
crisis, governments have allocated USD 900 billion to short-term consumer
affordability measures. This affordability spending continues to climb, with
over USD 270 billion allocated in the last 6 months, even as prices, notably in
Europe, have begun to abate, albeit remaining well above historic levels. New
allocations for clean energy investment support totalled almost USD 130 billion
in the past six months, making it one of the slowest periods of activity since
Q2 2020. This runs counter to stated government intentions to accelerate clean
energy transitions to manage exposure to global fossil fuel markets, notably
plans like REPowerEU to drastically cut natural gas use this decade. However, a
number of packages remain under discussion which could increase this total in
the coming year. The last six months continue trends seen since the start of the
tracker, that the spending mobilised in advanced economies far outstrips that
put forth in emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs). Advanced
economies account for 93% of total government clean energy investment support
and 85% of consumer affordability support.  Government spending for clean energy
investment support and crisis-related short-term consumer energy affordability
measures, Q2 2023 Open expand Affordability spending loomed large in recent
months, even as prices began to abate in wholesale markets. This tally captures
all government enacted spending to help consumers manage prices, including
direct grants, vouchers, tax reductions and price regulations. Announced
government affordability measures often do not provide the full picture, as many
pre-existing price regulations resulted in  record levels of fossil fuel
subsidies  in 2022, which either continue to be tacitly borne by governments or
state-owned energy companies, and often are felt as foregone revenues from not
selling oil and gas resources at global market prices. The tracker does,
however, capture government approved direct transfers from governments to energy
companies to cover losses caused by mandated price regulations. In addition,
governments also mobilised broader consumer supports to combat general
inflation, which if considered, would also substantially increase the total. 
Taken together, measures have been effective in shielding consumers from the
price shocks seen in global fossil fuel markets, but still many households felt
the crisis draw upon their finances.  In 12 countries representing nearly 60% of
the global population , average households saw their share of income going to
home energy rise in 2022, despite substantial government intervention, as energy
prices outpaced wage increases. Impacts were even larger for poorer households,
as they typically spend a higher share of income on energy. European Union
countries are now responsible for two-thirds of total affordability measures.
Germany is the largest single contributor to this total, and is estimated to be
on track to spend around one-half of its EUR 200 billion economic shield (
Abwehrschirm ) budget envelope approved last October. Croatia, Poland, Italy and
the Czech Republic represent the next largest new packages of affordability
measures in the European Union. Outside the European Union, Australia made
recent announcements in their 2023-2024 budget which, if adopted, would release
AUD 3 billion 1  towards energy price relief. Government consumer- energy
affordability measures, by region Open expand
Government consumer- energy affordability measures, by region
Close dialog Download image Download image Notes The spending is assessed from
the government’s perspective, as direct budget allocation, foregone tax
revenues, etc. Quantitative estimates from energy crisis response policies are
based on policies officially enacted by governments from September 2021 until 28
April 2023, and do not capture other forms of sub-market price subsidies that
may be channelled through utilities and other energy-related state-owned
enterprises without financial compensation by the government. Spending by EMDEs
on affordability measures increased in the past six months by additional USD 23
billion. These measures were largely in the form of direct transfers to energy
companies for keeping prices at affordable levels through the early part of the
energy crisis, as was the case in Indonesia, Mexico, Nigeria, and Malaysia.
However, high oil and gas prices increased revenues for producers in these same
countries, offseting their governments’ burdens to some extent.  The urgent need
to accelerate investments in climate mitigation is adding to a global call for
urgent reforms of MDBs, which would aim to restructure existing debt in EMDEs
and increase the catalytic impact of MDB support to these countries. Leading to
greater fiscal space and an increased focus on interventions that support
private capital mobilisation through de-risking can help to increase clean
energy investments in EMDEs.  Government clean energy investment support and
consumer energy affordability spending earmarked by region, Q2-2023 update Open
expand Affordability support is often made available to almost all consumers,
instead of targeting those most in need The tax reductions, fuel subsidies,
energy price regulations, cost compensation or liquidity support measures
offered to consumers and energy companies are largely not being targeted towards
those most in need. Almost 75% of the amounts earmarked globally benefit the
general population, as opposed to low-income households or economic sectors most
exposed to energy cost increase. This indicates that calls in previous updates
of the Government Energy Spending Tracker to better target support measures have
not been entirely heeded.  Government energy affordability spending earmarked by
sector, Q2-2023 Open expand Government energy affordability spending earmarked
by region, Q2-2023 Open expand Around 70% of global government spending on
consumer affordability measures are going to support electricity, natural gas
and heating. These measures were concentrated in Europe and Southeast Asia, to
counteract high electricity and gas prices. In other countries, including many
EMDEs, transport fuel prices rose more acutely, prompting EMDE governments to
dedicate 65% of gather consumer supports to discounts on transport fuels. Other
regions responded to higher transport fuel costs with reduced public transport
fares, such as the launch of a fixed-price rail and regional bus tickets in
Spain and Germany. While these fiscal interventions are, in principle, meant to
be short-lived, the lack of targeting raises questions as to whether countries
are sending sufficient signals to consumers to reduce unnecessary consumption,
increase efficiency, and seek out alternative energy supply. Some European
governments have hinted at their intention to extend major support schemes until
the end of next year, in anticipation of disrupted energy markets during the
next Northern hemisphere winter. Global government support for clean energy
investment registers small uptick, but more could be on the horizon In the last
six months, outlays for new clean energy investment support increased by almost
USD 130 billion, bringing the total enacted spending since 2020 to USD 1 343
billion. Government spending has played a central role in the rapid growth of
clean energy investment since 2020, ending a multi-year slump in the late 2010s.
In 2022, clean energy investment totalled to more than USD 1.7 trillion ,
meaning that for every USD 1 spent on fossil fuels, USD 1.7 is now spent on
clean energy from public and private sources. Five years ago this ratio was 1:1.
New outlays are mainly for low-carbon electricity generation projects (now
totalling USD 310 billion since 2020, mostly directed to renewable energy
sources), mass and alternative transit modes (USD 307 billion), and low-carbon
vehicle sales (USD 120 billion). Electricity grids have received the largest
percent increase (reaching USD 85 billion); however, that still lags well behind
other key areas. The new Norwegian national transport plan, India’s Green
Hydrogen Mission and Australian 2022-2023 budget were the largest new
allocations, providing incremental funding for electricity grids, low-carbon
power and electric vehicles (EVs). In addition, the Chinese government decided
on the province-by-province allocation of its EV and renewable energy production
schemes, which included more than was previously anticipated, after renewable
support subsidies had declined rapidly in recent years. Most EMDEs remain
constrained by rising debt levels and limited fiscal means. However, a number of
them have directed national development banks to support new clean investment,
notably for green hydrogen and renewable power production projects in Chile and
Brazil. New public-private partnerships are at the centre of Colombia’s new
clean bus programme. In Middle East and North Africa, governments have supported
state-owned companies to invest in new clean energy projects. Government clean
energy investment support enacted since the start of the Covid-19 crisis, by
sector, Q2-2023 Open expand A number of new policy packages are under discussion
in the European Union, Brazil, Canada and Japan, which could materialise by the
end of the Northern Hemisphere summer. Should the Canadian and Japanese packages
come to fruition in their envisaged format, they alone could add around USD 200
billion to the global total. Many of these packages are designed as direct
responses to the United States’ Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), which still
represents almost one-quarter of all clean energy support globally since 2020.
Already, schemes to boost local clean energy production competitiveness are
multiplying among advanced economies, mostly through calls for project or
specific sectoral grants. The IEA estimates that direct manufacturer incentives
since 2020 have reached around 90 billion of the total clean energy investment
support since 2020; a clear sign that the global race for clean energy
competitiveness is picking up. Recent examples include manufacturing incentives
in Spain and Hungary for EVs, and in Romania for batteries. The Net Zero
Industry Act recently put forward for discussion by the European Commission aims
at ensuring that by 2030 two-fifths of the production of eight strategic clean
energy technologies remains or develops in the European Union by fast-tracking
permit delivery and allowing larger financial and regulatory support. The French
government is also envisaging a Green Industry Plan to develop national low-
carbon sector manufacturing capacity. Canada’s 2023 budget, currently under
discussion, encompasses a new clean technology manufacturing investment tax
credit scheme. A similar trend can be identified among EMDEs. Some of them
previously established domestic production incentives – such as India’s
Production Linked Incentive Scheme, or the New Energy Automobile Industry
Development Plan in the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”). In
South-East Asia, the Malaysian Government introduced new income tax incentives
for EV charger manufacturers operating in the country. The Thai government aims
to boost local EV battery production and bring down the price of EVs on the
domestic market through a new subsidy scheme. Trade policy instruments are also
being mobilised: in January, the Philippines enacted a 5-year reduction in
import tariffs, notably targeting EV components. More such incentives are on the
horizon, including indirect incentives, such as local content requirements to
qualify for investment incentives. The IEA will closely monitor these incentives
in its upcoming updates.  Key government clean energy investment support
policies added to the IEA Government Energy Spending Tracker database Sector
What is included? Total government spending enacted Common policy types employed
Challenges Selected measures added since December 2022 update Low-carbon
electricity Solar, wind, bioenergy, hydro, nuclear, and other renewable power.
USD 310 billion Regulated cost-recovery. Tax credits. Government-backed
auctions. Improving financial securitisation renewable power. Administrative
delays, permitting, interconnection, public resistance to new projects.  Supply
chain constraints. commodities and material shortages/price spikes. Insufficient
government programmes and infrastructure to support construction, especially
offshore wind. China: 2023 renewable electricity subsidy scheme allocation to
provinces, focusing on wind, solar and biomass power generation Switzerland:
subsidies for large-scale solar PV, distributed as grants to small PV systems
operators in 2023 and through auctions to large PV system operators Fuels and
technology innovation Hydrogen, Carbon-capture sequestration, batteries, small
modular nuclear reactors, other digital technologies, biofuels, biogas, and
methane leak prevention. USD 182 billion Tenders. Loan guarantees. Subsidies/tax
breaks. Grants to pilot programmes & RD&D activities. International RD&D
partnerships/international trade partnerships (H 2 ). Low rates of return and
high cost of capital for pilot projects. Know-how and private sector expertise.
Lack of existing government R&D programmes. Private sector may lack ample R&D
capacity to respond to incentives. Some technologies (H 2 , batteries) are more
favoured than others (Carbon capture, utilisation and storage [CCUS]). India:
National Green Hydrogen Mission providing grants to green hydrogen production
projects United Kingdom: increased funding for the Net Zero Strategy Innovation
portfolio to support public institution-led research programmes on power,
buildings and industry; transport, waste and F-gases  Mass and alternative
transit Mass transit, rail, urban buses, charging infrastructure, walkways and
bikeways. USD 307 billion Consumer subsidies. Support and mandates for
manufacturers (subsidies, tax breaks, R&D funding, loan guarantees, fuel
efficiency standards). Public procurement for public fleets. Direct
spending/PPPs for infrastructure building (charging stations, low-carbon
fuelling). Funding for low-carbon fuelling pilots at ports, cross-docks, and
airports. Local manufacturers not prepared to ramp up production for alternative
transport modes. Supply chain constraints. Commodities and material
shortages/price spikes. Charging and low-carbon fuelling infrastructure chicken-
egg problem. Targeting infrastructure that will not happen without government
support. Targeting incentives to incremental market. Overcoming public and
private company reticence to adopt new technologies. Heavy transport technology
not ready for scale up. Co-ordination with subnational authorities or SOEs.
Public approval process of placing infrastructure. Infrastructure plans can
initially weigh heavily on public budget. Norway: 2022 - 2033 National Transport
Plan delineating direct procurement of works to enhance and digitalise railway
passenger and freight service over the next 12 years Spain: Low emission zones
(LEZ) programme enabling subnational authorities to provide grants to large and
medium-sized cities for the deployment of low-emission, electric or hydrogen
public transport modes, and the extension of pedestrian and cycling
infrastructures Low-carbon vehicles                             Electric and
efficient passenger vehicles, light and heavy trucking, shipping and aviation.
USD 120 billion Consumer subsidies. Support and mandates for manufacturers
(subsidies, tax breaks, R&D funding, loan guarantees, fuel efficiency
standards). Public procurement for public fleets. Direct spending/PPPs for
infrastructure building (charging stations, low-carbon fuelling). Funding for
low-carbon fuelling pilots at ports, cross-docks, and airports.   Local
manufacturers not prepared to ramp up production for alternatives. Supply chain
constraints. Commodities and material shortages/price spikes. Charging and low-
carbon fuelling infrastructure chicken-egg problem. Targeting infrastructure
that will not happen without government support. Targeting incentives to
incremental market. Overcoming public and private company reticence to adopt new
technologies. Heavy transport technology not ready for scale. Indonesia: 2023
VAT reduction on electric bus and car sales, subject to a local content
requirement set at 40% France: extension and continuation of consumer subsidy
schemes promoting the purchase of electric vehicles, hydrogen-based vehicles
(Bonus écologique) or energy-efficient vehicles (Prime à la conversion), and
design of a new subsidised leasing scheme enabling low-revenue households to
rent an electric car for EUR 100/month China: allocation of central government
New Energy Vehicles producer subsidies Hungary: direct grant supporting
corporate investments in a domestic EV component manufacturer facility Energy-
efficient buildings and industry Energy efficiency retrofits (buildings and
industry), efficient appliances, near net zero new buildings, end-use renewables
(e.g. solar thermal, geothermal). USD 264 billion Direct spending/PPPs for
infrastructure building (walkways, bike lanes, multi-modal options). Lack of
consumer-oriented offer and dedicated administrative processes. Effective
channelling depends on pre-existing energy efficiency programmes. Subsidies and
tax break effect will ultimately depend on consumer’s budget. Higher cost
financing due to small projects and revenue streams from efficiency hard to
count as secure revenue. Payback risks if ownership changes hands, or business
longevity is uncertain. Lack of qualified practitioners make retrofits fall
short of potential. Australia: subsidies for residential energy efficiency
retrofits and energy-efficiency grants for SMEs Latvia: State loans for energy
efficient renovation of multi-apartment buildings, provided to landlords United
Kingdom: 2023 Home Upgrade Grant scheme and the Social Housing Decarbonisation
Fund allocations targeting low-income households and social housing retrofits
Electricity networks Transmission, distribution, grid-side batteries, smart grid
investment. USD 85 billion Consumer subsidy and tax incentives. Energy
efficiency incentives and requirements on utilities and appliance manufacturers.
Direct spending on public buildings/PPPs for large-scale retrofit plans. Free
efficiency audits. Local energy efficiency funding distributors, with accredited
practitioner network. Public resistance to new large projects. Administrative
burden may delay projects. Ailing utility balance sheets. New resiliency and
cybersecurity concerns add requirements before implementation. Australia:
Rewiring the Nation programme aimed at upgrading and expanding Australia's
electricity grid India: Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme providing financial
assistance to distribution companies for modernizing distribution
infrastructures, Intra-State Transmission System Phase-II scheme financing grid
integration of 20 GW of renewable energy projects in seven specific States
People-centred transitions Just transition mechanisms, worker training
programmes, research programmes on market and social transitions. USD 20 billion
  Regulatory request to operators to build and upgrade infrastructure
(resilience, RE integration, digitalisation). New outcome-based regulations and
rate of returns. Know-how essential to tailor and direct support. Co‑ordination
with subnational authorities. Lack of appropriate training offer. Attracting new
enterprises to regions in decline. US Inflation Reduction Act: specific grant
schemes for energy efficiency contractor trainings, and grant/loan instruments
for the deployment of low-carbon technology in low-income and disadvantaged
communities. Energy access Access to clean cooking, electricity access by grid
extension, minigrids, or stand-alone power systems. Basic, efficient appliances.
USD 14 billion   Funding for training programmes. Targeted support
(subsidies/tax breaks/direct infrastructure spending) for vulnerable SMEs, local
communities depending brown sectors or low-income households. Financial
difficulties of utilities and energy companies (notably SOEs). Emerging Markets
and Developing Economies’ (EMDE) restricted fiscal leeway. Lack of programmes to
support access in remote areas. Brazil, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Kenya,
Morocco, Saint Lucia and Peru: temporary increase in consumer LPG subsidies
enabling clean cooking through dedicated vouchers or cylinder distribution.
Indonesia: extension of electricity access scheme targeting off-grid households,
through converter kit distribution, subsidies for new electric installations and
financing solar and micro-hydro power plants. Explore the policies database
Browse more than  1 600 national government financial measures , spanning more
than 68 countries, underlying the IEA Government Energy Spending Tracker.
Methodology The Government Energy Spending Tracker analyses disbursements made
by central governments, from the second quarter of 2020 to 28 April 2023.
Estimates are based on official government sources and their related budgets,
when available, and on IEA analysis when spending volumes are not provided. The
OECD released their assessment of energy affordability support measures, which
differs in scope, and includes sub-national policies, affordability support
beyond direct energy interventions, and assesses over a different time frame.
This assessment can be found at:, “ Aiming Better: Government Support for
Households and Firms During the Energy Crisis ”, OECD Economic Policy Papers No.
32, OECD. Government clean energy investment support Government clean energy
investment support policies are defined as measures meant to drive spending on
clean energy investment support included in government economic recovery plans
in response to the Covid-19 pandemic or to the subsequent global energy crisis.
Common clean energy investment support policies include consumer or producer
subsidies to develop electric vehicle markets, direct spending or Public-Private
Partnership for building low-carbon and efficient transport infrastructures,
grants for emerging energy technology pilot programmes, or tax incentives for
energy-efficient building renovations. Quantitative estimates in the Government
Energy Spending Tracker are based on national-level clean energy sector policies
enacted by governments from the second quarter of 2020 until end April 2023 as
part of Covid-19 related recovery measures and directed toward long-term
projects and measures to boost economic growth. The Government Energy Spending
Tracker organises clean energy investment support on a sectoral and regional
basis, into seven key sectors: low-carbon electricity, electricity networks,
mass and alternative transit, low-carbon vehicles, energy-efficient buildings
and industry, cleaner fuels and emerging low‐carbon technologies. Short-term
consumer affordability measures Short-term consumer affordability measures were
enacted by governments in response to the international energy price rise that
materialised in the fourth quarter of 2021 and was further aggravated by the
Russian Federation’s (hereafter “Russia”) invasion of Ukraine. The most common
policy instruments include temporary consumer subsidies or tax
alleviation/exemption, state-backed loans or price regulation mechanism, often
enacted as temporary measures. The spending is assessed from the government’s
perspective, as direct budget allocation, foregone tax revenues, etc.
Quantitative estimates from energy crisis response policies are based on
policies enacted by governments from September 2021 to the end of April 2023,
and are derived exclusively from official government estimates of the total
direct cost of supporting those measures borne by governments. Accordingly, it
does not capture other forms of implicit price subsidies that may be channelled
through public utilities and other energy-related state-owned enterprises.
Collection process The IEA independently collects government energy spending
policies, in cooperation with its members, as well as G20 members. The full list
of policies considered in the Government Energy Spending Tracker, including
budget information, is available on the  IEA Policies and Measures (PAMS)
Database , a unique repository that has aggregated energy policies over the last
20 years, bringing together data from the IEA Energy Efficiency Database, the
Addressing Climate Change database, and the Building Energy Efficiency Policies
(BEEP) database, the IEA/IRENA Renewable Energy Policies and Measures Database,
along with information on CCUS and methane abatement policies. These policy
records include concise summaries of the policy, links to the original source,
and relevant tagging for policy type, technologies and sectors. About the
tracker The Government Energy Spending Tracker assesses the level of new
commitments for government direct spending flowing toward energy. The update of
the Tracker accounts for such spending since April 2020 to the end of April
2023. The Tracker relies on extensive policy analysis conducted by the IEA. It
includes around 1 530 energy-related government policies and spending programmes
from 68 countries through the  Policies and Measures (PAMS) database . All
government spending allocated to energy sustainability and affordability
policies as of 1 September 2022 was incorporated into the  Global Climate and
Energy Model  for analysis in the  World Energy Outlook 2022  in the Stated
Policies Scenario, which provides an assessment of how this government spending
contributes to rising levels of clean energy investment. All new policies
captured since then will be included in the forthcoming World Energy Outlook
2023 Stated Policies Scenario. The Government Energy Spending Tracker measures
two types of energy spending: clean energy investment support and consumer
energy affordability measures.  Clean energy investment support  includes all
government spending that directly underpins increasing levels of clean energy
investment.  Consumer energy affordability measures  includes all measures
intended to help consumers and enterprises weather high energy prices in light
of the global energy crisis. This category includes policies enacted by
governments in response to the international price rise that materialised in the
fourth quarter of 2021 and was further aggravated by Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine.  The IEA also tracks  fossil fuels consumption subsidies  via a price
gap methodology. The  2022 IEA Global Energy and Climate Model documentation
provides additional information on policy collection specifics for government
recovery spending. The IEA Government Energy Spending Tracker was initially
published as the Sustainable Recovery Tracker on 21 July 2021, as requested by
the G20 Rome  Leaders’ Declaration , and the Joint G20 Energy-Climate
Ministerial Communiqué . It benefitted from the support of the Italian G20
Presidency and is currently supported by the IEA Clean Energy Transitions
Programme. References Exchange rate: 1 Australian Dollar (AUD) = USD 0.69
Reference 1 Close dialog Exchange rate: 1 Australian Dollar (AUD) = USD 0.69
Related files                                          December 2022
Download "December 2022" Government Energy Spending Tracker Updates
April 2022                                  Download "April 2022"
October 2021                                  Download "October 2021"
July 2021                                  Download "July 2021" Sustainable
Recovery Tracker Updates         Related content      All results circle-arrow
Government Energy Spending Tracker: Policy Database Browse the 1600+ policies,
spanning over 67 countries, underlying the Government Energy Spending Tracker
Data explorer card data set The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news,
analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample
Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system
Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries
Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east
Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024
Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  Government
Energy Spending Tracker , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/government-
energy-spending-tracker-2, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this
report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook
Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print
Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can
unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.