Improved energy efficiency of heritage buildings reduces CO2 emissions and
boosts local development | United Nations Development Programme     Skip to main
content
Belarus
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English
Русский   Global
Nav toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English Русский Locations                 Home Belarus Press Releases
Improved energy efficiency of heritage buildings reduces CO2 emissions and
boosts local development                       Improved energy efficiency of
heritage buildings reduces CO2 emissions and boosts local development      The
energy efficiency improvements of the Potemkin and Golinsky palace in Krichev
preserves local historic and cultural heritage, cuts CO2 emissions, and brings
socio-economic benefits to the local communities and guests.     July 4, 2023
Palace of Potemkin and Golinsky (late 18th century) in Krichev, Mogilev Region,
Belarus.   Photo: UNDP in Belarus         There are many ways to make a home
more energy efficient, for example by insulation or installation of solar
panels. However, these measures are not applicable to heritage and historic
buildings due to the necessity to preserve their authentic look. There are other
solutions exist for improving energy efficiency characteristics of historic and
heritage sites. Historic building and heritage sites play an important role in
local development. They have a strong potential to generate revenues for small
businesses through attracting flow of tourists into rural areas.      More than
30,000 tourists and locals visit the palace complex every year.   Photo: UNDP in
Belarus       Krichev district is rich in heritage sites. There are 85 historic
and cultural buildings located within the district’s borders, which makes the
area attractive to tourists.  In partnership with local authorities, the
UNDP/GEF Small Grants Programme supported an energy efficiency project in the
Krichev district heritage sector. The project aimed at ‘decarbonizing’ the
district’s most famous and precious historic building – “ Palace of the Potemkin
and Golinsky” of XVIII century – by introducing technological improvements for
better energy efficiency.     New boiler with increased energy efficient
characteristics.   Photo: UNDP in Belarus       As part of the project, the GEF
SGP/UNDP has installed smart heating system and replaced an old boiler with a
new, energy efficient model. The benefits of the renovated heating system can be
felt beyond the palace’s premises. The new boiler serves heat to neighboring
buildings within 3 km area that also includes social buildings such as a school
and the district hospital. Apart from this, the renovation helps the local
budget annually save US$ 15,000 on heating bills and to cut carbon emissions by
5%.      New energy saving light bulbs in the interior of the palace.   Photo:
UNDP in Belarus       The energy efficient improvements have also been carried
out on the palace’s lighting. The measure has included replacing 70% of the
lights bulbs inside the palace with light-emitting diode (LED).      Alexandra
Solovieva, UNDP Resident Representative in Belarus visits the project as a part
of a joint mission of UNDP, GEF SGP/UNDP and the Ministry of Environment of
Belarus to the south-eastern districts of Mogilev region.    Photo: UNDP in
Belarus          By joining efforts with local authorities, the Ministry of
Nature, businesses and NGOs on introducing energy efficient solutions for
historic buildings we are unlocking new opportunities to achieve social,
economic and environmental goals and to set the district on a path towards green
and sustainable development.    Alexandra Solovieva, UNDP’s Resident
Representative in Belarus        Due to their age and fragility, historic
buildings need constant care and maintenance to ensure their functionality and
prevent deterioration. Better energy efficiency characteristics also improve
interior comfort, which is important factor for attraction of tourists. 
Photo: UNDP in Belarus       In this context, more than 30,000 tourists and
locals who visit the palace annually are direct beneficiaries of the project’s
interventions.  The GEF SGP/UNDP project helped maximize the historic heritage’s
green potential for bringing down the carbon footprint and fostering ecotourism
development.   News Smart Air-Purifying System Installed in the Open in Belgrade
With the financial support by the European Union, the Institute Mihailo Pupin
installed a smart open-space air-purifying system, within the zone of the “Ušće”
Mal... Read more  News Fueling the Isles The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and our Partners at Core  such as Japan, are stepping in to
help, spearheading initiatives aimed at promoting ener... Read more  News Launch
of Solarization Head of State Residences in Pacific Islands Development Forum
Member Countries As the countries aspire towards the 2030 Agenda in the upcoming
years, they have also taken leadership in reducing their carbon footprint and
showcasing climate a... Read more  News Beach Profile Study in Maaneyre,
Fuvahmulah City Read more  News Solar Installation to Ease Service Delivery in
South Sudan’s Health Sector Read more    Search           Found  0  results.
Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All
UNDP United Nations Development Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                            Funding and
delivery                                                            Legal
framework                                                            Our team
What we do                                                      Our focus
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
Our impact                                                      Blogs
News Centre                                                            Press
Releases                                                            Publications
Get involved                                                      Contact us
Jobs                                                            Procurement
Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Scam Alert  Submit social or environmental
complaint Terms of Use © 2024 United Nations Development Programme