Is the energy crisis really making the business case for heat pumps? – Analysis
- IEA IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip
navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel,
technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels
Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and
Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore
all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's
50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical
Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy
Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable
Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries
Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or region Member countries
Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany
Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand
Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands
Türkiye United Kingdom United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa
Rica Israel Latvia Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India
Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All
Countries and Regions Data Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data
Data explorers Understand and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and
trackers Data explorers Data sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy
system available for download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or
planned government policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access
every chart published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports
Chevron down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February
2024                     Fuel report — February 2024
Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast to 2026                     Fuel report —
January 2024                  World Energy Outlook 2023
Flagship report — October 2023                  Net Zero Roadmap: A Global
Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Is the energy crisis really making the
business case for heat pumps? Is the energy crisis really making the business
case for heat pumps? This report is part of  Renewables 2022
Overview                                                      About this report
This report forms a component of Chapter 4 of  Renewables 2022  and addresses a
key question in renewable energy markets. Published December 2022 License CC BY
4.0 Share Cite As the current energy crisis is reviving energy security
concerns, heat pumps have benefited recently from growing policy momentum in a
number of countries, particularly the United States and European ones. Heat
pumps are expected to be pivotal to reduce fossil fuel dependency and CO 2
emissions in the heating sector by enabling energy savings and supply
diversification.  Many heat pump markets are currently experiencing
unprecedented growth. While the recent energy price hikes favour the most
energy-efficient technologies, thus enhancing the business case for heat pumps,
public initiatives to support investment in heat pumps are most often the
primary enabling factor for this market acceleration.  Several obstacles still
impede large-scale heat pump deployment. Chief among them is the cost-
competitiveness of heat pumps in places where lower-cost fossil fuel
alternatives have not yet been banned. Cost-competitiveness is determined by a
combination of parameters, including initial investment costs, operating and
maintenance costs (including fuel costs), equipment durability and economic
incentives. Like most other technologies that exploit renewable energy sources,
upfront costs for heat pumps are relatively high, but running costs are
generally lower than for fossil fuel-based options.  Soaring energy prices since
2021 have accentuated the running-cost advantage of heat pumps, especially as
residential consumer tariffs for natural gas have risen more quickly than for
electricity in most major heating markets. 1  This is particularly true for
countries such as Denmark and Sweden, where the competitiveness of gas-fired
boilers deteriorated substantially when gas prices rose during the first half of
2022. However, in most countries the overall cost-competitiveness of heat pumps
with gas boilers is still determined mainly by the significant investment cost
difference between the two. Marginal cost of heating with residential heat pumps
and gas boilers under different energy cost assumptions in selected countries,
between H1 2021 and H1 2022 Open expand Change in residential consumer prices
for electricity and natural gas in selected countries,  between H1 2021 and H1
2022 Open expand Investment costs for residential heat pumps (including
installation) are generally higher than for fossil fuel-fired boilers, though
the extent of the cost gap varies widely within and across countries, even for
the same technology, depending on market maturity. In only a few mature markets
(e.g. Denmark, Sweden and Japan) are the upfront costs for lower-cost air-to-air
heat pumps comparable with or lower than for gas boilers. Hydronic (air-to-
water) heat pumps typically entail higher investment costs than air-to-air heat
pumps, while ground-source heat pumps are the most expensive, owing partly to
installation of the underground heat exchanger, which can represent more than
half of the total system costs.  Plus, switching to a heat pump in an old
building can involve additional expense, as the electrical system may need to be
upgraded to accommodate a higher power load, or existing radiators may have to
be replaced with larger ones or with underfloor heating or a forced-air system
to allow more efficient heat pump operation. Such ancillary costs can make up as
much as one-third of the total cost of switching to a heat pump. However, some
of these upgrades can also improve thermal comfort and reduce heat demand. High
investment costs are a major barrier to heat pump adoption in the residential
sector, as financing is a challenge for many households. In the past year, many
countries have strengthened investment support for heat pumps or introduced new
measures in the form of grants, tax credits, reduced tax rates and specific loan
schemes. Some of these measures were taken in response to the energy crisis and,
in the European Union, to reduce dependence on Russian gas. Grants are the most
common policy tool and are  currently available in at least 30 countries  that
together represent 70% of global space heating demand. Tax credits are also
widely available, but in contrast with direct grants and subsidies, they
generally reach consumers only after a delay, sometimes of as much as two years.
Prevalent public investment support for heat pumps by policy type, selected
countries, 2022 Policy type Examples of supporting countries in 2022 Subsidy
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, United Kingdom, United States Tax reduction
Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Italy, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, United Kingdom, United States,
Slovenia, Sweden Loan Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic,
Denmark, France, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia,
United Kingdom   The level of support sometimes depends on household revenue
(e.g. in France and the United States), and for low-income households it can (in
some countries) cover most – if not all – of the purchase and installation
costs. In many countries, investment subsidies for heat pumps can substantially
reduce or even offset the upfront cost gap with gas boilers, sometimes making
heat pumps more economical for consumers than gas boilers over their lifetime.
Levelised cost of heating for air-to-air and air-to-water heat pumps and gas
boilers for selected countries, and sensitivity to fuel prices, H1 2021 - H1
2022 Open expand In addition to direct public investment support, alternative
business models (e.g.  on-bill financing, leasing, energy performance contracts
and heat-as-a-service ) can also play a pivotal role in reducing or eliminating
investment challenges for households. The two latter options can also help
overcome split-incentive barriers. Investment costs for heat pumps are expected
to decline gradually over this decade as markets expand, suppliers benefit from
economies of scale, and greater competition puts pressure on prices. Automation
and standardisation of parts could further reduce component, installation and
repair and maintenance costs, while the development of plug-and-play designs
could make installation faster and more affordable. However, clear, stable
policy signals are needed for manufacturers to commit to investments in process
upgrades. Targeting  serial installations  across similar buildings in the same
neighbourhood could also help mutualise logistical costs.  Beyond cost-
competitiveness challenges, a number of non-cost obstacles must also be
addressed to mainstream heat pump adoption. For instance, information campaigns
as well as independent and free audits to inform heating system replacement
decisions can raise awareness and confidence in the technology’s potential
benefits, while regulatory changes can make decision making and permitting for
collective buildings simpler. Finally, depending on the building, application
specificities, and local energy source availability, other renewable heat
options such as solar thermal and bioenergy may sometimes be easier or more
economical to implement. References Household electricity prices  were higher in
all but five EU member states  in the first half of 2022 than in the first half
of 2021. Many countries  have implemented or are considering implementing
differentiated tariff caps  for electricity and gas to protect consumers from
high market prices. Reference 1 Close dialog Household electricity prices  were
higher in all but five EU member states  in the first half of 2022 than in the
first half of 2021. Many countries  have implemented or are considering
implementing differentiated tariff caps  for electricity and gas to protect
consumers from high market prices. The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s
latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe
View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions
Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and
commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-
north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA
©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Is the
energy crisis really making the business case for heat pumps? , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/is-the-energy-crisis-really-making-the-business-
case-for-heat-pumps, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report
Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on
LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription
successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any
time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.