Greener Tehran and a new generation of energy efficient buildings | United
Nations Development Programme     Skip to main content
Iran
WHO WE ARE
WHAT WE DO
OUR IMPACT
GET INVOLVED
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
WHO WE ARE
WHAT WE DO
OUR IMPACT
GET INVOLVED
Locations                 Home Iran         Greener Tehran and a new generation
of energy efficient buildings                       Greener Tehran and a new
generation of energy efficient buildings   September 23, 2021             Photo
Credits: Kamyar Minoukadeh, UNDP Iran Anahita is a girl with a mission – she is
focused on saving energy. And she’s starting with her own apartment building. As
one of the over 3,000 students who attend energy efficiency programmes at school
in Tehran, the capital of Iran, Anahita came to know of the huge amounts of
energy that her country has been using up, placing a heavy burden on the
economy. Excited about the efforts to save energy in buildings, and eager to do
her part, Anahita asked her father to check on the efficiency of the powerhouse
in their building. Another initiative the young girl took was to persuade her
father to check with a specialist and replace all the light bulbs in the
building with energy-saving ones. Anahita’s father, spurred by his daughter’s
enthusiasm, raised the issue with other residents of the building and they are
now collectively taking steps to consult with an energy service company in order
to make their building more energy efficient. Iran is one of the most energy-
intensive developing countries and ranks among the top 10 emitters of carbon
dioxide in the world. The increase in energy consumption in the country is about
five times more than the worldwide average, and around 35% of this amount is
consumed in different types of buildings. On the other hand, Iran expends
approximately 20% of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) on energy subsidies. An
energy efficiency expert predicts that if the current trend of consumption
continues, Iran, despite being one of the largest energy producers, will need to
import energy. Improving energy efficiency is therefore vital to the country’s
progress, and can contribute to both environmental and economic sustainability.
Policy Reforms and Market Transformation of the Energy Efficient Buildings
Sector of I.R Iran is a project being taken up jointly by the UNDP, the Global
Environment Facility (GEF), and the Vice-Presidency for Science and Technology.
The ultimate aim is to improve the national energy efficiency. The project began
with a series of pilot projects which targeted 36 government buildings,
resulting in a saving of up to 8% in electricity consumption and 20% in natural
gas consumption. This was achieved through energy-saving and performance
contracting. Launching ceremony of Energy Monitoring Information System in
Tehran The process started with an energy audit, where buildings were scored
based on their energy performance. This was followed by energy-saving solutions
being offered and implemented. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, the
energy efficiency programme is continuing through an online platform. One of the
goals is to raise public awareness and promote environment-friendly behaviours,
particularly among adolescents. Paving the way for a greener and more energy-
efficient future in Iran. Upon finishing energy efficiency programmes,
elementary and high school students like Anahita celebrate their learning by
making models and submitting energy-saving plans to make their school buildings
more energy efficient. This year, a reduction of up to 20% in energy consumption
is expected in 400 buildings, including 36 governmental buildings where energy-
efficiency solutions are being implemented. Ali, a Tehran resident, says, "With
these solutions, we are not only saving energy for our country, but also taking
care of our planet. This makes me feel proud." As the project progressed, UNDP
also extended support to the launch of the Energy Monitoring Information System
(EMIS) in Tehran. This is a huge step towards introducing policy changes,
regulation and monitoring of the energy performance by facilitating a new
generation of energy-efficient buildings in Iran. Through energy audits, EMIS
will assess the real impact of implementing energy-saving solutions on energy
consumption in buildings. The figures relating to consumption of energy and
water in buildings will be directly transferred to the EMIS platform by smart
meters and will be available online. The concerned Government departments, such
as the Ministry of Roads and Urban Development, will evaluate and revise energy
efficiency laws, regulations, and policies based on data gathered by the EMIS.
In this way, together with national partners, UNDP is helming a gradual
institutional shift towards more energy-efficient solutions for buildings. The
efforts undertaken with the cooperation of 15 government organizations, 30
private companies, and five specialized NGOs, have already resulted in a saving
of around one million dollars in primary energy. In an initiative embodying an
essential, future-oriented convergence of various environmental policies, Energy
Efficiency Certificates will be issued on the basis of the EMIS. Buildings will
be given scores based on the amount of energy they save, and receive
certificates indicating both the extent of reduction of carbon dioxide emission
and the impact of energy efficiency solutions. These certificates will also be a
tradable commodity on the proposed national trading system, contributing to a
more efficient market. Cities are ground zero for the COVID-19 pandemic has
highlighted the pre-existing structural weaknesses. As we respond and work
towards recovery, we look to our cities as hubs of community, human innovation
and ingenuity. UNDP together with its partners is reacting to, and learning from
the crisis and responding with options towards building forward better with
greener strategies, greener infrastructure, financial instruments and green
jobs. These unprecedented times when many are facing socio-economic, public
health and climate action challenges, calls for strategies which brings more
efficiency to communities as a component of a much-needed broader approach to
building forward greener in an equitable and inclusive way to ensure everyone
enjoys clean air, healthy and comfortable living environments, quality jobs, and
affordable energy.       Related Content News Training on energy consumption and
environment for women in Iran During summer 2019, Vice-Presidency of Science and
Technology supported by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
conducted awareness-raising and  traini... Read more  Projects Policy Reforms
and Market Transformation of the Energy Efficient Buildings Sector of the I.R.
Iran Iran is among 10 largest emitter of Carbon Dioxide (CO2) and the
residential and commercial building sectors are playing a main role in this
result.  Increasing e... Read more  News Monitoring system and energy management
server installed at Sharif University of Technology Monitoring system and energy
management server installed at Sharif University of Technology Click here to
read the story in Farsi. A monitoring system and energy ... Read more    Search
Found  0  results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort by
Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development Programme
WHO WE ARE                                                      About us
Our Team                                                            Funding &
Delivery                                                            Legal
Framework                                                      WHAT WE DO
Our focus                                                            Sustainable
Development Goals                                                      OUR
IMPACT                                                       News Center
Publications                                                             Blog
GET INVOLVED                                                       Contact us
Jobs                                                            Procurement
Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit social or environmental complaint Scam
Alert Terms of Use © 2024 United Nations Development Programme