Renewable Energy Market Update - June 2023 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search
Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search
Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or
sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Renewable Energy Market Update - June 2023
Renewable Energy Market Update - June 2023                                 June
2023                              Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
The key areas examined by the report include the latest data and analysis on
renewable power capacity additions in 2022 – globally and for major markets – as
well as forecasts for 2023 and 2024. The update will look at key topics for
renewables this year and next, including how the energy crisis will affect their
deployment in the EU, their impact on energy affordability, and the latest
trends in the United States, China and India. It will also explore the
implications of developments affecting major technologies like solar, wind and
biofuels – including market dynamics, financing, energy security priorities,
manufacturing and power system integration. The report provides the IEA’s latest
assessment of the state of play in renewables markets since the publication of
our  Renewables 2022  report in December. In exploring the most recent market
and policy developments as of April 2022, our Renewable Energy Market Update
forecasts new global renewable power capacity additions and biofuel demand for
2023 and 2024. It also discusses key uncertainties and policy-related
implications that may affect projections for 2024 and beyond. This report is
part of the IEA’s support of the first global stocktake of the Paris Agreement,
which will be finalized in the run up to COP28, the next UN Climate Change
Conference, at the end of 2023. Find other reports in this series on the IEA’s 
Global Energy Transitions Stocktake  page. Published June 2023 License CC BY 4.0
Press release Share Cite Online table of contents 1.0  Executive summary read
Read online 2.0  How much money are European consumers saving thanks to
renewables? read Read online 3.0  How much will renewables reduce gas
consumption in European buildings? read Read online 4.0  Are market forces
overtaking policy measures as the driving force behind wind and solar PV? read
Read online 5.0  Will solar PV and wind costs finally begin to fall again in
2023 and 2024? read Read online 6.0  Will more wind and solar PV capacity lead
to more generation curtailment? read Read online 7.0  Is there enough global
wind and solar PV manufacturing to meet Net Zero targets in 2030? read Read
online 8.0  Will energy security concerns drive biofuel growth in 2023 and 2024?
read Read online The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis,
data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our
other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes
Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events
Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  Renewable Energy
Market Update - June 2023 , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/renewable-
energy-market-update-june-2023, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this
report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook
Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print
Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can
unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.