Residential behaviour changes lead to a reduction in heating and cooling energy
use by 2030 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News Events
Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down
Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables
Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency
and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand the
biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global
Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global
Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency
Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and
Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by
country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia
Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea
Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic
Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Residential behaviour changes lead to a
reduction in heating and cooling energy use by 2030 Residential behaviour
changes lead to a reduction in heating and cooling energy use by 2030
Part of Technology and innovation pathways for zero-carbon-ready buildings by
2030                                                          Overview
About this report This analysis is part of a series from our new report,
Technology and innovation pathways for zero-carbon-ready buildings by 2030 , and
provides the strategic vision of experts from the IEA Technology Collaboration
Programmes (TCPs) on how to help achieve some of the most impactful short-term
milestones for the buildings sector outlined in the  IEA’s Net Zero by 2050
Roadmap ; each report’s title reflects one of these milestones. Learn more about
the  report  and  explore the TCPs . Published September 2022 License CC BY 4.0
Share Cite         Highlights      Behavioural changes and citizen participation
can form part of a cost-effective solution to support the wholesale
transformation of energy systems, including in the buildings sector. Behavioural
changes involve people making low-carbon choices when purchasing products, or in
everyday activities that reduce carbon emissions (e.g.  transport mode, diet,
temperature set points ). In the buildings sector, one of the most significant
behaviour changes relates to adjusting space heating and cooling temperatures.
Lowering heating and raising cooling set points can save significant energy and
carbon, as can varying the heating or cooling in different parts of a building
(zonal control). Studies in occupied buildings show that any such changes are
context-specific and must take into account technical, economic, social and
physiological factors in people’s situations and environments.  A key global
milestone for behavioural change in the building sector in the  Net Zero
Emissions by 2050 Scenario  (NZE Scenario) requires space heating temperatures
be limited to 19‐20°C and space cooling temperatures to 24‐25°C by 2030,
alongside reductions in hot water temperatures. Currently, high energy prices
are concentrating the minds of building occupants on renewable resources,
efficiency measures and behaviour changes that could save energy. This is being
reinforced by messages from governments around energy-saving behaviours. IEA
modelling suggests that  thermostat set-point changes  could immediately  reduce
energy use from buildings , allowing the time needed for clean and efficient
measures to take place.         Relevance      Behavioural changes are amongst
the quickest and most cost-effective ways to reduce energy demand in buildings.
They also support adoption of low-carbon technologies and can curb energy demand
growth.  People’s energy behaviour is shaped by the design of physical and
information technologies, from the planning of cities to the interface with
smart heating controls. For instance, well-designed mixed-mode buildings on
tree-lined streets provide better occupant comfort and satisfaction by allowing
greater climate control through opening windows and adjusting fans and blinds.
When buildings allow for effective temperature control, giving people power
over, and responsibility for, their thermal environment, it reduces their
thermal sensitivity – widening the temperature range they are comfortable in.
Between now and 2030, IEA modelling projects global building floor area will
increase along with population and economic growth – especially in areas where
demand for cooling is also growing fast (primarily in the developing world). In
this decade, behavioural changes will play a key role in facilitating demand
reduction and creating time for market uptake of low-carbon technologies. While
some occupants in buildings with mechanical heating or air conditioning heat to
below the 19-20˚C, or cool to above the 24-25˚C NZE target, many buildings
operate narrower set point ranges. As the prevalence of space conditioning
increases globally, delivering changes in heating and cooling demand will be
particularly reliant on widening thermostat set points in developed countries.
For this, behavioural change will be needed. Doing so creates opportunities to
both reduce energy use and increase the demand response from the built
environment.          Current state      Behavioural changes in buildings are
facilitated by user-centred technologies. In relation to temperature set point
change, one of the most promising approaches is local heating and cooling of
occupants supported by  Personal Environmental Control Systems (PECS) . PECS,
such as use of fans and heated surfaces, deliver heating and cooling directly to
the individual occupant and are used in addition to the main conditioning
system, allowing each user to customise their microclimate to their personal
needs. By contrast, background space conditioning varies over a wider
temperature range.  PECS deliver comfort more efficiently  than conventional
conditioning systems through widening heating and cooling setpoints for
background space heating. Additional energy savings may be achievable by
integrated smart control of PECS and HVACs that can learn users’ preferences and
provide comfort with less energy by presenting the lowest energy options first,
making them easier to find and more likely to be chosen. Standards for these are
currently being developed by various standardisation bodies globally including
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers
(ASHRAE).  Through applying insights from behavioural science, such as use of
defaults more broadly, in building retrofit programmes they can be designed to
support pro-environmental behaviours. For example, using  behavioural science
toolkits  to design policies and programmes that shape expected behaviour can
lead to better outcomes. There is also experience in national policy to support
widening unconditioned temperature bands. The Japanese  ‘Cool Biz’  (cool to
28˚C) and  ‘Warm Biz’  (heat to 20˚C) programmes gave social permission for
building occupants to adopt a wider variety of dress codes to match varying
office temperatures. While there have been various policy initiatives relating
to moderating building temperatures, there has been little evaluation of the
efficacy of such measures.         Challenges      Behavioural change is
strongly linked to personal circumstances, preferences, and social context –
making the outcome in individual cases difficult to predict. Occupants’
willingness to accept temperature fluctuations is heavily determined by a range
of physiological, psychological, social, environmental, and technical factors.
As ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 55 states, “thermal comfort is a condition of mind” and
as such reflects the subjective experience of the occupant in their social,
technical and environmental context. Analysis of the recently released ASHRAE
global  thermal comfort database  show significant variation in thermal
sensation as a function of gender, age, body mass index, environmental
conditioning technology, country income, climate and building type. In addition,
sensitivity to thermal variations differ by place. When individuals have greater
autonomy and responsibility for their thermal environment, they  report being
satisfied  over a wider range of temperatures.  Of these, one of the most
notable differences is in building type. While occupants of residential and
commercial buildings have similar preferred neutral temperatures, occupants of
residential buildings will accept temperature variations from thermal neutrality
between four and five times greater than those of commercial buildings while
still remaining comfortable. The reasons for this are not fully understood, but
are thought to lie in occupants’ perceived control over their environment. If
energy use is to be reduced, and demand response increased in buildings,
occupants will need to accept lower/higher ambient temperature and be empowered
to adapt through changing their clothing and local environment to remain
comfortable. This adaptation can be facilitated by giving users control over how
they dress, how active they are, and how they manage their local environment.
Intuitive, usable, smart appliances can facilitate this.  Technical challenges
also remain around integrating control of PECS with building-level HVAC.
Laboratory field trials  demonstrate that PECS work well in delivering energy
savings and occupant comfort – but market availability and commercial scaling
are still challenging. In addition to standards, building codes, building
services design, and building management systems all need to be adapted. For
this reason, under existing conditions, a widespread adoption of PECS in
residential and commercial buildings is unlikely to be rapid. To achieve a 12%
heating and cooling energy demand reduction through temperature set point change
requires behavioural changes in how we live and work, and for these to be
supported by building occupants, owners, facilities managers and company
management. Currently, many  smart home appliances lack usability  and
frustrate, rather than support, users’ needs. There remains a  substantial gap
between the visions held by the energy sector and the reality of household
users’ experience of demand automation as well as a lack of transparency of who
benefits from such programmes. This can negatively impact social acceptance and
users’ trust resulting in some social groups, including vulnerable consumers,
being  less likely  to acquire smart appliances – in addition to their high
upfront costs. If the energy, health and wellbeing improvements offered by such
technologies are to be realised, such issues will need to be overcome. Policies
for managing thermal environments in buildings should both provide minimal
thermal standards to ensure occupant wellbeing and hygrothermal management,
while expanding the buildings unconditioned temperature range to minimise energy
use and maximise demand flexibility. Delivering both objectives will be a
formidable challenge, requiring coordinated actions across policy, regulation,
building codes, standards, technology development, construction, and facilities
management.          Innovation themes covered by the IEA TCPs      Establishing
design criteria and  operation guidelines for PECS,  quantifying health, comfort
and energy performance benefits, and integrating control of PECS with HVAC
systems. Determining the scope for machine learning approaches to identify
energy-saving opportunities in buildings. For example, the  Nest Learning
Thermostat  “aims to save energy by reducing the heating hours and the
temperature at moments that are acceptable to the occupant”.  Work on
understanding and aligning construction industry incentives to deliver PECS
solutions at scale.  Research on the scope for informal personal comfort systems
– supporting occupants to find their own solutions to broader unconditioned
temperature ranges through uncontrolled use of fans, heaters and clothing
variation – may allow faster and wider adoption, albeit within narrower
unconditioned ranges and lower overall energy savings.         Policy
recommendations      Strategies Policy recommendations Market creation and
standards   Widening set points supported by increased diffusion of PECS
Regulations.   Accelerating PECS integration will require alteration of building
standards, codes of professional practice, development of Application Programme
Interfaces (APIs) and interoperability of PECS and HVAC systems, accreditation
of PECS within environmental benchmarking systems, and alignment of PECS
multiple benefits around comfort and health. Programmes to lower heating and
raise cooling set points as default options Programming defaults.   Pre-setting
temperature set points to nudge energy consumers towards adopting such
temperatures as an automatic choice. The right default option can create
substantial changes among consumers. Cooperation-based instruments   Share
international best practice Best practices.    Sharing lessons from evaluation
and review of policies supporting widening thermostat set points should be
encouraged. Policy evaluation and review should be well funded, independent, and
peer-reviewed. Lessons learned from trials should be captured and shared between
countries. Preferential access to utilities data Open-source information
databases.   Enable utilities data sharing as one element of assessing the
impact of behavioural measures. Public support to R&D   R&D for social
acceptance of temperature variations Allocate funding.   Support research in how
much thermal variation is acceptable in the particular social context and
incentivise policies to increase the temperature variations. R&D into health
benefits of thermal variability Allocate funding.  Support research into the
benefits of thermal variation on occupant health by demographic cohort. R&D into
retrofit strategies that support zonal temperature control and occupant control
over local and heating and cooling Allocate funding.  Support field-trials of
retrofit strategies that maximise occupants’ capacity to heat and cool
themselves or individual rooms rather than assuming whole-building control.
Education and training   Awareness campaigns Awareness raising.  Through
trialling widening of thermostat set points, schools and public buildings
provide opportunities to develop facilities management best practice, and for
the population to experience that behavioural changes are possible. This can
create indirect benefits in the residential sector.   Industry training Industry
training.  HVAC engineer, electrician and plumber training on implementing local
and zonal control over heating and cooling.         Related content      All
results circle-arrow Technology and Innovation Pathways for Zero-carbon-ready
Buildings by 2030 A strategic vision from the IEA Technology Collaboration
Programmes                     Technology report — September 2022
The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events
delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other
newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore
Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect
Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Residential behaviour
changes lead to a reduction in heating and cooling energy use by 2030 , IEA,
Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/residential-behaviour-changes-lead-to-a-
reduction-in-heating-and-cooling-energy-use-by-2030, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to
clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on
Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on
Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing.
You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.