Status of the off-grid renewable energy market in Latin America & the Caribbean
- The Alliance for Rural Electrification Become a member About About us Team
Governance Contact us Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our
Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What
our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification
Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub
Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE
Publications Project database Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit
Member login About About us Team Governance Contact us Membership Our Members
Why become a Member? What our Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our
Partners Why partner with us? What our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic
Pillars Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub
Markets for Electrification Hub Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge
Centre Discover DRE Publications Project database Job platform News & Events
News Events Media kit Member login Become a member
Download
Publication 10 August, 2021 Status of the off-grid renewable energy market in
Latin America & the Caribbean In recent years, higher gross domestic product
(GDP) and a more equal distribution of economic resources, alongside robust
policy and regulatory frameworks and remarkable electrification efforts of the
Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) governments and international funding
partners, have been key in powering LAC’s sustainable path towards universal
electricity access. Nowadays, the region has achieved a 97% rate of electricity
coverage, compared to 52.2% in 1990. Despite the positive transition,  more than
18.1 million people in the region are still not covered by electricity ,
highlighting a persistent energy access gap in rural areas. In addition, the
reliability of the national grid poses serious problems for socioeconomic
development and disaster relief, particularly in island states. The good news is
that off-grid solutions are estimated to be the best fit solution to address at
least 40% of the electricity access gap in LAC. Out of that, 30% would be mini-
grids and the remaining 70% would consist of standalone systems. In light of the
above, ARE and IDB have joined forces to develop a  market assessment on the
status of the off-grid renewable energy market in the LAC region . The
publication provides international project developers, private investors and
funding institutions with key insights into the needs, trends, challenges and
opportunities in the LAC off-grid renewable energy market. The publication
consists of four sections: Overview of the Regional Off-grid Renewable Energy
Market Status in Haiti Status in Honduras Status in Suriname Statutes Terms &
conditions Privacy Policy Alliance for Rural Electrification Renewable Energy
House Rue d'Arlon 63-67 1040 Brussels Belgium are[at]ruralelec.org +32 2 400 10
00 Follow along Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube Flickr Newsletter Get in-depth
analyses, market intelligence & insights from the rural electrification sector
in your inbox every second month. For free. Subscribe
©2024 Alliance for Rural Electrification
Made by  Novel We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By
browsing this website, you agree to our use of cookies. Accept