Open Knowledge Repository Maigret English Français Español Collections Browse
Statistics FOCUS Home 04. Serial Publications Sustainable Energy for All
Sustainable Energy for All 2015: Progress Toward Sustainable Energy  
Publication:   Sustainable Energy for All 2015: Progress Toward Sustainable
Energy c b Tweet Like Share Loading...             Files in English
English PDF (23.64 MB)  4,231 downloads  Date 2015-06 ISSN Published 2015-06
Author(s)  World Bank   International Energy Agency  Tweet Like Share Abstract
Sustainable Energy for All seeks to improve the lives of billions of people
across the world and ensure a more sustainable future by working to achieve its
three global objectives: universal access to energy; doubling of the rate of
improvement in energy efficiency; and doubling of the share of renewable energy
in the global energy mix. Accountability and transparency are essential for
tracking Sustainable Energy for All’s global progress. Doing so will clarify
where the initiative stands, how various actions are contributing to the three
objectives, how much remains to be accomplished, and where more action is needed
to achieve Sustainable Energy For All. This second edition of the SE4ALL Global
Tracking Framework provides an update of how the world has been moving towards
the three objectives over the period 2010-2012. The report also explores a
number of complementary themes. First, it provides further analysis of the
financial cost of meeting the SE4ALL objectives as well as the geographical and
technological distribution of the investments that need to be made. Second, it
explores the extent to which countries around the world have access to the
technology needed to make progress towards the three goals. Third, it identifies
the improvements in data collection methodologies and capacity building that
will be needed to provide a more nuanced and accurate picture of progress over
time. Finally, this new edition of the Global Tracking Framework explores and
introduces nexus concepts focusing on the links between energy and four priority
areas of development: food, water, human health, and gender. Links between most
of these areas and energy are well established, but often presented in isolation
of each other. Link to Data Set Citation “ World Bank ;  International Energy
Agency .  2015 .  Sustainable Energy for All 2015: Progress Toward Sustainable
Energy .  ©  Washington, DC:  World Bank .  http://hdl.handle.net/10986/22148
License:  CC BY 3.0 IGO . ” URI  https://hdl.handle.net/10986/22148 Report
Series Other publications in this report series Journal Journal Volume Journal
Issue Collections Sustainable Energy for All Associated URLs Associated content
Citations  Full item page   Show statistical information  About Terms of Use FAQ
Data Research and Publications Learning   News Projects and Operations Countries
Topics  FOLLOW US  newsletter Legal Privacy Notice Site Accessibility Access to
Information Jobs Contact SCAM ALERT REPORT FRAUD OR CORRUPTION IBRD IDA IFC MIGA
ICSID  ©  2021  The World Bank Group, All Rights Reserved.