The Climate is Changing, so Must the Caribbean | United Nations Development
Programme     Skip to main content
Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean
Who we are
What We Do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What We Do
Our Impact
Get Involved
Locations                 Home Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean         The
Climate is Changing, so Must the Caribbean                       The Climate is
Changing, so Must the Caribbean   March 7, 2022             Photo: UNDP/Zaimis
Olmos The countries of the Eastern Caribbean are at a pivotal point in the
region’s development history; one in which its people are facing unprecedented
social, environmental, and economic challenges – headlined by the accelerating
global threat of climate change and the uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic
Three of the seven countries in the Eastern Caribbean are classified as having
high or extreme climate exposure risk and these have already started turning
into devastating impacts. Damages from major hurricanes over the past 5 years
have topped USD 12 billion and current projections suggest that damages from
winds, storm surge and inland flooding due to tropical storms could reach as
much as 9% of regional GDP by 2030. These risks have been compounded by the
COVID-19 pandemic which has cost the region hundreds of lives, shattered
livelihoods for countless of the most vulnerable, and erased decades of
development gains. These challenges exacerbate longstanding structural issues
facing the region, including narrow economic bases, high dependence on few,
vulnerable economic sectors, lack of economies of scale, high crime and lagging
judicial sectors, limited fiscal space and high indebtedness. The 2022-2026
Country Programme for Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean is the United Nations
Development Programme’s (UNDP) ambitious response to these challenges. It is
designed to support countries’ efforts to harness the immense potential of their
people, to achieve their sustainable development goals. The 5-year programme,
which has been designed in collaboration with national and community-level
stakeholders from across the region, applies three UNDP global Strategic Plan
approaches focused on accelerating structural transformation, particularly
green, inclusive and digital transitions; promoting equitable access to
opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development;
and building resilience to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk. To achieve
this, we must leverage the knowledge of our past within the context of future
realities. As such, the programme builds on the lessons learned from UNDP’s
partnership and support to countries in the region over the past half-century
and intentionally responds to both current and emerging challenges through a
participatory, systems-based approach and is driven by strategic innovation,
digitalisation, and mobilisation of new forms of sustainable development
financing. But the plan is the starting point – in order to encourage the
required changes necessary for a more resilient Caribbean, UNDP will work with
development partners, the local financial services sectors and the international
finance community to enhance national capacities and the access of small
businesses and governments to sustainable financing for shock responsive,
gender-responsive digital transformation and blue economy development. Under the
new programme, UNDP will leverage its expertise in disaster risk management and
response to enhance the capacities of national and regional disaster risk
management agents, for disaster recovery planning and intervention and to deploy
and strengthen integrated, gender responsive disaster preparedness systems. The
climate is dramatically changing and to thrive, the Caribbean must respond in
kind. The Country Programme further paves the way to resilience and will also
focus on mitigation and adaptation to climate change by supporting countries’
energy transition priorities and their conservation goals. It will support
countries in achieving their goals of enhanced access to affordable, reliable
and sustainable energy through a combination of incubation, investments at
scale, institutional strengthening and policy support. We will work with local
and regional academia, stakeholders in the agricultural and fisheries sectors
and civil society to strengthen the capacities of duty-bearers and empower
rights-holders to adapt to and mitigate the impacts of climate change  as well
as  promote gender-responsive natural resource planning, data collection,
analysis and management. But the climate is not the only changing issue that the
Caribbean must face. We must respond to perennial forms of crime, and new
challenges for the region such as trafficking in persons and constraints that
hinder equitable and efficient access to justice. We must evolve and support
countries in deploying new technologies, enhanced skills, and innovative tools
to improve governance, crime data management, crime response management and
coordination. While the new Country Programme acknowledges that the challenges
ahead are daunting, it represents a conviction that they are not insurmountable.
As we enter this new programme cycle, the Country Programme embodies UNDP's
commitment to our local, national, and regional partners to collectively pursue
new opportunities for tackling structural inequalities, and to strive to meet
the ambitions set out in the 2030 Agenda. As we strive to effect positive change
in the Caribbean, with the countries and people we serve, we reflect on our
vision of  development as freedom  and we renew our focus on empowering people,
protecting the planet, strengthening partnerships, promoting peace and
catalysing prosperity for all. Jason LaCorbiniere Head of Cluster Poverty,
Governance and Monitoring and Evaluation UNDP Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean
Related Content Publications EnGenDER Newsletter - Becoming Climate Resilient &
Disaster Ready:  Crossing the Finish Line The fifth edition of the EnGenDER
newsletter has been published under the theme, Becoming Climate Resilient &
Disaster Ready: Crossing the Finish Line. This issue... Read more  Press
Releases Project to strengthen water resource management advances in Grenada
Read more  News Accessible Aquaponics in Saint Lucia Read more  Stories Sowing
seeds of hope and resilience Read more  Publications EnGenDER Newsletter -
Gender Rising to the Forefront to Ensure No One is Left Behind: A Caribbean
Story  The fourth edition of the EnGenDER newsletter has been published under
the theme, Gender Rising to the Forefront to Ensure No One is Left Behind: A
Caribbean Stor... Read more    Search           Found  0  results.
Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All
UNDP United Nations Development Programme                         Who we are
About Us                                                            Funding and
delivery                                                            Where We
Work                                                       What We Do
Our Focus                                                            Sustainable
Development Goals
Projects                                                      Our Impact
News Centre
Publications                                                            Stories
Blogs                                                      Get Involved
Careers                                                            Procurement
Contact Us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Scam
alert Submit social or environmental complaint Terms of use twitter facebook
instagram youtube © 2024 United Nations Development Programme