Tracking Clean Energy Progress 2023 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Tracking Clean Energy Progress 2023 Tracking
Clean Energy Progress 2023                                 Assessing critical
energy technologies for global clean energy transitions
Overview
Methodology                                                      About this
report The IEA's Tracking Clean Energy Progress (TCEP) assesses recent
developments for over 50 components of the energy system that are critical for
clean energy transitions. The components assessed include sectors, subsectors,
technologies, infrastructure and cross-cutting strategies. Where do we need to
go? The IEA’s  Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario  (NZE) is a pathway for the
global energy sector to achieve net zero CO 2  emissions by 2050, while also
achieving universal energy access by 2030 and major improvements in air
quality.  How do we get there? Progress is assessed at the global level against
the Net Zero by 2050 Scenario trajectory for 2030, and recommendations are
provided on how they can get "on track" with this pathway. The assessed
components include technologies, infrastructure, sectors, subsectors and cross-
cutting strategies.    How are we doing? Of the over 50 components tracked, in
the 2023 edition 3 are evaluated as fully “On track” with the Net Zero by 2050
Scenario trajectory – solar PV, electric vehicles and lighting.  Solar PV  was
upgraded in this edition, as the annual growth in generation in 2022 of 26% is
now aligned with the average compound annual growth rate needed from now to 2030
in the Net Zero Scenario.  Progress on clean energy technology deployment has
been very rapid in 2022, even if many components are not yet fully on track at
the global level. The momentum towards the clean energy economy is clearly
accelerating. Some highlights in 2022 include the following:  Electric vehicle
sales grew by 55%, reaching a record high of more than 10 million. And for the
first time ever, announced manufacturing capacity for electric vehicle batteries
is sufficient to fulfil expected demand requirements in 2030 in the NZE
Scenario.  Nuclear   capacity additions grew by 40%, with 8 GW newly installed.
While higher deployment is needed in the Net Zero Scenario, the growth in 2022
represents a clear step forward after capacity additions had remained stable
from 2019 to 2021.  Heat pumps  saw another record year, with 11% growth in
sales. This is close to the 15% average compound annual growth needed to fully
align with the Net Zero Scenario.  Electrolyser   installed capacity grew by
more than 20%, while electrolyser manufacturing capacity grew by more than 25%.
The bigger story though is likely yet to come - based on the current pipeline of
projects under development and their expected operation dates, electrolyser
capacity could reach almost 3 GW by the end of 2023, a more than four-fold
increase in total capacity compared to 2022.  Energy efficiency  of the economy
overall grew by more than twice the level the previous year. This is a positive
step forward following several years of relatively weak improvements.  Progress
is occurring faster in those parts of the energy system for which clean
technologies are already available and costs are falling quickly, such as for
electricity generation and passenger cars. But a full transition to net-zero
emissions will require decarbonising all areas of energy production and use.
Rapid innovation is needed to bring to market clean technologies in particular
for those parts of the energy system where emissions are harder to address, such
as heavy industry and long-distance transport. Positive steps forward on
innovation have been made in the past few years, but an acceleration is needed
in order to soon move to deployment of novel low emission technologies for these
areas.    The transition is also occurring at different speeds across regions
and sectors. For example, nearly 95% of electric car sales in 2022 occurred in
China, the United States and Europe. Meanwhile, nearly 75% of operating and
planned carbon capture capacity is in North America and Europe. As such, the
global evaluation that a technology is “on track” does not mean that it is on
track in all countries, and, conversely, a technology that is “not on track”
globally could be progressing more quickly in some specific countries. Stronger
international cooperation and robust policy development is needed to spread
progress to all regions, particularly emerging market and developing economies. 
This report is part of the IEA’s support of the first global stocktake of the
Paris Agreement, which will be finalized in the run up to COP28, the next UN
Climate Change Conference, at the end of 2023. Find other reports in this series
on the IEA’s  Global Energy Transitions Stocktake  page. Published July 2023
License CC BY 4.0 Press release Share Cite What's on track? On track More
efforts needed Not on track What is this? Close dialog             Progress is
assessed at the global level against the Net Zero by 2050 Scenario trajectory
for 2030. Read the methodology section (accessible from the top of the page) for
more information about how these colours are assigned.          What is this?
Energy System Overview Energy Efficiency Behavioural Changes Electrification
Renewables Bioenergy Hydrogen Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Innovation
International Collaboration Digitalisation Cross-Cutting Technologies &
Infrastructure CO2 Transport and Storage CO2 Capture and Utilisation Bioenergy
with Carbon Capture and Storage Direct Air Capture Electrolysers District
Heating Data Centres and Data Transmission Networks Electricity Coal Natural Gas
Solar PV Wind Hydroelectricity Demand Response Nuclear Power Grid-scale Storage
Smart Grids Oil & Natural Gas Supply Methane Abatement Gas Flaring Low-Emission
Fuels Biofuels Transport Cars and Vans Trucks and Buses Rail Aviation
International Shipping Electric Vehicles Industry Steel Chemicals Cement
Aluminium Paper Light Industry Buildings Heating Space Cooling Lighting
Appliances and Equipment Building Envelopes Heat Pumps The ETP Clean Energy
Technology Guide  Explore an interactive framework that contains over 500
individual technology designs and components across the whole energy system that
contribute to achieving the goal of net-zero emissions. Use data explorer card
data set The IEA's Tracking Clean Energy Progress (TCEP) assesses recent
developments for over 50 components of the energy system that are critical for
clean energy transitions. The components assessed include sectors, subsectors,
technologies, infrastructure and cross-cutting strategies.   Progress is
assessed against the  Net Zero by 2050 Scenario  trajectory for 2030. In the
current edition, projections and estimates are based on research and modelling
results derived from data and policy inputs gathered up to June 2023. More
updated data will be available in the report  Net Zero Emissions by 2050: A
Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector – 2023 Update  and the  World Energy
Outlook 2023 , to be released in autumn 2023.   Each component is assigned one
of the following "traffic light" ratings:  On track (green):  if recent trends
continue, in 2030 this area will comfortably be in line with the Net Zero by
2050 Scenario  More efforts needed (yellow):  recent trends are positive and
generally in the right direction to being in line by 2030 with the Net Zero by
2050 Scenario trajectory. However, progress needs to be faster, as a
continuation of recent trends without any acceleration would still fall short of
the Net Zero by 2050 Scenario trajectory.  Not on track (red):  recent trends
are either in the wrong direction or substantially insufficient to get in line
by 2030 with the Net Zero by 2050 Scenario trajectory. This does not exclude
that there may be positive developments on certain aspects or in certain
regions; however, a step-change in effort is needed at the global level.  The
assessment includes consideration of multiple indicators, such as trends and
developments related to CO 2  emissions, energy consumption, activity,
technology deployment, innovation, supporting infrastructure, policy,
investment, international collaboration and private sector strategies. The
assessment does not rely on a single particular quantitative indicator, but
rather is an overall evaluation of the key factors that would contribute to Net
Zero by 2050 Scenario alignment by 2030. The assessment is made at the global
level, which means that the evaluation could differ for specific countries or
regions.  Learn more about the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario circle-arrow
Methodology note The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis,
data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our
other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes
Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events
Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  Tracking Clean Energy
Progress 2023 , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-clean-energy-
progress-2023, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close
dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.