Transforming a Billion Lives: The Job Creation Potential from a Green Power
Transition in the Energy Poor World
Skip to content   The Rockefeller Foundation     Research Library   Search
Menu     Our Work  We are a philanthropic foundation that promotes the well
being of humanity by finding and scaling solutions that advance opportunity and
reverse the climate crisis.   Focus Areas   Focus Areas   Health   Food   Power
Economic Equity   Innovation   Innovative Finance   Health   Food   Power
Economic Equity   Innovation   Innovative Finance   Where We Work   Where We
Work   U.S. & the Americas   Africa   Asia   Italy (Bellagio Center)   U.S. &
the Americas   Africa   Asia   Italy (Bellagio Center)   What We Do   What We Do
Grants   Initiatives   Convenings, Residencies & Networks   Big Bets   Grants
Initiatives   Convenings, Residencies & Networks   Big Bets   Partners &
Alliances   Partners & Alliances   Global Energy Alliance   Co-Impact
Collaborative   RF Catalytic Capital   Global Energy Alliance   Co-Impact
Collaborative   RF Catalytic Capital   News, Ideas & Reports   News &
Announcements   Ideas & Insights   Reports   About Us   Mission and Vision   Our
People   Our Offices   Our History   Careers   Subscribe   Search     Subscribe
facebook twitter linkedin copy url   Reports  /          Reports Transforming a
Billion Lives: The Job Creation Potential from a Green Power Transition in the
Energy Poor World    Download  Report Published Date September 21, 2021   Access
Report    Download  Quick Take 3.6   billion people still live in energy poverty
today around the world 25   million direct jobs created in energy-poor countries
in Asia and Africa through distributed renewable energy 30   x the number of
jobs created by a comparable investment in fossil fuels
attachment |
https://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Transforming-a-
Billion-Lives-The-Job-Creation-Potential-from-a-Green-Power-Transition-in-the-
Energy-Poor-World.pdf
Download the report  The Covid-19 crisis has resulted in millions of jobs lost
across the developing world, with the most vulnerable communities hardest hit,
including young people, women, and low-paid and low-skilled workers. There is
nothing inevitable about these developments – they can and must be reversed.
According to the recent report from the UN’s climate science body, human-induced
climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every
region across the globe. Within this context, the high carbon intensity of the
recovery in many geographies is another worrying trend, underlining the urgent
need for a global energy transition. Over the past decade, renewable power
generation technologies have rapidly displaced fossil fuels as the most cost-
effective building block for economic development. Distributed renewable energy
technologies (DREs), in particular, have become a faster, nimbler, and more
cost-effective solution for driving inclusive growth and reaching underserved
populations. Yet, we estimate that approximately 3.6 billion people still live
in energy poverty today in 63 countries across Asia and Africa. The time is ripe
for a global alliance of partners to come together with a plan to greatly expand
the climate-friendly use of DREs. This report explores a “what if” scenario –
what if the world took action to harness the full potential of DREs to end
energy poverty, setting in motion a green power transition across the energy
poor world? It combines qualitative case studies with predictive economic
modelling to explore the job creation potential that would flow from a steep and
rapid increase in investment in DREs across 63 energy-poor countries in Asia and
Africa. This would require $130 billion per annum of capital investment over the
coming decade. In “Transforming a Billion Lives: The Job Creation Potential From
a Green Power Transition in the Energy-Poor World”, we estimate the job creation
that would flow through tapping into the enormous growth potential of clean and
distributed energies to end energy poverty to achieve Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 7 by 2030.   Report Insights A Job-Creating Agenda We find that a
steep increase in investment in clean and distributed energy technologies would
result in: 30 x the number of jobs created by a comparable investment in fossil
fuels 25 million direct jobs created in energy-poor countries in Asia and Africa
through distributed renewable energy 520 million new downstream jobs would be
created in Asia and Africa by the utilization of the new electricity generated
for so-called “productive uses” 671 million existing jobs would be improved 4.2
billion of CO2 saved by the distributed renewable energy pathway by 2030
compared to a comparable investment fossil fuels Report Transforming a Billion
Lives: The Job Creation Potential from a Green Power Transition in the Energy
Poor World In “Transforming a Billion Lives: The Job Creation Potential From a
Green Power Transition in the Energy-Poor World”, we estimate the job creation
that would flow through tapping into the enormous growth potential of clean and
distributed energies to end energy poverty to achieve Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 7 by 2030.   Download PDF Stay Updated Get quick updates in our
e‑newsletter.   Subscribe Now   Related Updates     Dec   09   2020  Report
Powering an Inclusive Covid-19 Recovery   More       Jan   26   2021  Report
Raising Global Energy Ambitions: The 1,000 kWh Modern Energy Minimum   More
Sep   15   2020  Report  Smart Power Connect | Empowering Rural Communities &
Transforming Lives   More     Show More Updates     Nov   18   2020  Report
Smart Power India: Demand Generation Handbook   More       Sep   24   2020
Report  State of Global Mini-Grids Market Report 2020   More       Dec   03
2020  Report  GCEEP Electricity Access 2020 Report   More     Show Less Updates
Tags : energy access renewable energy sdg7 solar power   Back to Top     Close
We use cookies to offer you a better browsing experience, analyze site traffic,
personalize content, and serve targeted advertisements. Read about how we use
cookies and our use of data by reading our new  Privacy Policy . If you continue
to use this site, you consent to our use of cookies.   The Rockefeller
Foundation home page Resources Grants Annual Reports Governance Documents
Privacy Policy Terms of Use Accessibility Commitment  Statement Transparency in
Coverage Rule Locations All Offices Washington, D.C., United States Bellagio
Center, Italy Nairobi, Kenya Bangkok, Thailand New York City, United States Get
In Touch Contact Us Careers The Rockefeller Foundation's mission is to promote
the well-being of humanity and make opportunity universal and sustainable.
Subscribe Sign up for our newsletter to stay updated on all the latest news and
events.    Sign Up  Subscribe to our mailing list!   Sign up to receive updates
from The Rockefeller Foundation. NOTE: Fields with an asterisk * are required.
Name *       First         Last   Email *   Opt-in The Rockefeller Foundation
will use information you provide on this form to be in touch with you and
provide updates. *     I agree to The Rockefeller Foundation Privacy Policy and
I agree to receive email communications from The Rockefeller Foundation. You can
change your mind at any time by clicking the unsubscribe link in the footer of
any email you receive from us, or by contacting  info@rockfound.org . We will
treat your information with respect. For more information about our privacy
practices please visit the  Privacy Policy  page on our website. By clicking
"Subscribe" below, you agree that we may process your information in accordance
with these terms.   Set Your Preferences Country Country Afghanistan Albania
Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia
Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium
Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil
Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman
Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of the Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican
Republic East Timor Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia
Ethiopia Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Polynesia Gabon Gambia Georgia
Germany Ghana Greece Greenland Grenada Guam Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau
Guyana Haiti Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq
Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati North Korea
South Korea Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya
Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives
Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia Moldova
Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal
Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Northern Mariana Islands Norway
Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine, State of Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru
Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts
and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Saint Martin Samoa San
Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone
Singapore Sint Maarten Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa
Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Sudan, South Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syria
Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia
Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom
United States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela
Vietnam Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, U.S. Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Job
Title Employer Field/ Background:     Academia     Philanthropy/ Donor
Government     Private Sector/ Business     Grantee     Researcher     Media
RF Alumni     Non-profit/ NGO     Other Interests     Food     Health     Power
Economic Equity     Innovative Finance     Data & Technology     Convenings and
Network/ Bellagio Center Geographic Focus:     Africa     North America     Asia
Pacific     South America     Europe Name This field is for validation purposes
and should be left unchanged.                         Facebook Twitter linkedIn
Instagram YouTube  Copyright 2024 The Rockefeller Foundation.  All Rights
Reserved  Twitter  Facebook  LinkedIn