Understanding the Clean Energy Transition with Community-Driven DRE Projects in
Germany and Sub-Saharan Africa - The Alliance for Rural Electrification Become a
member About About us Team Governance Contact us Membership Our Members Why
become a Member? What our Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our Partners
Why partner with us? What our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic Pillars
Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub Markets for
Electrification Hub Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre
Discover DRE Publications Project database Job platform News & Events News
Events Media kit Member login About About us Team Governance Contact us
Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our Members say Become a Member
Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What our Partners say Become a
Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for
Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub Sustainability for
Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE Publications Project database
Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit Member login Become a member
Download
Publication 24 January, 2022 Understanding the Clean Energy Transition with
Community-Driven DRE Projects in Germany and Sub-Saharan Africa Climate change
impacts have accelerated and amplified over the last decades. Extreme weather,
natural disasters, economic collapses, food and water insecurity, are all
symptoms of this crisis. Similarly, 759 million people currently lack access to
electricity, while another 2.8 billion still suffer from unreliable electricity
services. With the goals of the Paris Agreement seemingly challenging to achieve
by 2030, new approaches to the clean energy transition are required. This
publication explores the potential of community-driven decentralised renewable
energy (DRE) projects to address the climate crisis, provide access to
electricity and contribute to socio-economic development in communities. The
case studies featured in this publication highlight the main benefits of the
community-driven DRE projects in Germany and Sub-Saharan Africa, and some of the
notable barriers faced in such projects. Statutes Terms & conditions Privacy
Policy Alliance for Rural Electrification Renewable Energy House Rue d'Arlon
63-67 1040 Brussels Belgium are[at]ruralelec.org +32 2 400 10 00 Follow along
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube Flickr Newsletter Get in-depth analyses,
market intelligence & insights from the rural electrification sector in your
inbox every second month. For free. Subscribe
©2024 Alliance for Rural Electrification
Made by  Novel We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By
browsing this website, you agree to our use of cookies. Accept