Understanding Gender Gaps in Wages, Employment and Career Trajectories in the
Energy Sector – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News Events
Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down
Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables
Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency
and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand the
biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global
Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global
Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency
Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and
Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by
country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia
Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea
Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic
Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Understanding Gender Gaps in Wages, Employment and
Career Trajectories in the Energy Sector                     Report
19 August 2022                                  License                  CC BY
4.0 Introduction This  report  draws upon matched employer-employee data
collected as part of the  OECD LinkEED project . Bringing together employer and
employee data in a single framework allows for the analysis of the role of the
firm in determining workers' wages, as well as the role of worker
characteristics such as skills and gender for firm-level outcomes. In the
context of this  report , the focus is on the extent of gender bias that exists
in the energy sector – a sector that has been lacking in gender diversity since
its creation and that is currently making considerable efforts to change this
imbalance. [See for example the Reference to C3E initiative (now the  Equality
in Energy Transitions Initiative ) and the Clean Energy Ministerial’s  Equal by
30 Campaign .] The data cover Austria, France, Germany, Portugal and Spain. 1
Unless otherwise stated, the figures are aggregated data of all five countries.
For Austria and Portugal, the data cover the full population of firms and
workers in the corporate sector, whereas for France, Germany and Spain, the data
cover a large representative sample of workers. For the purposes of this paper,
the energy sector is defined at the three-digit level using ISIC and NACE
classifications. 2 The years covered in the data are: Austria (2000‑2018),
France (2002‑2018), Germany (2002-2018), Portugal (2002‑2017), and Spain
(2006-2018). Firms in the energy sector are systematically compared with other
firms, referred to as the non-energy sector. The firms in the non-energy sector
represent 98% of firms in the full sample. Energy firms are approximately 50%
larger on average than non-energy firms, in terms of employment, and wages are
9% higher. The wage gap between the sectors cannot be explained by the skill
composition of the workforce, since controlling for skills actually increases
the difference to 12%. High wages in energy firms instead reflect the importance
of rents shared with workers. Wage premia in energy firms, i.e., the average
firm wage after abstracting from workforce composition, are 8% greater on
average than for the economy as a whole. 3  Dispersion of the wage premia is
also greater. The relative importance of wage premia in energy firms may reflect
a variety of factors, including the employees’ average performance related to
productivity, capital-intensity or profits, the wage-setting power of firms, and
the nature of wage-setting institutions. Significantly, the ability to set wages
differently from their competitors for similarly qualified workers increases the
potential for firms to discriminate between workers with different
characteristics, including demographic attributes such as gender, underlining
the importance of looking at potential bias in the energy sector. The energy
sector is male-dominated and women earn lower wages than men In line with
previous studies, we find significantly fewer women working in the energy sector
compared to men. In relative terms the gap is more than twice as large as it is
the case in the non-energy sector. In addition, we see that wages for female
employees are almost 20% lower than for male employees, with the gap being
somewhat greater than in non-energy firms. Significantly, the wage gap remains
approximately the same when the effects of skill composition in terms of
ability, education and potential experience are accounted for, indicating that
the gap is not a function of gender differences in skill levels within firms. 4
Average gender wage and employment gaps by sector Open expand Exploiting the
linked nature of the dataset we are able to assess the extent to which the wage
gap between similarly skilled men and women reflects the tendency of men and
women to work in different firms offering different wage premia (“between
firms”) or differences in pay between similarly skilled men and women within
individual firms (“within firms”). 5  It is interesting to note that while the
within-firm component is relatively more important, it is approximately the same
for energy and non-energy firms. However, the between-firm component is
considerably larger for energy firms than for non-energy firms. In other words,
women in the energy sector are working in firms with relatively lower wage
premia than men, and more so than women working in non-energy firms. Average
gender wage gaps within and between firms, non-energy vs. energy sectors Open
expand It is also possible to compare the importance of wage gaps for different
ages of employees. There is a generally increasing gender wage gap with age for
both energy and non-energy firms amongst workers 40 years of age and younger.
However, in the energy sector the gender wage gap continues to increase with age
until almost 50 years of age. The evolution of the gender wage gap with age is a
function of both “within-firm” and “between-firm” channels. In both the energy
and non-energy sectors, for younger employees the within-firm component has the
strongest effect on the wage gap, while for older employees the between-firm
component is more important Gender wage gap, within and between firms, by age in
the energy sector Open expand Gender wage gap, within and between firms, by age
in the non-energy sector Open expand Gender wage gaps arise from wage structures
within firms and from access to firms that pay high wages The finding that the
between-firm component is relatively more important for energy firms motivates
an interest to identify the mechanisms through which such “sorting” of
employment between firms arises, building off the work of  Card et al . This
sorting can arise either through differences in the percentage of male and
female employees in firms with different average wages (allocation component),
and/or through differences in the gender-specific wage structure of firms
(dispersion component). In order to disentangle the effects of these two
different channels, a counterfactual was created based on the mapping of the
gender composition of the workforce in non-energy firms onto energy firms. In
effect the objective is to measure the sorting component in the energy sector if
the firm wage premium dispersion was the same as on average in the country,
holding constant the allocation of men and women. The figure below shows that
the relatively greater role of sorting in energy firms in comparison with non-
energy firms is largely, but not exclusively, explained by the fact that in the
energy sector wage premia differences between firms are more pronounced
(dispersion component), rather than by the tendency of women to work in low-wage
firms (allocation component). This result is confirmed with a further comparison
in which the counterfactual is based on the mapping of the wage structure from
non-energy firms onto energy firms. Gender wage gap decomposition by sorting,
dispersion and allocation for the energy and non-energy sectors Open expand
Returning to the role of skills using the International Standard Classification
of Occupations ( ISCO)  we see that the gender wage gap is higher for high-
skilled workers. This may reflect both general access barriers to high-wage
occupations within firms (the glass ceiling), but also differences in wages for
work of equal value due to the greater importance of individual bargaining,
discrimination and networking, with women at a disadvantage. In addition, the
between-firm component of the wage gap is much more important for low-skill
workers than it is for high-skill workers in the energy sector. This suggests
that access to desirable energy firms is particularly an issue for low-skilled
women.  Average gender wage gap by skills in the energy sector Open expand
Average gender wage gap by skills in the non-energy sector Open expand Women are
more likely to leave energy sector firms for jobs outside the sector In light of
these results, we now decompose the gender wage gap within firms, following
Card et al ., into differences in tasks and responsibilities and differences in
bargaining and discrimination. 6  This is a critical distinction because the
public and corporate policies to address the two cases may be very different. On
the one hand, the “division of responsibilities” has important implications for
both recruitment and advancement practices. On the other hand, issues related to
negotiations and wage-setting stem most notably from gender norms and biases of
both employers and employees. It is interesting to see that the bargaining and
discrimination component is relatively more important in the energy sector than
in the non-energy sector. Gender wage gap decomposition by tasks and
responsibilities, bargaining and discrimination, and sorting for the energy and
non-energy sectors Open expand As a final contribution, we focus on career
trajectories. The data show that women in the energy sector are less likely to
remain at a given firm than men at all ages, a trend which is not present in the
non-energy sector. For employees that leave their firms there are three possible
destinations: i) leaving the labour market; ii) going to another firm in the
energy sector; and, iii) going to a firm in the non-energy sector. In the first
instance we find that women are more likely than men to leave the labour market
at all ages in both the energy sector and non-energy sector, though the gender
gap is more visible and consistent for energy.  In addition, women employed in
the energy sector are much less likely than men to leave for another firm within
the sector at all ages, something which is less evident in the non-energy
sector. Men advance in their careers by moving to more productive and high-wage
firms within the sector, while women tend to stay behind, increasing the gender
wage gap between firms with age. We also see that there is a consistent (albeit
minimal) gap showing that a higher share of women are leaving the energy sector
for other sectors compared to men. It is interesting to note that the opposite
is true for the non-energy sector.  Average share of firm stayers by age and sex
in the energy and non-energy sectors Open expand Average share of labour market
exits by age and sex in the energy and non-energy sectors Open expand Average
share of between sector firm change by age and sex in the energy and non-energy
sectors Open expand Average share of within sector firm change by age and sex in
the energy and non-energy sectors Open expand Conclusions The evidence presented
indicates that the energy sector has a relatively low percentage of female
workers relative to other parts of the corporate sector, signalling issues of
attracting and/or retaining a diverse workforce. It also reveals that rents are
relatively high, underscoring the importance of assessing how these rents are
shared with men and women in the same firm, and how sorting of employees across
firms with different rents and wage-setting practices contributes to the gender
wage gap. The key findings presented can be summarised as: Gender wage gaps are
greater in the energy sector than in the non-energy sector. Much of the gender
wage gap is explained by differences in pay between men and women with similar
skills within firms, but it is interesting that the between-firm component is
markedly greater than it is in the non-energy sector due to the concentration of
women in low-wage energy firms.   Moreover, the between-firm element of the
gender wage gap is particularly important for low-skilled workers in the energy
sector whereas it is of relatively little importance for workers in the non-
energy sector, regardless of skill level. A counterfactual experiment reveals
that wage dispersion between firms plays a greater role than differences in
gender shares in explaining the gender wage gap between firms. While it is found
that differences in tasks and responsibilities have a significant impact on the
gender wage gap in all firms, in the energy sector the role of bargaining and
discrimination (and thus firm-level wage-setting practices) is markedly greater
than in the non-energy sector.  Women are more likely than men to leave the
labour market at all ages in the energy sector. In addition, women employed in
the energy sector are much less likely than men to leave for another firm within
the sector, and they are more likely to leave the energy sector for another
sector.  What do these results mean for policymakers? Firstly, the relatively
low employment rates of women in energy firms and the concentration of women in
low-wage firms (sorting) and occupations (segregation) underscore the importance
of ensuring that recruitment and promotion practices in the sector are unbiased.
These trends are interlinked, since higher representation of women in low-wage
firms and occupations is likely to be contributing to the low employment levels
of women in the energy sector more generally. In particular, the findings
suggest a lack of career mobility and advancement for women in energy jobs
compared to those in other sectors, which will affect both the attraction and
retention of a diverse workforce. If women are not advancing in the energy
sector, there will be fewer female role models and mentors to attract more
women. Furthermore, if women working in the energy sector are unable to advance
in their careers, they will be motivated to change sectors.  The low employment
rate of women in the energy sector is also certainly in part due to a pipeline
problem, since there is still a disproportionately low number of women with
STEM degrees , reducing the pool of potential female applicants for some firms
and occupations.   Specialisation differences  between men and women can be
explained most notably by gender norms and expectations, which are further
enforced by the lack of female role models. Thus, measures taken to ensure
transparency and fairness in recruitment and performance assessment will
contribute to both attracting and retaining more women in the energy sector.
Corporate training on unconscious gender bias, particularly amongst managers,
can also play an important role in establishing equitable recruitment practices
and performance assessments. Secondly, elements related to the quality of the
work environment can also have significant negative impacts on the career
trajectories of female employees in the sector.   Measures taken  – above and
beyond wage incentives – to help women meet and balance their career and
personal objectives are essential. Such measures include focussing on improving
work-life balance through the provision of adequate parental leave, affordable
and quality child care, flexible working arrangements, but also creating a more
supportive environment through the use of mentoring programmes, career guidance
and training. Awareness building on unconscious gender bias and appropriate
workplace behaviour can also be key to ensuring a safe and attractive workplace
for women and men. In addition, effective sexual harassment policies are
essential. While many such measures may be nominally gender-neutral they can
have disproportionately more important benefits for female employees. And
finally, the relatively high pay gap in the energy sector between men and women
with similar skills due to discrimination and bargaining underscores the
importance of ensuring that workers (and others) are guarded against
discriminatory practices. As a high-rent sector, there are greater returns on
bargaining efforts and scope for discrimination. While we are not in a position
to assess the importance of the factors that drive gender differences in
bargaining and discrimination, gender bias in corporate practices related to
wage setting may play a role. A number of countries have introduced  “pay
transparency tools ” to help close the gender wage gap. In some cases, these
focus on information provision, but in other cases sanctions can be imposed for
firms in which the gap is particularly significant. In addition,  collective
bargaining  can play an important role in reducing the scope for discriminatory
policies, including those related to gender.  There is also  evidence  that
women are less likely to demand wages that reflect their true contributions to
firm rents. Looking at the employer side, a recent  study  shows that while
women and men are equally likely to request a raise, men are more likely to
succeed with their request even when controlling for background factors like
education, tenure and contract type. These explanations apply to the entire
workforce, thus it is worth investigating why such issues might be more
prominent in the energy sector compared to the non-energy sector.  In
conclusion, this paper has reported on the analysis of quantitative data related
to employee and firm characteristics and market structure on gender gaps in
employment, career trajectories and wages. However, assessing the implications
of discriminatory practices as well as the benefits of policies to address them
requires complementary work, eliciting qualitative information directly from
those affected. Such research was recently conducted by the Nuclear Energy
Agency, which surveyed over 8 000 women working in the nuclear energy sector
across the world in 2021. The reported key barriers facing women in the sector
are a lack of pay transparency and fairness, workplace sexual harassment, a lack
of female role models, and absence of measures to help with work-life balance,
particularly concerning pregnancy and family related-duties. All of the barriers
were identified to have a negative impact on gender wage gaps and career
trajectories. These findings are  consistent  with those of  other sectors  that
have historically employed mostly men and that are also facing a challenge of
retaining women.  The authors responsible for this research are Antton
Haramboure and Alex Hijzen from the Employment, Labour and Social Affairs
Directorate of the OECD, as well as Ashley Acker and Nick Johnstone from the
Energy Data Centre of the IEA. ﻿ References France This work is supported by a
public grant overseen by the French National Research Agency (ANR) as part of
the “Investissements d’Avenir” programme (reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17 - Centre
d’acces securise aux donnees – CASD). Germany The data access to the SIEED was
provided via on-site use at Centre Secure Data Access Center (CASD) of the
National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE) and subsequently
remote data access via the Josua platform from the Research Data Centre (FDZ) of
the German Federal Employment Agency (BA). SIEED Citation:  Berge, Philipp vom;
Schmidtlein, Lisa; Seth, Stefan; Graf, Tobias; Grießemer, Stephan; Kaimer,
Steffen; Köhler, Markus; Lehnert, Claudia; Oertel, Martina; Seysen, Christian
(2020): "The Sample of Integrated Employer-Employee Data (SIEED): SIEED 7518,
Version 1". Research Data Centre of the Federal Employment Agency (BA) at the
Institute for Employment Research (IAB). DOI: 10.5164/IAB.SIEED7518.de.en.v1
Energy sector ISIC/NACE selection: 051 Mining of hard coal, 052 Mining of
lignite, 061 Extraction of crude petroleum, 062 Extraction of natural gas, 072
Mining of non-ferrous metal ores, 091 Support activities for petroleum and
natural gas extraction, 191 Manufacture of coke oven products, 192 Manufacture
of refined petroleum products, 351 Electric power generation, transmission and
distribution, 352 Manufacture of gas; distribution of gaseous fuels through
mains, 353 Steam and air conditioning supply, 473 Retail sale of automotive fuel
in specialized stores, 493 Transport via pipeline. Workforce composition is
controlled for through the inclusion of worker fixed effects and “flexible”
experience earnings profiles.  Worker fixed effects and flexible experience
earnings profiles by gender. The sample used to generate gender wage gap
breakdowns (bargaining, sorting, etc.) is more restrictive than that used to
generate the overall gender wage gaps by sector. Specifically, the decomposition
can only be carried out on firms with gender diverse data (i.e. at least one
male and one female employee) which are connected to other firms by at least one
man and one woman who changed firm during the period of time studied.
Methodologically this is done by capturing the effects of bargaining and
discrimination through firm fixed effects by gender, and positing that
conditional on worker fixed effects, the difference between the estimated gaps
in firm fixed effects relative to a model without firm fixed effects can be
attributed to differences in tasks and responsibilities.  Reference 1 Close
dialog France This work is supported by a public grant overseen by the French
National Research Agency (ANR) as part of the “Investissements d’Avenir”
programme (reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17 - Centre d’acces securise aux donnees –
CASD). Germany The data access to the SIEED was provided via on-site use at
Centre Secure Data Access Center (CASD) of the National Institute of Statistics
and Economic Studies (INSEE) and subsequently remote data access via the Josua
platform from the Research Data Centre (FDZ) of the German Federal Employment
Agency (BA). SIEED Citation:  Berge, Philipp vom; Schmidtlein, Lisa; Seth,
Stefan; Graf, Tobias; Grießemer, Stephan; Kaimer, Steffen; Köhler, Markus;
Lehnert, Claudia; Oertel, Martina; Seysen, Christian (2020): "The Sample of
Integrated Employer-Employee Data (SIEED): SIEED 7518, Version 1". Research Data
Centre of the Federal Employment Agency (BA) at the Institute for Employment
Research (IAB). DOI: 10.5164/IAB.SIEED7518.de.en.v1 Reference 2 Close dialog
Energy sector ISIC/NACE selection: 051 Mining of hard coal, 052 Mining of
lignite, 061 Extraction of crude petroleum, 062 Extraction of natural gas, 072
Mining of non-ferrous metal ores, 091 Support activities for petroleum and
natural gas extraction, 191 Manufacture of coke oven products, 192 Manufacture
of refined petroleum products, 351 Electric power generation, transmission and
distribution, 352 Manufacture of gas; distribution of gaseous fuels through
mains, 353 Steam and air conditioning supply, 473 Retail sale of automotive fuel
in specialized stores, 493 Transport via pipeline. Reference 3 Close dialog
Workforce composition is controlled for through the inclusion of worker fixed
effects and “flexible” experience earnings profiles.  Reference 4 Close dialog
Worker fixed effects and flexible experience earnings profiles by gender.
Reference 5 Close dialog The sample used to generate gender wage gap breakdowns
(bargaining, sorting, etc.) is more restrictive than that used to generate the
overall gender wage gaps by sector. Specifically, the decomposition can only be
carried out on firms with gender diverse data (i.e. at least one male and one
female employee) which are connected to other firms by at least one man and one
woman who changed firm during the period of time studied. Reference 6 Close
dialog  Methodologically this is done by capturing the effects of bargaining and
discrimination through firm fixed effects by gender, and positing that
conditional on worker fixed effects, the difference between the estimated gaps
in firm fixed effects relative to a model without firm fixed effects can be
attributed to differences in tasks and responsibilities.          Data explorers
All data explorers circle-arrow Gender and Energy Data Explorer Detailed data on
gender gaps in the energy sector in employment and wages, senior management,
entrepreneurship and innovation Data explorer card data set         Related
content      All results circle-arrow Gender and Energy Data Explorer Detailed
data on gender gaps in the energy sector in employment and wages, senior
management, entrepreneurship and innovation Data explorer card data set The
Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events
delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other
newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore
Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect
Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for
subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom
of any IEA newsletter.