UNDP and Jerusalem District Electricity Company (JDECO) Reinforce Partnership to
Drive Renewable Energy Transformation in East Jerusalem | United Nations
Development Programme     Skip to main content
Programme of Assistance to the Palestinian People
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
Locations                 Home Programme of Assistance to the Palestinian People
UNDP and Jerusalem District Electricity Company (JDECO) Reinforce Partnership to
Drive Renewable Energy Transformation in East Jerusalem
UNDP and Jerusalem District Electricity Company (JDECO) Reinforce Partnership to
Drive Renewable Energy Transformation in East Jerusalem   October 5, 2023
During the signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) that marks a
continuation of a strategic cooperation, focusing on renewable energy, energy
efficiency, and skilling interventions   © UNDP/PAPP image bank        East
Jerusalem - The United Nations Development Programme/Programme of Assistance to
the Palestinian People (UNDP/PAPP) and the Jerusalem District Electricity
Company (JDECO) signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) that marks a
continuation of a strategic cooperation, focusing on renewable energy, energy
efficiency, and skilling interventions. This MoU is part of the GO SOLAR-
Renewable Energy Investments at Education in East Jerusalem project, funded by
the Government of Norway and implemented by UNDP/PAPP.  The project encompasses
the installation of solar systems on the rooftops and external spaces of 15
schools, deployment of energy efficiency and development of a business model. 
Through this effort, the projects aims to utilization generated resources for
the targeted institutions, seeking to foster self-reliance and sustainability
while transforming the schools into conducive and friendly learning
environments. Working closely with local institutions, the Awqaf General
Department and Jerusalem Directorate of Education, JDECO plays a pivotal role in
facilitating and guiding the implementation of the project interventions and
providing technical backstopping.   As part of the MoU, UNDP/PAPP and JDECO are
joining forces to promote technical education, skilling and vocational training,
with a focus on renewable energy, electricity installations and smart building
technologies. This effort will address education to employment nexus, to foster
mentorship and apprenticeship programmes for youth, and enhance their market-
driven skills and knowledge in energy-related fields for a sustainable future.
During the signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) that marks a
continuation of a strategic cooperation, focusing on renewable energy, energy
efficiency, and skilling interventions   © UNDP/PAPP image bank        UNDP/PAPP
Special Representative, Sarah Poole, recognised the strong partnership with
JDECO in offering reliable electricity sources in Palestine, within its
jurisdiction, and commended JDECO, in line with the national efforts, for its
concrete actions towards encouraging the transition to green and solar energies
which will contribute to having a positive impact on the Palestinians for
sustainable energy future.  Ms. Poole expressed her appreciation and gratitude
for the strategic partnership with the Government of Norway in advancing the
socio-economic resilience trajectory in Palestine, and its generous contribution
to support the public schools’ access to solar energy in East Jerusalem.
Additionally, Ms. Poole welcomed the efforts of the national partners for
reinforcing the transition towards green and renewable energy, which under this
initiative significantly contributes to, and strengthens, the schools’
resilience and self-reliance. On behalf of Norway Representative Office, Ms.
Tanja Ustvedt commended the signing of the MoU between UNDP and JDECO as part of
the overarching vision of the GO SOLAR- Renewable Energy Investments at
Education in East Jerusalem. Furthermore, Ms. Ustvedt emphasized Norway’s
longstanding support for Palestine's energy system and expressed deep
appreciation for the partners' invaluable role in facilitating and supporting
the implementation of the project. Hisham Al Omari, JDECO Board Director and
General Manager provided a brief about major challenges facing JDECO’s work, and
emphasized the importance of solar energy generation for reducing the dependency
on imported electricity, appreciating the focus on these organizations and
facilities that are providing essential services to the Jerusalemites. For
further information, please contact: Musa Khalil, Head of Communication Unit,
E-mail: musa.khalil@undp.org. Tel: +972 6268200, Mobile: +972 5748761.  For more
information about UNDP/PAPP visit  www.ps.undp.org   News With Funds from the
Government of Japan - UNDP Supports the Harnessing of Solar Power to Treat
Wastewater in Gaza Over 170,000 Palestinians, including farmers, in Gaza will
have improved access to water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services as a
result of the treated waste ... Read more  News In Partnership with the Ministry
of Health and World Health Organization, UNDP Conducts Solar Energy Needs
Assessment for Health Facilities  in the Gaza Strip The needs assessment comes
as part of collective efforts made in the preparation and adaptation of a
unified document on solar energy needs for Gaza health facili... Read more
Search           Found  0  results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort
by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development
Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                            Palestinian
Programme Framework
Funding and delivery                                                      What
we do                                                      Sustainable
Development Goals                                                            Our
focus                                                      Our impact
Blog                                                            News centre
Stories                                                             Publications
Projects                                                      Get involved
Jobs                                                            Procurement
Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit social or environmental complaint Scam
alert Terms of use facebook twitter youtube instagram © 2024 United Nations
Development Programme