UNDP supports efforts to raise awareness on renewable energy among women
associations in Mauritius. | United Nations Development Programme     Skip to
main content
Mauritius & Seychelles
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
Locations                 Home Mauritius & Seychelles         UNDP supports
efforts to raise awareness on renewable energy among women associations in
Mauritius.                        UNDP supports efforts to raise awareness on
renewable energy among women associations in Mauritius.       By familiarizing
women with renewable energy, solar PV systems and the relevant schemes, this
workshop has encouraged their active participation in climate change mitigation
and awareness raising.    September 13, 2023         This workshop aimed at
educating members of women associations about climate change, the significance
of renewable energy and the opportunity to benefit from rooftops solar PV
through the CEB schemes.   UNDP Mauritius / Sharon Sunassee         On 11
September 2023, a workshop on Solar Photovoltaic Energy was organized by the
National Women Council (NWC), in collaboration with Central Electricity Board
(CEB), under the Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) Project and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) under the GCF funded “ Accelerating
the transformational shift to a low-carbon economy in the Republic of Mauritius
” project. The aim of this working session was to educate members of women
associations on the basics of solar photovoltaic technology and encourage them
to apply to the various RE schemes available in view of empowering women to have
greater access to renewable energy. The key SGDs targeted through the workshop
were: SDG 5: Gender equality, SDG 7: Affordable and clean energy and SDG 14:
Climate action).             At the 16th meeting of the Conference of Parties to
the UNFCCC held in 2010, Parties agreed that developing countries would take
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA) for promoting sustainable
development. These refer to a set of actions and policies that countries
undertake as part of their commitment to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
in the long term. In Mauritius, the NAMA initiative received technical and
financial assistance from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). It is implemented by the Ministry of
Environment, Solid Waste Management and Climate change, the Ministry of Energy
and Public Utilities and the CEB in collaboration with the UNDP, under the
“Accelerating the transformational shift to a low carbon economy” project. This
project aims at enabling the Government of Mauritius to meet its target of using
renewables to supply 60% of the country’s electricity needs by 2030 and thus,
reducing dependency on fossil fuels.  As raising awareness is a key part of both
projects, it has been proposed to hold awareness sessions to build the capacity
of women. This working session therefore aimed at educating and inspiring
members of women associations about climate change, the significance of
renewable energy and the opportunity to benefit from rooftops solar PV through
the CEB Renewable Energy Scheme for Religious Bodies, NGOs and Charitable
Institutions. Through this scheme, women associations and women-led NGOs can
apply for and benefit from free solar PV installations. At an initial stage,
seven solar photovoltaic kits will be supplied and installed free of charge to
women associations in Mauritius and Rodrigues, which will enable them to receive
between 100 and 200 kwh of free electricity every month for twenty years. This
initiative not only empowers women economically but also allows them to actively
contribute to climate change mitigation.                                  
Involving the community in the path towards a low carbon economy in Mauritius In
her opening speech,  Ms. Jugnauth Naeck , Manager of the National Women Council,
explained that these sessions were specifically targeted at members of women
associations, because “ women often face higher risk and greater burden from the
impacts of climate change, due to existing cultural norms and roles. ” She also
emphasized that “ building resilience through renewable energy in communities
involving women is crucial .” Mr. Iqbal Dreepaul , Senior Strategic Business
Planning Analyst at the CEB, highlighted that “ women are champions in the path
towards local renewable energy production and environmental protection. ” He
added that this workshop is a continuation of the work started last year in
collaboration with the UNDP, involving the training of women entrepreneurs on
the basics of solar photovoltaic energy, provided under the GCF/UNDP project
‘Accelerating the transformational shift to a low carbon economy’. During the
workshop,  Mr. Sajjid Mooniaruck , Project Manager of the UNDP-supported, GCF-
funded ‘ Accelerating the transformational shift to a low carbon economy in the
Republic of Mauritius’ project , delivered a presentation renewable energy and
women empowerment. During this interactive discussion, he went over key
information on climate change, renewable energy and solar photovoltaics and
explained the basics of how energy is produced through solar PV kits installed
directly on houses. The presentation also included a component of women
empowerment, where participants had the opportunity to share their thoughts on
issues such as breaking the glass ceiling, and the relatively small proportion
(22%) of women currently working in the field of RE globally.  The workshop also
included a presentation on the various RE schemes proposed by the CEB, such as
the scheme for Religious Bodies, NGOs and Charitable Institutions, the Home
Solar Project and the SSDG Net-Billing Scheme. This was followed by a
demonstration exercise on how to install solar powered panels, and a session led
by CEB staff to guide the participants on how to apply and to fill out the
application form for the relevant RE schemes offered by the CEB. The activity
ended with a ‘drawing of lots’ ceremony in view of eventually awarding five
women associations a free solar PV kit financed through the project. By
familiarizing women with renewable energy, solar PV systems and the relevant
schemes, this intensive session has set the stage for their active participation
in climate change mitigation and awareness raising.      Search           Found
0  results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy
Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development Programme
Who we are                                                      About us
Our team                                                            UNDP in
Mauritius                                                            UNDP in
Seychelles                                                      What we do
Our Focus                                                            Sustainable
Development Goals                                                      Our
impact                                                      Blogs
News Centre                                                            Projects
Publications                                                            Stories
Get involved                                                      Contact us
Jobs                                                            Procurement
Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit social or environmental complaint Scam
alert Terms of use facebook youtube linkedin exposure twitter © 2024 United
Nations Development Programme