Unsustainable mining will be the Achilles heel of the global energy transition |
The Carbon Trust       Skip to main content      Europe (English) Global Europa
(Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America (English) Latinoamérica (Español) Asia
(English) 中国 Main Menu Who we are Overview Our experts Our history Our values
and commitments Our career opportunities Overview Internships What we do
Overview Strategy, delivery and reporting Overview Avoided emissions Beyond
value chain mitigation Climate action and Net Zero planning Climate change
risks, opportunities and TCFD alignment Decarbonisation strategy Footprinting
Implementation planning and execution Organisational verification Plastic
Packaging Framework Route to Net Zero Standard Supply chain engagement
Sustainability Reporting Sustainable finance Target setting The Carbon Trust
Standard for Zero Waste to Landfill Assurance and labelling Overview Carbon
neutral verification Footprint label – certified organisations PAS 2080 Product
carbon footprint label Market transformation Overview Acceso a energía limpia
Buildings and construction Clean hydrogen Climate policy Electromovilidad Energy
efficiency Energy Energía renovable terrestre Heat decarbonisation Heat networks
Industry Mining and metals Offshore wind Sustainable cooling Transport Venture
acceleration Our work and impact Overview Impact stories Guides, reports and
tools Overview 从英国能源技术清单（ETL）看英国节能技术推广 News and insights News Events Insights
Contact Europe (English) Global Europa (Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America
(English) Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国 Search Search Who we are
Overview Our experts Our history Our values and commitments Our career
opportunities Overview Internships What we do Overview Strategy, delivery and
reporting Overview Avoided emissions Beyond value chain mitigation Climate
action and Net Zero planning Climate change risks, opportunities and TCFD
alignment Decarbonisation strategy Footprinting Implementation planning and
execution Organisational verification Plastic Packaging Framework Route to Net
Zero Standard Supply chain engagement Sustainability Reporting Sustainable
finance Target setting The Carbon Trust Standard for Zero Waste to Landfill
Assurance and labelling Overview Carbon neutral verification Footprint label –
certified organisations PAS 2080 Product carbon footprint label Market
transformation Overview Acceso a energía limpia Buildings and construction Clean
hydrogen Climate policy Electromovilidad Energy efficiency Energy Energía
renovable terrestre Heat decarbonisation Heat networks Industry Mining and
metals Offshore wind Sustainable cooling Transport Venture acceleration Our work
and impact Overview Impact stories Guides, reports and tools Overview
从英国能源技术清单（ETL）看英国节能技术推广 News and insights News Events Insights Contact Europe
(English) Global Europa (Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America (English)
Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国 Breadcrumb Home Insights
Unsustainable mining will be the Achilles heel of the global energy transition
Insights Unsustainable mining will be the Achilles heel of the global energy
transition  Authors:   Renata Lawton-Misra ,  Reinhardt Arp ,  Christelle van
Vuuren The 2022 edition of the African Mining Indaba was all about
sustainability, with a particular focus on climate change mitigation. This
represented what we thought was a giant leap forward for the global mining
sector, let alone in Africa. But while the strong focus on sustainability is
indeed encouraging, we couldn’t help but think that more urgency and ambition is
needed to prevent the worst impacts of climate change and biodiversity loss.
After all, we cannot afford to reach Net Zero global emissions in 2050 if we
perpetuate environmental and social injustice along the way.   25 May 2022 Image
The Carbon Trust News and insights, The Carbon Trust Share Image   Avoiding the
worst impacts of climate change requires the global economy to prevent average
global temperatures from increasing by more than 1.5°C. To do this, we must
reach Net Zero emissions by 2050. Simply put, this means reducing greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions as much as possible before using credible carbon removal offsets
to “neutralize” any remaining hard-to-abate emissions. A big part of this global
transition must occur in the energy sector, what has been termed the  global
energy transition  – moving away from fossil fuel-based energy technologies to
renewable energy and low-carbon technologies, like solar, wind, batteries,
electric vehicles, and green hydrogen. The problem with all of these low-carbon
technologies, which are needed by almost all sectors to decarbonise, is that
they are metals-intensive and cannot be recycled (yet). Producing enough solar
panels and wind turbines to meet global energy demand is going to cause demand
for “energy transition metals” (ETMs), such as copper, nickel, and steel, to
sky-rocket. And that means more mining! On the one hand, this is a good thing,
particularly for Africa, given its abundant reserves of ETMs and the opportunity
they present for supporting economic development. On the other hand,
unsustainable and irresponsible mining practices threaten to perpetuate
environmental degradation and social inequalities that continue to plague the
African continent. It is, therefore, imperative that the increased mining and
production of ETMs decouples itself from GHG emissions and other environmental
and social risks that mining presents.   To this end, it was fantastic to see
sustainability topics becoming mainstream at this year’s African Mining Indaba.
While conversations continue to focus on the economic opportunities for mining
in Africa, it’s encouraging the see a shift that incorporates environmental and
social issues in a proactive, definable manner, together with economic
discussions. For example, the International Council on Mining and Metals
unveiled their new  Social and Economic Reporting Framework . The framework
aspires to create uniform and transparent reporting indicators to empower
communities, governments, and investors to assess the contribution of the mining
companies to social and economic development. The importance of good
environmental, social and governance (ESG) performance was emphasised by
financial institutions for miners wanting to access sustainable finance.
Financial actors were also increasingly wanting to understand how positive
social impacts from mining can be measured to better inform their financial
decision-making. One of the more interesting takeaways from Indaba included
learning about leapfrogging of fossil fuel-based energy that’s occurring in
Guinea, where mining communities are surpassing fossil fuels in their transition
and increasingly implementing renewable energy. The primary driver behind the
use of solar-based energy was not so much for climate mitigation (Guinea
contributes less emissions than some states in USA), but rather for securing
affordable energy access, allowing communities to leapfrog fossil fuels (and
enjoy associated environmental and social co-benefits).  After perhaps losing
ourselves in the aura of miners seemingly becoming sustainability experts, we
were quickly brought back down to Earth when someone asked us if “the strong
focus on climate mitigation was really relevant for Africa?”. Given the
continent’s limited contribution to the climate crisis, whilst simultaneously
being the most vulnerable to its impacts, suggests that answer to the question
is, in fact, no. While climate change mitigation is, of course, necessary, what
is equally important, if not more so for Africa, is climate change adaptation –
building resilience to climate change and ensuring a just transition.   For us,
this means ensuring a just transition to a sustainable and inclusive African
economy, one that is underpinned by the sustainable production of critical ETMs.
You’re probably thinking that a just transition is only necessary for the coal
sector and making sure that “no one is left behind” in the transition away from
coal-based to renewable-based electricity systems. I’m glad to say that you’re
not wrong. But just as sustainability is more than climate change, a just
transition is more than just about coal. We need to ensure that the expansion of
mining in Africa to provide the world with ETMs results in shared value for all.
At the same time, we need to make sure that decarbonising the production of
these ETMs also generates net-positive environmental and social outcomes for all
mining stakeholders. That means, for example, protecting existing jobs and
livelihoods, whilst creating new opportunities. Simply avoiding ESG risks is
quickly becoming obsolete and the expectation that mining positively contributes
to Africa’s sustainable and inclusive development is growing.   The low-carbon
transition comes with various challenges and opportunities, not only from an
environmental perspective, but also in the consideration of the social dimension
in the global transition. Companies are continuously stepping up to find
solutions to climate change, however, the balance between sustainability efforts
and company growth continues to be a challenge. While there is an increase in
the number of companies committing to achieve Net Zero by 2050,  recent analysis
by Climate Action 100+  indicates that many of these targets are not underpinned
by robust strategies, and global emissions are at an all-time high. The United
Nations has also recently announced the formation of an expert group that will
scrutinise company Net Zero pledges in an effort to prevent greenwashing. While
companies are eager to be part of climate solutions, for many, the pathway for
doing so and translating this into business action remains unclear.  Company
decarbonisation strategies are unique and fit for purpose, however there are
basic elements that need to apply in their development. As a starting point,
companies need to assess their carbon footprint to understand the drivers of
emissions and identify opportunities for carbon reduction. With this initial
insight into baseline emissions, companies can set ambitious, yet feasible
short- and long-term Net Zero targets to address Scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions.
Developing a decarbonisation strategy and credible action plans will be key for
decision-making, including efforts to drive deep decarbonisation and the role of
carbon offsets in achieving targets. Companies will need to continuously
identify, invest in, and implement emerging and innovative low-carbon
technologies to reduce emissions, while also trying to maximize broader
environmental and social co-benefits for a just transition.   The enormity of
ensuring a just transition to Net Zero mining in Africa is beyond the capability
and resources of an individual company. Trusted partnerships and collaboration
with governments, policymakers, local communities, labour, civil society,
technology developers, industry associations and financial institutions can
create an ecosystem for change. Executives and decision influencers need to
consider value chain and cross-sector integration in their decarbonisation
strategies.  Decarbonisation for the industry will not be easy, however we
cannot afford to delay action any longer. While it’s encouraging to see the
strong focus on sustainability in mining, the key will be advancing strategies
and action plans coupled with timely action. Mining companies must engage with
stakeholders in a participatory and inclusive manner to better understand
stakeholder needs and help inform decision-making, minimising business and
broader ESG risks and challenges, and accelerating decarbonisation efforts in
Africa.   References Climate Action 100+. 2022. Climate Action 100+ Net Zero
Company Benchmark Summary of company assessments, March 2022.
https://www.climateaction100.org/net-zero-company-benchmark/findings/ 
International Council on Mining and Metals. 2022. Social and Economic Reporting:
Framework and guidance.  https://www.icmm.com/en-gb/guidance/social-
performance/social-and-economic-reporting    Plan A. 2021. What does
decarbonisation mean for companies?  https://plana.earth/academy/what-does-
decarbonisation-mean-companies/  Volcovici, V. 2022. U.N. launches group to hold
companies to account for net-zero pledges.
https://www.reuters.com/business/sustainable-business/un-launches-group-hold-
companies-account-net-zero-pledges-2022-03-31/    World Climate Foundation.
2021. Holistic approach to the energy transition.
https://www.worldclimatefoundation.org/post/holistic-approach-to-the-energy-
transition  Stay updated Receive the latest news, insights and events from the
Carbon Trust directly to your inbox. Subscribe Contact us Get in touch to see
how our experts can help you. Contact us © 2024 The Carbon Trust Careers Contact
us Privacy notice Cookies notice Website terms Modern slavery statement Sitemap