Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 8
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
 
I.  UNDP within the Cooperation Framework  
 
1.  El Salvador has made significant progress in reducing monetary poverty in the last 
three  decades,  which  on  average  decreased  from  49.1  per  cent  in  1991-2000,  to 
36.1 per cent in 2001-2010, and to 31.3 per cent in 2011-2019. A similar trend is observed 
in  the  Gini  index,  which  dropped  almost  ten percentage  points  between  2001-2010  and 
2011-2019, from 48.2 per cent to 38.6 per cent. However, multidimensional poverty affects 
almost three out of every 10 households: 543,000 households and 2.1million people live in 
this condition. Poverty incidence in rural areas is more than double that of urban areas.  
2.  Crucial  development  challenges  in  the  country  are  thus  the  persistence  of 
multidimensional  poverty  and  the  need  to  increase  access  to  basic  services,  education, 
employment, social security, health, and water. In seven out of every 10 households there 
are five most frequent deprivations: low adult education; lack of access to social security; 
underemployment and job instability; lack of access to sanitation; and overcrowded homes. 
3.  The  risks  of  climate  change  are  growing  and  threatening  to  exacerbate  social 
imbalances. El Salvador is exceptionally vulnerable to changes in climate, which makes 
building  resilience,  climate  adaptation  and  mitigation  increasingly  essential  to  avoid  a 
greater incidence of poverty. Moreover, exclusion, poverty and climate change have been 
identified as the main drivers of migration in the region.  
4.  The national economy is characterized by fragmentation, with a large informal sector 
and  insufficient  decent  jobs.  In  2019,  70.5  per  cent  of  people  who  worked  were  in  the 
informal sector and 71.2 per cent in micro and small businesses; only 20 per cent had a 
decent job. Approximately one out of two women does not participate in the labour market, 
while male inactivity is one in five. In addition, 77 per cent of micro and small businesses 
were  disconnected  from  the  internet  in  2017;  the  lack of  digitization  makes  them  more 
vulnerable to shocks such as COVID-19. 
5.  Since  the  1992  Peace  Accords,  the  country  has  strengthened  its  democratic 
institutions. However, in recent years, support for democracy as a form of government has 
begun to show signs of wear, due to a perception that institutions are corrupt and inefficient. 
It reached its second lowest historical minimum support (27.7 per cent) in 2018, according 
to  Latinobarómetro.  El  Salvador  faces  a  challenge  in  access  to  justice.  In  2017,  it  was 
among  the  countries  with  the  highest  levels  of  impunity,  ranking  13th  according  to  the 
Global Impunity Index. 
6.  COVID-19  and  the  economic  recession  caused  by  its  mitigating  measures  also 
increased the vulnerability of the economy. At the end of 2020, the gross domestic product 
(GDP) growth rate decreased by 7.9 per cent, leading to a fiscal deficit of 16.8 per cent of 
GDP, and indebtedness of 85 per cent of GDP. The increases in spending derived from the 
pandemic  and  the  pressure  on  debt  growth  created  an  adverse  fiscal  context  and  an 
uncertain  economic  recovery.  The  pandemic  has  further  exacerbated  the  inequalities, 
particularly  for  those  in  monetary  and  multidimensional  poverty,  including  a  large 
proportion of women-headed households.   
7.  The Common Country Assessment and the United Nations socio-economic response 
plan  to  COVID-19  determined  that  it  was  imperative  to  focus  on  the  most  vulnerable 
population  groups,  including  rural  households  and  particularly  women,  older  adults  in 
vulnerable condition, violence victims – especially gender-based – young people at risk, 
displaced persons and returning migrants, small  businesses, persons deprived of liberty, 
people with disabilities, and people in extreme poverty.  
8.  Under  the  2016-2020  country  programme,  UNDP  promoted  a  multidimensional 
approach  to  citizen  security  to  respond  to  the  challenge  of  a  rate  of  81  homicides  per 
 
21-17880 
2/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
100,000  inhabitants  (2016)  and  a  large  number  of  internally  displaced  people  due  to 
violence.  The  approach  included  prevention  measures,  institutional  reforms,  structural 
changes in the relationship between the State and communities, promotion of broad and 
sustained  political  commitments,  care  for  victims,  social  inclusion,  and  the  adoption  of 
modernized information and intervention systems. UNDP also supported political dialogue 
and the engagement of civil society on Citizen Security, Education and the Environment 
through the National Councils. This integrated strategy was a priority for the Government 
of El Salvador with commitment at the highest level. UNDP was therefore able to influence 
the  public  agenda  strongly.  The  independent  country  programme  evaluation,  2019, 
demonstrated the effectiveness of UNDP technical support, methodological guidance, and 
inclusive strategy in setting up and convening democratic spaces for dialogue. 
9.  On  effective  governance  and  strengthening  of  democratic  institutions,  UNDP 
continued  to  support  the  Supreme  Electoral  Tribunal  for  fair  and  transparent  elections. 
UNDP  promoted  equal  rights  in  the  electoral  process  for  persons  with  disabilities,  the 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex community, and other vulnerable groups, 
through  training  and  awareness  campaigns.  UNDP  also  promoted  transitional  justice  as 
one  of  the  main  axes  of  strengthening  democracy.  UNDP  promoted  a  South-South 
partnership with Chile to strengthen the memory and reconciliation agenda. 
10.  The  independent  evaluation noted that public government institutions, especially  in 
the  health  sector,  were  well  supported  by  UNDP  in  accessing  international  markets  to 
acquire  high-quality  products,  ensuring  best  value  for  money.  UNDP  supported 
transparency,  efficiency,  and  quality  in  the  procurement  of  goods  and  management  of 
public funds. 
11.  The  country  also  benefited  from  data  production,  numerous  studies  and  analyses, 
including the 2018 national human development report on youth; systematic data collection 
on security and violence; and the  production  of analyses and studies on climate  change 
issues providing a wealth of information for key policy and legal framework decisions. 
12.  On gender equality, UNDP supported the  setting  up  of the  gender equality seal for 
public and private enterprises and the national gender equality management standard  for 
the business sector. UNDP, as part of the United Nations global initiative to eliminate all 
forms  of  violence  against  women  and  girls,  strengthened  its  work  on  gender-based 
violence, especially femicides. Through these initiatives, the capacity of key institutions 
such as the Attorney General’s Office, the Public Defender’s Office and the Supreme Court 
of Justice were strengthened, awareness campaigns were launched, and spaces for dialogue 
were promoted. 
13.  During  the  2016-2021  programme  cycle,  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  were 
adopted and the United Nations development system reform was implemented; and in June 
2020  the  United  Nations  developed  socio-economic response  plans  to  COVID-19.  This 
opened  an  opportunity  for  UNDP  to  consolidate  as  the  development  programme  of  the 
United Nations and the integrator of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. UNDP 
also consolidated as a reference point to the United Nations system in governance, electoral 
processes, dialogue, climate change and socio-economic analysis. 
14.  The  2016-2021  country  programme  showed  that  tackling  poverty,  inequality  and 
exclusion  requires  mainstreaming  economic  development  and  gender  equality. 
Comprehensive interventions to tackle violence, including gender-based violence, are key 
to  addressing  the  local  drivers  of  migration  and  forced  displacement.  Underpinning 
sustainable development requires strengthening interventions that target resilience; hence 
an increased focus  on  adaptation to  climate  change and mitigation is needed.  A holistic 
 
21-17880 
3/14 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
 
approach  to  the  rule  of  law,  access  to  justice  and  social  reintegration  provides  durable 
solutions to crime and social insecurity.  
15.  COVID-19 exacerbated the challenges listed above and made clear that it will only be 
possible  to  overcome  the  difficulties  through  innovation.  UNDP  is  uniquely  positioned 
with the establishment of the Accelerator Lab in the country, which fosters an enhanced 
innovation  ecosystem  in  key  areas,  such  as  access  to  water,  technology  and  innovative 
livelihood solutions for the informal sector.  
16.  UNDP  will  focus  on  four  of  the  seven  outcomes  identified  in  the  Cooperation 
Framework  and  integrate  the  other  three  outcomes  by  systematically  addressing  gender 
inequalities, human mobility, and citizen security. UNDP will strengthen universal social 
protection  systems  and  expand  educational,  health,  and  water  services  to  eradicate 
multidimensional poverty. For the economic transformation, UNDP will promote decent 
work, women’s economic participation, innovation and digital transformation, green jobs, 
adaptation to climate change, and risk management. In the area of peace and justice, UNDP 
will strengthen capacities to promote: the rule of law, access to public information, social 
cohesion, the fight against corruption, electoral participation, prevention of gender-based 
violence, transitional justice, citizen security, and improved public management. 
17.  To meet these challenges, UNDP will draw on its reputation as an impartial partner, 
its convening capacity, credibility, and legitimacy in development work. The relationship 
of trust built with the Government of El Salvador and other State institutions, the ability to 
construct state-of-the-art knowledge products, mobilize technical support around the globe 
and proven efficiency in implementing cost-sharing programmes, will be key to supporting 
national efforts to efficiently expand the offer of services in a fiscally constrained situation. 
UNDP expertise in creating opportunities for brokering dialogue among diverse actors on 
priority and sensitive issues will also be essential. 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships 
18.  The UNDP programme will contribute to the development of El Salvador in achieving 
improvements  by  2026  in  the  following  areas:  (a)  inclusion,  through  reduction  in 
multidimensional poverty and inequality  gaps; (b) resilience, through adaptation  to  and 
mitigation  of  climate  change;  and  (c)  productivity,  through  innovative,  inclusive  and 
sustainable  economic  transformation  –  all  of  this  based  on  effective  governance, 
strengthening of the rule of law, citizen security and accountability. To achieve this, UNDP 
will focus on four priorities in the 2022–2026 period. 
19.  People  have  equitable  access  to  education,  health  care,  social  services,  and 
universal social protection systems. UNDP will promote social inclusion if the following 
can  be  expanded:  the  multimodal  educational  offer,  through  better  digitization  and 
infrastructure,  particularly  with  computers,  digital  skills  and  management  systems;  the 
offer of health services and medicines, through a national health system integrated with the 
effective  use  of  digital  tools;  and  capacities  to  design  universal  social  protection 
programmes  and  achieve  a  higher-quality  coverage  of  water  services.  Then, 
multidimensional poverty and inequality gaps focusing on the most vulnerable populations, 
particularly at risk youth, women and girls in conditions of socioeconomic vulnerability 
and migrants, will be reduced. This priority is aligned with UNDP’s Strategic Plan, 2022-
2025, through the signature solution: lifting people out of poverty and strengthening gender 
equality. 
20.  Building partnerships is one of the main strategies for achieving the outcomes of this 
programme.  Consolidating  portfolios  with  the  Ministries  of  Education  and  Health,  the 
Institute for Teachers’ Welfare, and the Social Security Institute and the government bodies 
 
21-17880 
4/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
responsible for promoting social protection and the comprehensive management of water 
resources, will be key. UNDP is strengthening its partnerships within the United Nations 
system  to  deliver  solid  results:  collaborating  with  the  United  Nations  Children’s  Fund 
(UNICEF) for its knowledge of early childhood builds on UNDP strengths in educational 
innovation with digital services and infrastructure; working with the Pan-American Health 
Organization to strengthen the role of the governing body of the Ministry of Health, with 
UNDP contributing best practices in planning, acquisition of supplies, and digital services; 
collaborating with World Food Programme in social protection programmes, building on 
the UNDP capacity to developing public policy frameworks; and the United Nations Entity 
for  Gender  Equality  and  the  Empowerment  of  Women  (UN-Women)  for  ensuring  that 
gender inequality in access to social services is reduced. 
21.  People  have  greater  opportunities  to  access  decent,  productive  work  and 
sustainable livelihoods. UNDP will promote an economic transformation if capacities can 
be  expanded  to:  design  public  policies  that  promote  the  transition  to  decent  work,  the 
formal  economy,  the  economic  participation  of  women  and  sustainable  livelihoods; 
promote  innovation  and  inclusive  digital  transformation,  particularly  for  the  economic 
recovery  of  micro  and  small  businesses;  generate  green  jobs,  and  promote  the  circular 
economy.  Then,  the  economy  will  be  transformed  under  an  innovative,  inclusive  and 
environmentally  sustainable  model.  In  a  formal  and  innovative  economy,  increasing 
productivity is the basis for achieving sustained economic growth. This priority is aligned 
with  the  UNDP  Strategic  Plan  through  the  signature  solutions:  keeping  people  out  of 
poverty, strengthening gender equality, and promoting nature-based solutions. The gender 
equality approach will reduce inequalities by including women in the labour market and 
reducing the wage gap. 
22.  To  consolidate  the  economic  recovery  portfolio  and  face  COVID-19  challenges, 
strengthening partnerships with the Ministries of Economy, Tourism and Public Works, 
the Secretariat of Trade and Investments, and other government bodies such as the National 
Commission for Micro and Small Business will be key. Partnerships will be built with the 
private and academic sectors and international financial institutions to promote innovation 
and  financial  inclusion.  It  will  also  be  key  to  complement  UNDP  strengths  with  other 
United Nations system entities. The International Labour Organization, with its knowledge 
of decent work and the formal economy, builds on UNDP strengths to create an inclusive 
economic growth policy framework; UNDP works with International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD) and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
in  order  to  foster  agricultural  transformation,  food  safety  and  rural  development  into  a 
broader  UNDP  vision  of  sustainable  development;  and  with  UN-Women  for  promoting 
greater labour participation for women and the care economy. 
23.   Institutions and populations are more resilient to disasters and better  adapt to 
and mitigate climate change. UNDP will promote a strategy for better risk management, 
adaptation and mitigation to climate change. If capacities have been built: to implement 
public policies that promote climate change adaptation, mitigation of greenhouse gases and 
comprehensive  risk  management;  planning  and  land  use  management  leading  to 
comprehensive  risk  management;  and  to  develop  sustainable  and  resilient  infrastructure 
projects, with climate protection; Then, the resilience of the population, particularly at-risk 
youth, women in conditions of socioeconomic vulnerability, rural households, and older 
adults,  will  be  increased  to  confront  climate  change  and  natural  disasters.  Addressing 
gender gaps in access to natural resources is also important. This priority is aligned with 
the UNDP Strategic Plan through the signature solution of improving resilience and closing 
the energy gap. 
 
21-17880 
5/14 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
 
24.  As part of the consolidation of the environmental portfolio, updating the Nationally 
Determined  Contributions,  under  the  leadership  of  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and 
Natural Resources and  the Ministry of  Finance, will be key.  Consolidating  partnerships 
with the National Energy Council and the Secretary of Trade and Investment, and building 
partnerships with mayors, the private sector and civil society, will be central. Building on 
its strengths in providing a comprehensive risk management and climate change adaptation 
policy framework, UNDP will work with the United Nations Environment Programme to 
mitigate greenhouse gases and with IFAD and FAO to develop sustainable and inclusive 
production methods.  
25.  The institutions strengthen democratic governance by guaranteeing the rule of 
law as well as inclusive and fair political and civic participation. UNDP will promote 
a strategy for effective governance, strengthening the rule of law, citizen security, social 
cohesion and accountability, if capacities are built to: promote the rule of law, access to 
public information and the fight against corruption; there is increased citizen participation, 
particularly  of  youth  and  women,  in  electoral  processes  and  the  governance  agenda; 
capacities are built to promote access to justice, social  reintegration of  young  people in 
conflict  with  the  law,  and  reintegration  of  migrants;  prevention  of  violence  and 
comprehensive protection of gender-based violence victims; and application of transitional 
justice  and  reparations  for  victims.  Then,  contributions  to  sustainable,  inclusive,  and 
egalitarian peace for the exercise of democracy, human rights and the enjoyment of a more 
just  and  secure  society  will  have  been  made.  This  priority  is  aligned  with  the  UNDP 
Strategic  Plan  through  the  signature  solutions:  strengthening  effective,  inclusive,  and 
accountable governance and gender equality. Women’s empowerment and the construction 
of new masculinities will be key to preventing gender-based violence. 
26.  Under this priority, the following partnerships will be prioritized: the justice sector, 
the  Ministries  of  Justice  and  Security,  Education  and  Health,  Deputy  Ministry  of 
Transportation, the National Civil Police, the Court of Audit and institutions responsible 
for  the gender  agenda,  minors  and  human  rights.  The  partnership  with  key  mayors,  the 
private  sector,  civil  society  organizations,  and  the  Supreme  Electoral  Tribunal  will  be 
central.  Building  on  UNDP  strengths  to  foster  the  processes  of  reintegration  and  social 
cohesion, working with UNICEF and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
for their knowledge of the rights of children, youth and migrants; the United Nations Office 
on Drugs and Crime for the fight against corruption and access to justice; and the Office 
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for promoting the human rights of 
people displaced by violence, will be key to delivering robust results. 
27.  Some of the main assumptions for the achievement of the above outcomes are: (a) the 
Government concludes agreements with the international financial institutions to finance 
the growing social spending; (b) inter-institutional coordination is effective in addressing 
the complexity of the challenges of reducing poverty and improving resilience to climate 
change;  (c)  new  regulations  and  incentives  to  promote  sustainable  management  of  the 
natural resources are in place; and (d) the Government, the private sector and civil society 
adopt an integrated vision for the 2030 Agenda. 
28.  UNDP  will  continue  to  promote  South-South  cooperation  for  achievement  of  the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals  through  knowledge-sharing  and  innovation.  In  this 
context,  and  in  partnership  with  the  Korea  International  Cooperation  Agency,  the 
Accelerator  Lab  will  connect  with  its  global  network,  and  promote  South-South 
cooperation  on  digital  and  financial  inclusion  in  micro  and  small  tourism  enterprises. 
Another  area  is  the  sharing  of  historical  memory  with  other  Latin  American  countries. 
UNDP is brokering a partnership with Costa Rica on social reintegration and reconstruction 
of the social fabric.  
 
21-17880 
6/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
29.  The  inter-agency  work  of  the  United  Nations  will  continue  to  be  a  priority  in  this 
programme.  It  will  strengthen  the  new  approach  to  the  humanitarian  and  development 
nexus and inter-agency coordination in joint programmes – for example, those financed by 
the  Peacebuilding  Fund  and  the  European  Union.  UNDP  technical  leadership,  using  an 
innovative and catalytic approach, will be critical in implementing these programmes. 
III.  Programme and risk management 
30.  This  country  programme  document  presents  the  UNDP  contribution  to  national 
outcomes.  It  serves  as  the  main  instrument  of  accountability  to  the  Executive  Board 
regarding the harmonization of results and the resources allocated to the programme. The 
responsibilities  of  national,  regional  and  headquarters  administrators  with  respect  to 
country  programmes  are  described  in  the  Programme  and  Operations  Policies  and 
Procedures and the internal control framework. 
31.  The programme will be nationally executed under the coordination of the Ministry of 
Foreign  Affairs  and  the  Agency  for  International  Cooperation.  If  necessary,  national 
execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable 
response to force majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a 
coordinated  manner  with  other  United  Nations  entities  to  manage  financial  risks.  Cost 
definitions  and  classifications  for  programme  and  development  effectiveness  will  be 
charged to the concerned projects. 
32.  The programme document is based on the Cooperation Framework and the analysis of 
the  priorities  and  needs  of  the  country  carried  out  by  the  United  Nations  system. 
Additionally,  it  draws  on  consultations  with  multiple  stakeholders  and  development 
partners throughout the programming process. This participatory and consultative process 
reflects  national  ownership  of  the  programme.  The  National  Steering  Committee  will 
ensure that the UNDP contribution is implemented following the Cooperation Framework 
and national development priorities, supporting mutual accountability. 
33.  The main risks identified are: (a) a rise in the COVID-19 pandemic due to new variants 
of  the  virus,  leading  to  greater  social  vulnerability  of  households;  (b)  the  slowing  of 
economic  recovery,  associated  with  fiscal  and  financial  instability  (c)  socio-natural 
disasters with high human impact  due to the effects of climate change; and (d) a rise in 
crime  and  violence  affecting  the  implementation  of  a  prevention  policy,  particularly  in 
violence  against  women.  UNDP  will  strengthen  partnerships  with  other  United  Nations 
entities and international donors to address these risks comprehensively and will contribute 
to enhancing the capacities of public institutions for risk mitigation. 
34.  The capacity of the country office to adapt promptly to new realities and government 
demands and to provide procurement transparency mechanisms are key to implementing 
the programme and for fundraising.  
35.  UNDP  will  screen  and  review  its  activities  to  identify  social  and  environmental 
opportunities  and  risks  so  as  to  ensure  they  are  avoided,  minimized,  mitigated  and 
managed.  The  screening  further  develops  the  overarching  principle  of  “leaving  no  one 
behind”  by  incorporating  the  guiding  principles  of  human  rights,  gender  equality  and 
women’s empowerment, accountability, sustainability and resilience.  
36.  The combination of impact and likelihood of each identified  risk will determine  its 
overall  significance  and  the  management  measures  to  be  developed  and  implemented 
whenever avoidance is not possible. UNDP will ensure that grievance mechanisms are in 
place so that potentially affected individuals or communities can raise concerns and receive 
a clear and constructive response. 
 
21-17880 
7/14 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
 
37.  The  country  office  will  continue  to  use  the  available  programming  instruments  to 
manage  the  activities  and  inputs  to  obtain  the  outcomes  proposed  in  the  programme, 
depending  on  the  nature  of  UNDP  participation.  The  accumulated  experience  using 
innovative  programming  instruments  has  shown  their  usefulness  to  address  innovation, 
digital  transformation,  and  emergency  situations.  UNDP  will  seek  to  increase  its 
participation in joint programmes with other United Nations entities. 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
38.  The  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  programme  seeks  to:  support  accountability, 
guarantee effective execution to achieve the proposed outcomes, adapt the theory of change 
in  response  to  the  level  of  its  effectiveness  or  environmental  changes,  and  support 
accountability.  Monitoring  and  evaluation  will  follow  UNDP  standards  and  policies.  A 
midterm  evaluation  of  the  programme  will  be  commissioned  to  assesses  the  level  of 
effectiveness  in  delivering  the  intended  results  and,  if  needed,  adjust  direction.  The 
National Steering Committee is the decision-making mechanism regarding the design and 
implementation of the programme, and will also supervise the Cooperation Framework. At 
the  project  level,  a  board  of  multi-stakeholders  will  be  constituted  to  review  project 
performance and address implementation issues. 
39.  For programme monitoring, UNDP will collect the necessary evidence disaggregated 
by sex and other factors according to target groups, guaranteeing its quality, credibility, 
timeliness and relevance. To the extent possible, the evidence will use official nationally 
owned  sources.  To  cover  gaps  identified  about  the  measurement  of  Sustainable 
Development Goals progress and other disaggregated development data, UNDP will use 
international  sources  and  retrieve  data  from  projects.  Whenever  required,  randomized 
controlled trials  will be used  to generate  a valid estimate  of impact and  to  limit bias in 
results.  Projects  will  budget  monitoring  and  evaluation  activities  accordingly  to  their 
characteristics, and adequate staffing will be ensured.  To facilitate monitoring and ensure 
that  timely  action  is  taken,  interactive  digital  means  will  be  maximized  based  on  key 
performance indicators.  
40.  UNDP  will  continue  to  strengthen  the  data  systems  developed  in  the  previous 
programming  cycle,  to  address  any  information  gaps  about  Sustainable  Development 
Goals  and  disaggregated  development  data  for  informed  decision-making.  UNDP,  as  a 
member  of 
the  National  Steering  Committee,  will  work  in  coordination  with 
United Nations entities to harmonize its work to further strengthen national monitoring and 
evaluation systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21-17880 
8/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for El Salvador (2022-2026) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Reduce poverty, extreme income poverty and multidimensional poverty  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1 By 2026, individuals, especially those who are in the most vulnerable and exclusion situations, 
have equitable access to education, healthcare, basic services and integrated social protection systems, thus contributing to the reduction of multidimensional poverty and inequality gaps in all 
their manifestations 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Outcome 2. Leave no one behind 
Estimated cost by 
outcome 
($ thousands) 
Indicative country programme 
outputs (including indicators, 
baselines, targets) 
Major partners / partnerships 
frameworks 
Cooperation Framework outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, target(s)1 
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities 
Regular: 633 
Ministry of Health 
Ministry of Education 
Salvadoran Institute of Teachers’ 
Welfare  
Salvadoran Social Security Institute  
Public Water Administration  
UNICEF 
Joint United Nations Programme on 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
and Acquired Immunodeficiency 
Syndrome 
Civil society, private sector, 
international financial institutions   
Source 1.1: Ministry of the Economy. 
General Directorate of Statistics and 
Censuses. Multi-purpose Household 
Survey; annual 
 Indicator 1.1 Multidimensional poverty 
rate – total (SP1) 
(a) Male-headed households 
(b) Female-headed households 
(c) Rural 
(d) Urban 
Baseline (2019 – published in 2020): 
1.1  28.1% 
Output 1.1: Targeted national 
institutions of the health sector have 
better capacities to provide adequate 
access to health services 
Other: 78,612  
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.1. Number of national 
institutions with strengthened public 
administration and core government 
function for improved health service 
delivery (SP.2.3.1) 
Baseline (2020): 2  
Target (2026): 4 
Source: Ministry of Health, National 
Institute of Teacher Welfare (ISBM), 
Social Security Institute (ISSS)   
National Bureau of Medicine (DNM), 
annual 
 
 
 
(a) 29.89% 
(b)24.95% 
(c)46.0% 
(d)17.5% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2  Target (2026): To be determined 
 
(TBD) 
(a) TBD 
(b) TBD 
(c)TBD 
(d)TBD 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.2 Number of national 
institutions that transitioned towards 
digital health services 
Baseline (2020):1  
Target (2026): 4 
Source: Official reports of Ministry of 
Health, ISBM, ISSS, DNM; annual 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.2 Proportion of government 
spending on social services  
Source 1.2 Ministry of Finance: General 
State Budget; annual 
 
Baseline:41% (262.1/636.8) (2020) 
Target (2026): TBD  
 
Output 1.2  
Improved capacities for selected 
national institutions on social protection 
and social inclusion for advancing to 
universality, with an emphasis on 
vulnerable populations  
 
 
 
 
1 The targets for the outcome indicators are in the process of being determined under the Cooperation Framework in collaboration with the Government. 
 
21-17880 
9/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
 
Indicator 1.2.1  
Number of social protection and 
inclusion programmes in place with 
renewed and strengthened approaches to 
coverage scope, targeting beneficiaries 
or their financing (SP 1.2.2) 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 2 
Source: Presidency, annual 
 
Indicator 1.2.2 Number of knowledge 
products on social protection that 
support advocacy on coverage scope, 
improved targeting of beneficiaries or 
new approaches for their financing 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 3 
Source: UNDP, annual 
 
Output 1.3 Members of the 
educational community have physical 
and digital infrastructure to 
guarantee access to education 
 
Indicator 1.3.1 Number of persons that 
integrate the national educational system 
with technological tools 
Baseline (2020):  
1.3.1 (a) Teachers 5,941  
1.3.1 (b) Students 0  
Target (2026): 
1.3.1 (a) 46,117  
1.3.2 (b) 500,000  
Source: Ministry of Education, Science 
and Technology, annual 
  
Output 1.4 Public and private bodies 
and selected communities have better 
capacities to access quality water and 
contribute to an integrated 
management of water resources 
 
Indicator 1.4.1 Number of innovative 
solutions in integrated water 
management implemented based on  
the methodology of the Acceleration 
Lab 
Baseline (2021): 0 
Target (2026); 10 
Source: UNDP; annual 
21-17880 
10/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:  
The thrust on innovation and business competitiveness; promote agriculture that is sustainable, resilient and adaptable to climate change  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: By 2026, individuals, particularly those in vulnerable situations, have greater opportunities to 
access decent, productive work and sustainable livelihoods, in an environment of inclusive, innovative and sustainable economic transformation. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1. Structural transformation   
Regular: 370 
Ministry of Agriculture  
IFAD 
Executive and Autonomous Port 
Commission. 
Ministry of Public Works and 
Transportation  
Ministry of Tourism 
Comisión Nacional de la Micro y 
Pequeña Empresa  
Indicator 2.1 Percentage of employed 
population that is registered with or 
covered by a social security system, 
disaggregated by geographical area and 
sex  
2.1.1 Male 
2.1.2 Female 
2.1.3 Rural 
2.1.4 Urban 
Source 2.1 Ministry of the Economy. 
General Directorate of Statistics and 
Censuses.  Multi-purpose Household 
Survey; annual 
Output 2.1: Rural families in the 
eastern part of the country reduce 
their economic vulnerability 
Other: 19,325 
  
  
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of new jobs 
generated, disaggregated by sex   
Baseline (2021):  0 
Target (2026):  
2.1.1:300 
(a) Male:165 
(b) Female: 135 
Source: Ministry of Agriculture; annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline (2019-published in 2020) 
2.1: 34.7% 
2.1.1 34.5% 
2.1.2: 35.0% 
2.1.3: 18.9% 
2.1.4 43.1% 
 
 
  
 
Output 2.2 Entrepreneurial women 
enjoy digital and financial inclusion. 
 
 
  
 
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of women 
entrepreneurs with access to digital 
technologies for finances, e-commerce, 
digital marketing (SP.1.3.2) 
Baseline (2021): 0 
Target (2026): 2,500 
Source: UNDP; annual 
 
 
Target 2026: 2.1: TBD 
2.1.1 TBD 
2.1.2: TBD 
2.1.3: TBD 
2.1.4 TBD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2 Salary gap between men 
and women (%) - Total; 2.2.1 
agricultural workers  
 
Source 2.2 Ministry of the Economy. 
General Directorate of Statistics and 
Censuses.  Multi-purpose Household 
Survey; annual 
Output 2.3 Targeted national 
institutions have access to quality 
information to design evidence-based 
policies for sustainable economic 
transformation and the inclusion of 
populations in vulnerable conditions  
 
Baseline (2019-published in 2020) 
2.2. 18.02% 
2.2.1 25.9% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Target 2026: 2.2. TBD 
2.2.1 TBD 
Indicator 2.3.1 Number of knowledge 
products on produced and disseminated 
to inform public policies 
Baseline (2020): 6 
Target (2026): 11  
Source: UNDP; annual 
 
 
 
Source 2.3: World Intellectual Property 
Organization. Global Innovation Index; 
annual 
Indicator 2.3. Ranking in the Global 
Innovation Index 
 
Baseline: 92/131 (2020) 
Target 2026: TBD  
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Integrated disaster risk management, environmental management, adaptation to climate change and mitigation of greenhouse gases  
 
21-17880 
11/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3. By 2026, institutions and the population in El Salvador are more prepared and resilient to 
disasters, manage risks effectively, adapt better, and mitigate the effects of climate change. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3. Building Resilience.  
Regular:106 
MARN 
Indicator 3.1 Existence of nationally 
determined contribution (NDC) 
communication by El Salvador to the 
Convention on Climate Change 
 (Yes/No) 
Source 3.1. United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. NDC 
Submission Portal.  
Once in the programming cycle. 
Output 3.1. Targeted national 
institutions have better the capacities 
to prepare sectoral plans for the 
expansion and implementation of the 
nationally determined contributions 
 
Municipalities 
 Metropolitan area of San Salvador 
Other: 10,111 
 
 
Municipalities of San Francisco 
Menéndez and Tacuba 
 
 
 
Baseline (2020): Yes – first NDC 2017 
Target 2026: TBD  
Indicator 3.1.1. Number of sectoral 
plans prepared for the implementation of 
the NDCs 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 4 
Source: Ministry of Environment and 
Natural Resources (MARN); Annual 
 
 
 
National Energy Council (CNE) 
 
 
Indicator 3.2 Percentage of renewable 
energy generated 
Source 3.2. National Energy Council. 
Accumulative Generation Matrix by year 
(GWh); annual 
 
Global Environment Facility 
 
 
Adaptation Fund 
Baseline 3.2: 84% (2021) 
Target 2026: TBD 
 
 
  
 
Output 3.2. Selected institutions have 
updated information for decision-
making on climate change. 
 
 
Indicator 3.3 Proportion of women on 
boards in climate mechanisms and funds 
(SP6) 
Source 3.3  
(a) Gender climate Tracker. Women’s 
participation in party delegations; annual 
(b) UNDP; annual 
  
Indicator 3.2.1. Number of climate 
knowledge products  
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 8 
Source: MARN; annual 
 
(a) International 
(b) National 
 
 
Baseline: 
3.3. (a) 42% (COP25) 
3.3. (b) 0% (2021) 
Target 2026: 
3.3. (a) TBD 
3.3 (b) TBD 
  
Output 3.3. Targeted municipalities 
have incorporated energy efficiency 
actions  
  
Indicator 3.3.1. Number of 
municipalities with energy efficiency 
measures under implementation with 
UNDP accompaniment.  
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 4 
Source: CNE; annual  
 
Output 3.4. Targeted rural 
communities incorporate climate 
change adaptation practices  
 
Indicator 3.4.1. Number of climate-
resilient products/practices developed by 
rural communities 
Baseline (2021): 0 
Target (2026): 3 
21-17880 
12/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
Source: Ministerio de Agricultura y 
Ganadería 
Frequency: Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Territorial Control Plan: Citizen security, Digital agenda 2020-2030: Digital governance, Digital identity and modernization of the State, Fight against 
corruption  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4: By 2026, Salvadoran institutions strengthen democratic governance, guarantee the rule of law 
and inclusive political and civic participation, and prevent and combat corruption, promoting transparency and accountability. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Leaving no one behind.  
Indicator 4.1. Rule of Law Index 
Baseline 2020:  Score: 0.49 (2020)  
Target 2026: Score: TBD  
Source 4.1: World Justice 
Project; annual. 
Output 4.1 Prioritized institutions have better 
capacity for effective and transparent public 
management 
Regular:750 
Other: 8,556 
Supreme Court of Justice 
Governmental Ethics Court 
Institute on Access to Public 
Information 
Office of the Attorney General 
Court of Auditors 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
National Civil Police 
Civil society organizations 
Ministry of Justice and 
  Public Security  
General Directorate of Statistics and 
  Censuses 
Ministry of Health 
Ministry of Education  
Ministry of Agriculture  
Municipal governments 
National Commission of Micro and 
  Small Enterprises  
Ministry of Tourism  
National Youth Institute  
Supreme Electoral Tribunal 
National Registry of  
  Natural Persons 
Legislative Assembly 
Faith-based organizations 
Private sector 
Salvadoran Institute for the Integral 
  Development of Childhood and 
  Adolescence 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 4.1.1. Degree of improvement in the 
capacities of the civil society organizations to advocate 
transparency and anti-corruption 
Baseline: low 
Target 2026: large  
Source: UNDP, annual  
 
 
Indicator 4.2 Corruption Perception 
Index 
Baseline (2020): 36 
Target 2026: TBD 
Source 4.2: Transparency 
International. Frequency: annual  
 
 
 
 
Indicator 4.3 Democracy Index 
Baseline (2020): 5.9 
Target 2026: TBD 
Source 4.3: The Economist. 
Intelligence Unit; annual 
 
Indicator 4.1.2: Number of open data web portals on 
citizen security and justice with gender-sensitivity 
Baseline (2021): 2 
Target (2026): 4  
Source: Ministry of Justice data web portal  
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 4.4 Homicide rate per 
100,000 inhabitants, disaggregated 
by sex.  
4.4.1 Women 
4.4.3 Femicides 
Source 4.4: Infosegura. 
Analysis of citizen security 
based on approved figures from 
the National Police, Attorney 
General’s Office and Institute of 
Legal Medicine; annual.  
 
Output 4.2 Supreme Electoral Tribunal has 
management systems modernized for more inclusive, 
efficient and transparent electoral processes 
 
 
Baseline: (2020) 
4.4: 19.5 
4.4.1: 3.6 
4.4.2: 2 
Target 2026: 4.4: TBD 
4.4.1: TBD 
4.4.2: TBD 
Indicator 4.2.1: Percentage of citizen participation in 
the presidential and legislative elections, disaggregated 
by sex (SP.2.4.3) 
Baseline  
4.2.1.1 Presidential:51.87% (2019) 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) men 45.89%; (b) women 54.11% 
 
4.2.1.2 Legislative 45.68% (2018) 
 
(a) men 44.91%; (b) women 55.09% 
 
 
Indicator 4.5 Victimization rate 
Source 4.5: Ministry of the 
Economy. Dirección General de 
Estadística y Censos. Survey on 
victimization and perception of 
insecurity in El Salvador; 
annual. 
 
Target 2026:  
4.2.1.1 Presidential:55% 
 
 
Baseline (2019): 9.8 
Target 2026: TBD 
Directorate for the Reconstruction of 
the Social Fabric 
UNICEF 
IOM 
Central American Integration 
  System  
Vice-Presidency of the Republic 
(a) 46.6 men; (b) 53.4 women  
4.2.1.2 Legislative 50.00%  
(a) 46.6 men; (b) 53.4 women  
 
Source: Supreme Electoral Tribunal  
Frequency: Legislative elections, every 3 years; 
presidential elections, every 5 years 
 
 
21-17880 
13/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/SLV/4 
 
 
Solicitor for the Defence of Human 
  Rights. 
National Search Commission for 
  Missing Persons 
National Institute on Women 
Salvadoran Institute for the 
  Advancement of Women 
Office of the Public Prosecutor  
Deputy Ministry of Transportation 
 
Output 4.3: State and civil society institutions have 
better capacities to promote human rights, social 
cohesion, protection and reparation for victims.  
 
Indicator 4.3.1 New normative or institutional 
frameworks that support social reintegration, improve 
the reception, protection and reintegration mechanisms 
of people from mixed movements (internally displaced 
persons, returned migrants, refugees and asylum 
seekers) (SP.3.2.1) 
Baseline 1 (2020): 3  
Target 2026: 7  
Source: Legislative Assembly, annual 
 
 
Output 4.4 Victims of violence have institutional care 
and protection mechanisms that facilitate and 
guarantee access to essential services. 
 
Indicator 4.4.1: Number of gender-sensitive citizen 
security policy initiatives in place aimed at improving 
care and protection for victims of violence against 
women 
Baseline (2020): 0  
Target (2024): 3 
Source: Solicitor for the Defence of Human Rights; 
Supreme Court of Justice; annual 
 
Indicator 4.4.2: Percentage of people who feel safe on 
public transport in selected municipalities of the San 
Salvador metropolitan area, disaggregated by sex 
 
Baseline (2020) 
4.4.1.1 San Salvador 
(a) 65% women 
(b) 61% men 
4.4.1.2 Santa Tecla 
(a) 54% women 
(b) 56% men 
Target 2026:  
4.4.1.1 San Salvador 
(a) 75% women 
(b) 71% men 
 
4.4.1.2 Santa Tecla 
(a) 64% women 
(b) 66% men  
Source: Salvadoran Foundation for Economic and Social 
Development; annual 
 
21-17880 
14/14 
 
