www.ssoar.info
Azerbaijan's Renewable Energy Policy:
Opportunities, Drivers and Challenges
Bayramov, Agha
Veröffentlichungsversion / Published Version
Zeitschriftenartikel / journal article
Empfohlene Zitierung / Suggested Citation:
Bayramov, A. (2021). Azerbaijan's Renewable Energy Policy: Opportunities, Drivers and Challenges. Caucasus
Analytical Digest, 120, 2-7. https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-b-000476772
Nutzungsbedingungen:
Dieser  Text  wird  unter  einer  CC  BY-NC-ND  Lizenz
(Namensnennung-Nicht-kommerziell-Keine  Bearbeitung)  zur
Verfügung gestellt. Nähere Auskünfte zu den CC-Lizenzen finden
Sie hier:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/deed.de
Terms of use:
This document is made available under a CC BY-NC-ND Licence
(Attribution-Non Comercial-NoDerivatives). For more Information
see:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
Diese Version ist zitierbar unter / This version is citable under:
https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-87107-7
CAUCASUS ANALYTICAL DIGEST No. 120, March 2021
2
Renewable Energy in the South Caucasus
Introduction by the Special Editors Mary Keogh and Agha Bayramov (both University of Groningen)
The ratification of the Paris Agreement (2016) commits the states of the South Caucasus to reducing carbon emissions 
as part of the global effort to mitigate the worst effects of climate change. Replacing high-emitting hydrocarbons with 
renewable energy will be essential to realising that goal. For Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia, fulfilling the Paris 
agenda requires a recalibration of energy policy and dramatic changes in the energy mix.
This special issue provides an overview of the latest developments and policies on renewable energy in the South 
Caucasus. While all three states have significant potential for renewable energy development, multiple political, finan-
cial, technical, and social barriers obstruct the rapid and effective implementation of renewable energy policy in the 
region. In addition, the transition towards renewable energy is progressing at different speeds in each of the three 
states. They occupy different positions in the energy supply chain and, consequently, have different energy agendas 
and policies: Azerbaijan, as a hydrocarbon producer and exporter, faces very different constraints and opportunities 
in implementing a renewable energy strategy in comparison to Georgia, a consumer and transit state, and Armenia, 
a consumer state. This special issue examines these different opportunities and developments in the context of the 
evolving regional energy situation.
Dr Mary Keogh and Dr Agha Bayramov are both lecturers in the Department of International Relations at the University 
of Groningen, Netherlands.
Azerbaijan’s Renewable Energy Policy: Opportunities, Drivers and 
Challenges
Agha Bayramov (University of Groningen)
DOI: 10.3929/ethz-b-000476772
Abstract
This article looks at Azerbaijan’s renewable energy developments. Existing research and media coverage of 
international energy politics in the South Caucasus is overwhelmingly dominated by a focus on oil and gas 
pipelines, especially in Azerbaijan, due to its central place in traditional hydrocarbon fuels markets. This 
article aims to expand the scope of the literature on energy to bring more attention to Azerbaijan’s renew-
able energy sector, investigating the potential of and challenges to renewable energy development in the 
country. The key questions are: why would a small oil and natural gas-rich country seek to develop renew-
able energy? Who is promoting renewable energy in Azerbaijan and with what effects? And finally, how do 
low oil prices and Covid-19 affect the progress of renewable energy in Azerbaijan?
Introduction
Existing  research  and  media  coverage  of  international 
energy  politics  in  Azerbaijan  is  overwhelmingly  domi-
nated by a focus on oil and gas extraction due to its crucial 
place in traditional hydrocarbon markets. While the strate-
gic aspects of oil and natural gas are well-researched, there 
still exists a great deal of uncertainty about how renewable 
energy will reshape Azerbaijan’s energy security. This article 
aims to expand the scope of the literature on energy geo-
politics in the South Caucasus to bring more attention to 
Azerbaijan’s renewable energy sector, which is still nascent.
Around the world, the use of renewable energy is grow-
ing rapidly because of climate change concerns, diversifica-
tion strategies and strong economic investment. Although 
oil continues to hold the largest share of the energy mix 
(33.1%), the share of both natural gas and renewables 
3
rose to record highs of 24.2% and 5.0% in 2019, respec-
tively (BP, 2020). Renewables has now overtaken nuclear, 
which makes up only 4.3% of the energy mix. Recently, 
countries with significant oil and natural gas resources 
such as Nigeria and Qatar also have focused on develop-
ing their renewable energy potentials. The tendency is not 
only caused by concern for the environment, but also by 
economic demands. This trend is observed in almost all 
oil-rich countries, including Azerbaijan. For example, the 
Azerbaijani government has initiated various structural 
changes in order to facilitate investment in the renewable 
energy market. These initiatives include several draft pieces 
of energy efficiency legislation such as “Use of renewable 
energy sources in power generation” and “Efficient use 
of energy resources and energy efficiency” (IEA, 2020).
iance is the seasonal and year-on-year changes in hydro-
power production that have ranged from 2.4 % in 2010 
to only 0.8 % in 2019 (The State Statistical Commit-
tee, 2019). Currently, 91.9% of electricity in Azerbaijan 
is produced from traditional sources of energy (mostly 
from natural gas), while 8.1% of electricity is produced 
from renewable sources (Savchenko, 2020a). In other 
words, renewable energy sources do not occupy the cen-
tral position either in production or in consumption.
However, according to a 2019 report by the Interna-
tional Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Azerbaijan 
has outstanding renewable energy resources. More spe-
cifically, the potential of Azerbaijan’s renewable energy 
generating  capacity  is  26,000  megawatts  (MW).  To 
benefit from this potential, the government has estab-
lished a goal of increasing the share of renewable energy 
sources in electricity production to 30% by 2030 (Babay-
eva, 2020). On 29 May 2019, President Ilham Aliyev 
signed the order “On Accelerating Reforms in Azerbai-
jan’s Energy Sector”, which established the foundation 
for  expanding  the  usage  of  renewable  energy  sources, 
introduced a new legal framework, and moved to create 
a friendlier investment climate (IRENA, 2019).
Traditional oil producers such as Saudi Arabia, Iran 
and Russia, which have historically enjoyed geopoliti-
cal influence because they supply fossil fuels, are likely 
to see a decline in their global reach and impact unless 
they can reinvent their economies for a new energy era. 
Azerbaijan may face challenges in adapting to a world 
increasingly powered by renewables. Azerbaijan’s econ-
omy is smaller and less diversified than those of some of 
the Middle Eastern oil producers. Therefore, oil and gas 
rents are a vital component of the state budget, account-
ing for around 90% of fiscal revenues; Azerbaijan simply 
does not have competitive industries beyond fossil fuels. 
Declining export revenues will adversely affect Azerbai-
jan’s economic growth prospects and the national budget.
The principal purpose of this research is to explore 
sustainable energy development in Azerbaijan through 
a transition  to  renewable  energy.  It  intends  to  ascer-
tain: why a small oil-rich country would seek to develop 
renewable  energy;  whether  recent  challenges  on  the 
world oil market in terms of consistently low oil prices 
can motivate Azerbaijan to increase the use of its renew-
able energy resources; and who is promoting renewable 
energy in Azerbaijan, and with what effects.
Among  renewables,  hydropower  has  traditionally 
maintained a promising position in Azerbaijan’s energy 
production. It had the highest installed capacity of any 
renewable  energy  source  (1134MW)  in  2019,  provid-
ing about 6–10% of total electricity generation demand 
(IRENA, 2019). The resources are located next to the 
rivers,  such  as  the  Kura  and  its  tributaries,  the  Araz, 
streams terminating at the Caspian Sea, and irrigation 
canals. Additionally, Azerbaijan has a well-developed 
small hydropower generation sector, comprised namely 
of the Sheki, Mughan, Zeykhur, Gusar, Nyugedi, Chi-
narly, Balakan, Guba and Zurnabad power plants. To 
attract investors, the Azerbaijani government is consider-
ing the privatisation of these small power plants, which 
are of lesser importance for nationwide power supply. 
According to the Ministry of Energy, the six small hydro-
electric power stations previously operated by the power 
generating company Azerenerji are most likely to be sold 
to private investors (AHK Azerbaijan, 2019).
Renewable Energy Developments
Azerbaijan has been using oil as a principal driver of its 
economy since 1991. In this regard, the 2015 crash in oil 
prices negatively affected its economic and political sta-
bility; this was the first time in two decades that Azerbai-
jan’s economy showed significant stagnation, causing two 
currency devaluations. Such a situation made Azerbai-
jan reassess its priorities and seek a diverse economic and 
energy strategy for its sustainable development. In this 
regard, renewable energy resources appear to be the one 
of the most efficient and effective solutions (see below).
Azerbaijan has a low share of renewable energy in 
its Total Final Energy Consumption (TFEC), varying 
between 3.1% in 2010 and 1.6% in 2019 (The State Stat-
istical Committee, 2019). One explanation for this var-
After hydropower, wind energy has the second-high-
est installed capacity in the renewables sector (66MW). 
However, this is only a small fraction of total potential 
wind capacity, which is estimated at 3000MW (IRENA, 
2019,  17). The  Azerbaijani  government  plans  to  add 
420MW in renewable energy capacity in 2020, includ-
ing 350MW of wind. To develop this potential, Azer-
baijan has completed several small-scale projects. For 
example, it inaugurated the Yeni Yashma Wind Park, 
with a capacity of 50MW, in October 2018. According 
to IRENA (2019, 18), Yeni Yashma is the largest oper-
ating wind park in the South Caucasus. In addition, on 
4
9 January 2020, the Ministry of Energy signed agree-
ments  with  two  foreign  companies,  Saudi  Arabia’s 
ACWA Power and the United Arab Emirates’ Masdar, 
on the implementation of pilot projects in the field of 
renewable energy.
2020). In this regard, renewables offer a way to keep that 
from happening, and when fewer fossil fuels are used 
domestically, more oil and natural gas can be exported.
Secondly, the fall in oil prices since 2014 has exposed 
Azerbaijan’s significant economic vulnerability. In order 
to address its financial problems, in early 2016 Azerbai-
jan sought emergency loans from the International Mon-
etary  Fund  and  the  World  Bank. The  country’s  lead-
ership highlighted the importance of diversifying the 
economy and decreasing its dependence on the oil and 
gas sectors in its “Strategic Road Map on National Eco-
nomic Perspectives” (approved by Presidential Decree 
on  6  December  2016).  In  this  context,  the  increased 
share of renewable energy in the energy mix can offer 
multiple benefits, including job creation (direct and indi-
rect), economic diversification and associated increases 
in GDP (Vidadili et al., 2017).
ACWA  Power  will  build  40  wind  turbines  with 
a  total  capacity  of  240MW  in  Absheron  and  Khizi 
regions (Lmahamad, 2020). Despite its positive impacts, 
Azerbaijan should also consider wind energy’s negative 
environmental,  spatial  and  social  effects.  Numerous 
studies (Bilalova 2020; Dugstad et al. 2020) indicate 
that wind farms might be a problem for migratory birds 
if their locations are not carefully planned. Furthermore, 
several scholars highlight that due to issues of noise and 
landscape deterioration, wind energy has faced problems 
with  social  acceptance,  namely  “not  in  my  backyard” 
(NIMBY) protests (Dugstad et al., 2020).
Furthermore, renewables offer the most prominent 
low-carbon  solution  to  meeting  Azerbaijan’s  climate 
targets. Azerbaijan has signed and ratified the United 
Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change 
(UNFCCC) and adopted the Kyoto Protocol as a non-
annex country on the international greenhouse gas emis-
sion standard. Since the electric power industry is one 
of the most significant emitters of carbon, the success 
of renewable power plants is key, as well as increasing 
the efficiency of existing fossil fuel facilities.
The  potential  for  renewable  energy  production  in 
Azerbaijan through solar power is promising. As of 2017, 
photovoltaic installations with a capacity of 34.6MW 
were installed across the country, including at businesses 
and on the roofs of various public buildings (IRENA, 
2019).  Currently,  there  are  several  solar  power  plants 
in Azerbaijan operating in the cities of Gobustan and 
Samukh, the Baku districts of Pirallahi, Sahil and Surak-
han,  and  in  Nakhchivan.  Similar  to  other  renewable 
energy  sources,  Azerbaijan’s  solar  power  potential  is 
estimated  at  2040MW  (IRENA,  2019,  19),  which  is 
also not fully developed. The Azerbaijani government’s 
2020 renewable energy target (420MW) also includes 
50MW  of  new  solar  power. The  Ministry  of  Energy 
also signed an agreement with the UAE’s Masdar in the 
field of solar energy, the company taking on construc-
tion of a 200MW solar power facility in Garadahg and 
Absheron regions.
Finally, replacing fossil fuels-based electricity genera-
tion with renewables could force Azerbaijan to modern-
ise its national electrical grids. According to AHK Azer-
baijan (2019), the investment of US$6.1 billion in the 
electric power industry from 2006–2017 was not suffi-
cient to ensure a stable and, above all, efficient electricity 
supply for the country. Azerbaijan has also invested in 
modernising its old power plants, but the system is still 
designed to switch back to heavy oil in emergencies (IEA, 
2020). In this regard, renewable energy can help Azer-
baijan to modernise its electrical infrastructure, apply 
energy-efficient technologies and set up market-orien-
ted management systems.
Another project that has contributed to Azerbaijan’s 
renewable  energy  development  is  the  Baku-Waste-to-
Energy Plant, which became operational in 2012. The 
plant  is  located  in  Baku’s  Balakhani  settlement  and 
features two incineration lines, each with a capacity of 
250,000 tonnes and a power generation capacity of 231.5 
gigawatts-hours (GWh) per year.
Who is Promoting Renewable Energy?
The  realization  of  renewable  energy  projects  requires 
the involvement of private actors and intergovernmen-
tal institutions, as they offer a number of the required 
resources  to  realise  and  evaluate  the  projects. These 
resources include financial investment, global network-
ing, technical knowledge and advanced technology.
Environmental and Economic Benefits
One might ask: why would a small resource-rich country 
want to develop a renewable energy sector? First, Azer-
baijan’s prime incentive for developing wind and solar 
power is to ensure sufficient domestic production whilst 
maintaining gas export levels. In recent years, Azerbai-
jan’s domestic energy consumption has increased. Due to 
the resulting high internal gas consumption, Azerbaijan 
has struggled to meet its obligations on a variety of con-
tracts to export gas westward. To meet those shortfalls, 
it has had to import natural gas from Russia (O’Byrne, 
Considering  BP’s  critical  economic  and  technical 
role in oil and natural gas projects, Azerbaijan is also 
interested in BP’s participation in auctions on providing 
the right to generate electricity in its territory through 
renewable energy sources. Azerbaijan has signed a mem-
orandum of understanding on cooperation with nine 
5
international  energy  companies  including  BP  (UK), 
Masdar (UAE), Avelar Solar (Russia), Tekfen (Turkey), 
Total Eren (France), Equinor (Norway), ACWA Power 
(Saudi  Arabia),  Mitsui  &  Co.  (Japan),  and  Quadran 
International (France) (Savchenko, 2020b).
the state budget is the main financing source for the 
development  of  renewable  energy  in  Azerbaijan. The 
main reasons for this are the current investment climate, 
the state monopoly of the power sector, and the fact that 
renewable energy legislation is not yet investor-friendly.
As  mentioned  above,  renewable  energy  has  many 
benefits for Azerbaijan, such as more diversified energy 
mix, less harmful greenhouse gas emissions, and job cre-
ation. However, it can be seen that the key actors pro-
moting renewable energy in Azerbaijan are mainly West-
ern-based. While implementing their renewable energy 
suggestions, Azerbaijan should ask: do these measures 
actually promote energy security or replicate existing 
technical,  social  and  legal  problems?  When  are  they 
useful and when are they counterproductive in terms of 
Azerbaijan’s energy security? The existing measures are 
mainly designed to address energy importing countries’ 
needs,  and  therefore  they  should  not  simply  be  copy-
pasted by Azerbaijan.
However,  the  State  Oil  Company  of  Azerbaijan 
Republic (SOCAR) has showed little interest in renew-
able energy and has not formulated a clear renewable 
energy vision. For example, BP wants 50 gigawatts (GW) 
of  renewables  in  its  portfolio  by  2030,  up  from  just 
2.5GW  today.  Contrastingly,  it  is  not  clear  whether 
SOCAR is planning to transition from an oil and gas 
company  to  a broader-based  energy  company  in  the 
future.  One  might  argue  that  moving  away  from  its 
traditional base is risky for SOCAR because of the uncer-
tainty in the speed of transition. Nevertheless, a wait-
and-watch strategy by postponing investment decisions 
can  create  a  window  of  opportunity  for  competitors. 
By  analyzing  international  oil  companies’  renewable 
energy investment strategies, Pickl (2019) argues that 
there  is  a strong  linkage  between  the  oil  companies’ 
proven  reserves  and  their  renewable  energy  strategies. 
Oil majors with less proven oil reserves to tap into seem 
to be moving into the renewable space faster, with the 
aim of developing more diverse and less volatile port-
folios sooner. Those companies with large pools of oil 
reserves, remarkably including US majors owning oil 
assets with especially low breakeven points, are rather 
selecting the strategy to embrace the renewable indus-
try at a slower pace (Pickl, 2019).
Conclusion and Challenges
Considering  the  fact  that  the  concept  of  renewable 
energy is relatively young in Azerbaijan, there are sev-
eral challenges to its development in the country, such 
as  low  oil  prices,  limited  private  foreign  investments, 
legal  barriers,  institutional  barriers,  lack  of  political 
will (including on the part of state-owned energy com-
panies  SOCAR  and  Azerenerji),  and  inadequate  pub-
lic awareness.
The  first  issue  is  low  oil  prices. The  decline  in  oil 
prices  hinders  the  development  of  renewable  energy. 
Since Azerbaijan’s economy is based on fossil fuels, low 
oil prices result in tighter finances, economic slowdown 
and limited public budgets restricting the county’s abil-
ity to invest in its renewable energy sector. As expected, 
annual oil production in Azerbaijan has also begun to 
decline as its reserves are running out. The Covid-19 
crisis  has  further  exacerbated  global  oil  demand  and 
financial uncertainties. In light of this, the Azerbaijani 
government has prioritised financial resources for the 
response to the spread of Covid-19.
In addition, several international organisations are 
active in Azerbaijan’s renewable energy sector, namely 
the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the International 
Energy Charter, the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (EBRD), the European Union (EU) 
and the United States Agency for International Develop-
ment (USAID) (Aydin, 2019). The EBRD helps Azerbai-
jan with developing renewable energy auctions to facilitate 
private investment in future renewable energy projects. 
Furthermore, the ADB has allocated financial and techni-
cal support for the development of floating solar panels 
on Boyuk Shor Lake in Baku. The project involves the 
creation of a 300-kilowatt solar panel network on the 
lake (Cekuta, Schulz and Cohen, 2020). The World Bank 
and the Ministry of Energy have signed an agreement to 
increase the efficiency of small hydropower plants. Azer-
baijan has also been cooperating with IRENA since 2009, 
and has been a full member of the organisation since 2014. 
In 2019, IRENA completed the Renewables Readiness 
Assessment (RRA) report for Azerbaijan.
Secondly, Azerbaijan does not have a dedicated, com-
prehensive law governing the various aspects of renew-
able  energy  development. This  creates  challenges  for 
private investors when navigating legal and regulatory 
requirements, resulting in delays in the development of 
new  projects  and  increased  perception  of  risk  among 
investors. In an aim to fill this gap, the draft law on 
“The Use of Renewable Energy Sources in the Produc-
tion of Electricity” has been submitted to the relevant 
government agencies for approval. Furthermore, Azer-
baijan has a significant fossil fuels subsidy system. This 
implies that the subsidies go to the oil and gas sector, 
while in actuality they benefit the population through 
However, development partners have so far contrib-
uted  to  the  renewable  energy  sector  mostly  through 
technical assistance, with limited direct investment in 
renewable energy projects. Unlike oil and gas projects, 
6
artificially low fuel prices. Because of this, household 
prices for energy are very low in the country. However, 
the renewable energy sector does not receive an equal 
amount of government support. This unbalanced sub-
sidy  system  makes  the  renewable  energy  sector  unat-
tractive for potential investors. Several intergovernmen-
tal organisations’ reports (e.g., IRENA, 2019) highlight 
energy subsidy reform, but this reform should be well-
designed because it can have a significant adverse impact 
on the welfare of middle and lower-income consumers.
Thirdly,  while  measures  have  been  recently  imple-
mented to align its banking sector regulations with inter-
national norms, renewable energy projects continue to 
face challenges in terms of access to capital in Azerbai-
jan due to lack of liquidity in the local banking system 
and high interest rates, which can be as high as 30% per 
annum in local currency. In this regard, private domes-
tic investors’ willingness to invest in renewable energy 
has yet to strengthen.
Finally, customers’ preference to receive energy from 
renewable sources, rather than oil and natural gas, was 
and still is almost non-existent in Azerbaijan. The Azer-
baijani public remains poorly informed in terms of the 
potential presented by a transition away from fossil fuels. 
Therefore, awareness-raising among the public also needs 
to be enhanced in order to expand the deployment of 
renewables in Azerbaijan.
About the Author
Dr. Agha Bayramov is a lecturer in the Department of International Relations and International Organization at the 
University of Groningen, Netherlands. His research interests are energy security, climate change, private companies 
and the Caspian Sea region.
References
•  AHK Azerbaijan (2019). Market Analysis Azerbaijan 2019. Baku, German-Azerbaijani Chamber of Commerce. Avail-
able  at:  https://www.aserbaidschan.ahk.de/filehub/deliverFile/5bf9e95b-743b-42fd-9f3c-5cbea4d0ade4/784607/
Market_Analysis_Azerbaijan_2019.pdf. Accessed 18 February 2021.
•  Aydin. U. (2019). Energy Insecurity and Renewable Energy Sources: Prospects and Challenges for Azerbaijan (ADBI 
Working Paper 992). Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute. Available at: https://www.adb.org/publications/
energy-insecurity-renewable-energy-sources-challenges-azerbaijan. Accessed 18 February 2021.
•  Babayeva, F. (2020). ‘Azerbaijan eyes 50% of energy consumption from renewable sources’. Trend News Agency, 
22 June. Available at: https://en.trend.az/business/energy/3258301.html. Accessed 18 February 2021.
•  Bilalova, S. (2020). Wind Energy Potential of Azerbaijan (CCEE Policy Brief No. 34, February). Baku, ADA Uni-
versity. Available at: http://ccee.ada.edu.az/ccee-policy-brief-no-32-wind-energy-potential-of-azerbaijan/. Accessed 
18 February 2021.
•  BP (2020). Statistical review of world energy 2020. Available at: https://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/business-
sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/energy-economics/statistical-review/bp-stats-review-2020-full-report.pdf. Accessed 
18 February 2021.
•  Cekuta, R. F., Schulz, D. and Cohen, J. (2020). The Considerable Potential for Renewable Energy in the Caspian Region. 
Washington, DC, Caspian Policy Center. Available at: https://www.caspianpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/
The-Considerable-Potential-For-Renewable-Energy-In-The-Caspian-Region.pdf. Accessed 18 February 2021.
•  Dugstad, A., Grimsrud, K., Kipperberg, G., Lindhjem, H., and Navrud, S. (2020). ‘Acceptance of wind power 
development and exposure – Not-in-anybody’s-backyard’. Energy Policy 147, 111780. Available at: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.enpol.2020.111780. Accessed 18 February 2021.
IEA  (2020).  Azerbaijan  Energy  Profile:  Sustainable  Development.  Available  at:  https://www.iea.org/reports/
azerbaijan-energy-profile/sustainable-development Accessed 18 February 2021.
IRENA. (2019). Renewables Readiness Assessment: Republic of Azerbaijan. Available at: https://www.irena.org/
publications/2019/Dec/RRA-Republic-of-Azerbaijan. Accessed 18 February 2021.
• 
• 
•  Lmahamad, A. (2020). ‘Azerbaijan builds six wind metering stations’. Azernews, 20 August. Available at: https://
www.azernews.az/nation/168175.html. Accessed 18 February 2021.
•  O’Byrne, D. (2020). ‘Azerbaijan looks to renewables to meet growing power demand’. Eurasianet, 9 March. Avail-
able at: https://eurasianet.org/azerbaijan-looks-to-renewables-to-meet-growing-power-demand. Accessed 18 Feb-
ruary 2021.
•  Pickl, M. J. (2019). ‘The renewable energy strategies of oil majors – From oil to energy?’ Energy Strategy Reviews, 
26, 100370. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2019.100370. Accessed 18 February 2021.
•  Savchenko, A. (2020a). ‘Azerbaijan starts development of test project in renewable sector’. Trend News Agency, 
7 January. Available at https://en.trend.az/business/energy/3173483.html. Accessed 18 February 2021.
7
•  Savchenko, A. (2020b). ‘Energy minister: New stage in renewables’ development to begin in 2020 in Azerbai-
jan (Interview)’. Trend News Agency, 13 January. Available at: https://en.trend.az/business/energy/3176423.html. 
Accessed 18 February 2021.
•  The  State  Statistical  Committee  (2019). Renewable  energy  supply.  Available  at: https://www.stat.gov.az/source/
balance_fuel/en/001_5en.xls. Accessed 18 February 2021.
•  Vidadili, N., Suleymanov E., Bulut, C., and Mahmudlu, C. (2017). ‘Transition to renewable energy and sustain-
able energy development in Azerbaijan’. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 80, 1153–1161.
Renewable Energy Development and Energy Security in Armenia
Mary Keogh (University of Groningen)
DOI: 10.3929/ethz-b-000476772
Abstract
Overly dependent on Russian gas imports and an aging nuclear power plant, lacking domestic hydrocar-
bon resources and excluded from regional oil and gas projects, the development of indigenous renewable 
resources will play a key role in bolstering Armenia’s energy security in general and limiting reliance on Rus-
sia in particular. The country has significant renewable energy potential and has committed to increasing 
the share of renewables in the energy mix to 26% by 2025. The implementation of renewable energy projects 
has been slow, however, with prohibitive installation costs and a continued emphasis on nuclear power sty-
mying government investment in resource development. Yerevan has consequently sought to cooperate with 
both private investors and external political actors to realise its renewables agenda. This paper will explore 
the contribution of renewable energy to Armenian energy security, focusing in particular on the opportun-
ities made available by and consequences of cooperation with external actors on renewable energy initiatives.
Introduction
Landlocked, without hydrocarbon reserves, and isolated 
from regional energy projects due to its hostile relations 
with Azerbaijan, Armenia’s energy situation has been pre-
carious since its independence in 1991. The country has 
remained highly dependent on Russian imports to fulfil 
domestic energy requirements. Both this dependency and 
the mismanagement of the energy sector have contrib-
uted to several energy crises since independence. The first, 
which lasted until 1994, highlighted issues with virtually 
all areas of Armenia energy security including affordabil-
ity, availability, and security of supply. The second, in 2015, 
was more limited but nonetheless highlighted issues with 
the affordability of electricity supply in particular, as well 
as local corruption in the energy sector and popular dissat-
isfaction with overdependence on Russia (Kazarian, 2018).
In seeking to redress the dependence on hydrocar-
bon imports, as well as to address concerns around cli-
mate  change  and  sustainability,  Yerevan  has  increas-
ingly sought to develop indigenous renewable resources. 
Renewable  resource  development  is  also  essential  for 
Armenia to limit its carbon output and pursue a more 
environmentally-friendly energy strategy, meaning that 
diversifying resources will also facilitate the realisation 
of the state’s climate change goals. This paper presents 
an overview of those renewable policies in the context 
of efforts to diversify energy sources and reduce depend-
ence on external hydrocarbon suppliers. The next section 
will briefly outline the contemporary energy situation in 
Armenia, highlighting in particular the security implica-
tions of import dependency. The paper will then briefly 
explore renewable energy policy in general before focus-
ing more specifically on solar power. In particular, the 
paper will highlight the necessity of attracting external 
foreign direct investment (FDI) to develop the renewables 
sector and the implications of that FDI for energy security.
Armenian Energy Security
Armenia is heavily dependent on fossil fuels. In 2018, 
crude oil and natural gas accounted for 10% and 64% 
of  total  primary  energy  supply  (TPES)  respectively. 
Nuclear power from Armenia’s sole nuclear power plant 
