 
May 8th - 3PM 
Final   
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barbados Declaration on Achieving Sustainable Energy for All in  
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) 
 
 
We,  the  Ministers  and  other  Heads  of  Delegation  of  the  Alliance  of  Small  Island  States 
(AOSIS) present at the Ministerial Conference on “Achieving Sustainable Energy for All in 
SIDS – Challenges, Opportunities, Commitments” in Bridgetown, Barbados 7-8 May 2012, 
 
1.  Reaffirm that the Barbados Programme of Action (BPOA) and the Mauritius Strategy of 
Implementation  (MSI)  remain  the  essential  blueprints  for  addressing  the  sustainable 
development  needs  of  Small  Island  Developing  States  (SIDS).  In  this  regard,  SIDS 
remain  fully  committed  to  ensuring  the  full  and  effective  implementation  of  the  BPOA 
and  the  MSI  and  we  urge  our    development  partners  to  provide,  in  a  timely  and 
predictable  manner,  financial  and 
the  successful 
implementation of the BPOA and MSI. (agreed) 
technical  support 
to  ensure 
 
2.  Reaffirm  United  Nations  General  Assembly  resolution  65/151  of  20  December  2010 
which,  inter  alia  declared  2012  the  International  Year  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All. 
(agreed) 
 
3.  Emphasize  that  achieving  sustainable  energy  for  all  in  SIDS  includes  providing  all 
households  with  access  to    modern  and  affordable  renewable  energy    services,  while 
eradicating  poverty,  safeguarding  the  environment  and  providing  new  opportunities  for 
sustainable development and economic growth. (agreed) 
 
Challenges  
 
4.  Remain  deeply  concerned  that  SIDS  continue  to  face  acute  sustainable  development 
challenges  resulting  from  their  unique  and  specific  vulnerabilities  and  characteristics. 
SIDS  remain  highly  vulnerable  notably  due  to  their    small  open  economies,  narrow 
in  economies  of  scale,  remoteness,  high  export 
resource  base,  disadvantages 
concentration,  high  dependency  on  imports  with  high  vulnerability  to  energy  and  food 
price shocks and speculation, and relatively high levels of national debt. These combined 
vulnerabilities have been further exacerbated by the current global energy, food, financial 
and  economic  crises,  the  increased  incidence  of  natural  disasters,  and  environmental 
challenges. (agreed) 
 
5.  Express  our  grave  concern  that  international  action  to  address  climate  change  has  been 
slow  and  grossly  inadequate  given  that  climate  change  and  sea  level  rise  is  already 
threatening  the  viability  and  survival  of  SIDS.    Global  emissions  continue  to  increase, 
putting  the  world  on  a  pathway  that  would  result  in  an  increase  in  global  mean 
temperatures of more than 3.5 degrees Celsius, which is far in excess of the well below 
1 
 
 
1.5 degrees Celsius goal proposed by AOSIS and other vulnerable developing countries.  
(agreed) 
 
6.  Remain deeply concerned that most SIDS are highly dependent on imported oil and other  
fossil  fuels  for  transport  and  electricity  generation    and  this  is  a    major  source  of 
economic vulnerability for SIDS. This leaves SIDS highly exposed to oil-price volatility. 
The  increasing  cost  of  imported  fossil  fuels  represent  a  major  impediment  to  the 
achievement  of  sustainable  development  and  poverty  eradication  in  SIDS  as  scarce 
financial  resources  are  diverted  from  efforts  to  promote  social  and  economic 
development  and ensure environmental protection.  Furthermore, many remote and rural 
SIDS  communities  have  little  or  no  access  to  modern  and  affordable  energy  services. 
(agreed) 
 
7.  Underscore  that  while  SIDS  contribute  the  least  to  global  emissions  and  have  limited 
human, financial and technical resources, our nations continue to take significant actions 
towards the reduction of our own emissions including through regional and inter-regional 
energy  initiatives  as  our  contribution  to  resolving  global  climate  change  and  as  a 
demonstration of our moral leadership in the fight against climate change. (agreed) 
 
Opportunities  
8.  Emphasize that important lessons have been learnt from the implementation of the BPOA 
and  MSI  over  the  last  decades  including  the  value  of  SIDS-SIDS  cooperation  and 
collaboration, and fostering SIDS led partnerships with development partners.  (agreed) 
 
9.  Further emphasize that there are commercially feasible options for providing energy such 
as wind, solar, geothermal, and ocean energy, and that many SIDS are particularly suited 
to these options because of their geographical location. However, these technologies must 
be made, accessible, affordable and adaptable to the needs and particular circumstances 
of  SIDS  communities.  In  this  regard,  we  strongly  urge  the  international  community 
particularly  developed  countries  to  ensure  the  provision  of  financial  resources, 
technology transfer and capacity building to SIDS. (agreed) 
 
10. Further recognize that there are significant opportunities for SIDS to collectively develop 
their  vast  renewable  energy  resources  to  meet  present  and  future  needs  as  well  as  the 
potential to  export energy  to  other economies , and that through collective action SIDS 
can drive the development of SIDS –appropriate technology to ensure realization of the 
benefits of their renewable energy resources. In order to capitalize on these opportunities 
SIDS require financial resources, capacity building and technology transfer. (agreed) 
 
11. Recognize  that  the  current  high  global  cost  of  fossil  fuels  provides  opportunities  for 
investments in the development of the vast and underutilized renewable energy resources 
in SIDS which could form the basis for a new sustainable and resilient economy in SIDS. 
(agreed) 
 
2 
 
 
12. Underline the strong interdependence between energy and such sectors as water and food 
and  agriculture  as  well  as  the  importance  of  increased  access  to  sustainable  energy 
services to saving lives, eradicating poverty, improving health and ensure meeting human 
needs.  (agreed) 
 
 Commitments 
 
13. Remain  committed  to  work  towards  the  continued  development  and  implementation  of 
policies  and  plans  to  ensure  the  transformation  of  the  current  fossil  fuel  based  energy 
sector  to  a  modern,  affordable  and  efficient  renewable  energy  sector,  and  urge  our 
development  partners  to  provide  the  required  support  to  enable  us  to  achieve  this 
objective. (agreed) 
 
14.  Welcome the commitment by some SIDS to undertake the actions contained in  Annex I1 
of  this  Declaration  aimed  at  promoting  transformational  activities  in  the  areas  of,  inter 
alia, affordable and  modern energy access, renewable energy, energy efficiency and low 
carbon development, in the context of sustainable development. (agreed) 
 
15. Call  on  the  international  community  including  regional  and  international  development 
banks,  bilateral  donors,  the  UN  system,  the  International  Renewable  Energy  Agency 
(IRENA) and the private sector to provide adequate and predictable financial support and 
investments  as  well  as  technological  transfer  and  capacity  building  to  ensure  the 
achievement  of  the  voluntary  commitments  contained  in  Annex  I  of  this  Declaration. 
(agreed) 
 
16. Welcome  in  this  regard  the  commitments  made  by  the  Governments  of  Denmark, 
Norway  to  support  the  efforts  of  SIDS  to  promote  renewable  energy,  energy  efficiency 
and  low-carbon  development  including  achieving  the  voluntary  commitments  made  by 
some SIDS contained in Annex I of this declaration.2 (agreed) 
 
Initiatives 
17. Welcome  the  efforts  of  SIDS  to  develop  and  implement  national,  regional  and  inter-
regional  energy  policies,  plans  and  strategies  to  address  the  special  vulnerabilities  of 
SIDS,  while  ensuring  supplies  of  secure,  reliable,  affordable  and  environmentally 
friendly energy and power. (agreed) 
 
18. Welcome  also the SIDS-SIDS  Sustainable Energy  Initiative (SIDS  Dock) as  a valuable 
tool  to  support  these  efforts  and  encourage  SIDS  that  have  not  yet  done  so  to  consider 
becoming members of SIDS Dock. (agreed) 
 
                                                           
1 This Annex will remain open until May 25th 2012 for further inscriptions by SIDS 
2 This list will remain open until May 25th 201 for further indications of support by development partners  
3 
 
 
19. Acknowledge the initial financial support to SIDS Dock provided by the Governments of 
Denmark  and Japan and call on other development partners to provide support to SIDS 
Dock.  (agreed) 
 
20. Acknowledge also the contributions of UNDP and the World Bank in the implementation 
of SIDS Dock activities at the country and regional levels. (agreed) 
 
21. Acknowledge further the role of IRENA in supporting SIDS in their efforts to accelerate 
renewable  energy  deployment,  and  call  for  its  greater  involvement  in  supporting  SIDS 
efforts. In this context, we encourage SIDS that have not joined IRENA to consider doing 
so. (agreed) 
 
22. Welcome  the  efforts  of  the  UN  Secretary-General  in  organizing  and  coordinating 
activities during the International Year of Sustainable Energy for All. In this regard, we 
note with interest the Sustainable Energy for all initiative, and look forward to discuss it 
in  the  relevant  intergovernmental  fora.  We  further  acknowledge  that  this  initiative  has 
identified  three  interlinked  objectives  which  underpin  the  goal  of  achieving  sustainable 
energy for all by 2030: 
 
• Ensuring universal access to modern energy services; 
• Doubling the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency; 
• Doubling the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix (agreed) 
 
23.  Recognize other important regional and sub-regional initiatives implemented by SIDS 
aiming to provide sustainable energy for all. (agreed) 
Rio +20 
24. Welcome the convening of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development 
(Rio  +20)  in  Brazil  in  June  2012  as  an  important  opportunity  for  the  international 
community  to  secure  renewed  political  commitment  for  sustainable  development  and 
assess progress to date and the remaining gaps in the implementation of the outcomes of 
the major summits on sustainable development. (agreed) 
 
25. Reiterate that the outcomes of the Rio+20 Conference must be ambitious and convey the 
urgency of fully embracing the sustainable development agenda including the fulfillment 
of all commitments related to SIDS.  (agreed) 
 
26. Express  our full  support for the convening of 3rd Global  Conference on the Sustainable 
Development of SIDS in 2014 as a tangible outcome on SIDS at Rio +20.  (agreed) 
  
27. Invite all SIDS to use this declaration in our preparations for the Rio+20 Conference and 
to record their support of it in our national interventions there. (agreed) 
 
4 
 
 
Expression of Gratitude 
 
28. Express our profound gratitude appreciation to the Government of Barbados and UNDP 
for co-hosting this Conference and invite the Government of the Republic of Nauru in its 
capacity as Chair of AOSIS and the Government of Barbados to submit this Declaration 
to the Government of Brazil and the UNSG as a contribution to the UNCSD. (agreed) 
 
 
5 
 
 
Annex I 
Listing of Voluntary Commitments by  SIDS aimed at promoting Transformational Activities 
in  the  Areas  of  Renewable  Energy,  Energy  Efficiency,  Energy  Access  and    low  Carbon 
Development in the Context of Sustainable Development 
 
Country 
Voluntary Commitment 
1.  Renewable Energy Generation — to increase 
Barbados  
the share of economically viable renewable 
energy in Barbados’s energy mix, with an 
indicative target of about 29 percent of all 
electricity consumption to be generated from 
renewable sources by 2029; 
2.  Electric Energy Efficiency — to achieve savings 
in the country’s consumption of electricity, 
with an indicative overall target of 22 percent 
savings by 2029 compared to a ‘business as 
usual’ scenario; 
1.  Renewable Energy – Targets and objectives 
Cape Verde 
until 2020-2030 
 
Increase the coverage rate of electricity 
network to 100% 
  Universalize access to energy in a 
facilitated way while guaranteeing quality 
  Guarantee that at least one island is 100% 
renewable until 2020 
  Reduce the importation of fuels for the 
production of electric energy in 30% until 
2020 
  Reduce emission of gases with greenhouse 
effect in 35% until 2020 
  Guarantee that at least 10% of public 
lights are based on renewable energy 
Increase the micro-production, for that 
purpose using renewable energy, focusing 
on public buildings with the goal of 
reducing the energy bill cost 
 
  Guarantee the penetration rate of electric 
vehicles in 2% until 2030 
  Guarantee that at least 30% of the 
unsalted water for human consumption is 
produced based on renewable energy 
  Pursue the goal of a 0% emitter country 
until 2030 
 
6 
 
 
2.  Energy Efficiency Target and objectives until 
2030 
  Achieve target of 30% of energy efficiency 
through the promotion and the use of new 
technology so as to achieve greater 
efficiency both in the production as well as 
in the transportation, distribution and 
consumption 
Cook Islands 
50% of inhabited islands electricity needs to be 
provided by renewable energy in 2015 and 100% 
by 2020 through implementing the Cook Islands 
Renewable Energy Chart with key strategies that: 
(1) Ensure the use of proven renewable electricity 
technology options 
(2) Ensure the policy and regulatory environment 
is aligned with the 50% by 2015 and 100% by 2020 
renewable energy goal 
(3) Ensure ongoing education, awareness and 
advocacy for renewable energy and energy 
efficiency 
(4) Strengthen the required capacity to implement 
the Cook Islands renewable energy targets 
The Government of the Commonwealth of 
Dominica commits to: 
1. Increase renewable energy generation from the 
current 30% from hydro to 100% by adding 
geothermal energy to the mix; and 
Dominica  
 
2. Become carbon negative by exporting 
renewable energy to its neighbours - Guadeloupe 
and Martinique - by 2020. 
 
Dominican Republic 
Objectives to 2020. 
 
1. Promote local and sustainable use of biofuels, 
particularly in the transport sector in order to 
reduce dependence on imports and emissions of 
greenhouse gases and protecting the 
environment. 
 
2. Plan and promote the development of 
infrastructure for generation, transmission and 
distribution of electricity, operating at the 
standards of quality and reliability of service 
established by the rules. 
 
3. Encourage strict enforcement of environmental 
regulation in electricity generation aimed at the 
7 
 
 
adoption of sustainable management practices 
and mitigation of climate change. 
 
4. Promote a culture of citizenship and business 
efficiency, by inducing a wise use practices in 
electricity and promoting the use of equipment 
and processes to lower energy use or better use of 
it. 
Grenada is committed to transition to a low 
carbon development path through increasing the 
efficiency of energy usage and the further 
deployment of indigenous sources of renewable 
energy.  Grenada voluntarily commits to a 
minimum target of reducing its total GHG 
emissions by 20% below Business As Usual by 
2020."  
1.  Will ensure that reliable energy is provided to 
Grenada 
Guyana 
all in Guyana within an economically, 
environmentally and socially sustainable 
framework; with increasing consideration of 
renewable energy sources. 
2.  Recognizing the need for urgent action in 
addressing climate change has crafted a Low 
Carbon Development Strategy to protect and 
maintain Guyana’s forests to reduce global 
carbon emissions and at the same time attract 
resources for the country to grow and 
develop.  
3.  Will develop and harness hydropower which 
will transform the electricity sector by 
providing about 90% of Guyana’s electricity 
from renewable energy. 
4.  Has embarked on a programme to install 
about 15,000 home solar photovoltaic systems 
primarily in hinterland communities. 
 
5.  Continues to encourage the development of 
renewable energy by removing duties and 
taxes on renewable energy equipment and 
energy efficient compact fluorescent lamps 
(CFLs) and light emitting diode (LED) lights. 
Is in the process of conducting energy 
assessments/audits of public, residential and 
commercial buildings with the objective of 
reducing energy consumption and attaining 
higher levels of energy efficiency. 
6. 
7.  Will continue to promote awareness and 
disseminate information on sustainable energy  
8 
 
 
1.  Provide all citizens with access to reliable & 
Maldives 
sustainable energy services at lowest possible 
cost. 
 
2.  Achieve carbon neutrality in the energy sector 
by year 2020. 
3.  Promote energy conservation and energy 
efficiency. 
Increase national energy security. 
4. 
5.  Promote renewable energy technologies. 
6. 
 Strengthen the institutional and legal 
framework of the energy sector 
Marshall Islands 
Pursuant to the Republic of Marshall Islands 2009 
National Energy Policy and Energy Action Plan, the 
2011 National Climate Change Policy Framework 
and Joint National Action Plan (for climate change 
adaptation, energy security and disaster risk 
reduction), and the Green Energy Micronesia 
initiative: 
1.  A 40% reduction in CO2 emissions below 2009 
 
levels by 2020; 
2.  Electrification of 100% of urban households 
and 95% of rural outer atoll households by 
2015; 
3.  The provision of 20% of energy through 
indigenous renewable resources by 2020; 
Improved efficiency of energy use in 50% of 
households and businesses, and 75% of 
government buildings by 2020; 
5.  A 20% efficiency improvement in 
4. 
transportation sector fuel use by 2020; 
6.  Feasibility studies and internationally 
supported financing plans for innovative 
‘game-changing’ renewable energy and 
sustainable development opportunities 
including Majuro atoll waste-to-energy and 
Kwajalein/Ebeye atoll OTEC plants undertaken 
by 2015. 
Mauritius  
Reduce dependence on fossil fuels, Increase the 
share of renewable energy and Promote energy 
efficiency and conservation through the following 
actions: 
1. 
Increasing the share of renewable 
energy(including solar power, wind energy, 
hydro power, bagasse and landfill gas) to  
around 35% by 2025 
2.  Removal of barriers impeding the 
development of renewable energy 
3.  Use of innovative renewable energy 
9 
 
 
technologies 
4.  Promoting and monitoring  energy efficiency 
measures across all sectors 
5.  Democratizing energy supply  and promoting 
the participation of Small Independent Power 
Producers in electricity generation using 
renewable resources. 
6.  Promoting sustainable buildings and 
conducting energy audits of public buildings 
7.  Adopting product labeling and energy 
efficiency standards 
 
1.  Medium to long term- At least 50% of energy 
demand provided by alternative sources of 
energy, including through renewable sources 
by 2015. 
Nauru  
2.  Long term milestone- Viable power generating 
capacity including alternative renewable 
energy sources by 2025 
Palau 
Deliver clean, secure and affordable energy for all 
citizens of Palau while treating the environment 
responsibly. Respond to the risk of climate change 
by adaptation to changes and by mitigation 
through reducing greenhouse gases caused by the 
production and use of energy. 
A vision for a reliable and resilient energy sector 
delivering sustainable low emission energy 
services by: 
1.  Providing clear policy direction on the future 
of Palau’s energy sector 
2.  Appropriate regulations to secure  energy 
services at competitive prices 
3.  Maximizing cost efficient energy efficiency and 
renewable energy resources and conservation 
of energy wile safeguarding the environment 
4.  Promoting environmentally sustainable energy 
technologies with the aim to substitute fossil 
fuels 
5.  Supporting consumers through the transition 
towards renewable energy   
Increase the contribution of renewable energy 
to the national energy supply by 20% by 2020 
and support the development of indigenous 
energy sources. 
1. 
Saint Lucia 
2.  To promote energy efficiency at all levels and 
in all sectors at the national level. 
3.  To reduce the consumption of electricity in the 
public sector by 20% by 2020. 
10 
 
 
4.  To strengthen the institutional and legal 
framework for sustainable energy. 
5.  To develop and implement standards and 
guidelines for energy efficient products. 
6.  To develop and establish a suite of fiscal 
measures and a financing mechanism for 
greater penetration of sustainable energy 
technologies and products. 
7.  To facilitate capacity- building ,  innovation, 
research and development  for sustainable 
energy. 
8.  To implement a comprehensive sustainable 
energy education and awareness programme. 
9.  To provide an enabling environment for 
sustainable energy that simultaneously allows 
the private sector to generate business 
opportunities that are consistent with the 
Green Economy Concept. 
1.  Reduce projected increase in peak demand by 
5% by 2015 and 10% by 2010 an strive to 
reduce power losses down to a total of 7% by 
2015 and 5% by 2020 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  
2.  Deliver 30% of projected total electricity 
output from Renewable Energy Sources (RES) 
by 2015 and 60% by 2020 
Increase energy security and diversify the 
energy portfolio 
3. 
4.  Reduce projected consumption of fossil fuels 
in the transport sector by 10% by 2015 and 15 
% by 2020 
5.  Reduce projected electricity generation by 5% 
by 2012 and 15% by 2020 
Increase the contribution of Renewable Energy 
to total energy by 20% by the year 2030. 
2.  Promoting energy efficiency practices in all 
1. 
Samoa  
sectors 
Increase Public and Private investment on 
Renewable Energy in transport fuels and 
electricity generation. 
3. 
4.  Energy regulatory function established. 
 
1.  Diversification of the energy mix by the use 
Seychelles  
and promotion of renewable energy sources in 
all energy uses and services in all sectors, 
including electricity, cooling, transport, 
residential, commercial and industrial. 
Ultimately achieving the set target of 15% 
energy supply from renewable energy by 2030. 
11 
 
 
2.  Provide the whole population  with access to a 
safe, secure, affordable, reliable and high 
quality of energy services while ensuring 
environmental protection 
 Increase security of energy supply 
3. 
4.  Promote efficient use of energy and 
conservation 
5.  Strengthen the institutional and legal 
framework of the energy sector 
1.  By 2020 power generation – 50% of energy  
would be produced by renewable energy. 
Timor Leste 
2.  By 2030 all families will have access to 
electricity 24 hours a day  
3.  By 2030 approximately all 100,000 families will 
have access to solar energy 
4.  By 2015 there will no household(family) in the 
capital city using firewood for cooking 
1.  To reduce Tonga’s greenhouse gas emissions 
and improve energy security through 50% 
renewable energy mix in the Energy 
Transformation sector by the end of the Tonga 
Energy Roadmap 2010-2020 [TERM] 
implementation period. 
Tonga 
2.  To improve efficiency of electricity supply and 
demand sides by 18% by the end of the TERM 
implementation period. 
3.  All Tongans shall access to clean, reliable and 
affordable energy services by the end of TERM 
implementation period. 
4.  Establish phased comprehensive set of action 
plans to put in place a long term institutional 
arrangement which provides strong leadership 
and coordination of energy sector activities. 
1.  Power Generation – 100% renewable energy 
Tuvalu  
by 2020 
Implementation Principles 
- 
-  Wind 0 – 40% of demand (if feasible) 
-  Biodiesel  5% of demand (import) 
- 
2. 
Solar PV 60 – 95% of demand 
Energy Efficiency – improvements of 30% 
of current annual demand of Funafuti. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
