 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP) 
[RFP/2015-026] 
 
 
 
 
Quantitative Analysis for the Barbados Renewable Energy Roadmap 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Renewable Energy Agency 
Abu Dhabi, UAE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[December, 2015] 
 
Deadline for submission: 12 January, 2016  
Time:  14.00 hrs. Abu Dhabi time 
 
Page 1 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 1:  Letter of Invitation 
 
Abu Dhabi, 17 December, 2015 
Dear Madam or Sir,  
 
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) hereby invites you to submit a Proposal to this 
Request for Proposal (RFP) for the following consultancy for:   
Quantitative Analysis for the Barbados Renewable Energy Roadmap  
This RFP includes the following documents: 
Section 1 – This Letter of Invitation 
Section 2 – Instructions to Proposers (including Data Sheet) 
Section 3 – Terms of Reference (TOR) including technical evaluation criteria 
Section 4 – Proposal Submission Form 
Section 5 – Documents Establishing the Eligibility and Qualifications of the Proposer 
Section 6 – Technical Proposal Form  
Section 7 – Financial Proposal Form 
Section 8 – General Terms and Conditions (attached herewith) 
 
 
1.  Your  offer  comprising  of  a  Technical  and  Financial Proposal,  in  separate  sealed  envelopes, 
should be submitted in accordance with the Data Sheet.  
 
2.  You are kindly requested to submit an acknowledgment letter to IRENA via the following 
email procurement@irena.org or the following addressee and location: 
International Renewable Energy Agency, IRENA Secretariat, Masdar City, Abu Dhabi, 
United Arab Emirates, Procurement Section , 2nd floor 
 
[RFP/2015-026], Quantitative Analysis for the Barbados Renewable Energy 
Roadmap 
 
 
The letter should advise whether your company intends to submit a Proposal and if not, we 
would appreciate your kind indication of the reason, for our records purposes.  
3.  Should you need further clarification, kindly communicate with the contact person indicated 
in the attached Bid Data Sheet duly assigned to handle all queries for this RFP  
 
We look forward to your Proposal and thank you in advance for your interest in IRENA 
procurement opportunities.  
 
 
      Yours sincerely, 
        David Iyamah    
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
                                                    Director of Administration and Management Services  
 
Page 2 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 2:  Instruction to Proposers 
 
Definitions of Terms 
 
a)  “Contract”  refers  to  the  agreement  that  will  be  signed  by  and  between  the  IRENA  and  the 
successful  proposer,  all  the  attached  documents  thereto,  including  the  General  Terms  and 
Conditions (GTC1) and the Appendices. 
 
b)  “Country” refers to the country indicated in the Data Sheet.   
 
c)  “Data Sheet” refers to such part of the Instructions to Proposers used to reflect conditions of 
the tendering process that are specific for the requirements of the RFP. 
 
d)  “Day” refers to calendar day. 
 
e)  “Government”  refers  to  the  Government  of  the  country  that  will  be  receiving  the  services 
provided/rendered specified under the Contract.  
 
f)  “Instructions  to  Proposers”  (Section  2  of  the  RFP)  refers  to  the  complete  set  of  documents 
which  provides  Proposers  with  all  information  needed  and  procedures  to  be  followed  in  the 
course of preparing their Proposals 
 
g)  “LOI”  (Section  2  of the  RFP)  refers  to the  Letter  of Invitation  being  sent  by  IRENA  to  the 
Proposers. 
 
h)  “Proposal”  refers  to  the  Proposer’s  response  to  the  Request  for  Proposal,  including  the 
Proposal  Submission  Form,  Technical  and  Financial  Proposal  and  all  other  documentation 
attached thereto as required by the RFP.   
 
i)  “Proposer”  refers  to  any  legal  entity  that  may  submit,  or  has  submitted,  a  Proposal  for  the 
provision of services requested by IRENA. 
 
j)  “RFP” refers to the Request for Proposals consisting of instructions and references prepared 
by IRENA for purposes of selecting the best service provider to perform the services described 
in the Terms of Reference. 
 
k)  “Services” refers to the entire scope of tasks and deliverables requested by IRENA under the 
RFP.   
 
l)  “Supplemental Information to the RFP” refers to a written communication issued by IRENA 
to  prospective  Proposers  containing  clarifications,  responses  to  queries  received  from 
prospective  Proposers,  or  changes  to  be  made  in  the  RFP,  before  the  deadline  for  the 
submission of Proposals. 
 
m)  “Terms  of  Reference”  (TOR)  refers  to  the  document  included  in  RFP  as  Section  3  which 
describes  the  objectives,  scope  of  services,  activities,  tasks  to  be  performed,  respective 
responsibilities of the proposer, expected results and deliverables and other data pertinent to 
                                                 
 
Page 3 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the performance of the range of duties and services expected of the successful proposer.   
 
A.  GENERAL 
 
1.   IRENA  solicits  Proposals  in  response  to  this  Request  for  Proposal  (RFP).    Proposers  must 
strictly  adhere  to  all  the  requirements  of  this  RFP.    No  changes,  substitutions  or  other 
alterations to the provisions stipulated in this RFP will be accepted unless approved in writing 
by  IRENA.    However,  whilst  fully  complying  with  the  RFP  requirements,  Proposers  are 
encouraged to provide any suggestions and solutions that may achieve a more cost-effective 
and value-for-money approach to fulfilling the requirements of this RFP.   
 
2.   Submission of a Proposal shall be deemed to constitute an acknowledgement by the Proposer 
that  all  obligations  stipulated  by  this  RFP  will  be  met  and  unless  specified  otherwise,  the 
Proposer has read, understood and agreed to all the instructions provided in this RFP.   
 
3.   Any Proposal submitted will be regarded as an offer by the Proposer and not as an acceptance 
of  an  offer  of  any  Proposal  by  IRENA.    This  RFP  does  not  commit  IRENA  to  award  a 
contract. 
 
4.   A  Proposer  shall  not  be  in  any  position  of  conflict  of  interest  arising  from  their  current  or 
future work with respect to IRENA.  All Proposers found to have a conflict of interest shall be 
disqualified.    Proposers  may  be  considered  to  have  a  conflict  of  interest  with  one  or  more 
parties in this solicitation process, if they:  
 
4.1 
are  or  have  been  associated  in  the  past,  with  a  firm  or  any  of  its  affiliates  which 
have  been  engaged  with  IRENA  to  provide  services  for  the  preparation  of  the 
design, specifications, Terms of Reference and other documents to be used for the 
procurement of the goods and services to be purchased in this selection process;  
4.2  were involved in the preparation and/or design of the programme/project related to 
the services requested under this RFP; 
4.3  have owners, officers, directors, controlling shareholders, or key personnel who are 
related to IRENA staff involved in procurement functions; 
submit  more  than  one  Proposal  in  this  RFP,  either  as  an  individual  entity,  or 
through  its  membership  with  a  joint  venture/consortium/association  that  is  also 
submitting a Proposal for the same contract.  
4.4 
4.6   are found to be in conflict for any other reason, as may be established by, or at the 
discretion of, IRENA.   
 
B.   CONTENTS OF PROPOSAL 
 
6.  Sections of Proposal 
Proposers are required to complete, sign and submit in the number of copies the following 
documents: 
 
6.1  Proposal Submission Covering Letter Form  (see RFP Section 4); 
6.2  Documents Establishing the Eligibility and Qualifications of the Proposer (see RFP 
Section 5 and Data Sheet); 
6.3  Technical Proposal (see prescribed form in RFP Section 6); 
6.4  Financial Proposal (see prescribed form in RFP Section 7); 
6.5  Proposal Security, if applicable (if required and as stated in the Data Sheet, see 
Page 4 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prescribed Form in RFP Section 8); 
6.6  Any attachments and/or appendices to the Proposal (including those specified under the 
Data Sheet)  
 
7.  Clarification of Proposal 
 
Proposers may request a clarification of any of the RFP documents no later than the number 
of  days  indicated  in  the  Data  Sheet  before  the  proposal  submission  date.    Any  request  for 
clarification must be sent in writing, or by electronic means to the IRENA address indicated 
in  the  Data  Sheet.  IRENA  will  respond  in  writing,  or  by  electronic  means  and  will  send 
written copies of the response (including an explanation of the query but without identifying 
the source of inquiry) to all Proposers who have provided confirmation of their intention to 
submit a Proposal.   
 
IRENA shall endeavor to provide such responses to clarifications in an expeditious manner, 
but any delay in such response shall not cause an obligation on the part of IRENA to extend 
the submission date of the Proposals, unless IRENA deems that such an extension is justified 
and necessary.   
 
8.  Amendment of Proposals 
 
At  any  time  prior  to  the  deadline  for submission  of Proposals,  IRENA  may  for  any  reason, 
such as in response to a clarification requested by a Proposer, modify the RFP in the form of a 
Supplemental  Information  to  the  RFP.    All  Proposers  who  have  provided  confirmation  of 
their intention to submit a Proposal will be notified in writing of all amendments to the RFP.   
 
In  order  to  afford  prospective  Proposers  reasonable  time  to  consider  the  amendments  in 
preparing their Proposals, IRENA may, at its discretion, extend the deadline for submission of 
Proposals, if the nature of the amendment to the RFP justifies such extension. 
 
C. PREPARATION OF PROPOSALS 
 
9.  Cost of Proposal 
 
The Proposer shall bear any and all costs related to the preparation and/or submission of the 
Proposal, regardless of whether its Proposal was selected or not.  IRENA shall in no case be 
responsible or liable for those costs, regardless of the conduct or outcome of the process. 
 
10. Language of Proposal 
 
The Proposal, as well as all related correspondence exchanged by the Proposer and IRENA , 
shall  be  written  in  the  language  (s)  specified  in  the  Data  Sheet.    Any  printed  literature 
furnished by the Proposer written in a language other than the language indicated in the Data 
Sheet, must be accompanied by a translation in the preferred language indicated in the Data 
Sheet.    For  purposes  of  interpretation  of  the  Proposal,  and  in  the  event  of  discrepancy  or 
inconsistency in meaning, the version translated into the preferred language shall govern.   
 
11. Proposal Submission Form 
The Proposer shall submit the Proposal Submission Form using the form furnished in Section 
4 of the RFP. 
Page 5 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. Technical Proposal Format and Content 
 
Unless otherwise stated in the Data Sheet, the Proposer shall structure the Technical Proposal 
as follows: 
 
12.1  Expertise  of  Firm/Organization  –  this  section  should  provide  details  regarding 
management  structure  of  the  organization,  organizational  capability/resources,  and 
experience  of  organization/firm,  the  list  of  projects/contracts  (both  completed  and 
ongoing, both domestic and international) which are related or similar in nature to the 
requirements of the RFP, and proof of financial stability and adequacy of resources to 
complete the services required by the RFP (see RFP Clause 15 for further details).   
 
12.2  Proposed  Methodology,  Approach  and  Implementation  Plan  –  this  section  should 
demonstrate  the  Proposer’s  response  to  the  Terms  of  Reference  by  identifying  the 
specific components  proposed,  how  the  requirements  shall be addressed, as specified, 
point  by  point;  providing  a  detailed  description  of  the  essential  performance 
characteristics  proposed;  identifying  the  works/portions  of  the  work  that  will  be 
subcontracted; and demonstrating how the proposed methodology meets or exceeds the 
specifications,  while  ensuring  appropriateness  of  the  approach  to  the  local  conditions 
and the rest of the project operating environment.  This methodology must be laid out in 
an implementation timetable that is within the duration of the contract as specified in 
the Data Sheet.  
 
12.3  Management  Structure  and  Key  Personnel  –  This  section  should  include  the 
comprehensive curriculum vitae (CVs) of key personnel that will be assigned to support 
the  implementation  of  the  proposed  methodology,  clearly  defining  the  roles  and 
responsibilities vis-à-vis the proposed methodology.  CVs should establish competence 
and demonstrate qualifications in areas relevant to the TOR.   
 
In  complying  with  this section,  the  Proposer  assures and  confirms  to  IRENA  that  the 
personnel being nominated is available for the Contract on the dates proposed.  If any 
of the key personnel later becomes unavailable, except for unavoidable reasons such as 
death  or  medical  incapacity,  IRENA  reserves  the  right  to  render  the  proposal  non-
responsive.  Any substitution arising from unavoidable reasons shall be made only with 
the approval of IRENA.   
 
12.4  Other Information as may be relevant to the Proposal. 
 
The  Technical  Proposal  shall  not  include  any  financial  information.    A  Technical  Proposal 
containing any form of financial information that could lead to the determination of the price 
offer may be declared non-compliant.   
 
13. Financial Proposals 
 
The  Financial  Proposal  shall  be  prepared  using  the  attached  standard  form  (Section  7).      It 
shall list all major cost components associated with the services, and the detailed breakdown 
of such costs.  All outputs and activities described in the Technical Proposal must be priced 
separately  on  a  one-to-one  correspondence.    Any  output  and  activities  described  in  the 
Page 6 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical Proposal but not priced in the Financial Proposal, shall be assumed to be included 
in the prices of other activities or items, as well as in the final total price.   
14. Currencies of Proposals 
 
All prices from Proposers originating from outside the Country specified in the  Data Sheet 
shall be quoted in the currency indicated in the Data Sheet.  However, where Proposals are 
quoted in different currencies, for the purposes of comparison of all Proposals --   
 
14.1  IRENA  will convert the currency quoted in the Proposal to US Dollar, in accordance 
with the prevailing UN operational rate of exchange on the last day of submission of 
Proposals; and 
 
15. Documents Establishing the Eligibility and Qualifications of the Proposer  
 
The Proposer shall furnish evidence of its status as an eligible and qualified vendor, using the 
forms provided under Section 5, Proposer Information Forms.  The documentary evidence of 
the  Proposer’s  qualifications  to  perform  the  Contract,  if  the  contract  is  awarded  to  the 
Proposer, shall be established to the IRENA’s satisfaction.  This evidence shall include, and 
must demonstrate, the following: 
 
15.1  that, in the case  of  a  Proposer  offering  to  supply  goods  under  the  Contract  which the 
Proposer  did  not  manufacture  or  otherwise  produce,  the  Proposer  has  been  duly 
authorized by the goods’ manufacturer or producer to supply the goods in the country 
of final destination; and 
15.2  that  the  Proposer  has  the  financial,  technical,  and  production  capability  necessary  to 
perform the Contract.  
 
16. Joint Venture, Consortium or Association 
 
If the Proposer is a joint venture, consortium, or association, all of the parties shall be jointly 
and severally liable to IRENA for the fulfillment of the provisions of the Contract and shall 
designate  one  party  to  act  as  a  leader  with  authority  to  legally  bind  the  joint  venture, 
consortium, or association.  
 
The leader or lead entity, composition or the constitution of the joint venture, consortium, or 
association shall not be altered without the prior consent of IRENA . 
 
The  description  of  the  organization  of  the  joint  venture/consortium/association  must  be 
clearly  defined  in  the  course  of  establishing  the  eligibility  of  the  Proposer,  by  defining  the 
expected role of each of its component/member firm in the course of performing the services 
defined in the TOR.   
 
Where a joint venture/consortium/association is presenting its track record and experience in 
a similar undertaking as those required in the TOR, it should present such information in the 
following manner: 
 
  Those that were undertaken together by the joint venture/consortium/association 
jointly and severally; and  
Page 7 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Those that were undertaken by the individual members of the joint 
venture/consortium/association expected to be involved in the performance of the 
services defined in the TOR. 
 
Previous  contracts  completed  by  individual  experts  working  privately  but  who  are 
permanently or were temporarily associated with any of the member firms cannot be claimed 
as  the  experience  of  the  joint  venture/consortium/association  or  those  of  its  members,  but 
should  only  be  claimed  by  the  individual  experts  themselves  in  their  presentation  of  their 
credentials. 
 
17. Alternative Proposals 
 
Unless otherwise specified in the Data Sheet, alternative proposals shall not be considered.   
 
18. Period of Validity 
 
Proposals shall remain valid for the period specified in the Data Sheet, commencing on the 
submission  deadline  date  also  indicated  in  the  Data  Sheet.    A  Proposal  valid  for  a  shorter 
period shall be immediately rejected by IRENA and rendered non-responsive.   
 
In exceptional circumstances, prior to the expiration of the proposal validity period, IRENA 
may request Proposers to extend the period of validity of their Proposals.  The request and the 
responses shall be made in writing, and shall be considered  integral to the Proposal.  
 
 
 
D. SUBMISSION AND OPENING OF PROPOSALS 
 
19. Submission and Opening of Proposals 
 
19.1  The  Financial  Proposal  and 
the  Technical  Proposal  Envelopes  MUST  BE 
COMPLETELY SEPARATED and each of them must be submitted sealed individually 
and  clearly  marked  on  the  outside  as  either  “TECHNICAL  PROPOSAL”  or 
“FINANCIAL PROPOSAL”, as appropriate.  Each envelope MUST also bear the name 
of the Proposer. The inner and outer envelopes shall:  
  bear the name and address of the Proposer 
  be addressed to IRENA as specified in the Data Sheet and 
  bear  a  warning  not  to  open  before  the  time  and  date  for  proposal  opening,  as 
specified in the Data Sheet.  
 
If  all  envelopes  are  not  sealed  and  marked  as  required,  IRENA  will  assume  no 
responsibility for the misplacement or premature opening of the Proposal. 
 
19.2  Proposers  may  always  submit  their  Proposals  by  mail/courier  or  by  hand  delivery.  
When  so  specified  in  the  Data  Sheet,  Proposers  shall  have  the  option  of  submitting 
their Proposals electronically.  When the Proposals are expected to be in transit for over 
24 hours, the Proposer must ensure that sufficient lead time has been provided in order 
to  comply  with  IRENA’s  deadline  for  submission.    Under  such  circumstances,  the 
Proposer must inform IRENA of the exact date and time of their dispatch, through the 
submission of the official receipt and supporting documents (airway bill, etc.) issued by 
the forwarding/courier company that will deliver the Proposal to IRENA. 
Page 8 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19.3 Proposers submitting Proposals by mail or by hand shall enclose the original and each 
copy  of  the  Proposal,  in  separate  sealed  envelopes,  duly  marking  the  envelopes  as 
“Original  Proposal”  and  “Copy  of  Proposal”  as  appropriate.    The  number  of  copies 
required  shall  be  as  specified  in  the  Data  Sheet.    In  the  event  of  any  discrepancy 
between them, the original shall govern.  The original and copies of the Proposal shall 
be  signed  by  the  Proposer  or  person(s)  duly  authorized  to  commit  the  Proposer.  The 
Proposer  shall  submit  the  original  and  copies  of  the  Proposal  in  separate  envelopes, 
marked  “ORIGINAL”  and  “COPY”.    The  envelopes  shall  then  be  sealed  in  an  outer 
envelope.   
 
20. Deadline for Submission of Proposals and Late Proposals 
 
20.1 Proposals must be received by IRENA at the address and no later than the date and time 
specified in the Data Sheet.  
 
20.2 IRENA shall not consider any Proposal that arrives after the deadline for submission of 
Proposals.    Any  Proposal  received  by  IRENA  after  the  deadline  for  submission  of 
Proposals may be declared late, rejected, and returned unopened to the Proposer.   
 
21. Withdrawal, Substitution, and Modification of Proposals 
 
21.1 Proposers are expected to have sole responsibility for taking steps to carefully examine 
in details the full consistency of its Proposals to the requirements of the RFP, keeping in 
mind that material deficiencies providing information requested by IRENA , or clarity in 
the  description  of  services  to  be  provided,  may  result  in  the  rejection  of  the  Proposal.  
IRENA  shall  not  assume  any  responsibility  regarding  erroneous  interpretations  or 
conclusions made by the Proposer in the course of understanding the RFP out of the data 
furnished by IRENA.   
 
21.2 A Proposer may withdraw, substitute or modify its Proposal after it has been submitted 
by  sending  a  written  notice  in  accordance  with  RFP  Clause  19,  duly  signed  by  an 
authorized representative, and  shall include a  copy  of  the  authorization  (or  a  Power  of 
Attorney).  The  corresponding  substitution  or  modification  of  the  Proposal  must 
accompany the respective written notice.  All notices must be received by IRENA prior 
to the deadline for submission and submitted in accordance with Clause 19 (except that 
withdrawal  notices  do  not  require  copies).    The  respective  envelopes  shall  be  clearly 
marked “WITHDRAWAL,” “SUBSTITUTION,” or MODIFICATION”.   
 
21.3 Proposals requested to be withdrawn shall be returned unopened to the Proposers. 
  
21.4 No  Proposal  may  be  withdrawn,  substituted,  or  modified  in  the  interval  between  the 
deadline  for  submission  of  Proposals  and  the  expiration  of  the  period  of  proposal 
validity  specified  by  the  Proposer  on  the  Proposal  Submission  Form  or  any  extension 
thereof.    
 
22. Proposal Opening 
 
22.1 IRENA  will  open  the  Proposals  in  the  presence  of  an  ad-hoc  committee  formed  by 
IRENA.  If electronic submission is permitted, any specific electronic proposal opening 
Page 9 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
procedures shall be as specified in the Data Sheet. 
 
22.2 The  Proposers’  names,  modifications,  withdrawals,  the  presence  or  absence  of 
documents,  and  such  other  details  as  IRENA  may  consider  appropriate,  will  be 
announced at the opening.  No Proposal shall be rejected at the opening stage, except for 
late submission, for which the Proposal shall be returned unopened to the Proposer.   
 
E. EVALUATION AND COMPARISON OF PROPOSALS 
 
23. Confidentiality 
 
23.1  Information relating to the examination, evaluation, and comparison of Proposals, and 
recommendation  of  contract  award,  shall  not  be  disclosed  to  Proposers  or  any  other 
persons  not  officially  concerned  with  such  process,  even  after  publication  of  the 
contract award. 
 
23.2  Any  effort  by  a  Proposer  to  influence  IRENA  in  the  examination,  evaluation  and 
comparison  of  the  Proposals  or  contract  award  decisions  may,  at  IRENA  ’s  decision, 
result in the rejection of its Proposal. 
 
23.3  In  the  event  that  a  Proposer  is  unsuccessful,  the  Proposer  may  seek  a  meeting  with 
IRENA  for  debriefing,  but  said  debriefing  shall  be  limited  to  the  discussions  of  the 
strengths and weaknesses of the Proposal of said Proposer, and no information relating 
to the Proposal or rating of other Proposers may be discussed.  
 
24. Clarification of Proposals 
 
To  assist  in  the  examination,  evaluation  and  comparison  of  Proposals,  IRENA  may,  at  its 
discretion, ask any Proposer for a clarification of its Proposal.   
 
IRENA’s  request for  clarification  and  the  response  shall  be in  writing.  Notwithstanding  the 
written communication, no change in the prices or substance of the Proposal shall be sought, 
offered,  or  permitted,  except  to  provide  clarification,  and  confirm  the  correction  of  any 
arithmetic errors discovered by IRENA in the evaluation of the Proposals, in accordance with 
RFP Clause 28. 
 
Any unsolicited clarification submitted by a Proposer in respect to its Proposal, which is not a 
response to a request by IRENA, shall not be considered during the review and evaluation of 
the Proposals.   
 
25. Preliminary Examination of Proposals 
 
IRENA  shall  examine  the  Proposals  to  determine  whether  they  are  complete,  whether  the 
documents  have  been  properly  signed,  and  whether  the  Proposals  are  generally  in  order.  
IRENA reserves the right to reject any Proposal after preliminary examination of Proposal, if 
IRENA finds justifiable reason for such rejection, including but not limited to the discovery 
of significant or material deviation, conflict of interest, fraud, among others.    
 
26. Evaluation of Proposals 
 
Page 10 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26.1  IRENA shall examine the Proposal to confirm that all terms and conditions under the 
IRENA General Terms and Conditions and Special Conditions have been accepted by 
the Proposer without any deviation or reservation. 
 
26.2  The  evaluation  committee  shall  review  and  evaluate  the  Technical  Proposals  on  the 
basis  of  their  responsiveness  to  the  Terms  of  Reference  and  other  documentation 
provided, applying the evaluation criteria, sub-criteria, and point system specified in the 
Data Sheet. Each responsive Proposal will be given a technical score. A Proposal shall 
be rendered non-responsive at this stage if it does not substantially respond to the RFP, 
and particularly the Terms of Reference, or if it fails to achieve the minimum technical 
score indicated in the Data Sheet.   
 
26.3  In  the  second  stage,  only  the  Financial  Proposal  of  those  Proposers  who  achieve  the 
minimum  technical  score  will  be  opened  for  evaluation  for  comparison  and  review.  
The  Financial  Proposal  Envelopes  corresponding  to  Proposals  that  did  not  meet  the 
minimum  passing  technical  score  shall  be  returned  to  the  Proposer  unopened.    The 
overall  evaluation  score  will  either  be  based  either  on  a  combination  of  the  technical 
score  and  the  financial  offer,  or  the  lowest  evaluated  financial  proposal  of  the 
technically qualified Proposers.  The evaluation method that applies for this RFP shall 
be as indicated in the Data Sheet,    
 
26.4  IRENA shall reserve the right to determine to its satisfaction the validity of information 
provided  by  the  Proposer,  through  verification  and  reference  checking,  among  other 
means that it deems appropriate, at any stage within the selection process.   
 
27. Responsiveness of Proposal 
 
27.1  IRENA’s determination of a Proposal’s responsiveness is to be based on the contents of 
the Proposal itself.  
 
27.2  A  substantially  responsive  Proposal  is  one  that  conforms  to  all  the  terms,  conditions, 
and specifications of the RFP without material deviation, reservation, or omission.   
 
27.3  If a Proposal is not substantially responsive, it shall be rejected by IRENA and may not 
subsequently  be  made  responsive  by  the  Proposer  by  correction  of  the  material 
deviation, reservation, or omission. 
 
28. Nonconformities, Errors and Omissions 
 
28.1  Provided  that  a  Proposal  is  substantially  responsive,  IRENA  may  waive  any  non-
conformities or omissions in the Proposal that do not constitute a material deviation. 
 
28.2  Provided that a Proposal is substantially responsive, IRENA may request the Proposer 
to  submit  the  necessary  information  or  documentation,  within  a  reasonable  period  of 
time,  to  rectify  nonmaterial  nonconformities  or  omissions  in  the  Proposal  related  to 
documentation requirements.    Such  omission  shall  not  be related  to any  aspect of  the 
price of the Proposal.  Failure of the Proposer to comply with the request may result in 
the rejection of its Proposal. 
 
28.3  Provided that the Proposal is substantially responsive, IRENA shall correct arithmetical 
Page 11 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
errors on the following basis: 
 
28.3.1  if there is a discrepancy between the unit price and the line item total that is 
obtained  by  multiplying  the  unit  price  by  the  quantity,  the  unit  price  shall 
prevail  and  the  line  item  total  shall  be  corrected,  unless  in  the  opinion  of 
IRENA  there  is  an  obvious  misplacement  of  the  decimal  point  in  the  unit 
price,  in  which  case  the  line  item  total  as  quoted  shall  govern  and  the  unit 
price shall be corrected; 
28.3.2  if there is an error in a total corresponding to the addition or subtraction of 
subtotals, the subtotals shall prevail and the total shall be corrected; and 
28.3.3  if  there  is  a  discrepancy  between  words  and  figures,  the  amount  in  words 
shall prevail, unless the amount expressed in words is related to an arithmetic 
error, in which case the amount in figures shall prevail subject to the above. 
 
28.4  If the Proposer does not accept the correction of errors made by  IRENA, its Proposal 
shall be rejected. 
 
29. Fraud and Corruption 
 
IRENA  implements  a  policy  of  zero  tolerance  on  fraud  and  corrupt  practices  and  is 
committed  to  preventing,  identifying  and  addressing  all  acts  of  fraud  and  corrupt  practices 
against IRENA as well as third parties involved in IRENA activities.   
 
F.  AWARD OF CONTRACT 
 
30. Right to Accept, Reject, or Render Non-Responsive Any or All Proposals 
 
IRENA reserves the right to accept or reject any Proposal, to render any or all Proposals as 
non-responsive, and to annul the solicitation process and reject all Proposals at any time prior 
to award of contract, without thereby incurring any liability to the affected Proposer, or any 
obligation  to  inform  the  affected  Proposer(s)  of  the  grounds  for  IRENA  ’s  action.    IRENA 
shall neither be obliged to award the contract to the lowest price offer. 
 
31. Award Criteria  
 
Prior to the expiration of proposal validity, IRENA may award the Proposer, whose proposal 
offers best value for money being the proposal that has obtained the highest score based on 
the evaluation method indicated in the Data Sheet 
 
32. Right to Vary Requirements at the Time of Award 
 
At the time of award of Contract, IRENA reserves the right to vary the quantity of services 
and/or goods, by up to a maximum 15% of the total price offer, without any change in the unit 
price or other terms and conditions.   
 
33. Contract Signature 
 
Within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the Contract, the successful Proposer shall 
sign and date the Contract and return it to IRENA.  
 
Page 12 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34. Performance Security 
 
34.1  A performance security, if required, shall be provided in the amount and form provided 
in Section 8 and by the deadline indicated in the Data Sheet, as applicable.   
 
34.2  Failure of the successful Proposer to comply with the requirement of RFP Clause 33 or 
RFP Clause 34 shall constitute sufficient grounds for the annulment of the award and 
forfeiture  of  the  performance  security  if  any,  on  which  event  IRENA  may  award  the 
Contract  to  the  Proposer  with  the  second  highest  rated  Proposal,  or  call  for  new 
Proposals.   
 
35. Bank Guarantee for Advance Payment 
 
In the event that the advanced payment requested exceeds 20% of the total proposal price, or 
exceed the amount of $30,000, IRENA shall require the Proposer to submit a Bank Guarantee 
in the same amount as the advanced payment.  A bank guarantee for advanced payment shall 
be  furnished  in  the  form  provided  in  Section  9,  and  by  the  deadline  indicated  in  the  Data 
Sheet, as applicable.   
 
36. Proposer’s Conference 
 
When appropriate, a proposer’s conference will be conducted at the date, time and location 
specified  in  the  Data  Sheet.  All  Proposers  are  encouraged  to  attend.  Non-attendance, 
however,  shall  not  result  in  disqualification  of  an  interested  Proposer.    Minutes  of  the 
proposer’s  conference  will  be  either  posted  on  the  IRENA  website,  or  disseminated  to  the 
individual firms who have registered or expressed interest with the contract, whether or not 
they attended the conference.  No verbal statement made during the conference shall modify 
the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  RFP  unless  such  statement  is  specifically  written  in  the 
Minutes  of  the  Conference,  or  issued  as  an  amendment  in  the  form  of  a  Supplemental 
Information to the RFP. 
 
37. Vendor Protest 
 
IRENA vendor protest procedure provides an opportunity for appeal to those persons or firms 
not awarded a purchase order or contract through a competitive procurement process.  This 
procedure  is  not  available  to  non-responsive  or  untimely  Proposers  or  those  with  rejected 
Proposals.  In the event that you believe you have not received fair treatment, the following 
email provides further details regarding IRENA vendor protest procedures: 
Protest@irena.org  
 
Page 13 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Instructions to Proposers 
DATA SHEET 
The  following  data  for  the  services  to  be  procured  shall  complement,  supplement,  or  amend  the 
provisions  in  the  Instruction  to  Proposers.    In  the  case  of  a  conflict  between  the  Instruction  to 
Proposers and the Data Sheet, the provisions in the Data Sheet shall prevail.   
 
Project Context : 
IRENA RFP two envelopes approach  
Service for: 
 
Title of Services/Work: 
Quantitative Analysis for the Barbados 
Renewable Energy Roadmap 
Country:   
IRENA-Bonn Office 
English 
Language of the Proposal:  
Conditions for Submitting Proposals for Parts 
or sub-parts of the TOR 
x Not allowed 
Conditions for Submitting Alternative 
Proposals  
x shall not be considered 
A pre-bid conference will be held:   
NO  
 120 days 
Period of Proposal Validity commencing  
on the submission date 
Proposal Security 
x Not Required 
Validity of Proposal Security 
x Not Required 
Proposal Prices shall be subjected to Taxation     Yes, pls. submit a price inclusive of all  
applicable taxes 
Advanced Payment upon signing of contract  
x  Not allowed 
Liquidated Damages 
will be imposed in accordance with general terms & 
conditions for professional service attached hereto as 
section 8 
 Not Required 
Performance Security 
Preferred Currency of Bid Proposal and 
Method for Currency conversion 
Single Currency: [USD] UN exchange rate 
Page 14 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deadline for submitting requests for 
clarifications/ questions 
Three (3) working days before the submission  
Date/deadline. 
Contact Details for submitting 
clarifications/questions  
Focal Point in IRENA :  
Luay Shalkhoub, Chief Procurement Officer 
LShalkhoub@IRENA.Org  
Or procurement@irena.org  
No. of copies of Proposal that must be 
submitted  
None.  
Proposal submission address 
International Renewable Energy Agency, 
IRENA HQ , Masdar City, PO Box 236, 
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates 
Tel: 00971 2 417 9000 
Deadline of Submission  
Date: 12 January 2015; Time: 14.00 Hrs.  
Abu Dhabi time 
  Not Allowed.   
Procedures and conditions for electronic 
submissions of the Proposals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation method to be used in selecting 
the most responsive Proposal  
The  combined  scoring  methodology  shall    be 
applied, which consists of the following steps: 
Only those Offerors who attain 70% of the 
obtainable scores of the 100 points in the 
evaluation of the technical proposal will have 
their financial proposal envelope opened. The 
financial proposals shall be opened and will 
receive a weighting of 30% while the technical 
evaluation will receive 70%. The company 
with the highest combined technical and 
financial scoring will be awarded the contract. 
The evaluation criteria is indicated below in 
section 3. 
Required Documents that must be 
Submitted to Establish Qualification of 
Proposers  
 All  relevent  documentation 
including 
company  profile  should  not  exceed 
Fourty  (40)  pages,  excluding  the  latest 
and 
audited 
registration certificates  
 
statments 
financial 
 
 Certificate  of  Registration  of  the  business, 
including  Articles  of  Incorporation,  or 
equivalent  document  if  Proposer  is  not  a 
corporation 
 Quality  Certificate  (e.g.,  ISO,  etc.)  and/or 
other  similar  certificates,  accreditations, 
awards  and  citations  received  by 
the 
Proposer, if any 
Page 16 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 3 
TERMS OF REFERENCE (TOR) 
Quantitative Analysis for the Barbados Renewable Energy Roadmap 
Secretariat of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) 
IRENA Innovation and technology Centre (IITC) Bonn 
BACKGROUND 
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an inter-governmental organization, 
mandated  by  member  states  from  around  the  world  to  support  renewable  energy.  In 
accordance with its Statute, IRENA’s objective is to “promote the widespread and increased 
adoption  and  the  sustainable  use  of  all  forms  of  renewable  energy”.  These  forms  include 
bioenergy, geothermal energy, hydropower, ocean, solar, and on and off-shore wind power. 
IRENA's Innovation and Technology Centre (IITC) in Bonn, Germany provides cutting-edge 
information on renewable energy technologies and innovations, while seeking new pathways 
for  the  global  transition  to  a  sustainable  energy  future.  As  a  centre  of  excellence  for 
renewable  energy  technology  and  innovation,  IITC  researchers  stays  abreast  of  the  latest 
developments and translates them into practical, policy-friendly tools for IRENA’s Members. 
IRENA’s  researchers  produce  ground-breaking,  and  continually  updated,  cost  data  for 
renewable  energy  technologies,  assistance  with  energy  technology  planning,  project 
development,  and  strategies  to  enhance  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  innovation  for 
renewable  energy.  One  of  the  key  areas  of  the  IRENA’s  work  programme  is  centered  on 
assisting islands in their transition towards renewable energy. One of the key activities in this 
area,  supported  by  voluntary  contributions  from  the  German  Government  (Ministry  of 
Environment – BMUB), is the development of roadmaps for the transition of islands towards 
renewable energy. 
The Government of Barbados through its Division of Energy and Telecommunication in the 
Prime  Minister's  Office  and  the  IRENA  have  agreed  to  cooperate  on  the  development  of  a 
renewable energy roadmap for Barbados.  The objective of the roadmap is to assist Barbados 
in transitioning its energy sector away from the current dependence on fossil fuels to reliance 
  The  roadmap  will  support  the 
on  local,  sustainable  renewable  energy  resources. 
Government’s vision of an energy sector that:  
  Enhances economic growth by reducing energy costs; 
 
 
  Reduces  investment  needs  for  power  generation  by  promoting  energy  efficiency  and 
Improves energy security by reducing dependency on imported fossil fuels; 
Increases affordability of energy services for the consumers; 
conservation; 
  Reduces greenhouse gas and the emission of local pollutants from fossil fuel combustion. 
In support of this vision the roadmap will identify least-cost transition pathways supporting 
locally  available  renewable  energy  deployment  in  the  electricity  sector.  The  local  electric 
utility  is  the  investor  owned  Barbados  Light  and  Power  Company  (BLPC)  operating  under 
the  2013  Electric  Light  and  Power  Act  (ELPA)  and  regulated  by  the  Fair  Trading 
Commission  of  Barbados.    Renewable  energy  options  for  transportation  and  stationary 
applications will also be explored. 
The transition to renewable energy involves the integration of both dispatchable and variable 
renewable energy (VRE) into the generation mix of the local electric grid, using both utility-
scale and distributed systems. In the case of Barbados, dispatchable resources include thermal 
Page 17 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
power generation from biomass.  Variable renewable energy systems include wind power and 
solar photovoltaic systems both at utility scale and the roof-top level.  In addition to rooftop 
solar PV, distributed RE systems  include  end-use technologies like solar hot  water systems 
and  renewable  energy  for  refrigeration  and  space  cooling  (e.g.  solar  cooling,  sea  water  air 
conditioning, etc). To allow the use of RE in  land transportation, both  biofuels  and electric 
vehicles recharged from RE are viable options. 
Integrating  significant  shares  of  renewable  energy  into  the  Barbados  energy  system  will 
require  careful  planning,  the  development  of  clear  detail  options  for  deployment  and  a 
supportive  policy  environment.    The  roadmap  will  assist  the  Government  of  Barbados  in 
understanding  the  possible  pathways  to  high  shares  of  renewable  energy  and  in  developing 
specific plans to achieve its renewable energy goals.  
At present the Government's goal as identified in its Sustainable Energy Framework is 29% 
primary renewable energy penetration by 2029 (See Annex I below). However, the BLPC has 
limited itself to the analysis of medium term scenarios of up to 15.7% RE penetration derived 
from  80  MW  of  intermittent  wind  and  solar  in  its  Wind  and  Solar  Integration  Study  (See 
Annex  I),  leaving  the  remaining  13.3%  to  be  supplied  by  waste  to  energy  and  biomass 
thermal power plants that are assumed to materialize in the near future. The BLPC currently 
has a peak demand for electricity of about 150 MW, with total installed capacity of about 260 
MW.  Most  of  their  scenarios  do  not  require  any  mitigation  measures.  Indeed,  only  the 
scenario  with  the  highest  penetration  (i.e.  15.7%)  would  require  minimal  (but  necessary) 
control  systems,  operational  and  system  adjustments  to  maintain  stability  and  reliability  of 
grid operations.  However, the  BLPC did  conduct a feeder level  study  on  two of its feeders 
and determined that they can both accommodate the expected amount of variable renewables 
under certain assumptions.  Furthermore, the BLPC study builds on the assumptions made by 
the  BLPC  in  its  2012  Integrated  Resource  Plan,  some  of  which  have  not  materialised  (See 
Annex I). Hence the long term study contemplated here by IRENA goes beyond the level of 
RE penetration considered by the BLPC, and in addition to a least-cost scenario it includes a 
29% scenario as well as a 100% scenario. 
 
OBJECTIVE 
The  objective  of  this  study  is  to  conduct  the  detailed  quantitative  analyses  necessary  to 
support  the  development  of  the  Renewable  Energy  Roadmap  for  Barbados.  These  analyses 
will include national energy planning and power systems planning. Scenarios will include a 
100  percent  renewable  energy  scenario,  a  least  cost  scenario,  and  an  explicit  treatment  of 
electric vehicles and end-use RE technologies. 
 
SCOPE OF WORK 
The  Contractor  will  assist  IRENA  in  providing  quantitative  analyses  in  support  of  the 
following: 
1.  Long-term planning using the Long Range Energy Alternatives Planning System (LEAP):  
 
The Contractor will develop LEAP models that quantify least-cost options for the expansion 
of generation capacity and transmission and distribution infrastructure that are needed to meet 
electricity  demand  in  Barbados  over  a  twenty  five  year  planning  horizon.  The  models  will 
take into account the base case expansion plan identified by the BLPC in its 2012 integrated 
Page 18 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resource plan (IRP). This will account for non-utility energy expansion involving renewable 
energy  for  refrigeration,  space  cooling,  solar  hot  water,  and  electric  vehicles.  The  analysis 
should  be  conducted  with  the  aim  of  assessing  economic  and  social  impacts,  investment 
decisions and policy recommendations.  Key scenarios will include but are not limited to:  
 
  A 29% renewable energy share by 2029 
  The least cost expansion over the planning horizon 
  100% renewable energy share over the planning horizon. 
Data  available  for  the  LEAP  model  are  described  in  Annex  I.  Key  economic 
assumptions  may  be  found  on  the  web  site  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados. 
Technical assumptions and data concerning the utility expansion plan are to be found 
in the BLPC's 2012 IRP, in the 2015 grid integration study, and on the company's web 
site.    The  Contractor  will  therefore  compute  energy,  economic  and  employment 
impacts  as  part  of  the  long  term  planning  exercise.  These  impacts  will  inform  the 
computation  of  cost  benefit  ratios  and  net  present  values  for  the  scenarios  under 
consideration. 
 
The Contractor will also design and deliver a training workshop early in their work plan that 
describes  the  key  concepts  that  will  be  employed  throughout  the  study.  The  purpose  is  to 
facilitate  the  Division  of  Energy  and  its  invitees  in  their  understanding  of  these  concepts.  
This will be followed by a more detailed workshop at the end of the study that would equip 
the Division of Energy to conduct benefit costs analyses of new scenarios, plus monitor the 
markets for renewable energy. 
 
2.  Review of the BLPC Base Case and Assumptions 
 
The  Contractor  will  assist  IRENA  in  the  review  of  the  BLPC's  base  case  model  and 
assumptions made in its 2012 IRP, and2015 grid integration study.  Base on this review, the 
Contractor will develop a PLEXOS model and calibrate its outputs against those of the BLPC 
as  contained  in  its  2012  and  2015  reports  (See  Annex  I).    These  reports  contain  sufficient 
generation  plant,  load,  pricing  and  other  data  to  develop  a  PLEXOS  production  cost  model 
with  all  of  the  load  aggregated  at  a  single  node.    No  grid  data  is  publicly  available  in  the 
reports, except for a single line diagram for the entire transmission and distribution grid and a 
single  line  diagram  for  two  of  the  major  feeders  on  the  island.  The  Contractor  should 
therefore propose how they intend to fill this data gap if at all possible. The Contractor will 
also review and make recommendations on the need to identify a new reference year, and to 
develop a new base case model if recommended. 
Page 19 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Contractor is also expected to calibrate their model against the PLEXOS model internal 
to the BLPC, which includes the full technical details of the transmission grid, transformers, 
connecting lines and loads at the substations. The Division of Energy is expected to facilitate 
this exchange of data with the BLPC, and will share the data with IRENA who in turn will 
inform the Contractor. The Contractor will conduct a difference analysis in order to validate 
the  outputs  of  their  model,  and  incorporate  improvements  upon  consultation  with  IRENA. 
The  Contractor  will  recommend  to  IRENA  and  to  the  Division  of  Energy  if  and  how  to 
develop a new base case using updated information (e.g. on RE technologies cost, oil price 
scenarios,  gas  availability  scenario,  etc.)  and  without  having  access  to  the  grid  data.    The 
Contractor, upon consultation with IRENA and the Division of Energy, will develop a new 
base case generation expansion plan and model this in both PLEXOS and LEAP, calibrating 
the  latter  on  the  PLEXOS  model.  Once  this  is  concluded,  the  Contractor  and  IRENA  will 
hand  over  the  LEAP  model  to  the  Division  of  Energy,  together  with  a  training  on  how  the 
model  was  developed,  the  assumptions  used  and  how  the  Division  of  Energy  can 
independently  use  it  for  supporting  future  policy  making  efforts.  The  LEAP  model  will 
include end uses of energy, end use RE technologies and more detailed model of energy use 
for transportation, as PLEXOS is focused exclusively on the power sector. These models will 
form the analytical kernel of the cost benefit analysis, net present value and policy analysis to 
be conducted by the Contractor.  
 
3.  Scenario Development and Analysis in PLEXOS 
 
The  Contractor  will  propose  how  it  will  develop  a  number  of  scenarios,  based  on  the three 
supply scenarios described in section 1, with any necessary additional scenario for demand, 
energy  prices  to  be  analysed  as  part  of  the  development  of  the  Roadmap.    Initially  the 
scenarios will be modelled in the energy planning model LEAP. The Contractor will develop 
an approach to model the socio-economic impacts of the energy sector by introducing “labour 
intensities”  in  a  manner  similar  to  how  the  models  incorporate  energy  intensities.  The 
Contractor will quantify the impacts of the scenarios when compared  against the base case, 
and compute net present values and benefit cost ratios for each scenario. 
 
The Contractor will also develop the corresponding bottom-up engineering  models for each 
scenario  using  PLEXOS.  The  scenarios  will  consider  higher  levels  of  penetration  of  both 
Page 20 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dispatchable  and  variable  renewable  energy  compared  to  those  considered  by  the  BLPC  in 
their IRP report of 2012 and their grid integration study 2015. The Contractor is expected to 
make the necessary assumptions using the available sources or using other publicly available 
sources to develop the model, including assumptions about resource adequacy and the timing 
of the installation of new plants under the  various  scenarios,  and  discuss these assumptions 
with  IRENA,  the  Division  of  Energy  and  BLPC  for  their  feedback.    The  models  and  their 
outputs  should  be  benchmarked  and  calibrated  against  similar  runs  by  the  BLPC  using  the 
more  detailed  PLEXOS  models  internal  to  the  company.    In  order  to  facilitate  the 
benchmarking exercise, the Division  will request that the BLPC run models that correspond 
to the scenarios developed by IRENA in collaboration with the Contractor. The Division will 
request  that  the  results  be  returned  to  the  Division  for  sharing  with  IRENA  and  the 
Contractor.  The  Contractor  will  conduct  the  calibration  comparing  results,  and  improving 
their models as necessary.  
 
The  Contractor  will  conduct  a  difference  analysis  in  order  to  compare  the  outputs  of  the 
simplified  models,  and  incorporate  improvements  upon  consultation  with  IRENA  and  the 
BLPC.  The  Contractor  will  also  review  any  corresponding  optimal  load  flow  analysis, 
stability  analysis,  resource  adequacy,  and  other  grid  impact  and  mitigation  studies  that  are 
expected to be conducted by the BLPC on the behalf of the Division, and – if made available 
at least one month before the deadline for submission of the final report – adjust the models to 
include the necessary grid integration measures.   
 
The scenarios developed by the Contractor will consider technologies and strategies  not yet 
considered  by  the  BLPC  from  a  planning  perspective.  A  suggested  list  of  technologies  that 
will be considered for resource expansion is given below. This list is not exhaustive and the 
Contractor  should  include  in  their  proposal  additional  scenarios  and  technologies  that  are 
deemed appropriate to Barbados.   
 
The technologies are: 
a.  Solid  biomass  –  An  additional  thermal  plant  fuelled  100  percent  by  leucaena  (river 
tamarind).  This  goes  beyond  the  25  MW  plant  already  under  consideration.  The 
Contractors  will  build  a  model  for  this  additional  plant  and  define  its  optimal  size 
based on the sustainable yield of available biomass resources and least cost planning 
criteria. 
 
Page 21 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b.  Utility Scale Solar  – consideration for any additional projects that would reduce the 
electricity supply cost, to be deployed by either independent power producers (IPP) or 
the  BLPC.  The  Contractor  will  take  into  account,  consulting  with  the  Division  of 
Energy, any new projects that are being considered by the recently established Light 
and Power Advisory Committee. This Committee was commissioned under the new 
Electric  Light  and  Power  Act,  ELPA  (2013).    The  Contractor  will  supplement  this 
with  data  from  publicly  available  sources  such  as  the  IRENA  Global  Atlas 
( 
(http://irena.org/GlobalAtlas) 
http://www.irena.org/costing ). 
IRENA 
figures 
cost 
and 
RE 
 
c.  Utility Scale Wind – The Contractor will consider any new projects planned by both 
the  BLPC  and  IPP’s  that  are  made  known  to  the  Committee.    The  BLPC  has 
announced that a wind farm is currently planned for the northern part of the Island of 
Barbados  called  East  Lamberts,  St  Lucy.    Nominal  plant  data  is  published  in  the 
company’s  IRP  study.  As  no  resource  assessment  is  available  publicly  for  this 
project, the Contractor will develop data from publicly available sources such as the 
IRENA  Global  Atlas/DTU  Global  Wind  Atlas  and  manufacturer’s  data  for  wind 
turbines.  
 
d.  Direct Control Demand Response.  The Contractor shall describe in its proposal how 
it intend to model the impacts of demand side management. The Contractor is hereby 
made aware that the BLPC has made a presentation to the Division that summarises a 
recent  DSM  study.    Upon  award  of  the  contract,  the  Contractor  will  use  the  data 
contained in the BLPC’s presentation on demand side management (DSM) to analyse 
the  potential  and  impacts  of  direct  control  demand  response  technologies,  with  due 
consideration given to the limited information made available.  
 
e.  Price-Based Demand Response.  The Contractor shall describe in its proposal how it 
intend to model the impacts of price-based demand response.  Upon the award to the 
contract,  the  Contractor  will  use  the  data  contained  in  the  BLPC’s  presentation  on 
demand side management (DSM) to the Division to analyse the potential and impacts 
of price-responsive demand response technologies.  
 
f.  Utility  Scale  Battery  Storage.  The  Contractor  shall  describe  in  its  proposal  how  it 
intends to model utility scale storage options. The Contractor shall consider the full 
array  of  storage  technologies  and  recommend  the  most  suited  technologies  for 
application  in  Barbados.    Due  consideration  will  be  given  to  enough  storage  to 
support a 100 percent renewable energy scenario. 
 
g.  Customer Owned Battery Storage.  The Contractor shall describe in its proposal how 
it intends  to  model  customer  owned  battery  storage  options.  Upon  the award  of  the 
contract,  the  Contractor  will  build  a  model  for  this  class  of  technologies,  and  will 
analyse  its  potential  to  provide  both  back  up  energy  to  customers,  as  well  as  to 
provide a demand response mechanism to the BLPC. The Contractor will model this 
technology  using  the  simplified  PLEXOS  model,  with  the  understanding  that  the 
Page 22 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results  would  be  approximate  as  the  simplified  models  do  not  account  for  this 
distributed nature of this resource. 
 
h.  Ice  storage  for  applications  in  air-conditioning  and  refrigeration  systems.    The 
Contractor shall describe in its proposal how it intends to model customer owned ice 
storage  options,  in  particular  for commercial  (incl.  hotels)  and industrial customers. 
The Contractor will build a model for this class of technologies. The Contractor will 
analyse  its  potential  to  provide  both  back  up  energy  to  customers,  as  well  as  to 
provide  a  demand  response  option  for  the  BLPC  (e.g.  possibility  to  switch  off  the 
chiller when necessary and rely on ice storage for a limited time to provide cooling 
services).  The  Contractor  will  model  this  technology  using  the  simplified  PLEXOS 
model, with the understanding that the results would be approximate as the simplified 
models do not account for this distributed nature of this resource. 
 
i.  Utility-Owned Pumped Hydro Storage. The Contractor shall describe in its proposal 
how it intends to model system wide utility storage options. The Contractor will build 
a  model  for  this  class  of  technologies.  The  Contractor  will  analyse  its  potential  to 
provide both back up energy to customers, as well as to provide a grid management 
mechanism to the BLPC. 
 
j.  Electric  Vehicles.    The  Contractor  shall  describe  in  its  proposal  how  it  intends  to 
model electric vehicles and their interactions with the BLPC electricity grid. Based on 
an  analysis  of  the  evolution  of  the  vehicle  stock  in  Barbados  (in  LEAP),  the 
Contractor  will  include  electricity  demand  from  EVs  to  all  demand  scenarios.  Due 
consideration will be given to charging time of the EVs (day or night), its impact on 
BLPC  load  shape  and  on  integration  of  solar  and  wind,  with  an  assessment  of  the 
impact  on  overall  electricity  supply  cost.  The  Contractor  is  expected  to  make 
recommendations  on  the  ideal  charging  strategy  for  EVs,  the  appropriate  market 
signals (e.g. time of use pricing) or regulations to ensure a positive impact of EVs on 
electricity  supply  cost,  and  the  costs  of  not  adopting  the  optimal  strategy.  The 
Contractor  will  build  a  model  for  this  class  of  technologies.  The  Contractor  will 
analyse  its  potential  to  provide  both  back  up  energy  to  customers,  as  well  as  to 
provide a grid management mechanism to the BLPC. 
 
4.  Grid Impact Studies 
 
a.  The scenarios developed by Contractor will benefit greatly from support from a grid 
study  to  explore  the  grid  integration  measures  necessary  for  each  of  the  identified 
scenarios.  These  studies  are  necessary  in  order  to  determine  the  engineering 
feasibility of the scenarios, especially in relation to the impacts due to the integration 
of  high  levels  of  variable  renewable  energy.    It  is  expected  the  BLPC  will  conduct 
detailed  studies  of  the  impact  of  the  scenarios,  developed  by  the  Contractor  for 
IRENA,  on  grid  operations  and  make  the  results  available  to  the  Division.  The 
Contractor and IRENA are expected to be informed by the Division concerning these 
studies. The Contractor will review the outputs and modify their scenario models as 
Page 23 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appropriate,  if  provided  by  BLPC  to  the  Contractor  at  least  one  month  before 
deadline  for  submission  of  the  final  report  from  the  Contractor  to  IRENA.  If  the 
results of these studies will not be made available to the Contractor in due course, the 
Contractor  will  provide  detailed  description  of  how  to  include  the  grid  integration 
measures identified into the PLEXOS and LEAP models developed. 
 
The Contractor will also provide data on the likely costs impacts of these measures within the 
context of the scenarios for Barbados: 
a.  The operational and non-operational measures that may be employed by BLPC to 
mitigate  the  effects  of  integration  of  high  levels  of  variable  renewable  energy.  
The  mitigation  measures  are  expected  to  range  from  grid  reinforcement,  to 
automatic  generation  control,  to  the  use  of  storage  options,  and  to  the  use  of 
demand  response  options.  The  employment  of  these  mitigation  measures  is 
expected to provide operational flexibility and other benefits.  
 
b.  It is expected that the grid impact studies from the BLPC will include: 
  A steady state optimal power flow analysis of the transmission grid down to 
the level of the sub-stations for each scenario developed.  The optimal power 
flow  analysis  will  reveal  those  critical  hours  of  the  year  when  the 
transmission system is approaching its operational security limits 
  A  further  contingency  analysis  that  would  examine  the  impact  of  any 
significant event during the critical hours identified 
  A feeder level analysis that would explicitly account for the distributed nature 
of  the  resources.  This  analysis  would  include  voltage  impacts,  as  well  as 
contingency impacts due to a loss of system resources or load at the level of 
the distribution grid. A transient stability analysis for each scenario. 
In  the  event  that  the  BLPC  does  not  provide  the  supporting  studies,  the 
Contractor will not be required to offer any additional reports on this subject, 
but  only  a  detailed  description  of  how  to  include  the  grid  integration 
measures identified into the PLEXOS and LEAP models developed. 
 
 
5.  Cost Benefit Analysis 
 
The  Contractor  will  conduct  costs-benefit  analysis  for  each  scenario.    The  analysis  will 
compare the base case with the scenarios. The analysis will comprise of an evaluation of the 
net economic benefits and costs (if any) of the scenario versus the base case.  The analysis 
will be conducted in PLEXOS using the production cost routine therein and supplemented by 
spreadsheets as needed.  The benefits would comprise at least of – but not limited to - reduced 
production  costs, reduced CO2  and  other  environmental  emissions,  plus  any  other  financial 
benefits based on any increased operational flexibility imposed by the scenario.  The costs are 
primarily  those  of  the  technology  employed  in  scenarios  plus  the  cost  of  any  mitigation 
Page 24 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
measure. These benefits and costs will be used to calculate a discounted net present value and 
benefit cost ratio for each scenario. Based on the results of the policy analysis, the Contractor 
will  then  recommend  the  least  cost  pathway  to  meet  the  29%  renewable  energy  target  by 
2029, the least-cost generation mix (without a constraint on minimum RE share) and the 100 
percent renewable energy target. 
Of  particular  importance  would  be  the  assessment  of  costs  and  benefits  of  imposing  policy 
constraints on local content, local job creation and local investments, to advise the Division of 
Energy in their policy making efforts. 
 
6.  Protocol for Market Monitoring   
 
The  Contractor  will  develop  a  protocol  which  is  intended  to  guide  the  Minister  with 
Responsibility  for  Energy  in  fulfilment  the  role  of  the  issuance  of  licenses  to  any  utility 
operator under the Electric Light and Power Act, ELPA. The protocol should reflect all the 
technical  issues  contemplated  in  this  request  for  proposals.  The  Contractor  should  consider 
that the Division of Energy is not likely to obtain a full power systems planning model that 
incorporates  data  for  the  transmission  grid,  the  distribution  grid,  substations  and  the 
connecting lines.  Hence the Division, acting on the behalf of the Minister should be empower 
with  the  necessary  protocols  to  monitor  the acquisition  of  renewable  energy  resources. The 
Division should also be empowered with the knowledge to ask meaningful questions of the 
utility that are intended to ensure its safe and reliable operation within the context of the high 
penetration levels of variable renewable energy resources.  The Contractor will include in its 
proposal  the  scope  of  the  protocol,  and  the  nature  and  frequency  of  data  collection.  The 
protocol should also contain guidance on the framing of the questions that should be asked by 
the Minister when interrogating the utility. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXISTING RESOURCES, REPORTS AND DATA SOURCES 
The data sources and the assumptions will be provided by the Division of Energy through its 
liaison  with  a  number  of  Government  agencies,  non-governmental  agencies  and  the  private 
sector.  The Contractor will also review the following list of existing studies and information 
resources: 
1.  Integrated Resource Plan, Barbados Light and Power Company, 2012. 
See http://www.blpc.com.bb/co-mis/integrated-resource-planning.html 
(visited on 24 November 2015); 
2.  Executive Summary, Barbados Wind and Solar Integration Study, Barbados Light and Power 
Company,  2015.  See  http://www.blpc.com.bb/co-mis/barbados-wind-and-solar-integration-
study.html (visited on 24 November 2015); 
3.  Grid  Code  -  Interconnection  Requirements  for  24.9  KV  and  Below,  Barbados  Light  and 
Power Company, BLPC, 2014. See http://www.blpc.com.bb/images/brochures/GRID-C0DE-
Rev1-May%2020141.pdf (visited on 24  November 2015); 
4.  Barbados  National  Economic  Statistics  (and  Assumptions),  Central  Bank  of  Barbados.  See 
http://www.centralbank.org.bb/researchers/statistics (visited on 24 November 2015); 
5.  UNDP Report: Base Line Grid Report (of the BLPC), 2015; 
6.  UNDP Report: Grid Characterization Report (of the BLPC), 2015; 
7.  Electric Light and Power Act, ELPA 2013.  
See http://www.energy.gov.bb/elpa (visited on 25 November 2015); 
8.  Fair Trading Commission of Barbados. See http://www.ftc.gov.bb. 
 
 
 
 
 
Rest of the page intentionally left blank 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(TIMELINE (ESTIMATED) 
Timeline  for  the  finalization  of  the  report  will  be  at  latest  by  20  May  2016.  If  time  is 
considered insufficient,  a cost-neutral  extension of 1-3 months can be considered, if clearly 
requested by the Contractor in its offer. IRENA will confirm the possibility of this extension 
in the response to the successful bidder. 
Specific  milestones  will  be  as  in  the  table  below.  In  case  of  delays  in  the  award  of  the 
contract, the milestones will be postponed accordingly. 
 
PROJECT MILESTONES 
Award of contract 
Kick-off  workshop  in  Barbados  (4-5  days,  depending  on 
need) 
Date (all dates are for 2016) 
Before 1 February 
February  or  early  March, 
depending  on  schedule  of 
stakeholders 
By 14 March 
Tentatively 6 April 
Inception Report 
Presentation in Barbados of: (a) LEAP base case model, and 
(b) PLEXOS base case model and calibration results 
 
Submission  of  Scenarios  with  NPV  and  BCR  analyses, 
benchmarking results, plus grid impact results (optional – if 
grid study results received by 20 April). 
Delivery of the complete version of the LEAP and PLEXOS 
scenario    models,  with  accompanying  draft  report  to  the 
Division  of  Energy  and  IRENA  including  a  draft  Market 
Monitoring Protocol 
Final workshop with presentation of the results in Barbados, 
including  hand-over  training  for  the  LEAP  model  to 
Division of Energy and IRENA 
Final adjustments to the models, based on the discussions in 
the final  workshop, and  finalization of the report including 
the Market Monitoring Protocol 
By 4 May 
By 4 May 
Tentatively 11 May 
20 May 
 
DELIVERABLES 
1.  Inception Report 
2.  Report and presentation on:  (a) LEAP base case model; and (b) PLEXOS base case model; 
and (c) Calibration results 
3.  Report and presentation of: (a) Scenarios with NPV and BCR analyses; (b) grid impact results 
(if possible); (c) Benchmarking results 
4.  Complete draft versions of the LEAP and PLEXOS models for each scenario 
5.  Draft  Report  to  accompany  the  draft  LEAP  and  PLEXOS  models  under  #4  above,  and 
including a draft Market Monitoring Protocol; 
6.  Final Workshop incl. LEAP training 
7.  Final Report and LEAP and PLEXOS Models 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex I 
D A T A   A V A I L A B L E   F O R   T H E   D E V E L O P M E N T   O F   B A R B A D O S  
N A T I O N A L   E N E R G Y   R O A D M A P  
 
1.  The National Sustainable Energy Framework. See http://www.energy.gov.bb/web/national-
sustainable-energy-policy  
 
2.  Most of the information references can be found in BLPC’s Integrated Resource Plan and 
BLPC’s Barbados Wind and Solar Integration Study Executive Summary which can be 
accessed at the following locations: 
 
Integrated Resource Plan: Main Report 
http://www.blpc.com.bb/IRP/photos/IRP%20Revised%20Final%20Report%20- 
%20February%202014%20-%20Clean%20Copy.pdf  
 
Integrated Resource Plan: Appendices A through AA : 
http://www.blpc.com.bb/IRP/photos/IRP%20Revised%20Final%20Report%20- 
%20February%202014%20-%20Appendices%20-%20Clean%20Copy.pdf 
 
Integrated Resource Plan: Appendix B: 
http://www.blpc.com.bb/IRP/photos/IRP%20Revised%20Final%20Report%20- 
%20February%202014%20-%20Appendix%20AB.pdf 
 
Barbados Wind and Solar Integration Study Executive Summary: 
http://www.blpc.com.bb/images/wattsnew/ 
Barbados%20Wind%20and%20Solar%20Integration%20Study%20-
%20Exec%20Summary.pdf 
 
 
3.  Wind and Solar Resources 
 
Barbados Wind and Solar Integration Study Executive Summary: 
 
 
 
4.  Renewable Energy Rider (net billing solar PV systems) aggregate capacity at the end of 
August 2015 is as follows: 
 
Page 28 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  Utility-Planned Renewable Energy Projects 
 
St. Lucy Energy Gateway Solar Project 
Capacity: 12 MW DC, 10 MW AC 
Energy Production: 20, 000 kWh 
Configuration: Ground mounted on 42 acres of land at Trents, St. Lucy 
Current status: Under construction 
In-service date: Expected to be in-service in Q3 2016. 
 
Lamberts Wind Farm Project 
Capacity: 10 MW 
Energy Production: 30,170 kWh 
Configuration: 11 turbines located at Lamberts, St. Lucy 
Current status: Finalising land access with land owner 
In-service date: Expected to be in-service in Q4 2017. 
 
6.  PLEXOS data inputs 
Please refer to the Integrated Resource Plan and its Appendices as follows: 
Integrated Resource Plan & Appendices: 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
System operating philosophy 
Please refer to the Integrated Resource Plan as follows: 
Integrated Resource Plan: 
 
 
 
Electricity Demand Forecast 
Please refer to the Integrated Resource Plan and its Appendices as follows: 
Integrated Resource Plan & Appendices: 
 
 
Hourly Electricity demand Data 
Available hourly load profile for typical weekday, Saturday and Sunday of 2010, and 
total monthly demand for each month of 2010. 
 
Hourly Electricity demand Data 
Measured solar radiation, averaged from all installed pyranometers in Barbados. Data 
with 10 minutes resolution, from 6:00 am to 6:00 pm of 18 April 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rest of the page intentionally left blank 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TECHNICAL EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR PROPOSALS 
S C O R I N G   A N D   E V A L U A T I O N   C R I T E R I A  
Summary of Proposal Evaluation  
Score Weight 
1.  Technical Evaluation 
70% 
2. 
Financial Evaluation 
30% 
Technical Evaluation Criteria 
Score Weight 
1. 
 
Proposed approach, methodology and implementation plan:  
a)  Propose  an  approach  to  carry  out  the  work  along  with  providing  a 
target-oriented  work  plan  that  is  realistic  and  in  line  with  the 
milestones provided within the TOR (10%);  
 
 
b)  Recognize  the  important  aspects  related  to  the  individual  tasks. 
Indicate in the proposal the allocation of resources dedicated of each 
of the tasks outlined in the TOR (5%). 
 
 
c)  Identify and describe the tools that will be used, and which functions 
in particular will be used to carry out the analysis based on the data 
available and the expected results (10%). 
30% 
d)  Highlight  possible  challenges  in  the  performance  on  the  tasks 
required according to the timeline, and propose solutions that will be 
considered  as  risk  mitigation  measures,  including  use  of  own  data 
and  engineering  expertise based  on  previous  similar projects  to  fill 
any information gap (5%). 
2. 
 
Expertise of the firm / organization:  
a)  Present documented experience and knowledge on issues related to 
the  development  of  long  term  energy  planning  models  using 
PLEXOS  and  LEAP  (not  necessarily  in  the  same  project).  Provide 
references  of  similar  projects,  including  national  energy  roadmaps, 
utility  integrated  resource  plans  and  master  plans,  highlighting 
which of team members proposed for this work were involved in the 
referenced projects, and what their role was. (20%) 
 
40% 
b)  Present documented experience and knowledge on issues related to 
the development of grid studies using PLEXOS and the appropriate 
grid  modeling  tools  (e.g.  ETAP,  Power-Factory,  PSLF,  etc.). 
Provide  references  of  similar  projects  where  the  output  from 
PLEXOS  was  used  to  perform  a  grid  integration  study  for  large 
shares of variable renewable energy using the appropriate tools, and 
the  output  of this  study  where  used to  update the  PLEXOS  model, 
e.g. including any grid integration measures identified as necessary. 
Please  highlight  which  of  team  members  proposed  for  this  work 
were  involved  in  the  referenced  projects,  and  what  their  role  was 
(10%). 
Page 31 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c)  Present documented experience and knowledge on issues related to 
the  development  of  power  sector  modeling  and  energy  planning  in 
islands. Any previous experience in Barbados or similar context will 
be advantageous. Please highlight which of team members proposed 
for  this  work  were  involved  in  the  referenced  projects,  and  what 
their role was (10%) 
3. 
 
Team quality:  
a)  Provide a breakdown of the composition of the team and a detailed 
allocation  of  the  time  spent  on  each  task  by  each  team  member 
(5%); 
 
30% 
b)  Provide  the  relevant  qualifications  and  experience  of  the  experts 
who  will  be  directly  involved  in  the  project  in  various  capacities 
(including project manager  - not less than 15 years of experience - 
PLEXOS  modeler,  LEAP  modeler  and  grid  integration  studies 
expert – each of the three with no less than 5 years of experience). 
For  each  team  member,  provide  CV  and  samples  of  relevant  work 
undertaken (25%); 
TOTAL  
100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 32 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 4: Proposal Submission Form 
This form must be returned along with the submission signed and stamped from authorized person 
 
To: 
IRENA, Chief Procurement Officer 
 
Dear Sir/Madam: 
We, the undersigned, hereby offer to provide professional services for IRENA’s Consultancy Service 
for indicated subject with your Request for Proposal dated and our Proposal.  We are hereby 
submitting our Proposal, which includes the Technical Proposal and Financial Proposal sealed under a 
separate envelope. 
 
We  hereby  declare  that  all  the  information  and  statements  made  in  this  Proposal  are  true  and  we 
accept that any misinterpretation contained in it may lead to our disqualification. 
 
We confirm that we have read, understood and hereby accept the Terms of Reference describing the 
duties  and  responsibilities  required  of  us  in  this  RFP,  and  the  General  Terms  and  Conditions  of 
IRENA ’s. 
 
We agree to abide by this Proposal for 120 days.  
 
We undertake, if our Proposal is accepted, to initiate the services not later than the date indicated in the Data 
Sheet. 
We fully understand and recognize that IRENA is not bound to accept this proposal, that we shall bear 
all  costs  associated  with  its  preparation  and  submission,  and  that  IRENA  will  in  no  case  be 
responsible or liable for those costs, regardless of the conduct or outcome of the evaluation. 
 
 
We remain, 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
Authorized Signature [In full and initials]:   
 
 
Name and Title of Signatory:   
 
 
Name of Firm:   
 
             
Contact Details:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 5: Documents Establishing the Eligibility and Qualifications of the Proposer 
 
Proposer Information Form 
 
 
1.  Proposer’s Legal Name  [insert Proposer’s legal name] 
2.  In case of Joint Venture (JV), legal name of each party: [insert legal name of each party in JV] 
3.  Proposer’s actual or intended Country of Registration: [insert actual or intended Country of 
Registration] 
4.  Proposer’s Year of Registration: [insert Proposer’s year of registration] 
5.  Proposer’s Legal Address in Country of Registration: [insert Proposer’s legal address in country of 
registration] 
6.  Proposer’s Authorized Representative Information 
     Name: [insert Authorized Representative’s name] 
     Address: [insert Authorized Representative’s Address] 
     Telephone/Fax numbers: [insert Authorized Representative’s telephone/fax numbers] 
     Email Address: [insert Authorized Representative’s email address] 
7.   Attached are copies of original documents of: [check the box(es) of the attached original 
documents] 
  Articles of Incorporation or Registration of firm named in 1, above, in accordance with ITB Sub-
Clauses 4.1 and 4.2. 
  In case of JV, letter of intent to form JV or JV agreement. 
  In case of government owned entity, documents establishing legal and financial autonomy and 
compliance with commercial law. 
 
Joint Venture Partner Information Form 
 
[The Proposer shall fill in this Form in accordance with the instructions indicated below]. 
 
1.  Proposer’s Legal Name: [insert Proposer’s legal name] 
2.  JV’s Party legal name: [insert JV’s Party legal name] 
3.  JV’s Party Country of Registration: [insert JV’s Party country of registration] 
Page 34 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  JV’s Party Year of Registration: [insert JV’s Part year of registration] 
5.  JV’s Party Legal Address in Country of Registration: [insert JV’s Party legal address in country of 
registration] 
6.  JV’s Party Authorized Representative Information 
Name: [insert name of JV’s Party authorized representative] 
Address: [insert address of JV’s Party authorized representative] 
Telephone/Fax numbers: [insert telephone/fax numbers of JV’s Party authorized representative] 
Email Address: [insert email address of JV’s Party authorized representative] 
7.  Attached are copies of original documents of: [check the box(es) of the attached original 
documents] 
  Articles of Incorporation or Registration of firm named in 2. 
  In case of government owned entity, documents establishing legal and financial autonomy and 
compliance with commercial law. 
 
Page 35 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 6: Technical Proposal Form 
 
TECHNICAL PROPOSAL FORMAT 
 
SECTION 1: EXPERTISE OF FIRM/ ORGANISATION 
This section should fully explain the Proposer’s resources in terms of personnel and facilities 
necessary for the performance of this requirement.  
 
1.1 Brief Description of Proposer as an Entity: Provide a brief description of the organization / firm 
submitting  the  proposal,  its  legal  mandates/authorized  business  activities,  the  year  and  country  of 
incorporation, types of activities undertaken, and approximate annual budget, etc.  Include reference 
to reputation, or any history  of litigation and arbitration in which the organisation / firm has been 
involved  that  could  adversely  affect  or  impact  the  performance  of  services,  indicating  the 
status/result of such litigation/arbitration. 
 
1.2.    Financial  Capacity:    Provide  the  latest  Audited  Financial  Statement  (Income  Statement  and  
Balance  Sheet)  duly  certified  by  a  Public  Accountant,  and  with authentication  of  receiving  by  the 
Government’s Internal Revenue Authority.  Include any indication of credit rating, industry rating, 
etc. 
 
1.3.  Track Record and Experiences:  Provide the following information regarding corporate 
experience within the last five (5) years which are related or relevant to those required for this 
Contract.   
 
Name of 
project 
Client  Contract 
Period 
of 
activity 
Types of 
activities 
undertaken 
Status or 
Date 
Completed 
References 
Contact Details 
(Name, Phone, 
Email) 
Value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION  2 -  APPROACH AND IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
This  section  should  demonstrate  the  Proposer’s  responsiveness  to  the  specification  by  identifying 
the  specific  components  proposed,  addressing  the  requirements,  as  specified,  point  by  point; 
providing  a  detailed  description  of  the  essential  performance  characteristics  proposed;  and 
demonstrating how the proposed methodology meets or exceeds the specifications. 
 
2.1.  Approach  to  the  Service/Work  Required:  Please  provide  a  detailed  description  of  the 
methodology  for  how  the  organisation/firm  will  achieve  the  Terms  of  Reference  of  the  project, 
keeping in mind the appropriateness to local conditions and project environment. 
 
2.2. Technical Quality Assurance Review Mechanisms: The methodology shall also include details 
of the Proposer’s internal technical and quality assurance review mechanisms.   
 
Page 36 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3. Reporting and Monitoring: Please provide a brief description of the mechanisms proposed for 
this project for reporting to the IRENA and partners, including a reporting schedule.  
2.4.  Subcontracting:  Explain  whether  any  work  would  be  subcontracted,  to  whom,  how  much 
percentage of the work, the rationale for such, and the roles of the proposed sub-contractors.  Special 
attention should be given to providing a clear picture of the role of each entity and how everyone 
will function as a team.  
 
SECTION 3: PERSONNEL 
 
3.1 Management Structure: Describe the overall management approach toward planning and 
implementing this activity.  Include an organization chart for the management of the project 
describing the relationship of key positions and designations. 
 
3.2 Staff Time Allocation:  Provide a spreadsheet will be included to show the activities of each staff 
member and the time allocated for his/her involvement.  (Note: This spreadsheet is crucial and no 
substitution of personnel will be tolerated once the contract has been awarded except in extreme 
circumstances and with the written approval of the IRENA.  If substitution is unavoidable it will be 
with a person who, in the opinion of the IRENA project manager, is at least as experienced as the 
person being replaced, and subject to the approval of IRENA . No increase in costs will be 
considered as a result of any substitution.) 
 
3.3 Qualifications of Key Personnel.  Provide the CVs for key personnel (Team Leader, Managerial 
and general staff) that will be provided to support the implementation of this project. CVs should 
demonstrate qualifications in areas relevant to the Scope of Services.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 7: Financial Proposal Form 
Financial Proposal Form 
The Proposer is required to prepare the Financial Proposal in a separate envelope from the rest of the 
RFP response as indicated in RFP. The format shown below is required in preparing the Financial 
Proposal.  
 
A.  Cost Breakdown by Cost Component:  
The Proposers are requested to provide the overall cost breakdown for all deliverables based on the 
following  format.  IRENA  shall  use  the  cost  breakdown  for  the  price  reasonability  assessment 
purposes  as  well  as  the  calculation  of  price  in  the  event  that  both  parties  have  agreed  to  add  new 
deliverables to the scope of Services. Prices should be in USD inclusive of VAT / All Taxes & fees (if 
applicable).  
 
*Total Period of 
the Engagement 
(Days) –per 
categories of staff 
assigned 
Name / 
Designation 
of the 
Proposed 
Staff 
Rate / 
Cost per 
day 
(USD) 
Total in 
USD  
No 
Description of deliverables 
Deliverable 1: Kick-off workshop 
in Barbados (1 day- require 1 
trainer and 1 assistant).  
  
 
 
 
 
Deliverable 2: Inception Report 
  
 
 
 
 
Deliverable 3: Draft report and 1 
day consultations in Barbados on:  
 
 
 
 
 
(a)  LEAP  base  case  model;  and 
(b)  PLEXOS  base  case  model;   
(c) Calibration results.  
Deliverable 4: Review of the grid 
study developed by BLPC (if 
provided by deadline) based on 
deliverable 3. and update of the 
PLEXOS and LEAP models 
based on this study  (Optional, 
but quotation is required )   
 
 
 
 
 
Deliverable 5: Delivery of the 
complete version of the LEAP 
and PLEXOS models, with 
accompanying draft report to the 
Division of Energy and IRENA 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including a draft Market 
Monitoring Protocol 
Deliverable 7: delivery of final  
workshop with presentation of 
the results in Barbados (1 day), 
including hand-over training for 
the LEAP model to Division of 
Energy and IRENA (1 additional 
day).  
Deliverable  8:  Final  Report  and 
LEAP  and  PLEXOS  Models 
including final adjustments to the 
models,  based  on  the  discussions 
final  workshop,  and 
in 
the 
report 
the 
of 
finalization 
including  the  Market  Monitoring 
Protocol 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grand Total in USD    
 
 
*Note on deliverbales  : As per TOR, It is expected that this project duration is approximately 3 months 
of work. The estimated actual days of work on the analysis is not expected to exceed 60  +/- 10%. 
 
1.  Total estimated work days to complete the tasks  
 
 
 
 
2.  Total Lump Sum: 
USD. WITHOUT TRAVEL COST 
 
 
The fee must be all inclusive of VAT / All Taxes & fees (if applicable). The Fee should not 
include cost of travel. Any travel, if authorized by IRENA, will be made in accordance with 
IRENA’s travel policy.  
 
For: 
 
Name of Bidder:-------------------------- 
Authorised Signatory:------------------- 
Name:-------------------------------------- 
Designation:------------------------------- 
 
_______________________________________          
 
Signature 
 
 
 
Date: ____________/ 2015 
 
 
  
Page 39 of 39 
RFP/2015-026 
 
