Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 3
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 7
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
 
I.  UNDP  within  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation 
Framework (UNSDCF) 
1.  Ghana is a lower-middle income country with a population estimate of 30.8 million people 
in 2021, which is a five-fold increase since independence in 1957, with females (50.7 per cent) 
outnumbering  males  (49.3  per  cent)  by  almost  half  a  million.  Youth  and  people  living  with 
disabilities constitute 38 per cent and 7.8 per cent of the population, respectively. The country’s 
Human  Development  Index  (HDI)  value  for  2019  was  0.611,  which  places  it  in  the  medium 
human development category, with a ranking of 138 out of 189 countries. The Gender Inequality 
Index value of 0.538 also places the country at 138 out of 189 countries. In 2020, 45.6 per cent of 
Ghana’s  population  was  categorized  as  multi-dimensionally  poor,  posing  a  threat  to  national 
progress to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).1 In general, high rates of rural 
poverty and spatial inequality have driven rapid rural-urban and north-south migration without a 
corresponding increase in decent urban employment opportunities and basic services, with youth 
and women most affected.  
2.  The United Nations Common Country Assessment (CCA) notes considerable progress was 
made  in  advancing  national  development  priorities  and  the  SDGs  in  the  last  few  decades.2 
However, in the report it is noted that despite strong gross domestic product (GDP) growth figures 
over the last decade, Ghana’s economy has yet to show significant structural transformation and 
related  progress  on  the  income  ladder.  The  economy  remains  heavily  dependent  on  the 
agricultural sector in spite of the  growing prominence of the  services sector in  contributing to 
GDP and the absorption of labour.3 Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic had a severe impact on 
economic activities, slowing economic growth from 6.5 per cent in 2019 to 0.4 per cent in 2020. 
The pandemic particularly affected the micro and small enterprise (MSME) sector that generates 
up to 70 per cent of the national GDP. Although Ghana’s economy is recovering from the impact 
of the COVID-19 pandemic it now faces new challenges brought on by the Russia-Ukraine crisis 
by way of global oil price shocks, fuel-pump prices, and food cost increases.4 
3.  The  CCA  also  indicates  that  poverty,  livelihoods,  gender,  and  geography  continue  to 
determine the level of climate change vulnerabilities in Ghana. People living under the poverty 
line  are  assumed  to  have  reduced  capacity  to  adapt  to  climate  change.5  The  report  notes  that 
despite  the  upward  democratic  governance  trajectory,  national  capacity  gaps  in  public  service 
delivery,  contested  rule  of  law  and  human  rights  aspects,  and  limited  participation  of  citizens 
(especially  women, youth  and  other marginalized  groups) have  contributed  to  a  weakening  of 
social  contracts  and  created  a  deficit  of  trust  in  key  institutions.  In  addition,  Ghana’s  peace 
dividend is coming under stress as new conflict drivers and internal and sub-regional threats to 
stability emerge.  
4.  Ghana’s  vision  for  fulfilling  its  development  potential,  addressing  identified  challenges, 
consolidating its status as a middle-income country and supporting Ghana Beyond Aid are defined 
in several major policy documents and national strategies. At the centre of different policies and 
strategies  is  the  Coordinated  Programme  of  Economic  and  Social  Development  Policies 
(CPESDP)  2017-  2024  that  sets  out  the  government  vision  for  creating  an  optimistic,  self-
confident, and prosperous nation. CPESDP calls for this to be done through the creative  use of 
the  country’s  human  and  natural  resources,  and  operating  within  a  democratic,  open  and  fair 
society  where  mutual  trust  and  economic  opportunities  exist  for  all.  CPESDP  also  seeks  to 
modernize  and  transform  agriculture,  promote  industrial  diversification,  and  accelerate  youth 
employment with deliberate national strategies to localize and achieve the SDGs, leaving no one 
behind. 
 
1 NDPC/GoG (2019), “Ghana: VNR Report on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,” p. 118. 
2 UN Ghana (2021), United Nations Common Country Analysis for The Republic of Ghana. 
3 UN Ghana (2021), “Economic Transformation Analysis,” CCA Thematic Brief, p. 52. 
4 UNDP Ghana Briefing Note Impact of Russia-Ukraine War on Ghana.  
5 The World Bank (2020), Ghana Country Environmental Analysis. 
 
2/16 
22-10510 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
5.  The UNSDCF articulates government expectations of the UN development system (UNDS) 
in  delivering  strategic  priorities  of  the  Government  of  Ghana.  It  centralizes  the  economic 
transformation  agenda  and  commitment  to  leave  no  one  behind,  with  special  attention  on  the 
country’s  youth  and  SDG  achievement.  Considering  lessons  learned  from  the  UN  Sustainable 
Development  Partnership  (UNSDP)  2018-2022  Evaluation,  the  new  UNSDCF  (2022-2025) 
development process adopted a co-creation approach that involved participatory consultations and 
inputs  from  all  stakeholders  to  facilitate  implementation.  The  UNDP  Country  Programme  is 
anchored  in  the  UNSDCF  and  takes  inspiration  from  the  Ghana  Coordinated  Programme  for 
Economic and Social Development (CPESD) vision document and Ghana Beyond Aid strategy 
document.  Together,  these  form  the  centerpiece  towards  fulfilling  the  economic  and  social 
transformation agenda in Ghana. The overarching vision of these two documents rests on the goals 
of a wealthy, inclusive, sustainable, empowered, and resilient Ghana where the people are self-
reliant  and  in  charge  of  the  country’s  destiny.  Complimentary  to  the  policy  vision  are 
commitments to implementing the SDGs, African Union Agenda 2063, and Paris Agreement on 
Climate Change (COP21). These policy commitments are being implemented through the  post-
COVID-19 blueprint for economic recovery, Ghana CARES programme, and the medium-term 
development framework (2022-2025). 
6.  The Ghana country programme also takes inspiration from the UNDP Strategic Plan (2022-
2025)  with  the  focus  on  three  directions  of  change  (structural  transformation,  leaving  no  one 
behind, and building resilience), as well as the six signature solutions and UNDP Strategic offer 
for Africa (2022-2025). It also takes advantage of lessons learned from evaluations, including the 
Independent Country Programme Evaluation (ICPE) and the UNSDP 2018-2022 Evaluation. The 
two  pillars  of  the  CPD  are  aligned  with  the  Medium-Term  National  Development  Policy 
Framework (2022-2025), in particular goals to build a prosperous country; safeguard the natural 
environment and constructed environment; maintain a stable, united, and safe country, and build 
resilience to withstand threats  to different  risks and shocks, including COVID-19. Programme 
priority  areas  are  also  aligned  to  the  19  policy  actions  of  the  Updated  Nationally  Determined 
Contribution  and  have  the  potential  to  maximize  synergies  between  adaptation  and  economic 
diversification, which will result in mitigation co-benefits.6 
7.  UNDP comparative advantage draws comes from its strategic positioning as a long-term and 
trusted  government  partner  during  previous  programming  cycles,  and  as  a  result  of  ongoing 
activities at national and sub-national levels in advancing progress towards the achievement of 
the  SDGs.  As  evidenced  in  the  ICPE,  UNDP  has  a  successful  track  record  of  supporting 
development progress and in delivering on partner priorities in line with the UNSDCF in the areas 
of women and youth empowerment, peace and social cohesion, climate financing, digitalization 
and  learning.  Moving  forward,  UNDP  will  contribute  to  UNSDCF  objectives  by  playing  a 
strategic  role  in  bringing  together  partnerships  from  government,  civil  society  organizations 
(CSOs), development partners and private sector for accelerating the implementation of the SDGs. 
As a partner of choice for institutional capacity strengthening, UNDP will continue to leverage 
the expertise of its innovation hubs and the Accelerator Lab to foster innovation and creativity 
that helps strengthen institutions and systems and foster inclusive development. 
8.  UNDP will emphasize collaboration across a revitalized UN system and continue drawing on 
complementary strengths and capabilities to deliver stronger and collective results for the people 
of  Ghana.  This  will  be  achieved  by  applying  integrated  approaches  aimed  at  transformative 
change. 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
9.  The  overarching  theory  of  change  can  be  summarized  as  follows: IF  government  and 
peoples’ capacities for sustainable, resilient and inclusive growth and structural transformation 
are enhanced, IF policies, strategies and institutional frameworks to boost accountable, inclusive, 
 
6 Updated Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement (2020 - 2030). 
3/16 
22-10510 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
 
responsive  governance  and  social  cohesion  are  strengthened,  and  IF gender  equality  is 
mainstreamed, and women, youth, other marginalized groups are empowered; THEN all people 
will enjoy an inclusive and transformed economy that creates jobs, and THEN people will benefit 
from  transparent,  accountable,  inclusive  institutions  and  greater  environmental  stewardship, 
leading to enhanced socioeconomic development, and a peaceful and socially-cohesive Ghana. 
10.  The UNDP Ghana country programme takes its priorities from the UNSDCF vision that is 
inspired by a cohesive, innovative, responsive, and agile UNDS, and aims to promote and support 
SDG  implementation  for  an  inclusive  and  resilient  Ghana.  UNDP  will  provide  investment 
expertise,  including  catalytic financial  structuring,  de-risking,  and  capital  deployment  to  drive 
resource  mobilization  for  climate  financing  and  achieving  SDG  impact.  UNDP  will  apply  a 
holistic development approach based on its track record as  published in the ICPE and various 
evaluations and surveys. Aside from its own reports, UNDP will also leverage data from analytical 
reports  by  the  United  Nations  Environment  Programme  (UNEP)  and  World  Bank  country 
environmental  analysis  reports  to  inform  programme  design  focused  on  natural  resource 
management and the restoration of degraded landscapes. The country programme will ensure the 
use  of  a  human  rights-based  approach  across  programme  activities,  including  the  principle  of 
‘leave no one behind’ to ensure all human rights (economic, social and environmental) are upheld. 
11.  Against the backdrop of  rising to lower middle income country status, UNDP Ghana will 
continue to focus on making effective use of a tight resource envelope to advance equitable and 
transformative development in Ghana, including the consolidation of governance reforms. Main 
areas  of  work  will  include  sustainable  development  and  inclusive  growth,  and  strengthened 
institutional  capacities  for  good  governance,  human  rights,  peace,  and  security.  Programme 
implementation  will  employ  a  portfolio  approach  to  arrive  at  strategic  solutions  for  complex 
challenges. The goal is to break “siloed” ways of working by clustering around two programming 
areas: (i) resilience and linking economic and environment resilience through skills, financing and 
technology access for MSMEs, and (ii) inclusion in reaching marginalized groups, including them 
as partners and agents of change, expanding opportunities for youth and women, and increasing 
citizen engagement and participation to prevent conflict, sustain peace and ensure social cohesion. 
Sustainable, resilient and inclusive growth and structural transformation 
 
12.  Based on the recommendations of the ICPE and the principle of ‘leave no one behind’, UNDP 
will support the Government of Ghana to reinforce  a youth and women led MSME sector that 
flourishes in a green, inclusive, and equitable manner. This will be achieved primarily through 
partnerships with the private sector in building the capacities of institutions to deliver improved 
services  to  support  MSMEs  to  innovate  and  leverage  additional  financing  for  increased 
productivity  and  opportunities  for  decent  jobs,  particularly  youth.  This  will  help  position 
enterprises to take advantage of the large African Free Trade market. It also holds great potential 
for achieving the SDGs 8,9,10, and 17 in particular. 
13.  Findings from recent evaluations suggest deepening of engagement with key development 
actors in climate action. UNDP, in close collaboration with the Ministry of Environment, Science, 
Technology and Innovation, will lead coordination and resource mobilization efforts for climate 
action. Concurrently, the Forestry Commission, Ghana Cocoa Board, Metropolitan, Municipal, 
and  District  Assemblies  (MMDAs),  and  Community  Based  Organizations  (CBOs)  will 
collaborate  on  interventions  for  restoring  degraded  landscapes  and  promoting  sustainable 
environmental  production  with  a  specific  emphasis  on  agroforestry.  As  the  private  sector 
continues  to  provide  targeted  finance  and  technology  aimed  at  driving  climate  action  and 
environmental  sustainability,  SMEs  and  start-ups  will  lead  in  onboarding  and  adopting digital 
technology that serves people and the planet.   
14.  Drawing  from  its  global  expertise  and  local  networking  capacities,  UNDP  will  facilitate 
access to innovative tools, approaches and technologies developed and tested around the world to 
help  communities  (particularly  in  the  north  or  highly  degraded  rural  areas)  adapt  to  climate 
change, reduce vulnerability to disasters, promote environmental conservation, support the private 
 
4/16 
22-10510 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
sector  to  make  production  more  environmentally  sustainable,  and  enhance  private  sector 
involvement  in  inclusive  markets  and  the  delivery  of  green  products  and  services.  The  latter 
includes a focus on youth-led innovative business models. 
15.  UNDP will continue to coordinate support with the government by retaining core strategic 
partnerships  with  MMDAs,  national  ministries,  departments  and  agencies,  commissions  and 
development  authorities,  while  exploring  government  cost-sharing  engagements.  Additionally, 
UNDP will strengthen collaboration with other UN agencies in the context of Delivering as One 
(DaO) and leverage its existing partnerships with bilateral and multilateral donors especially the 
top five development partners from the last CPD cycle: Green Climate Fund (GCF), Adaptation 
Fund, the governments of Japan and Germany, and the Global Environment Facility (GEF). New 
partnerships  with  CSOs  (for  advocacy,  accountability,  and  expertise),  academia  (quality  data 
innovative  solutions  and  for  knowledge  production  and 
gathering, 
dissemination),  and  private  sector  (for  incubation  of  innovative  and  alternative  sources  of 
resources,  and  to  create  green  jobs)  will  be  explored,  nurtured  and  managed.  African  Union, 
regional actors, Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), tech hubs, parliament, 
youth organizations will also be engaged in programme partnerships. 
identification  of 
16.  The  UNDP resource mobilization strategy will include scaling up access to vertical funds 
such  as  GCF,  Adaptation  Fund,  GEF,  and  Montreal  Protocol  and  retaining  private  funding 
towards the attainment of the SDGs. UNDP will continue to partner with the government on the 
implementation  of  the  Integrated  National  Financing  Framework  (INFF)  relating  to  SDG 
financing  strategies  at  subnational  and  national  levels  to  complement  the  Country  Financing 
Roadmap  for  the  SDGs,  a  country-led  initiative  to  formulate  an  action  plan  to  unlock  greater 
financing for SDGs achievement.7 
Accountable, inclusive, and responsive governance and social cohesion  
 
17.  Noting the UNDP track records in institutional capacity strengthening and multi-stakeholder 
engagement,  UNDP  will  align  efforts  with  national  priorities  and  support  state  and  non-state 
institutions in enhancing their capabilities through the exploration of innovative approaches.  
18.  To accelerate the implementation of the SDGs, UNDP will support impactful policymaking, 
strategic innovation, digitalization, inclusive data collection and use, and promote easy access to 
information  through  one-stop  shops/dashboards.  UNDP  will  support  and  provide  technical 
assistance to the National Development Planning Commission (NDPC) to support routine data 
collection,  surveys  and  compilation  of  national  human  development  reports  and  multi-
dimensional  poverty  indices.  Jointly  with  the  United  Nations  country  team  (UNCT)  and  other 
Development  Partner  (DPs),  UNDP  will  focus  on  data  and  analytics  to  strengthen  national 
statistical systems for planning, financing and reporting with attention on inclusion of vulnerable 
groups such as women and youth in national data sets, and to ensure timely production of data for 
SDG reporting. 
19.  Building on past success in facilitating constitutional reform and supporting the conduct of 
free, fair and transparent elections, UNDP will partner with the Ministry of Justice and Attorney 
General’s  Department  and  Parliament  to  support  ongoing  constitutional,  electoral  and  legal 
reforms that promote inclusive and transparent governance processes. In collaboration with civil 
society, the Electoral Commission, and National Commission for Civic Education, UNDP will 
enhance  aspects  of  voter  education,  citizen  participation  in  electoral  processes  at  national  and 
local  levels,  and  the  expansion  and  uptake  of  globally  accepted  digital  technologies  and 
innovations to improve transparency and effective management of general and local elections.  
20.  A  critical  role,  UNDP  will  enhance  the  enabling  environment  for  economic  governance, 
including natural resource management, to contribute to social cohesion and delivery of people-
centered  economic  dividends.  In  line  with  SDGs  1,  2,  and  16,  UNDP  will  provide  tools, 
methodologies, and capacities to support partnerships between UN agencies and the government 
 
7 World Economic Forum (2021), Country Financing Roadmap for the SDGs: Ghana. 
5/16 
22-10510 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
 
to strengthen the efficient and transparent mobilization of revenue. UNDP will also collaborate 
with  national  audit  institutions,  and  other  UN  agencies  to  promote  more  transparency, 
accountability  and  cost-effectiveness  in  public  financial  management  and  control  of  illicit 
financing flows. UNDP will also enhance partnerships with CSOs to support advocacy towards 
the more equitable and inclusive participation of women and youth in decision-making processes 
and management of economic and natural resource governance ecosystems. 
21.  Leveraging its trusted partner role in line with ICPE recommendations, UNDP will support 
effective collaboration amongst local authorities, civil society, and communities at large, as well 
as  development  partners  to  establish  dialogue  spaces  for  deepening  democratic  discourse, 
promoting  inclusive  participation,  increasing  women  and  youth  leadership,  and  demanding 
accountability. In addition to strengthen social contract and responsiveness, UNDP will monitor 
and  transform  service  delivery  by  contributing  to  policy  dialogues  with  national  and  local 
government on citizen rights and accountability as per SDG financing dialogues.8 Furthermore, 
UNDP will advocate for policy options on inclusive and sustainable economic growth and SDG 
implementation through coordinated platforms. In line with SDG 5, UNDP will explore a joint 
intervention with UN Women in partnership with the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social 
Protection (MoGCSP), governments of Canada and Norway, national political parties, parliament, 
and other actors to strengthen women groups and CSOs, and address the inadequate numbers of 
women in political and governance processes and mainstream gender equality and empowerment 
of women and youth, focusing on vulnerable groups (women, children, people in late adulthood, 
people with disabilities, and people living with HIV). 
22.  UNDP,  in  partnership  with  the  Commission  on  Human  Rights  and  Administrative  Justice 
(CHRAJ) and other UN agencies, will adopt a human rights-based approach that works with right-
holders and duty-bearers and draws on the principle of fulfilling economic, and social rights to 
strengthen the protection of the human rights of all segments of society, particularly women and 
people  living  with  disabilities.  Contributing  to  SDG  3,  leveraging  UNDP  global  and  regional 
assets, and in partnership with Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), World 
Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and 
Government of Japan, UNDP will work with the Ghana AIDS Commission (GAC) and Ghana 
Health Service to enhance health systems and improve equitable access and rights of vulnerable 
groups  to  health  services,  especially  those  related  to  HIV/AIDS,  non-communicable  and 
infectious diseases (NCDs).  
23.  To  address  challenges  related  to  increasing  transnational  organized  crimes  and  political 
instability in neighbouring countries that has caused an increased number of displaced people and 
illegal immigrants, UNDP will continue to build upon its trusted leadership role in peacebuilding 
and keeping to expand its reach to regional peace councils, civil society, CBOs, and other peace 
actors.  In  collaboration  with  the  governments  of  Japan,  Germany,  and  Sweden,  UNDP  will 
strengthen efforts to prevent and mediate ongoing and emerging conflicts that may involve violent 
extremism,  political  vigilantism,  and  herdsmen-farmer  conflicts,  and  to  combat  terrorism  and 
crime in the country and sub-region. This will be accomplished by working in collaboration with 
relevant  UN  agencies  and  other  partners  on  programmatic  interventions  that  strengthen  the 
functionality  of  peace  architecture  and  introduce  measures  to  promote  social  cohesion  at  the 
regional level. UNDP will also support the creation of an enabling environment to promote the 
inclusion  of  women  and  youth  in  peacebuilding  processes,  capacity  building,  dialogue, 
meaningful  participation  and  direct  support  to  young  peacebuilders  as  implementers  of 
peacebuilding  initiatives  in  fulfilment  of  SDG  16,  and  UN  security  council  resolutions  1325, 
2250, 2419, and 2535.  
 
8 See https://inff.org/report/governance-and-coordination-report. 
 
6/16 
22-10510 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
III.  Programme and risk management  
24.  This country programme document (CPD) outlines UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources  assigned  to  the  programme  at  the  country  level.  Accountabilities  of  managers  at 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the 
organization’s  Programme  and  Operations  Policies  and  Procedures  and  Internal  Control 
Framework. 
25.  The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced 
by  direct  execution  for  part  or  all  of  the  programme  to  enable  response  to  force  majeure. 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other  UN 
agencies  to  manage  financial  risks.  Cost  definitions  and  classifications  for  programme  and 
development effectiveness will be charged to concerned projects. 
26.  In addition, UNDP will leverage the expertise of regional service centers and headquarters 
for needed advisory services. Programme accountability will focus on development results, use 
of programme resources as well as the sustainability of development investments. 
27.  Development  financing  challenges  in  Ghana’s  lower  middle-income  country  environment 
shifted  funding  from  aid  to  trade  and  investments  with  potential  risk  to  resource  mobilization 
efforts to meet projected revenue. Challenges may be multiplied by the Ukraine-Russia conflict 
and  deviation  of  development  finance  from  other  regions,  including  Africa,  all  of  which  may 
impact the implementation of planned activities. To address potential shortfalls in aid flows and 
seize  emerging  opportunities,  UNDP  will  explore  new  types  of  financing,  partnerships  and 
collaborations,  along  with  support  analytical  work  on  expanding  fiscal  spaces,  including 
innovative sources of financing from private sector and non-traditional donors. UNDP will use its 
convening power to galvanize partnerships with bilateral and multilateral institutions. While the 
size of the programme is expected to increase significantly in the new cycle, UNDP will adopt 
measures from conducting private sector to human rights due diligence to avoid operational and 
reputational  risks.  Over  time,  measures  will  be  modified  to  ensure  UNDP  adapts  to  new 
challenges. 
28.  Political risks and possible flare-ups of latent and emerging conflicts can negatively impact 
the implementation of planned projects in affected communities. UNDP will manage this risk by 
continuously  scanning  the  operating  environment,  strengthening  collaboration  with  national 
authorities, and strengthening early warning and response mechanisms. The programme will be 
agile enough to be adapted to evolving contexts, UNDS reforms, and the new UNDP Strategic 
Plan. 
29.  Potential health threats arising from poor sanitation management, regional and national health 
epidemics, climate-related disasters, and negative environmental impacts related to unregulated 
mining  will  be  addressed  through  proactive  collaboration  with  national  authorities,  regional 
entities to enhance  the policy environment, promote adherence to national environmental laws 
and,  where  possible,  strengthen  the  resilience  of  institutions  and  local  communities.  Ongoing 
recovery efforts related to COVID-19 and pandemic-specific socioeconomic implications will be 
bolstered by sustained collaboration with the government, UNCT, and development partners at 
policy  and  programme  levels.  UNDP  will  also  enforce  quality  assurance  principles,  apply  its 
Social and Environmental Standards, undertake regular monitoring, and use the biannual review 
mechanism to assess programme risks and put in place mitigation actions. 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
30.  Monitoring and evaluation will be guided by relevant UNDP policies and procedures, and 
indicators in the CPD results framework, which are drawn from the Partnership Framework and 
UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022- 2025. 
7/16 
22-10510 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
 
31.  In line with ICPE recommendations for the country office to strengthen its monitoring and 
evaluation systems to provide evidence-based data on the progress of results against targets and 
generate  information  on  outcomes  as  well  as  output  level  changes  directly  related  to  UNDP 
contributions, the country office will develop and implement a comprehensive  monitoring and 
evaluation  plan  for  the  new  country  programme.  UNDP  will  implement  the  project  quality 
assurance  system  and  develop  capacities  for  gender-sensitive  monitoring  and  evaluation.  In 
addition,  the  country  office  will  organize  periodic  review  meetings  with  partners  to  assess 
progress. 
32.  UNDP will also leverage the monitoring and evaluation capacities of Ghana’s well-renowned 
research and academic institutions, and the Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) to conduct surveys 
and contribute to evaluations, policy briefs and reports. A share of the programme budget will be 
allocated for these activities. A gender marker will be applied to outputs and used to track CPD 
budgets and expenditures to improve planning and resources allocation regarding gender equality. 
At the UNSDCF outcome level, monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken via inter-agency 
results groups, as well as through mid-term and final evaluations of the UNSDCF and CPD.  
33.  The  Evaluation  Plan  in  the  annex  of  this  CPD  is  formulated  with  a  view  to  enhance 
transparency, learning, accountability for results within CPD priority areas and to generate lessons 
for improved programming. This plan complies with Section II of  the UNDP evaluation policy 
and will be periodically reviewed to address changes made during the CPD implementation cycle. 
34.  The evaluation plan will be reviewed and updated periodically. Evaluations will be selected, 
planned and conducted to measure progress and results for learning and accountability purposes. 
Findings and recommendations from all evaluations will be used to enhance project, portfolio and 
programme design and implementation and will inform decisions to make needed adjustments 
during  the  implementation  phase  as  well  as  ensure  accountability  to  stakeholders.  In  addition, 
evaluations  will  be  used  to  strengthen  the  quality  of  partnership  for  resource  mobilization  to 
expand the scope of key interventions for increased impact. 
 
 
8/16 
22-10510 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Ghana (2023-2027) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Building a green, inclusive, and prosperous country that creates opportunities for all   
COOPERATION  FRAMEWORK  (OR  EQUIVALENT)  OUTCOME  INVOLVING  UNDP  #1:  By  2025,  people  in  Ghana  particularly,  women,  youth,  persons  with 
disabilities and those furthest behind will enjoy an inclusive and transformed economy that creates decent jobs and sustainable livelihoods reducing inequality. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions  
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME  
(US dollars) 
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), BASELINES, 
TARGET(S) 
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including 
indicators, baselines targets) 
MAJOR PARTNERS/ 
PARTNERSHIPS 
FRAMEWORKS 
Regular: 500,000 
Other: 7,000,000 
Indicator:  
Proportion of men women and 
children of all ages living in 
poverty in all its dimensions 
according to national definitions 
(SDG indicator 1.2.1.). 
Data Source:  
Multi-dimensional child index in 
Ghana and Multi-dimensional 
Poverty Index, Ghana 
National Development Planning 
Commission (NDPC), Ministry of 
Finance (MoF), Ministry of Trade 
and Industry (MoTI), Ghana 
Statistical Service (GSS), Ghana 
Enterprise Agency (GEA), Food 
and Agricultural Organization 
(FAO), International Fund for 
Agricultural Development, United 
Nations Capital Development 
Fund 
Output 1.1.: Enabling environment 
improved for enhanced productivity of 
youth and women led MSMEs. 
 
  
 
Indicator 1.1.1.: Number of enabling, 
inclusive and gender responsive 
strategies and digital solutions developed 
and implemented to increase productivity 
of MSMEs. 
Baseline: 3 (2021) 
Target: 50 (2027) 
Data Source: MoTI/MoF reports and 
Ghana Budget Statement. 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
Frequency: Every four years 
 
 
 
 
Baseline:  
Overall: 45.6% (2020) 
Male heads of households: 47.7% 
(2020) 
Female heads of households: 
40.6% (2020) 
Target:  
Overall: 40.6% (2025) 
Male heads of households: 42.7% 
(2025) 
Female heads of households: 
35.6% (2025) 
Responsible: GSS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.2.: Number of institutions 
with strengthened capacities to provide 
adequate business regulatory and/or 
development services to MSMEs. 
Baseline: 8  
Target: 20 
Data Source: UNDP Project Reports, 
National Development Planning 
Committee, GEA, Ministry of Trade and 
Industries reports.  
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator:  
Unemployment rate, by sex, age 
and persons with disabilities (SDG 
indicator 8.5.2.). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Source: to be determined 
(TBD) 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline: TBD 
Target: TBD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Frequency: TBD 
 
 
 
 
Indicator:  
Output 1.2.: Institutional capacities to 
promote innovative public and private 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
 
Reduction in national emissions of 
carbon dioxide compared to the 
“business as usual” scenario. 
Responsibility: TBD 
financing/investment for sustainable 
economic diversification enhanced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Source:  
Ghana’s Communications and 
Biennial Update reports to the 
United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) 
Indicator 1.2.1.: Number of institutions 
with enhanced capacity to promote 
innovative public and private 
financing/investment. 
Baseline: 1 (2021) 
Target: 3 (2027) 
Data Source: MoF report  
Frequency: Annual 
Regular: 615,000 
Other: 7,000,000 
 
 
Baseline:  
46.69 MtCO2e9 (2019) 
Target:  
59.79 MtCO2e (2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator:  
Proportion of land degraded over 
total land area 
 
 
Frequency: Biennial  
 
 
 
 
Responsibility: The Ministry of 
Environment, Science, Technology 
and Innovation (MESTI) and 
Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) 
 
 
Baseline: 7,963,900 ha (2020) 
Target: 3,706,950 (2025) 
National Youth Authority (NYA); 
Ministry of Youth and Sports, 
MoF, GEA, the National 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation 
Programme, MoTI, United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
United Nations Office for Project 
Services (UNOPS), and UNIDO 
 
 
 
 
Data Source: Annual Progress 
Reports of the Ghana Forestry 
Commission (FC), Ghana’s 
Communications and Biennial 
Update Reports to UNFCCC. 
Output 1.3.: Degraded landscapes 
(reserves and off-reserves) restored 
through public and private partnerships 
for people and planet. 
Regular: 600,000 
Others: 22,000,000 
Ministry of Lands and Natural 
Resources (MLNR), Forestry 
Commission, environment 
Protection Agency, MESTI, 
MMDAs, research institutions, 
CSOs, traditional authorities, 
Ghana Cocoa Board, State 
Secretariat for Economic Affairs, 
European Union, FAO, other 
development partners 
 
  
Frequency: Annual/biennial 
Indicator 1.3.1.: Number of hectares of 
degraded land or forests under improved 
management (through Modified Taungya 
System (MTS), Community Resource 
Management Areas (CREMAs) that 
contributes to CO2 emission reductions.  
Baseline: 124,096 ha (2021) 
Target: 730,000 ha (2027) 
Data Source: FC  
Frequency: Annual  
 
Responsibility: FC 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.3.2.: Tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (t CO2eq) reduced or 
avoided (including increased removals). 
 
9 Unit of measurement refers to metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.  
 
10 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
Baseline: 0 tCO2e (2021) 
Target:  4.5 million tCO2e (2027) 
Data Source: FC, Ghana’s 
Communications and Biennial Update 
reports to UNFCCC 
Frequency: Annual  
MLNR, FC, EPA, MESTI, 
MMDAs, research institutions, 
CSOs, and traditional authorities 
Regular: 600,000 
Others: 12,000,000 
Output 1.4.: Communities enabled to 
adopt systems for integrating climate 
change and environmental considerations 
into management of natural resources 
(e.g., forest and land) and livelihood 
activities. 
 
  
Indicator 1.4.1.: Number of Community 
Resource Management Areas (CREMA) 
or similar landscape management 
structures established and 
operationalized.  
Baseline: 49  
Target: 60 
Data Source: Forestry Commission 
Reports   
Frequency: Annual.  
 
Indicator 1.4.2.: Number of males and 
females benefitting from the adoption of 
diversified, climate resilient livelihood 
options. 
Baseline:  
Females: 3,600 (2021) 
Males: 2,400 (2021) 
Target: 
Female: 15,600 (2027) 
Male: 5,200 (2027) 
Data Source: Forestry Commission 
reports 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 1.4.3.: Number of districts 
with development plans integrating 
climate change and environmental 
considerations. 
11 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
 
Baseline: 10 (2021) 
Target: 50 (2025) 
Data Source: NDPC reports 
Frequency: Annual  
Regular: 600,000 
Others: 12,000,000 
MESTI, Association of Ghana 
Industries, Ghana Recycling 
Initiative by Private Enterprises, 
Ministry of Local Government and 
Rural Development, Ministry of 
Sanitation and Water Resources, 
Accra Metropolitan Assembly, 
MMDAs, Private Enterprise 
Federation, UNICEF, UNIDO, 
research institutions, CSOs,  
development partners, Netherlands 
Embassy 
in  Ghana,  Canadian 
Embassy, Germany, 
Sweden, Switzerland,  
EPA 
Output: 1.5.: Risk-informed and 
Evidence-based plans/policies and 
innovative solutions developed and 
financed at national and subnational 
levels for gender-responsive climate 
action, green and circular economy in 
line with international conventions. 
 
 
  
Indicator1.5.1.: Number of innovative 
finance instruments developed and 
implemented for climate smart 
agriculture, just energy transition and 
disaster risk reduction. 
Baseline: 0 (2021) 
Target: 4 (2027) 
Data Source: National Communication 
to the UNFCCC and Biennial 
Transparency Report 
Frequency: Annual 
  
Indicator1.5.2.: Number of partnerships 
with state and non-state actors for 
environmental services established and 
implemented.  
Baseline: 14 (2021) 
Target: 30 (2027) 
Data Source: MESTI reports   
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 1.5.3.: Extent to which gender 
sensitive policy measures (governance, 
financing mechanisms and institutional 
capacities) are developed and 
implemented for climate action, green 
and circular economy.  
Baseline: 2 (very partially) 
Target: 3 (partially) 
Data Source: MESTI reports 
Frequency: annual 
12 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
 
NATIONAL GOAL: A democratic political system that maintains a stable, united and safe country, is issue based, people-centred, result-oriented and accountable to the public.  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME #3: By 2025, people in Ghana will benefit from transparent, accountable, inclusive governance institutions and systems 
including quality integrated digital services delivering a peaceful, cohesive and just society. 
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transition.  
Indicator:  
Level of citizen trust in 
institutions  
Output 2.1.:  Democratic institutions and 
processes strengthened for an inclusive and open 
public sphere with expanded public engagement. 
Data Source: Afrobarometer 
Survey Report 
Ministry of Local 
Governance (MoLC), 
Inter-ministerial 
committee on local 
government, MMDAs,  
Public Service 
Commission, NDPC, 
MoGSP, Children and 
Social Protection,  
NYA, Ministry of 
Interior, Electoral 
Commission, 
CSOs,  
development partners, 
Netherlands Embassy in 
Ghana, Canadian 
Embassy, GIZ, United 
Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO), 
and United Nations 
Population Fund 
(UNFPA) 
National Peace Council 
(NPC), National 
Commission on Small 
Arms and Light 
Weapons, CSOs,  
National Security Fusion 
Center, International 
Organization for 
Migration (IOM), 
UNFPA, United Nations 
Office on Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC), 
UNICEF,  
Regular: 500,000  
Others: 5,500,000  
 
Frequency: Biennial 
 
 
Baseline: (2020) 
Parliament – 50.6% 
EC – 52.9% 
Local Government Council – 
41.3% 
The Police – 39%  
Ghana Armed Forces – 72.9% 
Courts – 47.9% 
Target: (2025) 
Parliament – 60% 
EC – 55.9% 
Local Government Council – 
46.3% 
The Police – 55% 
Ghana Armed Forces – 75% 
Courts – 50% 
Indicator 2.1.1.: Number of strategies implemented 
at the national and sub-national levels  to promote 
inclusive spaces for advancing leadership and 
participation of women, and youth in public life. 
Baseline: 5 (2021) 
Target: 10 (2027) 
Data Source: MoGCSP Reports 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Responsibility: Ghana Centre 
for Democratic Development 
(CDD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.2.: Number of mechanisms instituted 
to strengthen public sector agility and effectiveness 
for improved service delivery. 
Baseline:0 (2022) 
Target: 5 (2027) 
Data Source: MMDA Reports 
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator:  
Proportion of population that 
feel safe walking alone around 
the area they live (SDG 
Indicator 16.1.4). 
 
 
 
Output  2.2.:  Communities  and  infrastructures  for 
peace  enabled  to  adopt  systems  for  resilience  and, 
early action and prevention. 
Regular: 404,000  
Others: 4,000,000  
Data Source: Ghana Living 
Standard Survey 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.1.: Extent to which early action 
measures are adopted to manage current and 
emerging conflicts. 
Baseline:  Level 2: Partially 
Target: Level 3: Moderately  
Data Source: NPC Reports 
Frequency: Annual 
Frequency: Every four years  
Baseline:  
37.4% (2019) -feels very safe 
45.3% (2019) -feels moderately 
safe 
Target:  
40.7% (2025) - feels very safe 
42% (2025) feels moderately 
safe 
 
Responsibility: GSS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.2.: Number of gender- responsive 
community and cross-border initiatives and action 
 
 
13 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
 
Indicator: 
Extent to which Ghana’s 
national human rights 
institutions are in compliance 
with Paris Principles (SDG 
indicator 16.a.1). 
plans in place for enhancing resilience and conflict 
prevention. 
Baseline: National 2 (2021); Sub-national 5 (2021)  
Target: National 4 (2027); Sub-national 10 (2027) 
Data Source: NPC/GNACSA Reports 
Frequency: Annual 
development partners, 
and Netherlands Embassy 
in Ghana  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Source: Annual Progress 
Reports 
 
 
Scale: 
0 – Not Compliant 
1 – Partly Compliant 
2 – Mostly Compliant 
3 – Fully Compliant  
Baseline: 1(2022) 
Target: 2(2025) 
Indicator 2.2.3.: Number of women and youth  
organizations, movements and networks at sub-
national level with strengthened capacity for conflict 
prevention, resilience and national interest. 
Baseline: Women: 3, Youth: 3 (2021) 
Target: Women:  6, Youth: 6 (2027) 
Data Sources: NPC Reports  
Frequency: Annual  
Output 2.3.: Local governance systems strengthened 
for increased socioeconomic opportunity, inclusive 
and gender sensitive basic service delivery, 
transparency and accountability. 
 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Responsibility: Commission on 
Human Rights and 
Administrative Justice (CHRAJ), 
Amnesty International Ghana 
 
Regular: 500,000  
Others: 10,000,000 
MoLC, ministerial 
committee on local 
government, MMDAs, 
local government service, 
academia, CSO’s, private 
sector, and UNICEF 
 
Indicators 2.3.1.: Number of new measures 
implemented to enhance the agility and 
responsiveness of local governance institutions for 
improved service delivery and accountability. 
Baseline: 0 (2021) 
Target: 20 (2027) 
Data Source: Local Government Service Reports 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 2.3.2.: Number of women and youth 
focused CSOs with enhanced capacity to participate 
in governance processes at the local level.   
Baseline (2021):  1 CSO (Y), 2 CSOs (W) 
Target (2027): 6 CSO (Y), 4 CSOs (W) 
Data Source: GSS Reports 
Frequency: Annual  
Output 2.4.: Economic governance capabilities, 
including on natural resource management 
strengthened, to contribute to social cohesion and 
delivery of the economic dividends of democratic 
governance. 
Regular: 300,000 
Others: 3,500,000 
Commission of Human 
Rights and 
Administrative Justice, 
Judicial Service, 
Ministries, Departments 
and Agencies (MMDAs), 
National Youth 
Authority, MoGCSP, UN 
Women, International 
 
Indicator 2.4.1.: Number of initiatives implemented 
at national and sub-national level to enhance the 
14 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
Labour Organization 
(ILO), UNFPA, 
UNAIDS, National AIDS 
Control program, Ghana 
AIDS Commission, Inter-
Ministerial Coordination 
Committee on 
Implementation of 
Universal Periodic 
Review (UPR), Ministry 
of Health, Ghana Health 
Service (GHS), non-state 
actors, and Ministry of 
Lands and Natural 
Resources 
enabling environment for economic and natural 
resource governance.  
Baseline:  
National: 0 (2021) 
Sub-national: 0 (2021) 
Target:   
National: 2 (2027)  
Sub-national: 3 (2027) 
Data Source: NDPC reports and MMDA composite 
budgets 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 2.4.2.: Number of women and youth and 
their networks engaged in the economic and natural 
resource governance ecosystem. 
Baseline (2021): 0 Networks 
Target (2027): 5 Networks 
Data Source: NDPC Reports 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Output 2.5.: Policies and strategies developed and 
implemented for equitable health services for all of 
society, particularly the vulnerable. 
 
Indicator 2.5.1.: The number of digital solutions 
introduced to accelerate equitable health service 
delivery to the vulnerable and marginalized. 
Baseline: 1 (2021)  
Target: 3 (2027)  
Data Source GHS and NDPC Report  
Frequency: Annual  
 
Indicator 2.5.2.: Number of health institutions with 
strengthened capacity to provide non-discriminatory 
services to all.  
Baseline: 4 (2021)  
Target: 8 (2027)  
Data Source: GHS Report  
Frequency: Annual  
 
Output 2.6.: National capacities for planning, 
budgeting and data systems for SDGs 
15 
 
DP/DCP/GHA/4 
 
 
implementation, including indicator tracking and 
reporting, strengthened. 
 
Indicator 2.6.1.: Number of strategies implemented  
to generate data for SDG implementation and 
reporting.  
Baseline: 5 (2021 
Target: 10 (2027) 
Data Source: Voluntary National Review Report 
Frequency: Biennial  
 
 
16 
