E
N
I
P
S
GHANA
RENEWABLES READINESS 
ASSESSMENT
R
e
n
e
w
a
b
l
e
s
 
R
e
a
d
i
n
e
s
s
 
A
s
s
e
s
s
m
e
n
t
:
 
G
H
A
N
A
November 2015
Please adjust the spine base on the 
E
N
thickness of the inside pages.
I
P
S
Copyright © IRENA 2015
Unless  otherwise  stated,  this  publication  and  material  featured  herein  are  the  property  of  the  International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and are subject to copyright by IRENA. 
Material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that 
all such material is clearly attributed to IRENA and bears a notation that it is subject to copyright (© IRENA, 2015).
Material contained in this publication attributed to third parties may be subject to third party copyright and 
separate terms of use and restrictions, including restrictions in relation to any commercial use.
About IRENA 
The  International  Renewable  Energy  Agency  (IRENA)  is  an  intergovernmental  organisation  that  supports 
countries in their transition to a sustainable energy future, and serves as the principal platform for international 
cooperation, a centre of excellence, and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge 
on renewable energy. IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable 
energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable 
development, energy access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity.
Acknowledgements
IRENA prepared this report in close collaboration with Lawrence Agbemabiese (University of Delaware, USA) 
Edward Awafo and Abeeku Brew Hammond (KNUST, Ghana), and Ishmael Edjekumhene (KITE, Ghana). The 
report benefited from review and consultations with the Ministry of Power as well as the Energy Commission 
of  Ghana.  IRENA  wishes  to  thank  the  following  experts  for  their  insights  and  constructive  guidance  during 
the peer review process: David Ato Quansah (KNUST, Ghana), Joseph Essandoh (Energy Commission, Ghana), 
Monica Maduekwe (ECREEE), Seth Mafo (Ministry of Power, Ghana), Yacob Mulugetta (University of London, 
UK), Kwabena Otu-Danquah (Energy Commission, Ghana), Bah Saho (ECREEE) and Wisdom Togobo-Ahiataku 
(Ministry of Power, Ghana).
Authors: Gauri Singh (IRENA), Safiatou Alzouma Nouhou (IRENA) and Mohamed Youba Sokona (IRENA)
Disclaimer
This publication and the material featured herein are provided “as is”, for informational purposes. 
All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the material featured in this 
publication. Neither IRENA nor any of its officials, agents, data or other, third-party content providers or licensors 
provides any warranty, including as to the accuracy, completeness, or fitness for a particular purpose or use of 
such  material,  or  regarding  the  non-infringement  of  third-party  rights,  and  they  accept  no  responsibility  or 
liability with regard to the use of this publication and the material featured therein. 
The information contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA, nor is it 
an endorsement of any project, product or service provider. The designations employed and the presentation of 
material herein do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any 
region, country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries. 
GHANA
RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT
II
FOREWORD
from the Minister        
of Power
Ghana is endowed with renewable energy resources that can be utilised to contribute to sustainable economic 
growth of the country. It has been recognised that these resources can contribute to achieving the Sustainable 
Energy for All agenda by ensuring access to modern energy services for the majority of rural communities. It 
has been established that small-scale renewable energy systems can provide affordable and cleaner energy 
for cooking and heating and for empowering enterprises for increased production, create employment and 
increase rural income and thereby reduce poverty.
In  an  effort  to  increase  sustainable  energy  access  to  her  population,  particularly  in  the  rural  areas,  the 
Government  of  the  Ghana  developed  the  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  Action  Plan,  which  is  anchored  on 
the  Renewable  Energy  Act  passed  by  the  Parliament  of  Ghana  in  2011,  whose  objective  is  to  provide  for 
the  development,  management,  utilisation,  sustainability  and  adequate  supply  of  renewable  energy  for 
generation of heat and power and for related matter. 
In  implementing  the  SE4ALL  Action  Plan  and  the  Renewable  Energy  Act,  Ghana  received  the  support  of 
the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and the ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and 
Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) to increase the uptake of renewables through the Renewables Energy Readiness 
Assessment (RRA). The RRA is a process that assesses the potentials and opportunities for renewable energy 
development  and  identifies  barriers  and  constraints  that  hinders  its  development  and  therefore  identifies 
possible  solutions  and  concrete  actions  over  a  short-term  to  increase  the  uptake  of  renewable  energy  to 
contribute to sustainable energy access. The RRA process therefore identifies components in the renewable 
energy  sector  agenda  that  impedes  its  development  and  identify  potential  opportunities  in  the  form  of 
investment potentials in the sector. Realising our national development plans will depend on the continuation 
of  this  support  and  the  identification  of  increased  resources  for  investment,  Ghana  is  actively  looking  at 
opportunities in the renewable energy sector and ways of maximising investment.
Ghana is therefore grateful to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and the ECREEE for being 
selected  as  a  participating  country  for  the  Renewable  Readiness  Assessment  (RRA)  Process.  The  actions 
identified  in  the  RRA  process  will  help  strengthen  our  investment  framework,  create  a  renewable  energy 
friendly institutional and regulatory framework, support techno-economic assessments of renewable energy 
systems, and develop a biofuel framework, all of which will go a long way in assisting in the implementation 
of the Draft Renewable Energy Strategy for Ghana.
As a founding member, Ghana fully supports the mandate of IRENA to promote the deployment of renewable 
energy worldwide. We also fully endorse the RRA process, which creates a solid foundation for enhancing the 
contribution of renewable energy to social and economic development in Ghana and Africa.
It  is  my  ardent  hope  that  the  RRA  Report  for  Ghana  will  receive  a  wider  international  reception  and 
consequently provide a medium for increasing investment in renewable energy development in the country 
with the support of all our development partners.
Hon. Dr. Kwabena Donkor
Minister of Power
III
IV
FOREWORD
from the IRENA
Director-General
The Africa High-level Consultative Forum held by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) in 
July  2011  highlighted  the  opportunity  presented  to  African  Countries  by  renewable  energy  and  the  need 
for technical support to countries and regions to identify their readiness to scale up. IRENA’s Renewables 
Readiness Assessment (RRA) process, initiated as part of the forum’s outcome, involves a holistic evaluation 
of  a  country’s  social,  economic  and  environmental  conditions,  in  order  to  identify  the  actions  needed  to 
overcome barriers to deployment of renewables. This is a country-led process, with IRENA primarily providing 
technical support and expertise to facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders. 
Since  2011,  more  than  20  countries  in  Africa,  the  Middle  East,  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean,  Asia  and 
the Pacific have undertaken the RRA process, which generates knowledge of best practices and supports 
international co-operation around the accelerated deployment of renewable energy technologies. Ghana, a 
strong and consistent supporter of IRENA’s mission, is one of those countries. 
The country has one of West Africa’s highest rates of access to electricity, estimated at around 72% — with 
over 87% in urban areas and a little under 50% in rural areas — and also exports power to neighbours. However, 
local demand is growing at about 10% annually, necessitating further growth in energy generation. 
Ghana is well endowed with renewable energy resource potential, particularly biomass, solar and wind, and 
to a lesser extent small and mini-hydropower. In combination with energy efficiency measures, renewable 
energy development would greatly bolster Ghana’s energy security as well as filling the remaining gaps in 
electricity access.
The Renewable Energy Law adopted in 2011 provides for the establishment of two crucial policy instruments: 
the feed-in-tariff (FiT), which creates pricing incentives for renewable power generation; and the Renewable 
Energy Purchase Obligation (RPO), incumbent on every electrical distribution utility or bulk customer. The 
law prompted the establishment of a national renewable energy development fund, while the government 
has channelled levies on energy consumption to finance power sector upgrades. To attract private investment 
in Ghana’s energy transition, renewable energy technologies have been made exempt from import duty. 
IRENA wishes to thank Minister Kwabena Donkor and his team at the Ministry of Power for their commitment 
to this study. We are grateful for their positive engagement and valuable input, which has given us additional 
insights for further RRAs in Africa and beyond. 
I sincerely hope that the findings and recommendations from the RRA consultations will enhance Ghana’s 
pursuit of accelerated renewable energy deployment. IRENA stands ready to provide continuing support for 
the country to implement the actions identified and further the pursuit of a cleaner and more prosperous 
energy future.
Adnan Z. Amin 
Director-General, IRENA
V
VI
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF FIGURES 
LIST OF TABLES 
ABBREVIATIONS 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
VIII
 
 
IX
 
 
X
 
 
XI
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
1
 
 
1.1  Country Overview 
1.2  Energy and Development Nexus in Ghana 
1.3  The Renewables Readiness Assessment Process in Ghana 
1
2
3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II.  ENERGY CONTEXT 
5
 
 
2.1  Regional Context 
2.2  Energy Supply and Demand in Ghana 
2.3  Electricity System 
2.4  Renewable Energy Resource and Potential 
5
8
9
13
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III.  ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY 
19
 
 
3.1  Key Energy Stakeholders and Institutions 
3.2  Policy and Regulatory Framework 
3.3  Financing and Investment 
19
21
22
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV EMERGING ISSUES IN THE DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY 
25
4.1  On-grid Electricity 
4.2  Decentralised Renewable Energy Applications 
4.3  Modern Cooking/Heating with Biomass 
4.4  Opportunities and Constraints Affecting Renewable 
25
28
32
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Energy Expansion 
35
 
 
 
 
V   REFERENCES 
37
 
 
ANNEX   
38
 
 
VII
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Sector Growth Rates in Ghana, 2009 - 2013 
1
   
Figure 2 Access to fuels in 2010 
2
   
Figure 3 Schematic of WAGP Pipelines 
7
   
Figure 4 Total Primary Energy Supply 
8
   
Figure 5 Trends in Petroleum Imports (between 2000 and 2011) 
9
   
Figure 6 Ghana Electricity Sector Institutional Structure 
10
   
Figure 7 National Interconnected Transmission System of Ghana 
12
   
Figure 8 Global Solar Irradiation in Ghana 
16
   
Figure 9 Annual Mean Wind Profile for Mankoadze and Anloga 
18
   
Figure 10 2013 Electricity Tariffs Compared with Long Run Marginal Cost of Solar PV   
26
Figure 11 Procedures for Entry into the Electricity Market with Renewables 
28
   
Figure 12 Map of Recommended Off-grid Communities Showing Solar Radiation Levels 
29
Figure 13 ARB APEX BANK GHANA Project Financing Plan 
30
   
Figure 14 Locations of DTI Solar Dryer Tests in 2002. 
31
   
Figure 15 Average Time Saved per Day per Stove-Associated Activity 
33
   
Figure 16 Alternative Activities for Participants Using Improved Cookstoves 
33
   
VIII
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 GDP Growth Rates in Ghana 
1
   
Table 2 Ghana RRA Service Resource Pairs 
3
   
Table 3 ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy Targets 
7
   
Table 4 Electricity Generation by Plant 
11
   
Table 5 Renewable Energy Priority Projects 
13
   
Table 6 Modern Energy from Biomass Resources 
14
   
Table 7 Identified Mini Hydropower Sites in Ghana 
15
   
Table 8 Potential Small and Medium Hydro Sites 
15
   
Table 9 Gross Wind Resource Potential of Ghana 
18
   
Table 10 Key Institutions in Ghana’s Energy Sector 
20
   
Table 11 Ghana Feed-in Tariffs 
22
   
Table 12 Small-scale Solar PV Systems in Ghana 
28
   
Table 13 Charcoal Savings for Four Toyola Stove Sizes 
32
   
IX
ABBREVIATIONS
ECG  
Electricity Company of Ghana
 
 
ECOWAS  
Economic Community of West African States
   
ECREEE 
ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
 
EREP 
ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy
  
 
FiT 
Feed-in Tariff
   
 
GDP 
gross domestic product
  
 
GEDAP   
Ghana Energy Access and Development Project
   
GHS 
Ghana cedi
 
   
GRIDCo 
Ghana Grid Company
    
GW 
gigawatt
    
    
GWh 
gigawatt-hours
   
  
ha 
hectares
 
   
IPP 
independent power producer
 
  
IRENA     
International Renewable Energy Agency
 
km 
kilometre
 
 
KNUST  
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology
 
kV 
kilovolt
 
 
kWh 
kilowatt-hour
 
 
kWp 
kilowatt-peak
 
 
LPG 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas
 
 
m/s 
metres per second
 
 
m3 
cubic metres
 
 
MoEP 
Ministry of Energy and Petroleum
 
 
Ministry of Power
 
MoP  
 
MW 
megawatts
 
 
NEDCo  
Northern Electricity Distribution Company
 
NGOs 
Non-governmental organisations
 
 
PPA 
power purchase agreement
 
 
PURC 
Public Utilities Regulatory Commission
 
 
PV 
photovoltaic
 
 
RPO 
Renewable Energy Purchase Obligation
 
 
RRA 
Renewables Readiness Assessment
 
 
SNEP 
Strategic National Energy Plan
 
 
USD 
United States Dollar
 
 
VRA 
Volta River Authority
 
 
WAGP   
West Africa Gas Pipeline
 
W 
Watt
 
 
X
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Formerly known as the Gold Coast, Ghana is on the West Coast of Africa. In 2014, 
the population stood at 27 million, with a relatively high rate growth rate of 2.4% 
per annum. Its gross domestic product (GDP) has been increasing by about 5.5% 
per year on average, peaking at 15% in 2011 due to the start of crude oil production. 
Biomass, consisting mainly of wood fuel like firewood and charcoal and to a lesser 
extent crop residues, accounts for half the Total Primary Energy Supply. Oil is the 
second most widely used source of energy in Ghana, accounting for 40% of primary 
energy supply, followed by hydropower and natural gas accounting for 7% and 3% 
respectively. Large hydropower and oil-fired plants provide most of the electricity 
(64% and 36% respectively).
The Ghanaian power industry is unbundled and consists of state-owned utilities. The 
generation utilities are the Volta River Authority (VRA) and Bui Power Authority. 
The  Ghana  Grid  Company  (GRIDCo),  the  Electricity  Company  of  Ghana  (ECG) 
and  the  Northern  Electricity  Distribution  Company  (NEDCo)  are  responsible  for 
transmission and distribution along with independent power producers (IPPs) like 
Sunon Asogli and CENIT Energy. Access to electricity is around 72% with over 87% 
for urban areas and just under 50% for rural areas. In 2012, total generated electricity 
in Ghana stood at 12,870 gigawatt-hours (GWh) with demand at 9,000 GWh. This 
means the country is a net power exporter to neighbouring countries Togo, Benin 
and Burkina Faso. However, domestic demand is growing annually by about 10% 
and is expected to reach around 24,000 GWh by 2020. This will require an increase 
in  generation  capacity  to  more  than  3.5  gigawatts  (GW)  by  2020.  Furthermore, 
recent constraints in the supply of natural gas caused by damage to the West Africa 
Gas Pipeline (WAGP) have severely curtailed the capacity of thermal power plants 
to  meet  peak  demand.  This  amounts  to  around  1,745  megawatts  (MW).  This  has 
forced the utilities to practise periodic load shedding since August 2012. 
Ghana enjoys excellent renewable energy resources, particularly biomass, solar, wind 
and, to a limited extent, small (1 MW - 30 MW, according to Economic Community of 
West African States — ECOWAS) and mini (100 kilowatt (kW) - 1 MW) hydropower. 
When combined with aggressive measures to promote energy efficiency, renewable 
energy development can contribute substantially to expanding energy access while 
reducing the latent energy crises stalking the country.
Although, Ghana abounds in renewable energy resources, the bulk of this potential 
largely remained untapped. In 2011, a Renewable Energy Law (Act 882) was adopted 
to provide fiscal incentives and regulatory framework to encourage private sector 
investment. The provisions of the Renewable Energy Law includes: Feed-in Tariffs 
(FiT),  Renewable  Energy  Purchase  Obligations  (RPO),  Net  Metering  (distributed 
generation), Off-grid Electrification for Isolated Communities, Promotion of Clean 
Cookstoves, Research and Development, Renewable Energy Fund (RE Fund), and 
the establishment of a Renewable Energy Authority (REA).
This report presents the output of the Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) 
process in Ghana. It highlights a number of bottlenecks impeding the widespread 
deployment of renewable energy systems in Ghana, and identifies a range of critical 
actions in key areas, which when implemented, could have a significant impact on 
the scaling up of renewable energy in the short- to medium-term. The report also 
identifies stakeholders who are required or expected to play various roles towards 
the  implementation  of  the  recommended  action  and  the  period  of  time  within 
which, the actions are realistically expected to be implemented.
XI
The  keys  findings  from  the  RRA  process  are  as 
presented as follows:
distribution  operators  to  connect  a  renewable 
energy  generator  within  their  area.  However  the 
proportion  of  renewable  energy  in  the  electricity 
mix of bulk consumers has yet to be defined. It is 
important that this be developed in the context of 
the target for the entire renewable energy sector.
Target setting
The  National  Energy  Policy  objective  of  using 
10%  of  total  energy 
renewable  energy 
production  by  2020  was  translated 
into  the 
generation  master  plan  as  10%  of  the  electricity 
mix.  This  focused  exclusively  on  grid-connected 
applications,  essentially  6%  dispatchable  and 
4% variable  renewable  energy  power. 
Investor 
interest  in  developing  variable  renewable  energy 
power  has  increased  at  a  time  when  thermal 
power  generation 
is  expensive  and  backup 
capacity  almost  nil.  The  time  has  therefore  come 
for the government to assess the grid conditions to 
accommodate variable renewable energy. This will 
further  help  establish  technology-specific  targets 
and  related  definite  capacity  additions,  thereby 
increasing  market  confidence  and  competition. 
This should drive down costs.  
for 
The  Renewable  Energy  Law  also  provides  for  the 
establishment of a renewable energy fund to offer 
financial  incentives,  capital  subsidies,  production 
subsidies  and  equity  participation  for  renewable 
energy  power  generation.  However,  the  provision 
of  payment  guaranteed  to  IPPs,  which  will  affect 
the  commercial  viability  of  renewable  energy 
projects,  remains  a  concern  due  to  the  fact  that 
the  distribution  companies  ECG  and  NEDCo  are 
saddled  with  debt  and  are  unable  to  meet  their 
payment  obligations  to  present  suppliers,  and 
cannot  credibly  form  an  offtake  agreement  for 
renewable  energy 
is 
important  that  appropriate  structures  are  put 
in  place  to  resolve  such  challenges,  focusing  on 
capacity  building  for  relevant  public,  private  and 
civil society organisations.
investment.  Therefore, 
it 
Grid integration of variable renewable energy 
Ghana has developed a comprehensive grid code, 
revised  most  recently  in  2009.  This  establishes 
requirements,  procedures,  practices  and 
the 
standards  governing  the  development,  operation, 
maintenance  and  use  of  the  high  voltage 
transmission system in Ghana. In its present form, 
this  grid  code  lacks  two  prerequisites  that  would 
further  enable  the 
integration  of  utility-scale 
variable  renewable  energy  in  the  grid.  These  are 
generation  forecasting  and  priority  dispatch.  The 
grid code needs to be revised and include specific 
conditions  accommodating  renewable  energy 
generators to provide accurate data. This also has 
some implications for the system operator, which 
would have to adapt by developing the necessary 
capacities  and  procedures  in  its  daily  operation. 
The grid code should, in addition, provide priority 
dispatch for renewable power. 
The local currency (Ghana cedi, GHS) fall could have 
implications  for  the  development  of  renewable 
energy projects, as investments are most likely to 
be denominated in foreign currency, while revenues 
are expected in cedi. Designing effective currency 
risk  mitigation  instruments,  would  help  increase 
investor confidence in financing renewable energy 
projects.
Streamlining the renewable energy IPPs procedure 
for entering the electricity market
To enter the electricity market, a renewable energy 
IPP  has  to  interact  with  a  number  of  regulatory 
agencies  in  the  power  sector,  once  detailed 
feasibility  studies  have  been  completed.  These 
include the Energy Commission and Public Utilities 
Regulatory Commission (PURC), the Environmental 
Protection  Agency,  Ministry  of  Power  (MoP),  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Ghana  Investment 
Promotion Agency. These provide various licences, 
approvals, clearances and incentives linked to the 
development of the renewable energy project (see 
figure 11). This complex and lengthy procedure can 
lead  to  significant  administrative  and  transaction 
costs, and may discourage potential investors and 
project developers from entering the market. Thus 
there is a need to set up a one-stop shop, to reduce 
complexity  and  assist  IPPs  working  through  the 
bureaucracy.
Given the fact that the RPO imposed on distribution 
utilities  in  the  Renewable  Energy  Law  opens  the 
door  for  consumers  to  sell  renewable  electricity 
to  the  grid,  net  metering  solar  photovoltaic  (PV) 
electricity is an option that can be further explored. 
However,  the  government  needs  to  engage  in 
developing standards and codes for grid-connected 
rooftop  solar  PV  as  well  as  supporting  capacity 
building efforts for local financial institutions.
Financial support mechanisms and payment 
guarantees to IPPs 
The Renewable Energy Law provides the basis for 
developing grid-connected renewable energy. This 
is  because  it  establishes  supportive  instruments 
like  FiTs  and  RPOs  for  distribution  utilities  and 
bulk  consumers,  and  requires  all  transmission  or 
Designing clear policy for off-grid mini-grids
The  country’s  objective  of  increasing  rural  access 
to electricity would be facilitated by creating a level 
playing  field  for  local  private  sector  involvement. 
XII
The  support  announced  through  the  renewable 
energy  fund  (REF)  should  be  clearly  defined, 
with  reliable  operating  schemes  designed  for  the 
small-scale  decentralised  renewable  energy  mini-
grids.  Competencies  and  responsibilities,  as  well 
as  political  direction  and  relationships  between 
different  stakeholders,  should  be  clearly  defined 
on  the  basis  of  local  political  frameworks  and 
infrastructure.  This  would  provide  a  sustainable, 
functional  socio-economic  background  for  mini-
grids in Ghana.  
range of generation technologies and more complex 
management systems. Utilities may also perceive the 
management  of  mini-grids  as  expensive,  so  these 
may  be  better  run  by  small-  and  medium-sized 
enterprises and energy savings companies.
Facilitating end users access to technologies and 
improving cookstove awareness and acceptability 
Reviewing  electricity  tariffs  for  off-grid  systems 
would  help  to  attract  local  private  operators. 
This  could  be  accompanied  by  end-user  access 
facilitation  options. 
include  targeted 
subsidies  and  deferred  payment  schemes  that 
could  be  pre-financed  directly  by  the  service 
providers  or  through  a  microfinance  institution. 
A  sound  business  model  should  be  developed 
for both stand-alone systems and mini-grids, and 
needs to increase the viability and sustainability of 
decentralised renewable energy projects, as well as 
access to electricity services in rural Ghana. 
It  could 
Increasing political support for promoting 
sustainable use of biomass energy
The  government  should  continue  to  create  and 
support  policy  initiatives  aimed  at  accelerating  the 
development and promotion of sustainable biomass 
energy  for  households.  This  is  needed  alongside 
present  policies  and  goals  focused  on  tackling 
deforestation  effects  caused  partly  by  traditional 
cookstove use.
Getting  the  REF  up  and  running  would  help,  as 
would  other  finance  support  mechanisms.  These 
include group lending approaches and sustainable 
credit  programmes  for 
low-income  operators 
and  farmers.  Additionally  researchers  should  be 
supported in designing, e.g. solar dryers that could 
be manufactured locally. 
High interest rates on loans have prevented supply-
side investors from expanding their businesses and 
increasing  production.  There  is  a  need  to  further 
encourage those entrepreneurs who are prepared 
to  invest,  by  supporting  them  through  building 
capacity,  grants  programmes  and  providing 
access  to  working  capital.  Matching  government 
programmes are required to cultivate fast-growing 
energy  wood  plots,  improve  charcoal  production 
technologies  and  skills,  and  improve  cookstove 
production.
 
in  Ghana  shows 
that 
Previous  experience 
communities  often  prefer  grid  connectivity  as  it 
has  the  potential  for  higher-wattage  appliances. 
They may consider solar power to be inferior and 
even  discontinue  off-grid  systems  to  put  political 
pressure on governments. This is particularly true 
where the grid has been extended to neighbouring 
communities. Most farmers in Ghana have limited 
knowledge of labour-saving technologies or post-
harvest  management,  especially  for  perishable 
produce. There is a need to run awareness-raising 
campaigns and create communications strategies 
to  educate  operators  and  farmers  about  the  new 
business  opportunities  and  off-grid  renewable 
energy benefits. 
 
Supporting private sector involvement 
The  relatively  small  size  of  the  off-grid  market 
means it is not very attractive to foreign investors. 
Consequently the sector would probably be left to 
local private operators with the support of donors 
and development partners. Local private operators 
often face technical and financial constraints. These 
include  lack  of  technical  expertise  to  develop 
insufficient  working 
bankable  proposals  and 
capital due to difficulties in accessing loans. Other 
constraints  include  high  interest  rates,  attributable 
to the perception of high risk and a lack of financial 
institution expertise in evaluating off-grid renewable 
energy  proposals.  There  is  a  need  to  build  the 
capacity  of  local  private  operators  and  financial 
institutions  to  develop  and  appraise  bankable 
decentralised renewable energy project proposals.
Existing  cookstove  technologies  also  needs  to 
be  improved,  with  new  and  proven  technologies 
introduced  through  innovations  that  not  only 
increase efficiency, but also reduce emissions. This 
will  decrease  exposure  to  household  air  pollution 
and  very  likely  to  have  an  impact  on  health  of 
such households, while continuing to support the 
local  production  of  cookstoves.  If  consumers  are 
to  adopt  improved  cookstoves  in  the  long  term, 
the  government  should  embark  on  critical  mass 
education to increase product market penetration 
and acceptability.
The development and operation of certain renewable 
energy technologies in mini-grids requires expertise 
to  assess  the  local  conditions,  and  when  installing 
and  maintaining  systems.  This  is  particularly  the 
case for hybrid systems, because they use a greater 
XIII
Bui hydropower plant
Photo: Ministry of Power
XIV
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Country Overview
Previously known as the Gold Coast, Ghana is located on the West coast of Africa. 
It covers a total land area of 239,000 square kilometres (km2) and is divided into 
ten  administrative  regions.  Ghana’s  population  in  2014  was  27 million  (Ghana 
Statistical Service, n.d.), increasing each year at the relatively high rate of 2.4%. This 
compares to 1.6% for other lower-middle income countries, but is in line with the 
2.5% average for sub-Saharan Africa (United Nations Development  Programme, 
2011). The country is endowed with diverse and rich natural resources, including 
gold, timber, cocoa, diamonds, bauxite and manganese.
In  2001-2009,  Ghana’s  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  growth  averaged  around 
5.5%. This has risen to 8% since crude oil production began in 2010. It peaked in 
2011 to 15%, as summarised in table 1.
Table 1: GDP Growth Rates in Ghana
Economic aggregate
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
GDP current (million USD)
25,773
32,816
39,517
40,436
44,154
Per capita GDP (USD) 
1,100
1,328
1,606
1,563
1,688
Growth Rates
%
GDP at current market prices
21.3
25.8
29.9
22.2
16.0
GDP at constant 2006 prices
4.0
8.0
15.0
7.9
7.4
Source: Ghana Statistical Service, 2013
The service sector is the backbone of the economy, accounting for about 51% of 
the country’s GDP in 2013, followed by industry with 28% and agriculture with 21%. 
The evolution of GDP share for each economic sector in 2009–2013 is presented 
in figure 1.
Figure 1: Sector Growth Rates in Ghana, 2009 - 2013
Source: Government of Ghana, 2013
1
1.2 Energy and Development Nexus
in Ghana
Authorities  in  Ghana  use  two  different  definitions 
when it comes to energy access. The Ghana Statistical 
Service measures access to electricity in terms of the 
total  number  of  people  living  in  homes  connected 
to  the  distribution  grid.1  Using  the  Ghana  Statistical 
Service  definition,  electricity  accounted  for  64.2%  of 
household  lighting  fuels  in  2010.  Access  to  modern 
fuels  has  not  kept  up  with  electricity  access.  As 
illustrated  in  figure  2,  household  access  to  Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas (LPG) stood at 18.2% in 2010, while the 
rest of households relied mostly on firewood, charcoal 
and agricultural residues. The situation is far worse in 
rural communities where close to 90% of households 
depend on either firewood or charcoal for cooking. 
Energy  use  is  linked  directly  to  economic  growth 
and  living  standard  and  consequently  energy  is 
essential for development. Equally, energy supply 
can  have  an  impact  both  environmentally  and 
financially, with unrestrained energy consumption 
having an adverse effect. Although the benefits of 
increased energy to national development are not 
in doubt, Ghana and many of its neighbours in sub-
Saharan Africa continue to lag behind in terms of 
energy access.
Figure 2: Access to Fuels in 2010
Data from Ghana Statistical Service (2012)
administration,  trade  and  hospitality  were  other 
dominant  sub-sectors.  Energy  demand  in  the 
service  sector  is  in  the  form  of  electricity  and 
petroleum fuels. Electricity consumed by the service 
sector increased by about 11%. This correlates with 
the sector’s electricity consumption.  
Per  capita  consumption  of  electricity  was 
357 kilowatt-hour  (kWh)  in  2012.  This  is  on  the 
high side compared to about 180 kWh per capita 
in  sub-Saharan  Africa,  excluding  South  Africa 
(Bazilian,  et  al.,  2012).  However,  it  is  far  less  than 
the world average of 2,500 kWh. In 2012, electricity 
and petroleum product consumption grew by 7.2% 
and  around  17.2%  respectively.  GDP  growth  was 
at 7.9%. This suggests GDP growth was somehow 
correlated  with  electricity,  but  still  lagged  behind 
petroleum product consumption growth. 
As  shown  in  figure 1,  industry  overtook  the 
agricultural sector in 2011 due to oil exploitation 
and  grew  by  9.1%  in  2012.  The  mining  and 
industrial  growth, 
led  the 
quarrying  sector 
with  manufacturing  remaining 
low  at  2.5%. 
Industrial  electricity  consumption  outpaced 
industrial  GDP  growth.  It  rose  by  over  15% 
The  service  sector  recorded  a  growth  of  10.2% 
in  2012  led  by  transportation  and  storage.  Public 
1  By contrast, the Ministry of Energy calculates access to electricity in terms of the total population of communities connected to the grid, 
  regardless of whether homes in that community are connected or not. Going by this method, 72% of Ghana’s population in 2010 were 
  living in communities that had access to electricity. This report utilises the Ghana Statistical Service definition of energy access as this takes 
   affordability into account, thereby providing a more accurate assessment of access than is possible using the Ministry of Energy’s definition.
2
from  3,900 gigawatt-hours  (GWh)  in  2011  to 
4,513 GWh in 2012.
Table 2: Ghana RRA Service-Resource Pairs
Mini-grid Electricity — Hybrid Sources 
(Solar Photovoltaic (PV) + Wind or Fossil)
1.
Agriculture in Ghana is labour-intensive. Over 90% of 
agricultural output comes from subsistence farmers 
cultivating less than two hectares (ha) of land. Diesel 
for  ploughing  is  the  main  form  of  energy  used  in 
agriculture, although, there are no records of exactly 
how much fuel is used. 
On-grid Electricity — Proven Renewable 
Energy Sources (Wind or Small Hydro or 
Solar PV)
2.
Crop-drying/Agro Process Heat — Solar 
Thermal
3.
In  dry  periods,  water  flow  to  hydroelectric  dams 
is  reduced.  Combined  with  the  low  electricity 
generation 
reserve  capacity  and  difficulties 
acquiring  fuel  for  thermal  generation,  this  often 
leads to power cuts or load shedding. Low rainfall 
in  2003  and  2007  and  long-term  maintenance 
on  the  West  Africa  Gas  Pipeline  (WAGP)  in  2013 
caused  disruption  to  the  power  supply.  This  not 
only  affected  households,  but  commerce  and 
industrial  activity.  The  Volta  Aluminium  Company 
is the best known case in point. Once a flourishing 
bauxite  processing  company,  it  has  had  to  shut 
down  some  of  its  production  due  to  inadequate 
electricity supply and rising power costs. This has 
meant  job  and  income  losses  for  many  families 
whose livelihood depends on the company and on 
related downstream industries. This illustrates the 
strong correlation between economic development 
and energy supply in Ghana, especially electricity. 
The  country’s  GDP  growth  rate  of  8%  will  only 
be sustained over the coming years if the energy 
supply is maintained. This warrants an examination 
of  all  forms  of  available  and  indigenous  energy 
resources that could play a crucial role in meeting 
the country’s energy needs. 
4.
Cooking/Heating — Modern Biomass
5. Off-grid Electricity — Solar PV
sector  and  civil  society  to  be  part  of  the  Ghana 
RRA team. They were briefed on the RRA process. 
Several  workshops  were  conducted  throughout 
the  RRA,  involving  identifying  renewable  energy 
service-resource  pairs,  selecting  prioritisation 
criteria  and  filling  in  a  set  of  templates  for  each 
service-resource  pair.  A  final  RRA  workshop  on 
9 August  2013  completed  the  service-resource 
pairs and identified specific action needed to get 
the  renewable  energy  sub-sectors  going.  The 
service-resource pairs are listed in table 2. 
This  report  is  divided  into  four  sections.  The  first 
section contains the introduction covering country 
background  and  the  RRA  process  in  Ghana.  The 
second  is  an  overview  of  the  regional  energy 
setting.  It  puts  Ghana’s  national  energy  sector 
in  context,  as  well  as  describing  the  challenges 
it  faces,  and  provides  an  overview  of  renewable 
energy  potential  and  use.  It  also  provides  a 
detailed  discussion  of  the  electricity  sector.  The 
third section identifies institutions playing a role in 
Ghana’s  energy  sector.  It  also  defines  key  energy 
policies  and  regulatory  frameworks  as  well  as 
finance  and  investment  conditions  in  Ghana.  The 
fourth  section  discusses  the  RRA  findings  on 
emerging  concerns  and  enabling  conditions  for 
scaling  up  the  service-resource  pairs,  presenting 
the  recommended  actions  and  details  of  the 
opportunities and constraints. The Annex contains 
the  detailed  recommended  actions  necessary  to 
scale up renewable energy in Ghana.
1.3 The Renewables Readiness 
Assessment Process in Ghana
The  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Petroleum  (MoEP) 
and  the  Energy  Commission  led  the  Renewables 
Readiness Assessment (RRA) process in Ghana in 
partnership with the Economic Community of West 
African  States  (ECOWAS)  Centre  for  Renewable 
Energy  and  Energy  Efficiency  (ECREEE)  and  the 
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). 
The MoEP and Energy Commission invited experts 
from  key  governmental  institutions,  the  private 
3
Solar PV for a school in island community
Photo: Ministry of Power
4
II. ENERGY CONTEXT
2.1 Regional Context
Energy  in  Ghana  mirrors  its  broader  regional  setting,  defined  here  in  terms  of 
ECOWAS. As described in later sections of this report, regional trends in energy 
markets,  as  well  as  policy  and  regulatory  developments,  significantly  affect 
prospects for renewable energy development in Ghana.
The  ECOWAS  region  has  very  low  energy  consumption.  This  is  explained  by 
insufficient access to modernised forms of energy, including electricity and modern 
cooking fuels. These are key to building economic activity and reducing poverty. 
Electricity access in 2010 exceeded 20% in only 10 out of the 15 ECOWAS countries, 
namely  Benin,  Burkina  Faso,  Cabo  Verde,  Ivory  Coast,  the  Gambia,  Ghana,  Mali, 
Nigeria, Senegal and Togo. Ghana’s high electricity access rate was probably due 
to the successful implementation of its National Electricity Scheme. The average 
electricity access rate in the region was around 40% in 2011, but for many countries 
stood at less than 20% (ECOWAS, 2012).
The  lack  of  electricity  access  is  most  apparent  in  rural  areas,  where  it  fails  to 
reach  over  95%  of  the  population.  Lower  rural  energy  access  in  most  ECOWAS 
countries is partly due to low incomes and the underdeveloped electricity supply 
infrastructure.
The  majority  of  the  ECOWAS  member  countries  predominantly  use  biomass 
energy,  which  contributes  more  than  80%  of  the  final  energy  consumption,  as  
access  to  modern  fuels,  such  as  LPG  and  kerosene,  is  limited  (ECOWAS,  2012). 
Most  of  the  population  is  in  rural  and  peri-urban  areas,  and  are  dependent  on 
traditional biomass for cooking and heating, with its related health concerns and 
environmental consequences.
If sub-Saharan African countries, especially those in the ECOWAS region, are to 
reach the Millennium Development Goals by 2015, at least half the rural and peri-
urban  population  must  gain  access  to  modernised  energy  services.  This  access 
plays a key role in economic and social development. To support such development, 
ECOWAS member countries have made some investments in the energy sector to 
improve their population’s access to modernised energy services. However, these 
countries still face common problems and concerns such as: (i) a low rate of access 
to  modern  energy  services;  (ii)  a  difference  between  urban  and  rural  access  to 
modern energy services; (iii) an inadequate institutional and regulatory framework 
offering incentives for new energy service providers and investor protection; (iv)  a 
substantial  dependence  on  oil  products  for  power  generation  and  rural  lighting 
(v)   barriers  to  the  development  of  local  and  renewable  energy  sources;  (vi)  a 
lack of strong political support and will to improve energy efficiency and a lack of 
national access targets for energy services.
ECOWAS  has  taken  the  initiative  in  promoting  sustainable  energy  technologies 
and harmonising national energy legislation to increase energy supply autonomy 
and massively improve access to modern energy services. This is a policy response 
to rising energy security concerns, continued lack of energy access and the need to 
mitigate climate change. In order to achieve these goals, various policy initiatives 
and programmes have been developed in the ECOWAS region. They are outlined 
as follows:
In  2006  ECOWAS  published  a  white  paper  concerning  the  regional  policy  on 
access to energy services for populations in rural and peri-urban areas. It expects 
an  increased  access  to  energy  services  and  at  least  20%  of  new  investments  in 
5
locally 
electricity  generation  originating  from 
available  renewable  resources.  The  white  paper 
calls for 100% access to electricity by 2015, to meet 
the  basic  needs  in  urban  and  peri-urban  areas 
and 36% basic needs access for rural households. 
ECOWAS  also  hopes  to  achieve  100%  access  to 
modern  fuel  by  2015,  with  50%-70%  provided 
through LPG and the rest through improved wood 
fuel cookstoves. 
Gas  Company’s  Itoki  natural  gas  export  terminal 
in  Nigeria.  It  then  continues  offshore  to  Takoradi 
in  Ghana  via  a  beachhead  in  Lagos.  Gas  delivery 
laterals from the main Lagos — Takoradi line provide 
connections to Cotonou in Benin, Lome in Togo and 
Tema  in  Ghana.  The  WAGP  was  commissioned  in 
2008 and has a maximum capacity of 474 million 
standard  cubic  feet  (MMscf)  per  day.  The  WAGP 
Company  owns  and  operates  the  WAGP.  This 
multinational  is  owned  by  Chevron  West  African 
Gas Pipeline (36.7%), Nigerian National Petroleum 
Corporation  (25%),  Shell  Overseas  Holdings 
(18%),  Takoradi  Power  Company  (16.3%),  Société 
Togolaise  de  Gaz  (2%)  and  Société  BenGaz  (2%). 
Nigeria, whose natural gas reserves are estimated 
at  180.5 trillion  cubic  feet,  supplies  gas  to  the 
WAGP (West African Gas Pipeline Authority 2011).
The West African Power Pool has issued a revised 
master plan aiming to create a regional electricity 
market  by  2020-2025.  ECOWAS  countries  have 
been classified in the plan as follows:
i.  potential self-sufficiency due to large coal-fired 
thermal  power  plants,  after  2020  —  Senegal, 
Ivory  Coast,  Ghana,  Nigeria,  Togo/Benin  and 
Niger; 
The  ECOWAS  Regional  Electricity  Regulatory 
Authority  was  created  in  2008.  Its  aim  is  to 
ensure  the  regulation  of  cross-border  exchanges 
in  electricity  and  provide  substantial  support  for 
member state national electricity regulators.
ii.  expected  to  remain  dependent  on  power 
imports from neighbouring countries up until at 
least 2020 — the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, 
Burkina Faso and Niger; and
In  2008,  the  ECOWAS  Regional  Centre  for 
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) 
was established by the ECOWAS energy ministers. 
They  were  supported  by  the  Governments  of 
Austria  and  Spain  and  had  technical  assistance 
from  the  United  Nations  Industrial  Development 
Organisation.  ECREEE  was  founded  in  2010  in 
Praia,  Cape  Verde,  and  is  expected  to  further 
galvanise  efforts  previously  initiated  in  several 
ECOWAS  member  states.  These  were  aiming  to 
mainstream  renewable  energy  into  their  national 
energy  policies.  The  creation  of  ECREEE  greatly 
facilitated  the  subsequent  development  of  an 
ECOWAS  Renewable  Energy  Policy  (EREP).  This 
was  adopted  by  member  countries  in  November 
2012  with  several  objectives.  These 
include 
improving energy supply safety and sustainability 
and  reducing  imported  fossil  fuel  dependency 
and  exposure  to  volatile  hydrocarbons.  Its  other 
objectives  include  promoting  rural  and  urban 
energy access, creating a favourable environment 
for private sector investment and using renewable 
energy to drive the industrial, social and economic 
development  (EREP,  2012).  Table  3  displays  the 
EREP targets. 
iii.  potential power exporters after 2018 usually by 
developing hydropower — Ivory Coast, Guinea, 
Sierra Leone and Liberia.
The bulk of electricity supply capacity additions are 
expected to come from large hydropower and natural 
gas.  The  master  plan  envisages  adding  16,000 km 
of  transmission  lines  and  10,000 megawatts  (MW) 
of  installed  capacity.  Of  this,  7,000 MW  will  be 
derived from hydropower sources by 2025. The plan 
also  adds  10%  renewable  energy  (excluding  large 
hydropower)  into  the  regional  electricity  fuel  mix. 
A  330 kilovolt  (kV)  Ghana-Togo  interconnection 
project is expected to be commissioned in December 
2014 (ECOWAS, 2013).
After  ECOWAS  proposed  a  natural  gas  pipeline 
across  West  Africa  in  1982,  Benin,  Ghana,  Nigeria 
and Togo heads of state signed the WAGP treaty 
in 2003. The pipeline was to transport natural gas 
for  power  plants  and  industries  using  heat,  from 
Nigeria  to  Benin,  Togo  and  Ghana.  As  illustrated 
in figure 3, the 678 km pipeline connects with the 
existing  Escravos-Lagos  pipeline  at  the  Nigeria 
6
Figure 3: Schematic of WAGP pipelines
BENIN
NIGERIA
TOGO
Onshore Pipeline
56km x 30’
GHANA
Cotonou
R+M Stn
Lome
R+M Stn
Lagos
Beach
Comp
Station
Existing ELP
Pipeline
Tema
R+M Stn
Takoradi
R+M Stn
Main line
569km x 20’
Source: WAGPCo, 2014
Table 3: ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy Targets
2010
2020
2030
EREP renewable energy options (MW)
0
2,425
7,606
Total renewable energy penetration (incl. medium and large hydro)
32%
35%
48%
EREP renewable Energy options (GWh)
0
8,350
29,229
Total renewable energy production (incl. medium hydro)
26%
23%
31%
Off-grid (mini-grids and stand-alone) share of rural population served 
form renewable energy (%)
22%
25%
Biofuels (%)
5%
15%
Improved cookstoves (percentage of population)
60%
100%
Efficient charcoal production
60%
100%
Solar water heating and industrial water preheating technologies
•  Residential sector & district health centres, maternities, school 
25%
50%
kitchen and boarding schools
•  Agro-food industries 
•  Hotels for hot sanitary water 
10%
10%
25%
25%
Source: ECREEE, 2012
In co-operation with ECREEE and the International 
Atomic  Energy  Agency,  IRENA  has  created  a 
modelling tool for West African countries called the 
ECOWAS Renewable Energy Planning Model. This is 
for power sector planning that meets various system 
requirements including reliability. It also accounts for 
the  optimal  economic  configurations  —  including 
both  investment  and  operation  costs  —  of  the 
system to meet daily and/or seasonally fluctuating 
demand.  Using  this  tool, 
IRENA  developed  a 
transition scenario for the renewable power sector 
in ECOWAS countries. This shows that the share of 
renewable technologies in the region could increase 
from 22% of electricity generation at present to as 
much as 52% in 2030 (IRENA, 2013). This is in line 
with the EREP targets outlined above. 
is  positioning 
itself  as  a  major  player 
Ghana 
in 
regional  electricity  market 
by  strengthening  and  extending  transmission 
interconnections  to  neighbouring  countries.  Apart 
from the existing supplies to Togo and Benin, it plans 
the  ECOWAS 
7
haulage,  road  and  water  passenger  transport,  and 
rail, but also in electricity generation, farming, fishing 
and  industry.  According  to  the  2010  Population  and 
Housing Census, 17.8% of Ghanaians use kerosene as 
their main source of lighting. LPG is used as a cooking 
fuel  in  more  than  18%  of  households.  Other  fuels 
(electricity, kerosene, etc.) are used for cooking by less 
than 1% of households in Ghana (Energy Commission, 
2014).
to export power to Burkina Faso and Mali in 2014 and 
2016 respectively (GRIDCo, 2011). To this end, a new 
330 kV interconnection between the Volta region in 
Ghana and Lome in Togo was planned for 2013. A 
new 225 kV interconnection with Burkina Faso from 
Bolgatanga is expected to be commissioned in 2014 
(ibid). It is expected that by 2015, the transmission 
systems upgrade would enable transmissible power 
capacity  of  about  191 MW  to  Burkina  Faso.  The 
Ghana  Grid  Company  (GRIDCo)  is  also  planning 
a  new  225 kV  interconnection  from  Bolgatanga 
to  Mali  via  Burkina  Faso  in  2016.  By  2020,  a  new 
225 kV interconnection with the grid in Ivory Coast 
will be established through Prestea in the Western 
Region  of  Ghana.  A  generation  master  plan  has 
been prepared in keeping with Ghana’s long- term 
strategy of meeting domestic needs while increasing 
energy  exports.  This  would  increase  generation 
capacity  from  2,680 MW  in  2012  to  5,500 MW  by 
2026.  The  first  phase  of  capacity  additions  means 
converting single cycle into combined cycle plants 
and therefore increasing their capacities by about a 
third. 
Natural  forests  supply  the  bulk  of  wood  fuel 
consumed  in  Ghana  -  up  to  90%.  The  remainder 
comes from wood waste, like sawmill residue and 
plantations  (Government  of  Ghana,  2012)  and 
accounted for 38% of total final energy consumed 
in  2012.  Charcoal  has  been  steadily  growing  in 
importance  compared  to  firewood.  Since  2009, 
Charcoal’s  share  of  total  biomass  supply  has 
increased  by  26%  while  firewood  production 
has  increased  by  an  almost  negligible  amount  of 
1%.  Trends  in  biomass  consumption  mirror  this 
pattern. Charcoal consumption increased by 18% in 
2009-2013  compared  to  a  1%  growth  in  firewood 
consumption  over  the  same  period  (Energy 
Commission,  2014).  Total  national  petroleum 
product consumption has doubled over the 12-year 
period. Hydropower and natural gas accounted for 
7% and 3% primary energy supply respectively.
2.2 Energy Supply and Demand in Ghana
Biomass consisting mainly of wood fuel, like firewood, 
charcoal and to a lesser extent crop residues, accounts 
for  half  the  Total  Primary  Energy  Supply.  Oil  is  the 
second  most  widely  used  form  of  energy  in  Ghana, 
accounting  for  40%  of  primary  energy  supply, 
while  hydro  and  natural  gas  account  for  7%  and 
3%  respectively  (see  figure  4).  The  main  petroleum 
products are gas oil (diesel), petrol, kerosene and LPG, 
with gas oil being the most widely consumed. The main 
use of gas oil is transport, namely dry and wet cargo 
The  Tema  Oil  Refinery  is  unable  to  meet  daily 
national  demand  for  petroleum  products  of 
60,000  barrels  per  day.  Imports  compensate  for 
the  supply  shortfall,  as  shown  in  figure  5.  Rising 
oil  product  imports  had  a  direct  impact  on  the 
country’s  petroleum  import  bill.  This  has  been 
growing consistently from USD 0.56 billion in 2003 
to USD 3.44 billion in 2012. Petroleum import costs 
Figure 4: Total Primary Energy Supply
250
200
150
PJ
PJ
100
50
0
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
Oil          Bioenergy          Hydro          Natural gas
2000
2005
2010
2012
Based on: IRENA data from the International Energy Agency and the Energy Commission of Ghana 
8
Figure 5: Trends in Petroleum Imports (between 2000 and 2011)
Source: National Petroleum Authority, 2012.
are susceptible to the international crude oil price 
and the high demand for petroleum products in all 
sectors  of  the  Ghanaian  economy.  Although  this 
represented  about  8.5%  of  Ghana’s  GDP  in  2012, 
it  put  a  great  deal  of  strain  on  Ghana’s  foreign 
exchange reserves, as it accounted for around 19% 
of  total  merchandise  imports  of  USD 17.7 billion 
and 63% of gross international reserves in 2012.
growing at about 10% per annum. According to the 
Ghanaian  Strategic  National  Energy  Plan  (SNEP), 
electricity  demand  is  due  to  grow  from  less  than 
9,000 GWh in 2012 to about 24,000 GWh by 2020. 
This will require generation capacity to rise to over 
3.5 gigawatts (GW) by 2020.  
The institutional arrangement of Ghana’s electricity 
sector  is  displayed  in  figure  6.  MoP  is  responsible 
for  policy  formulation  and  some  aspects  of  its 
implementation.  The  Public  Utilities  Regulatory 
Commission  (PURC)  and  the  Energy  Commission 
are  the  economic  and  technical  regulators  of  the 
energy sector respectively. As the Ghanaian power 
industry is unbundled and consists of state-owned 
utilities. The generation Utilities are the Volta River 
Authority (VRA) and Bui Power Authority. GRIDCo, 
the  Electricity  Company  of  Ghana  (ECG)  and 
Northern Electricity Distribution Company (NEDCo) 
are  responsible  for  transmission  and  distribution 
along with IPPs — Sunon Asogli and CENIT Energy.
2.3 Electricity System 
Electricity accounted for about 13% of total energy 
consumed in Ghana in 2013 (Energy Commission, 
2014).  However,  access  to  electricity  is  skewed 
towards  urban  households,  with  over  87%  having 
access  to  grid  electricity.  This  compares  with  just 
under half of rural households using electricity as 
their main lighting source (Ghana Statistical Service, 
2012). Overall, electricity demand is estimated to be 
9
Figure 6: Ghana Electricity Sector Institutional Structure
Ministry
of Power
Generation 
Total  installed  electricity  generation  capacity  at 
December 2013 is 2,847 MW (Energy Commission, 
2014).  Hydropower  capacity  constitutes  64%  of 
total  generation  capacity  and  thermal  capacity 
36%. Hydropower generation capacity includes the 
Akosombo, Kpong and Bui hydropower generation 
facilities.  Thermal  capacity  sources  include  the 
Takoradi  Power  Company,  Takoradi  International 
Company,  Sunon-Asogli  Power,  Tema  Thermal 
Plant 1, Tema Thermal Plant 2, Mines Reserve Plant 
and  CENIT  Energy.  The  country’s  total  electricity 
generated  through  the  grid  was  12,870 GWh  (see 
table  4).  Recent  constraints  in  natural  gas  supply 
caused  by  damage  to  the  WAGP  have  severely 
curtailed the capacity of thermal power plants to 
meet  peak  demands  of  about  1,745 MW.  Sunon-
Asogli Power, which runs exclusively on natural gas, 
was  particularly  affected.  Increasingly  frequent 
shortfalls in generation have forced the utilities to 
apply  periodic  load  shedding  since  August  2012. 
Load shedding is expected to be reduced when the 
recently commissioned Bui Hydro project reaches 
full generation capacity of 400 MW, and gas supply 
from the WAGP is fully restored.
To guide public and the private sector investment 
in generation, the country’s 2011-2026 generation 
master plan was commissioned by GRIDCo in close 
collaboration  with  all  stakeholders  in  the  energy 
sector.  This  long-term  plan  was  developed  with 
a  least-cost  assumption.  It  reflected  technical 
and  economic  constraints  such  as  geographical 
distribution, power demand evolution, operational 
constraints  and 
fuel  availability.  The  plan 
considered  a  total  installed  renewable  energy 
capacity share of 10% by 2020 in order to comply 
with  the  national  renewable  energy  target.  The 
total  required  dependable  capacity  for  the  base 
case scenario amounts to 4,200 MW in 2020 and 
5,550 MW  in  2026.  The  corresponding  installed 
renewable energy capacity would thus amount to 
420 MW and 550 MW respectively.
10
Table 4: Electricity Generation by Plant
Total generation (GWh)
Installed 
Capacity 
(MW)
Plant Type
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Hydro Generation
Akosombo
Kpong
Bui*
1,020
160
266
5,842
1,035
—
5,961
1,035
—
6,495
1,066
—
6,950
1,121
—
6,727
1,144
362
Sub-Total
1,446
6,877
6,996
7,561
8,071
8,233
Thermal Generation
Takoradi Power Company (TAPCO)
Takoradi International Company (TICO)
Tema Thermal 1 Power Plant (TT1PP)
Tema Thermal 2 Power Plant (TT2PP)
Mines Reserve Plant (MRP)
Sunon-Asogli Power Ltd. (SAPP)
CENIT Energy Ltd (CEL)
Takoradi T3 
330
220
110
49.5
80
200
110
132
453
1,040
570
—
18
—
—
—
1,234
1,160
591
28
20
138
—
—
1,137
657
559
50
12
1,224
—
—
1,061
1,168
622
141
20
848
94
—
1,783
1,032
475
94
—
694
454
102
Solar Generation 
VRA Solar Plant*
2
—
—
—
—
3
Sub-total
1,234
2,081
3,171
3,639
3,954
4,634
Grand Total
2,682
8,958
10,167
11,200
12,025
12,870
*Bui and Navrogo were commissioned in 2013
Source: Ghana Energy Commission, 2014 
Transmission and Distribution 
distribution  losses  are  estimated  at  23.6%  and 
21.3% respectively for each company. 
The power generated in Ghana is carried through 
4,000 km of transmission lines across the country 
to  51  operational  transformer  substations.  The 
lines operate at various voltages including 330 kV, 
225 kV  and  161 kV  as  depicted  in  figure  7.  The 
transmission  company  GRIDCo  has  the  mandate 
to  provide  all  participants  in  the  power  market 
with  open  access  to  the  transmission  grid.  One 
aim  is  efficient  power  delivery,  and  transmission 
losses  average  4.8%.  For  distribution  purposes, 
power is ramped down to lower voltages including 
34.5 kV  and  11 kV  for  major  bulk  customers  such 
as  ECG  and  NEDCo.  Technical  and  commercial 
The  drive  for  national  electrification  has  led  to 
an  expansion  in  the  national  transmission  and 
distribution  grid  since  the  late  1980s.  Several 
programmes  and  projects  have  extended  the 
electric grid to the Brong Ahafo, Northern, Upper 
East  and  Upper  West  regions  of  Ghana  and  also 
supported  the  national  electrification  efforts. 
These  are  the  National  Electrification  Scheme, 
Northern Electrification Programme, the Northern 
Electrification  and  System  Reinforcement  Project, 
the Rural Electrification Programme, and the Self-
Help Electrification Project.
11
Figure 7: National Interconnected Transmission System of Ghana
Source: Ghana Grid Company Limited (GRIDCo)
12
Production Costs and Tariffs
The  cost  of  power  generation  in  Ghana  varies 
from  plant  to  plant  depending  on  a  number 
of  factors.  These 
include  cost  of  construction, 
fuel  type  and  non-variable  costs.  Hydropower 
constituted  about  60%  of  the  electricity  supply, 
with  generation  cost  at  0.033-0.09 USD/kWh. 
Thermal  generation  accounted  for  about  40% 
with  costs  at  0.09 USD/ kWh  for  natural  gas  and 
0.21-0.32 USD/ kWh for light crude oil and diesel. 
to  low  rainfall,  the  electricity  mix  has  increasingly 
shifted  to  costlier  thermal  generation.  This  has 
had  a  negative  impact  on  the  financial  position  of 
utility  service  providers  and  justifies  tariff  reform. 
The  utility  service  providers  therefore  requested 
a  166%  upward  adjustment  in  electricity  tariffs 
to  cover 
their  operational  and  maintenance 
costs.  In  2013,  PURC  approved  a  tariff  increase  of 
78.9%  for  all  customer  categories  except  for  the 
lifeline  tariff,2  which  was  granted  a  65%  increase. 
The increases were part of efforts to acquire full cost 
recovery  of  electricity  generation  and  distribution 
costs. The aim is to introduce this over a scheduled 
period using an automatic adjustment formula.  
The average end-user tariff in Ghana is broken down 
into  bulk  generation  charge,  transmission  service 
charge and distribution service charge. In 2012 these 
were estimated at 0.053 USD/kWh, 0.013 USD/ kWh 
and  0.05 USD/kWh  respectively,  resulting  in  an 
average  end-user  tariff  of  0.012 USD/kWh  (PURC, 
2011).  Electricity  consumers  are  grouped  into  three 
main  categories  -  residential,  non-residential  (or 
commercial) and special load tariff. These are further 
subdivided  into  low,  medium  and  high  voltage 
customers  based  on  their  maximum  demand. 
Residential and non-residential customers are further 
segregated into separate tariff categories. 
2.4 Renewable Energy Resource and 
Potential
Ghana  is  well  endowed  with  renewable  energy 
resources, particularly biomass, solar, wind energy, 
and  to  a  limited  extent,  small-  and  mini-hydro 
energy as shown in table 5. When combined with 
aggressive measures to promote energy efficiency, 
renewable  energy  development  can  contribute 
substantially  to  expanding  energy  access,  while 
reducing  the  latent  crises  of  energy  insecurity 
stalking the country.
Ghana’s  electricity  mix  was  historically  dominated 
by  hydropower,  so  residential  tariffs  were  low 
and  did  not  reflect  costs.  However,  with  growing 
electricity demand and hydropower variability due 
Table 5: Renewable Energy Priority Projects
Expected 
Installed 
Capacity 
(MW)
Investment 
Requirement 
(US$)
Potential 
Renewable Energy 
Projects
Accelerated 
Timeline
Status
2 MW constructed; construction of a 
20 MW plant on-going
On-grid solar PV 
plants
50
100 – 150
2012 – 2014
Medium – small 
Hydro
150 – 300
200 – 650
2018 – 2020 230 MW feasibility study ongoing
Grid-tied Rooftop 
Solar (net metered)
19 existing installations with total 
capacity of approximately 1 MW
50
100 – 150
2012 – 2014
Wind resource assessment underway 
at 16 sites sponsored by VRA and the 
Energy Commission
Wind parks
150 – 300
200 – 600
2018 – 2020
Source: MoEP, 2014; VRA, 2014
Biomass Potential
Ghana’s  total  stock  of  direct  wood  fuel  is  around 
832 million tonnes.  Unless 
there  are  dramatic 
improvements  in  energy  efficiency,  demand  for 
wood fuel, the dominant energy source, is expected 
to rise. The increase from 14 million tonnes in 2000 
is  projected  to  reach  38-46 million  tonnes  by  2015 
and 54-66 million tonnes by 2020. If this trend were 
to continue as projected, it would put pressure on 
the  nation’s  dwindling  forests,  leading  to  major 
deforestation, with all the associated consequences 
for climate change, agriculture and water resources. 
However,  wood  fuel  consumption  seems  to  have 
stabilised  over  the  last  decade  or  so,  with  a  14.6% 
reduction in demand between 2000-2014. 
Timber 
logging  uses  2.0-2.7 million cubic metres 
(m3)  biomass  annually,  producing  1.0-1.4 million  m3 
of logging residues each year. These include edgings, 
offcuts,  peeler  cores,  slabs,  sawdust  and  residues 
13
from  plywood  manufacturing.  The  Kumasi  area  in 
particular  has    a  concentration  of  residues  due  to 
the number of sawmills and plywood manufacturers 
located there, whereas Accra has large-scale furniture 
mills  in  its  vicinity.  Several  smaller-scale  furniture 
producers  are  distributed  throughout  the  country. 
Potential wood residue may  also be obtained from 
road construction, forest skidding trails for harvested 
timber  haulage,  forest  clearings  for  agriculture  and 
surface mining sites. 
food  crops  in  Ghana.  Maize  is  grown  across  the 
whole  country.  In  2008,  about  1.5 million tonnes 
of  maize  were  harvested  from  an  area  of  about 
850,000 ha, increasing to about 1.9 million tonnes 
produced  in  2010.  There  has  been  significant 
rise 
In  2010,  about 
13.5 million tonnes of cassava was harvested from 
an area of about 875,000 ha according to the Food 
and  Agriculture  Organisation  Statistics  Division 
in  2013.    High-yielding  new  varieties  of  cassava 
as  part  of  the  President’s  Special  Initiative  on 
cassava production, have been in part responsible 
for the increase in production since 2000. In 2013, 
the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organisation  Statistics 
Division estimated Ghana sugar cane production at 
145,000  tonnes in  2010.  In  Ghana,  sorghum  is 
cultivated 
in  the  savannah  zones.  Food  and 
Agriculture  Organisation  crop  statistics  reported 
Ghana  sorghum  2010  production  of  about 
324,000 tonnes from an area of about 253,000 ha. 
Ghana  jatropha  plantations  currently  cover  about 
1,534 ha and oil palm plantations about 320,000 ha.
in  cassava  production. 
Estimates  by  Duku,  Gu  and  Hagan  (2011)  and 
Mohammed, et al.  (2013), place bioenergy potential 
from  crop  residue  at  75-100 terajoules  with  about 
47.6 terajoules  from  animal  manure.  Approximately 
976,000 m3  of  forestry  residues  were  generated  in 
2008,  a  potential  source  of  bioenergy  production 
(Duku, Gu and Hagan, 2011). There are several other 
biomass  potential  reserves,  for  example,  trees 
unsuitable  for  commercial  sale  that  are  removed 
from  plantations  and  residues  from  lumber  grade 
tree harvesting, which could also count as potential 
sources of energy.
Small- and medium-scale hydropower 
potential
Several  oil  palm  and  timber  processing  firms  have 
taken advantage of their residue streams to generate 
electricity  for  internal  use  and  also  for  export  into 
the grid. Table 6 lists some of the companies already 
generating electricity from their waste resources. Much 
more can be extracted out of the biomass sector. 
The  prospect  of  harnessing  the  hydropower 
potential  of  small  rivers  in  Ghana  has  been 
investigated for many years, and many potential 
mini-hydropower  sites  have  been 
identified. 
ECREEE  defines  small  hydropower  as  plants 
with  production  capacity  less  than  30 MW,  but 
hydropower schemes of up to 100 MW qualify for 
renewable  electricity  Feed-in  Tariff  (FiTs)  under 
Ghana’s  Renewable  Energy  Act.  Table  7  shows 
potential hydropower sites in the different regions 
with  individual  capacities  of  4  kilowatt  (kW)  to 
2,000 kW. Table 8 also shows small- and medium-
scale  hydropower  sites  with  a  total  capacity  of 
837 MW  also  qualifying  for  the  FiT.  According 
to  its  national  energy  policy,  the  Government  of 
Ghana  intends  to  support  the  development  of 
these additional hydropower capacities. Detailed 
technical  and  financial  feasibility  studies  are 
under way at five selected sites. VRA is carrying 
them out at Juale, Pwalugu, Kulpawn and Daboya 
while the MoP is conducting the Hemang study.
Urban  areas  generate  large  quantities  of  organic 
municipal  waste,  with  Kumasi  and  its  suburbs 
1,600 tonnes  daily,  while 
generating  up 
Accra  and  its    surrounding  areas  produce  up  to 
2,500 tonnes  daily.  Municipal  waste  generation 
in 
from  
600-800 tonnes  per  day.  As  it  is  convertible  to 
energy, this is a potential source of bioenergy.
to 
the  metropolitan  centres 
ranges 
 
Besides  wood  residues  and  municipal  waste, 
energy crops could be used for biofuel production 
jatropha,  oil  palm, 
in  Ghana.  They 
sunflower, soybean and coconut for biodiesel and 
cassava, maize, sugar cane and sweet sorghum for 
ethanol  (Ahiataku-Togobo  and  Ofosu-Ahenkorah, 
2009).  Maize  and  cassava  are  important  staple 
include 
Table 6: Modern Energy from Biomass Resources
Plant location
Installed capacity (kW)
Average annual energy (GWh)
Kwae Oil Mills
2,500
6.8
Benso Oil Mills
500
1.9
Twifo Mills
610
2.1
Juaben Oil Mills
424
1.5
Source: Government of Ghana (2012)
14
Table 7: Identified Mini Hydropower Sites in Ghana*
Potential minimum
power (kW)
Potential maximum 
power (kW)
Region
Number of sites
Upper East and Upper West
8
499
2,100
Northern
16
913
4,420
Brong Ahafo
364
1,900
Western and Central
9
332
2,150
Ashanti
4
140
720
Eastern
9
569
1,150
Volta
17
4,919
12,065
* Individual site potential ranges from 4 kW to 2,000 kW. 
Table 8: Potential Small- and Medium- Hydropower Sites
River basin
Potential (MW)
Average annual energy (GWh)
Black Volta
Koulbi
68
392
Ntereso
64
257
Lanka
95
319
Jambito
55
180
Total:
282
1,148
White Volta
Pwalugu
48
184
Kulpawn
36
166
Daboya
43
 194
Total:      
127
544
River Oti
Juale
90
405
Total:
90
405
River Tano
Asuaso
25
129
Sedukrom
17
67
Jomoro
20
85
Tanoso
56
256
Total:          
118
537
Pra River
Awiasam
50
205
Hemang
90
336
Abatumesu
50
233
Kojokrom
30
136
Total:       
220
910
Source: Energy Commission (2010)
15
Solar Energy Resource
The  Ghana  Meteorological  Services  Agency 
Data  has  been  collecting  for  over  50  years,  data 
on  the  solar  radiation  and  sunshine  hours.  The 
probable  error  for  the  daily  irradiation  data  is 
15%.  The  Mechanical  Engineering  Department  at 
Kumasi’s  Kwame  Nkrumah  University  of  Science 
and Technology (KNUST) measures hourly global 
and  diffuse  irradiance,  where  the  probable  error 
is  5%.  The  monthly  average  solar  irradiation  in 
Ghana  ranges  between  4.4-5.6 kWh/m2/day,  this 
includes 5.3 hours at Kumasi in the cloudy semi-
deciduous forest region to 7.7 hours at Wa in the 
dry savannah region. 
Northern  Ghana,  including  northern  parts  of 
Brong-Ahafo  and  the  Volta,  have  a  monthly 
average of 4-6.5 kWh/ m2/ day, which is very high. 
This  area  also  experiences  a  major  rainy  season 
between July and September, and the Harmattan, 
a  hot,  dry  wind,  between  November  and 
February. Ashanti, parts of Brong-Ahafo, Eastern, 
Western  and  parts  of  Central  and  Volta  regions 
have  monthly  average  radiation  level  range  of 
3.1-5.8 kWh/ m2/ day  (Energy  Commission,  2012). 
Greater  Accra  and  the  Central  and  Volta  coastal 
regions  have  monthly  average  radiation  levels 
between  4.0-6.0 kWh/ m2/day 
(see  figure 8; 
Energy Commission, 2012).
Figure 8: Global Solar Irradiation in Ghana
N
5.6
5.5
5.3
5.4
5.3
5.2
5.1
5
4.9
4.8
4.9
4.7
5
4.6
4.5
4.9
4.6
5
Global (Total) Radiation (kWh/m2/day)
Very Low Diffuse Radiation (32%)
Very High Diffuse Radiation (48%-53%)
Moderate Diffuse Radiation (41%-45%)
300
60
120
180
240
Low Diffuse Radiation (36%-40%)
Kilometers
High Diffuse Radiation (45%-47%)
Source : Ministry of Power 
16
About  15,000  solar  systems  have  been  deployed 
in rural areas with an estimated installed capacity 
of  about  3.2 MW.  This  was  achieved  through  the 
Ghana  Energy  Access  and  Development  Project 
(GEDAP)  funded  by  multiple  donors.  It  is  being 
implemented by MoEP. 
next six years in increments of 20-25 MW annually. 
This would ensure the 10% renewables target (wind 
and  solar)  in  the  energy  portfolio  is  reached  by 
2020.
Small-scale grid-connected solar PV systems have 
been  tested  in  Ghana,  and  there  are  19  existing 
installations  with  a  combined  capacity  of  around 
1 MW.  One  of  these  is  the  KNUST  grid-connected 
solar  PV  system  on  the  roof  of  its  College  of 
Engineering.  The 
is 
24 kW  and  has  monitoring  equipment  that  takes 
readings at hourly intervals. The system serves as a 
tool for research and teaching and has been used 
to assess grid-connected solar PV grid-connected 
systems.
VRA commissioned a 2.5 MW grid-connected solar 
plant in Navrongo in 2013 as part of its Renewable 
Energy  Development  Programme.  This  aims  to 
install a total capacity of 10 MW in its first phase. 
The Navrongo plant is the first “large-scale” solar 
plant  to  be  integrated  into  the  national  grid.  It 
comprises six PV arrays covering 3.9 ha. The China 
Wind  Power  Company  completed  the  installation 
for USD 8 million funded by VRA, which is receiving 
a grant of EUR 22.8 m from KfW2 to add another 
12 MW  at  Kaleo  and  Lawra  in  the  Upper  West 
Region.  The  state  generator  is  also  negotiating 
another  57 ha  of  land  for  grid-connected  solar 
electricity generation at Bongo in the Upper East 
Region. It hopes to add another 100 MW over the 
installed  capacity 
total 
 
A number of international and national developers 
have shown a growing interest in developing utility- 
scale solar PV plants. Blue Energy has announced 
it  plans  to  build  a  155 MW  solar  PV  plant  in  the 
Western Region of Ghana.
A section of the solar PV panels of KNUST’s 24 kWp system
Photo: Ministry of Power
	  
2  Formerly  the  Kreditanstalt  für  Wiederaufbau  Bankengruppe  (KfW  banking  group),  meaning  Reconstruction  Credit  Institute  —  a  
  German government-owned development bank, based in Frankfurt.  
.
 
17
Wind Energy Resource
Ghana’s  technical  wind  power  potential  has  been 
estimated at more than 5,000 MW. Average wind 
speeds  are  6.4-7.5  metres  per  second  (m/s), 
corresponding  to  wind  class  categories  3  and  4 
shown in table 9. Overall, the most promising areas 
for  deployment  of  wind  power  plants  are  along 
the  mountains  in  the  south-eastern  part  of  the 
country and along the eastern coastal areas of the 
country. It has been estimated that 200-400 MW 
of onshore wind power could be established there 
with  wind  speeds  in  excess  of  8  m/s  (Essandoh, 
Osei and Adam, 2014).
150-200  MW.  It  has  also  signed  contracts  for 
additional  wind  speed  measurement  at  six  sites 
to  determine  which  are  best  for  wind  power 
development:  Anloga,  Lekpoguno,  Akplabanya, 
Mankoadze, Amoma South and Gambaga. 
To  encourage  grid-connected  wind  energy 
systems,  a  technical  and  financial  assessment 
was  conducted  at  KNUST  Energy  Center.  It  was 
conducted using wind data collected at Mankoadze 
and Anloga. Wind speeds at Mankoadze averaged 
6.1  m/s  and  were  taken  at  12  m  heights  between 
January 2001 and July 2002. Anloga wind speeds 
were lower, at an average of 5.4 m/s taken at 20 m 
heights  between  May  2006  and  December  2007. 
Figure 9 shows that the annual mean wind speed 
for Mankoadze increases from 6.1 m/s at 12 m above 
ground level, reaching 9.7 m/s at 100 m.  
The  VRA  has  entered  into  agreements  with  two 
wind  infrastructure  manufacturers  and  project 
developers  -  Vestas  Mediterranean  and  Elsewedy 
- to develop two wind parks, capable of producing 
Table 9: Gross Wind Resource Potential of Ghana
Wind 
Power at 
50 m
Wind 
Speed at 
50 m
Percent 
Windy 
Land
Total 
Technical 
Capacity 
Total Area
Wind Resource Utility 
Scale
Wind 
Class
W/m2
km2
m/s
%
MW
Moderate
3
300 - 400
6.4 – 7.0
715
0.3
3,575
Good
4
400 – 500
7.0 – 7.5
268
0.1
1,340
Very Good
5
500 – 600
7.5 – 8.0
82
<0.1
410
Excellent
6
600 – 800
8.0 – 8.8
63
<0.1
315
Total
1,128
0.5
5,640
Where: W is Watt
Source: Ministry of Energy, 2013
Figure 9: Annual Mean Wind Profile for Mankoadze and Anloga
Source: KNUST
18
III.  ENABLING
  ENVIRONMENT FOR
  RENEWABLE ENERGY 
Historically, the institutional framework of the energy sector and associated human 
capacities was designed to support large-scale, centralised energy infrastructure. 
For  the  most  part,  however,  renewable  energy  development  requires  more 
decentralised  governance  approaches,  including  the  creation  of  new  policies, 
regulations and plans that catalyse the active participation of new players in the 
public  and  private  domain.  In  addition,  renewable  energy  development  often 
requires fundamental changes in the roles and responsibilities of key actors making 
up the energy sector institutional framework. This section reviews the key energy 
stakeholders  and  the  policy,  regulatory,  financing  and  investment  framework  of 
the country’s energy sector. 
3.1 Key Energy Stakeholders and Institutions 
The  Ghana  energy  system  is  managed  by  the  public  sector.  MoP  is  responsible 
for formulating, implementing, monitoring and evaluating power sector policies. 
VRA and Bui Power Authority are state-owned utilities that generate the bulk of 
the  country’s  electricity  supply.  GRIDCo  manages  the  national  transmission  and 
system operation and supplies electricity to industrial and mining units as well as 
to the two VRA electricity distribution companies ECG and NEDCo. 
A  number  of  regulatory  agencies  have  been  established  by  acts  of  parliament. 
This is to ensure all players in the energy sector function properly, and to create 
a  conducive  environment  for  protecting  and  enhancing  private  investment  in 
the  sector.  These  agencies  are  the  Energy  Commission,  PURC  and  the  National 
Petroleum  Authority.  The  Energy  Commission  advises  government  on  energy 
policy and strategy. It is also involved in indicative planning of energy and electricity 
system  expansion  and  licensing  energy  sector  operators  (Energy  Commission, 
2006). Established in 1997, PURC is the prime body for setting tariffs and framing 
customer service regulations. The National Petroleum Authority is an independent 
regulator which reviews world market price developments, the prices of imported 
finished products and the operations of Ghana’s oil refinery.
The  sector  also  has  several  active  non-governmental  organisations  (NGOs), 
research  institutes  and  universities  as  well  as  industry  associations  involved  in 
a  range  of  activities.  These  include  renewable  energy  promotion,  research  and 
deployment. Table 10 lists the institutions whose actions can most influence the 
renewable energy trajectory in Ghana and briefly describes their functions.
19
Table 10: Key Institutions in Ghana’s Energy Sector
Institutions
Functions
Policy and Regulation
Ministry of Power (MoP)
Formulates, implements, monitors and evaluates power sector policies
Ministry of Energy and Petroleum
Formulates, implements, monitors and evaluates energy sector policies
Licenses, regulates and monitors energy service providers, develops 
indicative national energy plans and advises the minister on energy 
policy 
Energy Commission (EC)
Public Utilities Regulatory Commission 
(PURC)
Regulates tariffs and enforcement of customer service obligations of 
all public utilities and IPPs
Regulates, oversees and monitors activities in the downstream 
petroleum industry
National Petroleum Authority (NPA)
Regulates and manages the utilisation of petroleum resources, and co-
ordinates policies on petroleum resources
Petroleum Commission (PC)
Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA)
Distributes, monitors and enforces environmental policies, including 
the energy sector
Encourages and promotes investments in Ghana, providing for the 
creation of an attractive incentive framework and a transparent, 
predictable and facilitating environment for investment  
Ghana Investment Promotion Centre 
(GIPC)
Implementation
Volta River Authority (VRA)
Generation and transmission of electricity
GRIDCo
Electricity transmission services
Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG)
Distribution of electricity in southern Ghana
Northern Electricity Department (NED) Distribution of electricity in northern Ghana
Crude oil and petroleum product import, crude oil refining and bulk 
sale of petroleum products to OMCs and bulk consumers
Tema Oil Refinery (TOR)
Ghana National Petroleum Corporation 
(GNPC)
Oil and gas exploration 
Bulk Oil Storage and Transportation 
Company (BOST)
Planning for laying and managing strategic petroleum product stocks 
Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs)
Distribution and marketing of petroleum products
Education and Research
Carries out research, development, demonstration and educational 
activities in energy technology, policy and management
The Energy Center, KNUST
University of Energy and Natural 
Resources (UENR)
Provides training in science, technology and management of energy 
and natural resources
Council for Scientific and Industrial 
Research (CSIR)
Pursues the implementation of government policies on scientific 
research and development  
Non-governmental Organisations
Energy policy studies and analysis/clean energy enterprise 
development
KITE
Association of Ghana Solar Industries 
(GSI)
Promotes and raises the profile of the solar industry, improves quality, 
develops standards and arranges renewable energy training
Promotes energy efficiency/conservation measures and renewable 
energy technologies.
Energy Foundation
New Energy
Develops and implements clean energy initiatives
Dedicated to technologies that offer engineering solutions to climate 
change, energy poverty and environmental degradation 
CEESD
20
3.2 Policy and Regulatory Framework 
energy  services  for  all  sectors  of  the  Ghanaian 
economy. At the same time, the country would be 
transformed into a major exporter of oil and power 
by 2012 and 2015 respectively (Ministry of Energy, 
2010a). The specific goal of the policy on renewable 
energy is to increase its proportion in the national 
energy mix and ensure its efficient production and 
use. This objective is to be reached via a number 
of  routes.  One  is  to  promote  the  efficient  use  of 
biomass and improve production while increasing 
regeneration.  Another  is  to  convert  most  waste 
generated  in  municipal  activities,  industrial  and 
agricultural  operations  to  energy.  Another  is  to 
create fiscal and pricing incentives to enhance the 
development and use of renewable energy. Finally, 
Ghanaian engineers and scientists are to collaborate 
with international experts to bring down the cost 
of solar and wind energy technologies (ibid). 
During  the  second  half  of  the 
1990s,  the 
Government  of  Ghana  initiated  a  broader  energy 
sector  reform.  This  allowed  the  creation  in  late 
1997 of PURC and the Energy Commission through 
two acts of parliament, Act 538: the Public Utilities 
Regulatory  Commission  Act  and  Act 541:  the 
Energy Commission Act. The Energy  Commission 
was  tasked  with  the  technical  regulation  of  the 
energy  sector,  while  PURC  was  mandated  to 
handle  the  economic  regulation  of  the  energy 
and water sectors. In that same year, the vertically 
integrated VRA was to be unbundled into separate 
transmission  and  system  operation  companies. 
It  retained  the  task  of  electricity  generation  and 
distribution  in  the  North  through  its  Northern 
Electricity  Department.  This  later  became  NEDCo 
while ECG was tasked with electricity distribution 
in southern Ghana. IPPs were allowed to enter the 
market, and the first one was created in 2000.  
The Energy Sector Strategy and Development plan
was  also  completed  by  the  Ministry  of  Energy  in 
2010,  building  on  SNEP,  developed  in  2006  by 
the  Energy  Commission.  Three  main  objectives 
concerning  the  renewable  energy  sub-sector  are 
to  be  implemented  under  this  strategy.  The  first 
is to increase the renewable energy supply in the 
national  energy  mix  to  10%  by  2020.  The  second 
is  to  create  legislation  to  encourage  renewable 
energy technology development and utilisation by 
adopting  a  renewable  energy  law.  The  third  is  to 
manage municipal industrial and agricultural waste 
for energy production (Ministry of Energy, 2010b).  
The Strategic National Energy Plan (SNEP)
completed  by  the  Energy  Commission  in  2006 
comprehensively  examines  the  energy  resources 
available  to  Ghana.  It  considers  how  and  when 
to tap them economically to ensure a secure and 
adequate energy supply for sustainable economic 
growth to 2020 (Energy Commission, 2006). The 
SNEP goal is to enable the development of a sound 
energy market that would provide sufficient, viable 
and efficient energy services for Ghana’s economic 
development. It will be achieved by articulating a 
comprehensive  plan  identifying  the  optimal  path 
for  developing,  utilising  and  efficiently  managing 
the energy resources available to the country. The 
plan  identified  renewables  (including  wind,  solar 
and  biomass)  as  key  energy  sources  for  long-
term  development  and  sustainable  electricity 
supply. Unfortunately the huge potential of SNEP 
to  create  a  market  for  renewable  energy  was  not 
fully  realised.  This  is  because  it  was  not  formally 
adopted by the government. One of the challenges 
facing  renewables  development  today  is  finding 
a  way  to  redress  this  situation  and  make  SNEP  a 
binding policy document. 
The Renewable Energy Law 
was adopted by Act 832 in 2011. It provided for the 
development, management, utilisation, sustainability 
and adequate supply of renewable energy for heat 
and  power  generation  and  related  matters.  This 
law  provides  for  the  establishment  of  two  policy 
instruments. The first is the FiT, a pricing incentive. 
The  second  is  the  Renewable  Energy  Purchase 
Obligation (RPO). They are available to all electricity 
distribution  utility  or  bulk  customers,  and  aim  to 
boost renewable energy technology deployment in 
Ghana  in  a  sustainable  way.  The  law  also  provides 
rules for connecting a renewable energy generator 
to the transmission and distribution systems and the 
establishing a renewable energy fund, the REF. The 
FiT rate was developed by PURC and published on 
1 September 2013 (see table 11). It is guaranteed for 
a  period  of  ten  years  and  subsequently  subject  to 
review every two years.
The National Energy Policy
was completed by the Ministry of Energy in 2010. 
It  envisages  the  development  of  an  “Energy 
Economy”  that  will  allow  a  secure  and  reliable 
supply of high quality, environmentally sustainable 
21
Table 11: . Ghana Feed-in Tariffs (Gazetted in 2013)
FIT effective 
1st September 2013 
(GHS/kWh)
FIT effective 
1st September 2013 
(US cent/kWh)a
Renewable Energy Technology
Wind 
32.1085
15.15
Solar
40.210
18.97
Hydro < 10 MW
26.5574
12.53
Hydro (10 MW > < 100 MW)
22.7436
10.73
Landfill Gas
31.4696
14.84
Sewage Gas
31.4696
14.84
Biomass
31.4696
14.84
Source: PURC
a At 2013 exchange rate of 1 USD = 2.12 GHS
3.3 Financing and Investment
Project  is  a  hybrid  credit  facility  comprising  of 
a  concessional  loan  and  a  buyer’s  credit  facility 
between the Government of Ghana and Exim Bank 
of China.
There would have been no progress in renewable 
energy  development  in  Ghana,  however  modest, 
without  substantial  inflows  of  foreign  investment. 
These  are  buttressed  by  donor 
funding  to 
support  “soft”  activities  such  as  pilot  testing 
of  technologies,  business  model  development 
and  institutional  capacity  building.  Most  energy 
projects 
in  Ghana  are  carried  out  with  the 
assistance of development partners. These include, 
for instance, the World Bank, ARB Apex bank, the 
United  Nations  Development  Programme,  Danish 
International Development Agency and the Global 
Environment Facility. Similarly, the United Nations 
Environment  Programme  runs  the  African  Rural 
Energy  Enterprise  Development  Programme. 
For 
is  a  USD 227.5 million 
multi-donor  project  involving  the  World  Bank’s 
International  Development  Association,  Global 
Environment  Facility,  African  Development  Bank, 
Global  Partnership  on  Output  Based  Aid,  Africa 
Catalytic  Growth  Fund  and  the  Swiss  Agency  for 
Development and Co-operation. 
The  government  has  made  some  efforts  to  set 
up  national  funds  into  which  levies  on  energy 
to  finance  specific 
consumption  are  paid 
development activities in the power sector. These 
include: (i) the Rural Electrification Levy paid into 
the  National  Electrification  Fund,  (ii)  the  Street 
Lighting Levy (iii) the Power Factor Surcharge Levy 
paid  into  the  Electricity  Demand  Management 
Fund.  This  funding  mechanism  is  slowly  being 
applied  for  raising  internal  funds  for  renewable 
energy from conventional fuels. For example, a levy 
of 0.26 USD/litre3 on gasoline, kerosene and diesel 
fuel products supports research, development and 
promotion of Ghana’s natural energy resources —
particularly renewable energy. The levy goes into a 
fund called the Energy Fund and yields an average 
USD 500,000 per annum. 
instance,  GEDAP 
The  recent  establishment  of  a  renewable  energy 
fund under the Renewable Energy Act is possibly 
the  most  important  event  affecting  renewable 
energy  development.  The  point  of  the  fund  is  to 
mobilise  financial  resources  for  the  promotion, 
sustainable  management  and 
development, 
utilisation  of  renewable  energy  resources.  Monies 
from  the  fund  are  to  be  used  to  promote  the 
following:
is 
The  GEDAP  development  objective 
to 
improve  the  operational  efficiency  of  the  power 
distribution  system  and  increase  the  population’s 
access  to  electricity.  This  helps  move  Ghana  to 
a  low-carbon  economy  through  the  reduction 
of  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  Electricity  access 
expansion and renewable energy development are 
subcomponents of GEDAP with a total project cost 
of  USD 101.5 million.  It  is  a  multifaceted  approach 
aimed both at grid extension and isolated grids. 
Innovative approaches, including new business 
models for developing and utilising renewable 
energy sources
• 
The  country  also  borrows  from  the  international 
financial  markets  to  fund  energy  projects.  For 
instance,  the  funding  for  the  Bui  Hydroelectric 
•  Scientific, technological and innovative research 
into renewable energy
3 Equivalent to 0.78 GHS/kWh using exchange rate of 1 USD = 3.00049 Ghana cedi (GHS) on 6 January 2014
22
Source:  KNUST
•  Designing  and  implementing  standards  for 
exemptions  on  renewable  energy  technologies 
given that most of this technology and equipment 
is imported.4 For investors importing generators to 
invest in the renewable energy sector, the following 
specific incentives are available:
utilising renewable energy
•  Manufacturing  equipment  for  developing  and 
utilising renewable energy
•  Programmes 
practices
to  adopt 
international  best 
•  Total exemption from import duty on renewable 
energy  generators,  including  solar  generators, 
wind turbines and technologies for generating 
energy from municipal waste;
•  Development  of  infrastructure  for  renewable 
energy
•  VAT exemption on imports of renewable energy 
products if the components are brought in as a 
single  piece  (i.e.  not  taken  apart  beforehand);  
and
•  Capacity  building 
development
for 
renewable  energy 
As  part  of  efforts  to  further  stimulate  private 
investment 
in  the  renewable  energy  sector, 
Investment  Promotion  Centre  Act 
the  Ghana 
was  passed  in  1994.  It  provides  for  import  duty 
•  Customs 
import  duty  exemption  on  plant, 
machinery, equipment and accessories imported 
specifically and exclusively to set up an enterprise
Good Practice Demonstration: Creating a Favourable Climate for Private
Renewable Energy Investors
Due largely to the policy measures taken by the government to promote investments, Ghana has 
witnessed growing inflows of financing into the renewable energy sector, the bulk of it targeting 
the proven renewable energy resources for on-grid electrification. DEG, a German development 
financier  with  focus  on  the  private  sector  in  developing  countries  is  keen  on  increasing  its 
investments in IPPs with renewable energy sources in the West African sub-region, Ghana being 
a  key  prospective  market  for  its  mission.  The  private  sector  financing  institution  is  currently 
finalising arrangements with some independent power producers (IPP) to build a biomass power 
plant and a couple of other plants to generate power from renewable sources. Out of the EUR 1 bn 
portfolio DEG has in Africa, a third is in West Africa, amounting to about EUR 300 million. With 
a  standing  portfolio  of  about  USD 270 million  in  Ghana,  DEG  has  made  investments  of  about 
USD 40 million in 2012, and were expected to repeat that feat in 2013 (Ghana Daily Graphic,  2012; 
13  November Issue).
4  Solar systems are exempted from VAT if the components are brought in as a unit. However, if batteries and inverters are brought in 
 separately, they are subject to VAT.
 
23
Solar PV street lighting in island community
Photo: Ministry of Power
24
IV. EMERGING ISSUES IN   
  THE DEPLOYMENT OF   
  RENEWABLE ENERGY 
There are opportunities in Ghana to deploy renewable energy systems capable of 
meeting a large variety of service needs. However, resources have to be allocated 
only to priority needs, the satisfaction of which can generate high impacts at low 
costs. This section focuses only on those service-resource pairs prioritised during 
the  RRA.  In  each  case,  we  take  a  more  in-depth  look  at  the  key  concerns  and 
barriers  as  renewable  energy  technologies  are  scaled  up.  It  concludes  with  key 
action recommended by the RRA.
4.1 On-grid Electricity
As  discussed  in  section  2.4,  Ghana  enjoys  an  abundance  of  renewable  energy 
resources  in  the  form  of  solar,  wind,  mini-hydropower  and  biomass.  These 
resources  are  together  theoretically  capable  of  generating  far  more  than  the 
targeted 550 MW electricity from renewables by 2020 prescribed in the generation 
master plan. This consists of 300 MW from hydropower and 250 MW from variable 
renewable  energy.  However  planned  and  announced  renewable  energy  projects 
amount  to  about  2,000 MW  of  installed  capacity  at  the  moment.  This  includes 
900 MW  for  solar  PV,  800 MW  for  wind  and  300 MW  for  hydropower.  This  is 
around four times more than expected in the generation master plan. This is partly 
due  to  the  approval  of  the  FiTs,  which  has  attracted  investor  interest.  However, 
several problems still need to be solved if Ghana is to raise its share of renewable 
energy  in  the  national  electricity  mix  to  help  close  the  gap  between  electricity 
supply and demand.  
Target Setting 
The National Energy Policy objective of using renewable energy for 10% of total 
energy production by 2020 was translated into the generation master plan as 10% 
of  the  electricity  mix.  This  focused  exclusively  on  grid-connected  applications, 
which means 6% dispatchable and 4% variable renewable energy power. Investor 
interest in developing variable renewable energy power has increased at a time 
when  thermal  power  generation  is  expensive  and  backup  capacity  almost  nil. 
The  time  has  therefore  come  for  the  government  to  assess  the  grid  conditions 
for  accommodating  variable  renewable  energy.  This  will  further  help  establish 
technology-specific  targets  and  related  definite  capacity  additions,  thereby 
increasing market confidence and competition. This should drive costs down. 
Grid Integration of Variable renewable energy 
Ghana  has  developed  a  comprehensive  grid  code  revised  most  recently  in 
2009. This establishes the requirements, procedures, practices and standards 
governing the development, operation, maintenance and use of the high voltage 
transmission  system  in  Ghana.  In  its  present  form,  this  grid  code  lacks  two 
prerequisites that would further enable the integration of utility-scale variable 
renewable  energy  in  the  grid.  These  are  generation  forecasting  and  priority 
dispatch. At the moment, the Ghana grid code requires generators to submit 
their production capability and availability one day ahead so that the system 
operator can prepare the next day’s generation schedule. However, operators 
of variable renewable energy plants can best provide accurate information on 
electricity output on an hourly or sub-hourly basis. The grid code thus needs 
25
to  be  revised  and  include  specific  conditions 
accommodating  renewable  energy  generators 
to  provide  accurate  data.  This  also  has  some 
implications  for  the  system  operator,  which 
would have to adapt by developing the necessary 
capacities and procedures in its daily operation. 
The grid code should in addition provide for the 
priority dispatch of renewable power. 
the  grid.  Net  metering  solar  PV  electricity  is 
therefore  an  option  to  be  further  explored. 
Key  net  metering  drivers 
include 
high  solar 
increasing  electricity 
retail  tariffs,  the  declining  cost  of  solar  PV  and 
import tax exemptions on solar PV panels. Indeed, 
the  2013  tariff  reform,  which  increased  the  retail 
price by 78%, offers a real opportunity to reduce 
electricity  expenses.  This  is  especially  true  for 
households  consuming  over  300 kWh  and  for 
all  non-residential  customers,  allowing  them  to 
become PV “prosumers” (figure 10).5 
in  Ghana, 
irradiation, 
The  RPO  imposed  on  distribution  utilities  in 
the  Renewable  Energy  Law  opens  the  door 
for  consumers  to  sell  renewable  electricity  to 
Figure 10: The 2013 Electricity Tariffs Compared with Long Run Marginal Cost of Solar PV
Source: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), 2013
Financial Support Mechanisms and 
Payment Guarantees to IPPs
As  mentioned  above,  the  Renewable  Energy  Law 
provides  the  basis  for  developing  grid-connected 
renewable  energy.  This  is  because  it  establishes 
supportive  instruments  like  FiTs  and  the  RPO 
for  distribution  utilities  and  bulk  consumers  and 
requires all transmission or distribution operators to 
connect a renewable energy generator within their 
area. However the proportion of renewable energy 
in the electricity mix of bulk consumers has yet to 
be defined. It should therefore be developed in the 
context of the target for the entire renewable energy 
sector.  The  Renewable  Energy  Law  also  provides 
for the establishment of a renewable energy fund6 
In addition, both distribution utilities (NEDCo and 
ECG) are taking various initiatives to increase their 
readiness  to  adopt  smart  grid  technologies.  This 
will help scale up grid-connected rooftop solar PV 
systems as these distribution utilities will be better 
able to manage and integrate them into the grid. 
There  is  therefore  a  need  to  raise  awareness  of 
these savings opportunities for these potential PV 
prosumers. This business opportunity needs to be 
marketed  to  local  financial  institutions  to  design 
tailored-made  financial  products  for  this  sector. 
The  government  therefore  needs  to  engage  in 
developing standards and codes for grid-connected 
rooftop  solar  PV  as  well  as  supporting  capacity 
building efforts for local financial institutions.
5  The term prosumer is used in the electricity industry to refer to energy consumers who also produce their own power from a range of  
  different on-site generators (e.g. diesel generators, combined heat and power systems, wind turbines and solar PV systems).
26
incentives,  capital  subsidies, 
to  offer  financial 
production  subsidies  and  equity  participation  for 
renewable energy power generation. 
diminishing  as  the  country  struggles  to  reduce  its 
budget  deficit.  This  could  have  major  implications 
for the development of renewable energy projects, 
as  investments  are  most  likely  to  be  denominated 
in foreign currency while revenues are expected in 
cedi.  Ghana  needs  to  consider  designing  effective 
currency  risk  mitigation  instruments  that  will  help 
increase investor confidence in financing renewable 
energy projects. 
This  RRA  finds  that  the  establishment  of  a  new 
FiT  regime,  though  necessary,  is  not  sufficient 
to  unleash  the  maximum  flow  of  investment 
into  on-grid  electrification  projects.  A  remaining 
concern is the provision of payment guarantees to 
IPPs,  which  will  affect  the  commercial  viability  of 
renewable energy projects. This is due to the fact 
that  distribution  companies  ECG  and  NEDCo  are 
saddled  with  debt.  The  two  utilities  are  unable 
to  meet  their  payment  obligations  to  present 
suppliers  and  thus  cannot  credibly  offtake  any 
renewable  energy  investment.  ECG  has  already 
signed  power  purchase  agreements  (PPAs),  but 
none of these projects has yet been implemented. 
Given  the  minimal  experience  of  FiTs  in  Ghana, 
setbacks  are  likely  at  the  earliest  stage  of  the 
scheme. It is important that appropriate structures 
are put in place to resolve such challenges, focusing 
on capacity building for relevant public, private and 
civil society organisations.
Streamlining IPP Market Entry for 
Renewables
To  enter  the  electricity  market,  a  renewable 
energy  IPP  has  to  interact  with  a  number  of 
regulatory  agencies  in  the  power  sector  once 
detailed feasibility studies have been completed. 
These include the Energy Commission and PURC, 
the  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  MoP,  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Ghana  Investment 
Promotion Agency. These provide various licences, 
approvals, clearances and incentives linked to the 
development of the renewable energy project (see 
figure 11). This complex and lengthy procedure can 
lead to significant administrative and transaction 
costs,  and  may  discourage  potential  investors 
and project developers from entering the market. 
Thus  there  is  a  need  to  set  up  a  one-stop  shop, 
which may help reduce complexity and assist IPPs 
working through the bureaucracy.   
The average FiT rate was equivalent to 0.14 USD/ kWh 
in 2013 when it was adopted. Since then the Ghana 
cedi has fallen over 21% to a rate of GHS 3/USD within 
a year. This is because foreign exchange reserves are 
6  The  Renewable  Energy  fund  is  expected  to  be  sourced  by  moneys  approved  from  the  parliament,  premiums  payable  by  bulk 
  consumers who fail to meet RPOs, donations, grants and gifts received for renewable energy activities, moneys approved by the 
  board of the Energy Fund, and money generated by the Energy Commission from the provision of services for renewable energy 
  activities
27
Figure 11: Procedures for Entry into the Electricity Market with Renewables
IPP undertakes pre-feasibility study
IPP identifies a buyer or an off-taker (e.g. ECG or another bulk customers)
Detailed feasibility studies to ascertain technical feasibility and financial viability of the project
IPP interacts with relevant regulatory agencies, such as the Energy Commission (EC)
(licensing and technical regulations) and PURC (pricing regulations)
IPP obtains site clearance by Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and EC.
IPP obtains environmental permit from EPA
Concluding a memorandum of understanding between IPP and off-taker
after securing PURC’s no-objection in principle
Obtaining license from the Energy Commission
IPP obtains relevant approvals of identified relief’s from governmental agencies, such as (GIPC), 
Ministry of Power (renewable Energy Law) and Ministry of Finance & Economic Planning, etc.
IPP concludes PPA with off-taker
4.2 Decentralised Renewable Energy 
Applications
Off-grid Electricity with Solar PV
The  MoEP  has  promoted  off-grid  solar  PV  for 
more  than  two  decades.  It  has  focused  primarily 
on lighting and other rural community household 
needs. The main systems promoted on the Ghanaian 
electricity market are solar home systems and solar 
lanterns.  These  are  being  promoted  across  the 
whole of Ghana, and over 6,000 solar systems have 
been installed in about 89 communities throughout 
the country. They satisfy a range of uses including 
basic  household  lighting,  radio  and  television 
use,  vaccine  refrigeration,  hospital  and  classroom 
lighting.  Other  applications  are  distance  learning 
using television, street lighting, water pumping for 
irrigation and rural mobile phone charging systems. 
The total small-scale solar capacity throughout the 
country is outlined in table 12. The recommended 
off-grid communities are shown in figure 12.  
Table 12: Small-scale Solar PV Systems in Ghana
Installed Capacity 
(kW)
Average Annual Production 
(GWh)
Solar PV Systems
Rural home system
450
0.70-0.90
Urban home system
20
0.05-0.06
School system
15
0.01-0.02
Health centre lighting
6
0.01-0.10
Vaccine refrigeration
42
0.08-0.09
Water pumping
120
0.24-0.25
Telecommunications
100
0.10-0.20
Battery charging system
10
0.01-0.02
Solar street lights
10
0.04-0.06
Total
793
1.34-1.82
Source: Energy Commission 2011
28
Figure 12: Map of Recommended Off-grid Communities Showing Solar Radiation Levels
Off-grid communities
Small Hydro Sites
4.5 - 4.8 (kWh/sq. m/day)
4.9 - 5.2 (kWh/sq. m/day)
5.3 - 5.6 (kWh/sq. m/day)
Volta Lake
Source: Ministry of Energy (2012)
One  of  the  most  successful  examples  of  solar 
PV  finance  for  off-grid  rural  populations  is  the 
ARB  Apex  bank  Ghana  model.  This  comes  under 
Electricity  Access  and  Renewable  Energy,  part 
of  GEDAP.  This  helped  install  15,000  systems  for 
90,000  rural  people  unlikely  to  be  connected  to 
the  grid  in  the  next  five  or  ten  years.7  The  model 
rested on three main pillars. The first was capacity 
building  using  Global  Environment  Facility  funds 
to involve rural and community banks and market 
to  target  populations.  The  second,  funded  by  the 
International  Development  Association,  was  to 
remove  finance  barriers  by  providing  credit  lines 
to  rural  off-grid  households  to  purchase  solar  PV 
systems. The third, funded by the Global Partnership 
on Output Based Aid, was the provision of partial 
grants  for  obtaining  the  relevant  incentives  for 
solar PV systems and making loans affordable.
Through this model, systems are paid using a 10% 
cash  contribution  from  the  beneficiary,  a  rural 
bank  loan  from  the  International  Development 
Association fund and grant support from the Global 
Partnership  on  Output  Based  Aid.  Installation, 
operation and maintenance is carried out by locally 
recognised companies (see figure 13).  
7  Rural electrification in Ghana aims to extend the grid to all communities apart from islanders/lakeside inhabitants who cannot be  
  reached due to their geographical position.
29
Figure 13: ARB APEX BANK GHANA Project Financing Plan
Grant (subsidy)
between 30% - 50%
B
Installation and
3 year maintenance
cost (A)
Customer contribution of 10%
of amount less grant
10% (A-B)
Loan component of 90%         
of amount less grant
90% (A-B)
Source: ARB Apex Bank, Ghana, 2011
The project has overcome many barriers. Although, 
not  enough  well-trained  solar 
installers  were 
available and solar systems were perceived as weak 
compared  to  grid-connected  electricity  due  to 
usage  limitations  and  previous  installation  failures. 
Financial institutions had a poor knowledge of solar 
products, financing costs were high and politicians 
interfered. 
of  125.7 kWh  per  year  amounting  to  2.4 kWh 
per  week.  If  the  budget  spent  on  lighting  were 
replaced by electricity payments, each household 
could  afford  to  pay  1.3 USD/kWh.  This  is  much 
higher  than  the  on-grid  electricity  tariff  in  Ghana 
at the moment. 
The  total  installed  cost  for  solar  PV  mini-grids 
per  kilowatt-peak  (kWp), 
island 
community  taxes,  is  around  USD 9,830.  The  total 
delivery  cost  for  a  50 kWp  mini-grid  system  will 
be  USD 491,500  for  a  maximal  annual  output  of 
70,000 kWh.8
including  all 
The  experience  revealed  that  quality  after-sales 
service,  well-designed  products  and  repayment 
plans  alongside  participating  private  sector 
company  financial  engagement  are  key  to  the 
success of such projects. 
 
To establish the technical and economic feasibility 
of solar PV mini-grids, an analysis was conducted 
for Alorpkem, a typical island community of around 
1,000  inhabitants.  It  included  a  50 kWp  planned 
solar  PV  plant  with  distributed  energy.  Based  on 
similar  rural  electrification  projects  in  Ghana,  the 
initial  consumption  in  Alorpkem9  was  estimated 
at  44,929 kWh/year.  For  electricity  tariffs  of 
1.3 USD/kWh for households and 1.4 USD/kWh for 
commercial and municipal users, the total revenue 
from  electricity  sales  is  60,928 USD/year.  These 
mini-grids  produce  an  internal  rate  of  return  of 
10.9% and a break-even point in year 15 where 100% 
finance  is  provided.  The  underlying  assumptions 
are  a  cost  of  capital  of  7.5%,  inflation  rate  at  3%, 
annual  amortisation  rate  at  7.5%,  operations  and 
maintenance at 5% and annual PV degradation of 
0.6%.  The  break-even  point  is  in  year  12  for  50% 
debt finance and year 10 for 0% debt finance.  
Mini-grid Electricity with Hybrid Systems 
(Solar PV + Wind or Fossil)
Mini-grids based on renewable energy have been 
relatively  unusual  in  Ghana.  The  Government  of 
Ghana  has  been  implementing  the  Northern 
Electrification  Programme  to  ensure  electricity 
access  becomes  a  reality.  Its  target  is  universal 
access  by  2020  via  grid  extension.  However, 
certain  remote  communities,  such  as  those  in 
Ghana’s 200-plus islands and Volta river lakesides, 
cannot  be  connected  to  the  national  grid  due  to 
their  geographical  location.  The  main  activities 
of  these  communities  are  fishing  (accounting  for 
over 75% of household incomes), crop farming and 
trading.  These  households  spend  about  USD 54.5 
on energy per month, of which USD 11.5 is kerosene 
lighting and batteries for portable lights. Charcoal 
and  fuel  for  gensets  account  for  the  bulk  of  the 
expenditure.  The  present 
lighting  requirement 
of  these 
island  communities  suggests  each 
household has an average electricity consumption 
However, the uniform tariff policy of 0.07 USD/kWh 
applies to mini-grids in Ghana, which means they 
8   Breakdown of 2 x 25 W lights on for 4 h/day 7 days a week is (1.4 kWh), 3 x 5 W mobile phones charged for 8 h/week is (0.84 kWh) and  
1 x 10 W portable lamp charging for 2 h/day for 7 days a week (0.14 kWh). Total is 2.38 kWh/week. 
 
9  Residential use 19,740 kWh per year on the basis of 125.73 kWh per household and commercial/municipal use 25,190 kWh per year.
30
Figure 14: Locations of DTI Solar Dryer Tests in 2002
are not feasible from a private sector perspective. 
This  is  despite  the  huge  motivation  shown  by 
around  97%  of  households  and  commercial 
businesses  to  pay  for  electricity  if  their  whole 
community gets connected. This was revealed by 
a  2011  survey  for  the  Government  conducted  on 
islands  and  at  lakesides.  The  government  should 
either set up special tariffs for mini-grids or provide 
subsequent support to private operators willing to 
invest in mini-grids. The small size of these systems 
means they are not attractive to foreign investors, 
so the sector will probably be left to local operators 
who face financial and technical constraints.
Electricity  access  and  renewable  energy,  part  of 
GEDAP, intends to remove the capacity and finance 
barriers  to  accelerate mini-grid renewable energy 
such as small hydropower, wind, and biomass below 
10 MW. This will be achieved by providing business 
support  to  local  renewable  energy  developers, 
energy  saving  companies  and  commercial  banks. 
However,  the  Government  of  Ghana  should 
think  of  a  more  long-term  sustainable  support 
mechanism as GEDAP is funded by donors. When 
commissioned, the REF can help lower this barrier, 
as it aims to provide financial incentives for mini-
grid  renewable  power  systems  for  remote  areas 
and islands. 
Solar fish dryer
at Tema
Solar crop dryer
at Pokuase
Solar kiln at
Mankoadze
Source: Jensen, 2002
to these challenges. A 2002 report by the Danish 
Technological  Institute  (DTI)  captures  interesting 
results  from  a  DANIDA-funded  solar  crop  drying 
project  involving  the  design,  construction  and 
testing  of  three  pilot  solar  dryers  at  the  premises 
of three commercial operators in the Greater Accra 
and Central Regions (See Figure 14). 
Many electrification projects fail due to the lack of a 
clear definition of competencies and responsibilities 
as well as political power and relationships between 
different  stakeholders.  There  is  a  need  to  design 
reliable  operating  schemes  on  the  basis  of  local 
political frameworks and infrastructure to realise a 
sustainable, functional socio-economic system for 
mini-grids in Ghana.
The solar dryer at Silwood Farms (on which the rest of 
this section will concentrate) the total cost (without 
VAT)  per  unit  was  USD 2,525,  and  the  full  cost  of 
the  installation  including  civil  works  amounted  to 
nearly USD 14,000. Though the report did not cover 
the  economic  benefits  gained  by  Silwood  Farms 
from the solar crop dryers, the DTI report concluded 
that  in  general,  the  dryer  realised  achieved  sound 
technical  performance — consistently 
reducing 
moisture  content  in  up  to  600 kg  of  maize  from 
approximately 20% to 10% within 6 days at 35°C – 
38°C.  The  tests  also  demonstrated  that  solar  crop 
dryers  of  this  particular  design  can  achieve  similar 
results  with  other  locally  grown  crops  such  as 
cassava, pepper, okra and pineapple (Jensen, 2002).
There is currently very little expertise in mini-grid 
management in Ghana. For the government, it has 
become  a  concern  lately  due  to  the  challenges 
associated  with  the  electrification  of 
island 
communities in Lake Volta. For NGOs and research 
institutions,  mini-grids  are  becoming  interesting 
concepts,  because  they  could  rely  on  freely 
available renewable energy resources to generate 
electricity for remote rural communities. However, 
much  more  needs  to  be  done  to  scale  up  the 
deployment of these technologies.
favourable 
performance 
These 
results 
notwithstanding,  the  high  capital  cost  of  solar 
crop  dryers  is  an  obvious  limiting  factor  to  their 
accelerated  uptake  amongst  low  income  farmers 
who  make  up  the  bulk  of  the  potential  market.  
Additionally, there are critical issues concerning the 
maintenance of the systems to keep them operating 
at  peak  performance.  The  seasonality  of  crop 
production in the country, also means that the cost 
per tonne per year of using solar dryers may be too 
Solar drying/Agro Process Heat with 
Solar Thermal
In  Ghana,  crops  are  traditionally  dried  using  the 
sun. The disadvantage of this method is that crops 
and grain may be damaged by birds, rodents, wind 
and rain or contaminated by dust and dirt.
Recent studies addressing solar dryer performance, 
demonstrates  the  potential  of  practical  solutions 
31
high, given that the dryers may only be needed for 
less  than  2 months  in  a  year  in  some  cases.  These 
high upfront capital and operating costs often make 
traditional sun drying, even in the face of postharvest 
losses,  a  cheaper  option  for  farmers.  Commercial 
farmers who use irrigation facilities and are able to 
cultivate a variety of crops throughout the year may 
consider the use of solar dryers, but again this will 
only succeed if there is adequate policy support in 
place for acquiring these technologies, including the 
promotion of credit schemes.
economic  and  food  security.  This  will  help  the 
country to achieve the objectives set in the Food 
and  Agriculture  development  Policy  (FASDEP II) 
in  2007.  Although  the  existing  tax 
adopted 
renewable  energy 
exemption  on 
technology is an asset, additional incentives should 
be put in place for easing the acquisition of solar 
dryers  as  well  as  for  the  development  of  solar 
drying  markets.  The  REF  aims,  amongst  others, 
to  apply  for  provision  on  financial  incentives, 
capital  subsidies  and  production  based  subsidies 
for  renewable  energy  projects  for  non-electricity 
purposes, however the fund is still not operational.
imported 
The  cost  barriers  to  deployment  of  solar  drying 
technology will eventually require that government 
allocates  sufficient  amounts  of  public  funding  in 
support of the aforementioned solutions and other 
measures. However, it is also reasonable to expect 
that  these  macro-level  costs  may  be  offset  by 
several developmental benefits that are attributable 
to solar crop dryers, including:
4.3 Modern Cooking/Heating with 
Biomass
More  than  70%  of  households  in  Ghana  continue 
to  rely  on  firewood  and  charcoal  as  their  main 
source  of  cooking  fuel.  Campaigns  to  reduce 
wood fuel consumption within the biomass sector 
are  targeting  the  introduction  of  biodigesters  to 
produce methane for cooking. Improved cookstoves 
are being promoted to increase efficient traditional 
biomass  source  use.  Popular  improved  cookstove 
brands include Ahibenso, Gyapa and Toyola. Efforts 
to promote improved cookstoves were stimulated 
with the recent formation of the Ghana Alliance for 
Clean  Cookstoves  This  is  the  local  chapter  of  the 
Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves.
•  Job  creation,  especially  where  all  or  some  of 
the  components  are  eventually  manufactured 
locally  or  sourced  at  competitive  prices  from 
least-cost suppliers
•  Wealth  creation  resulting  from  the  reduction 
in  post-harvest 
losses,  as  well  as  general 
improvements  in  quality  of  produce,  leading 
to increased revenues from sales in high value 
domestic and export markets
Improved  cookstoves  have  been  the  subject  of 
several  studies  evaluating  their  fuel  savings  and 
implications for forest degradation and greenhouse 
gas  emissions.  These  have  provided  valuable 
feedback to guide continuous improvement in their 
design. The latest biannual survey was conducted 
in  2012  by  Berkeley  Air  Monitoring  group,  a 
Californian  monitoring  and  Evaluation  Company, 
using  a  team  from  KNUST  Energy  Center.  It 
determined  fuel  savings  and  other  parameters  in 
households that switched from ordinary coal pots 
to  improved  cookstoves  in  four  regions:  Greater 
•  Local capacity building — closely related to job 
creation, while contributing to reduction in the 
involvement  of  costly  foreign  technicians  in 
the  design,  implementation,  testing  and  mass 
production of crop-dryers.
 
With  new  market  opportunities  opening  up  (new 
foreign direct investment in industrial production), 
Ghana  should  consider  promoting  solar  drying 
as  a  way  to  improve  agricultural  productivity, 
while  stimulating  local  agro-industrial  growth  for 
Table 13: Charcoal Savings (kg/household/day) for Four Toyola Stove Sizes
Improved Stove Size
Charcoal Savings
Large commercial
0.50
Small commercial
0.43
Medium household
0.36
Small household
0.18
Source: Ministry of Power
32
Figure 15: Average Amount of Time Saved per Day per Stove-Associated Activity
Accra, Brong Ahafo, Eastern and Northern regions. 
Table 13  shows  the  results  for  charcoal  savings 
using  Toyola  household  stoves  as  well  as  larger 
Toyola commercial stoves.
3.5 hours. Over a quarter of the women (26%) said 
they used their saved time to work more for pay, 
40% reported that they spent it with their families 
and  34%  reported  that  they  used  it  for  other 
activities such as household chores (figure 16).
The  main  benefit  of  improved  cookstoves  were 
judged  to  be  time  savings.  Average  time  savings 
accrued  by  users  of  the  improved  cookstove  are 
estimated  at  30  minutes  per  day  during  cooking. 
However, very modest amounts of saved time were 
reported from fuel gathering, stove tending – the 
feeding  of  fuel  and  maintenance  of  combustion 
during  cooking  activities  –  and  other  related 
activities such as purchasing charcoal (Figure 15).
However,  end-users  in  Ghana  reported  similar 
smoke  emissions  from  ordinary  charcoal  “coal 
pots”  and  improved  charcoal  cookstoves.  Most 
households  were  of  the  opinion  that  smoke 
emissions  depend  more  on  the  quality  of 
the  charcoal  than  the  stove.  Moreover,  rural 
households  will  not  become  enthusiastic  enough 
about 
the 
government  runs  a  thorough  and  sustainable 
their 
awareness-raising  campaign 
acceptability.  
improved  cookstoves  unless 
the 
The average time saved per week, assuming that 
the majority of women cook every day, is nearly
improving 
Figure 16: Alternative Activities for Participants Using Improved Cookstoves
33
Access  to  finance  is  another  important  barrier 
to  the  promotion  of  improved  cookstoves.  High 
interest rates on loans have prevented supply-side 
investors from expanding their businesses to reach 
greater  production  numbers.  Lack  of  support 
policy  initiatives  obstructs  upstream  supply-side 
organisations from expanding their businesses and 
reducing costs to end-users. These initiatives need 
to create the enabling environment for accelerated 
development  and  sustainable  biomass  energy 
promotion for household energy needs. 
technical  and  financial  constraints.  These  include 
lack  of  technical  expertise  to  develop  bankable 
proposals  and  insufficient  working  capital  due  to 
difficult loan access. Other constraints include high 
interest  rates  due  to  perception  of  high  risk  and 
lack of financial institution expertise in evaluating 
off-grid  renewable  energy  proposals.  There  is 
thus  a  need  to  build  the  capacity  of  local  private 
operators and financial institutions to develop and 
appraise bankable decentralised renewable energy 
project proposals.
 
Recommendations
Detailed descriptions of the recommendations for 
each resource-pair can be found in the Annex.
The  development  and  operation  of  certain 
renewable  energy  technologies 
in  mini-grids 
requires  expertise  in  assessing  local  conditions, 
installing  and  maintaining  systems.  This 
is 
particularly  the  case  for  hybrid  systems  because 
they use a greater range of generation technologies 
and more complex management systems. Utilities 
may  also  perceive  the  management  of  mini-grids 
as expensive, so these may be better managed by 
small-  and  medium-sized  enterprises  and  Energy 
Saving Companies.
Designing clear policy for off-grid mini-grids
The  country’s  objective  of  increasing  rural  access 
to electricity would be facilitated by creating a level 
playing  field  for  local  private  sector  involvement. 
The  support  announced  through  the  REF  should 
be clearly defined, and reliable operating schemes 
designed 
small-scale  decentralised 
renewable  energy  mini-grids.  Competencies  and 
responsibilities,  as  well  as  political  direction  and 
relationships  between  different  stakeholders, 
should  be  clearly  defined  on  the  basis  of  local 
political frameworks and infrastructure. This would 
provide  a  sustainable,  functional  socio-economic 
background for mini-grids in Ghana.
the 
for 
Facilitating end-user access and improving 
cookstove awareness and acceptance
Electricity  tariffs  for  off-grid  systems  should  be 
reviewed  to  attract  more  local  private  operators. 
This  could  be  accompanied  by  end-user  access 
include  targeted 
facilitation  options. 
subsidies  and  deferred  payment  schemes  that 
could  be  pre-financed  directly  by  the  service 
providers  or  through  a  microfinance  institution. 
A  sound  business  model  should  be  developed 
for  both  stand-alone  systems  and  mini-grids.  It 
needs  to  increase  the  viability  and  sustainability 
of  decentralised  renewable  energy  projects  and 
access to electricity services in rural Ghana.  
It  could 
Increasing political support for promoting 
sustainable use of biomass energy
The  government  should  continue  to  create  and 
support policy initiatives towards an environment 
accelerating  the  development  and  promotion  of 
sustainable  biomass  energy  for  households.  This 
is  needed  alongside  present  policies  and  goals 
focused  on  remedies  to  deforestation  effects 
caused partly by traditional cookstove use.  
This  should  be  done  by  getting  the  REF  up 
and  running  as  well  as  other  finance  support 
mechanisms.  These 
lending 
approaches and sustainable credit programmes for 
low-income  operators  and  farmers.  Researchers 
should  be  supported  in  designing  prototypes  for 
solar dryers that could be manufactured locally.  
High interest rates on loans have prevented supply-
side  investors  from  expanding  their  businesses 
and raising production. There is a need to further 
encourage  entrepreneurs  prepared  to  invest  and 
support them by building capacity, through grants 
programmes  and  by  providing  access  to  working 
capital.  Matching  government  programmes  are 
required  to  cultivate  fast-growing  energy  wood 
plots,  improve  charcoal  production  technologies 
and skills, and improve cookstoves production.
include  group 
in  Ghana  shows 
Previous  experience 
that 
communities  often  prefer  grid  connectivity  due 
to its potential use for higher-wattage appliances. 
They  may  consider  solar  power  to  be  inferior 
and  may  even  discontinue  off-grid  systems  to 
put  political  pressure  on  governments.  This  is 
particularly true where the grid has been extended 
to  neighbouring  communities.  Most  farmers  in 
Ghana  have  limited  knowledge  of  labour-saving 
technologies  or  post-harvest  management, 
especially for perishable produce. There is a need 
Supporting private sector involvement 
The  relatively  small  size  of  the  off-grid  market 
means it is not very attractive to foreign investors. 
This is why the sector would probably be left to local 
private operators with the support of donors and 
development partners. Local private operators face 
34
to  run  awareness-raising  campaigns  and  create 
communications  strategies  to  educate  operators 
and farmers about the new business opportunities 
and benefits of off-grid renewable energy. 
one  of  the  greatest  constraints  to  renewables-
based electricity production in the country. There 
are, however, a number of outstanding issues that 
need to be addressed, such as the ability of utilities 
to absorb the higher costs of FiTs. 
Existing  cookstove  technologies  need  to  be 
improved  and  new  and  proven  technologies 
introduced  through  innovations  that  not  only 
increase efficiency, but also reduce emissions. This 
will decrease exposure to household air pollution. 
It  is  likely  to  have  an  impact  on  the  user  health 
while  continuing  to  support  the  local  production 
of cookstoves. If consumers are to adopt improved 
cookstoves in the long term, the government should 
embark  on  critical  mass  education  to  increase 
product market penetration and acceptability.
Even  though  Ghana  is  aiming  for  10%  renewable 
energy  electricity, 
could  also  explore 
opportunities in the West African Power Pool with 
the possibilities of investors generating power for 
the  West  African  Power  Pool  using  resources  in 
Ghana. This would have socio-economic benefit for 
Ghanaians, creating jobs and adding income to the 
economy. Such power would not be subsidised in 
anyway by the Ghanaian government. 
it 
High start-up costs
Start-up  costs  are  one  of  the  barriers  preventing 
a  technology  from  being  scaled  up.  For  most 
renewable  energy  technologies,  start-up  costs 
are  high.  Even  when 
investment  costs  are 
not  paid  by  households,  as  with  mini-grid  or 
grid-connected  systems,  experience  across  the 
world  shows  that  tariffs  are  higher  at  present 
than those of large hydropower and most thermal 
plants. Investment costs are relatively high for the 
low-income  rural  households  needing  renewable 
energy  technologies  such  as  solar  PV  and  biogas 
systems.      
4.4 Opportunities and Constraints 
Affecting Renewable Energy Expansion
Abundant resources
The  RRA  has  clearly  shown 
in  section  2.4 
that  Ghana  is  endowed  with  an  abundance  of 
renewable  energy  resources  in  the  form  of  solar, 
wind,  mini-hydropower  and  biomass.  Together, 
these  resources  are  capable  of  generating  far 
more  than  the  2020-2025  target  for  500 MW 
renewable electricity. The state generator VRA has 
taken a leadership position in renewable electricity 
generation,  cementing  its  earlier  status  as  pace-
setter  in  the  power  generation  sector.  Now  that 
the  2 MW  solar  PV  grid-connected  system  and 
expected expansion has been commissioned, VRA 
is  actively  exploring  additional  opportunities  for 
solar  PV,  wind,  mini-hydropower  and  biomass. 
industry 
Admittedly, 
previously  suffered  from  a  lack  of  approved  FiTs. 
These  are  necessary  for  the  private  sector  to  get 
engaged in the industry. With the recent publication 
of  the  FiTs,  this  obstacle  has  been  cleared  and 
should stimulate private sector participation.
Where  these  technologies  are 
installed  and 
marketed  as  part  of  social  aid  projects,  tariffs 
are  nonetheless  higher  than  those 
in  urban 
households that are often subsidised by the state. 
Coupled  with  the  high  investment  cost,  is  the 
lack of low interest finance for renewable energy 
technologies. After several years of discussions, no 
clear solution has been found to these problems. 
Going  forward,  there  is  a  need  for  government 
support  similar  to  the  subsidies  enjoyed  by  grid 
electricity  and  urban  LPG  consumers.  These 
must  be  appropriately  targeted  to  ensure  that 
remote rural communities benefit from access to 
electricity and modern fuels.  
renewable  energy 
the 
As  far  as  scalability  is  concerned,  renewable 
energy  projects  have  an  additional  advantage  in 
that barriers to entry are lower for local investors. 
This contrasts with large hydropower and thermal 
plants.  It  levels  the  playing  field,  enabling  smaller 
IPPs to compete favourably with the big players for 
grid  connection.  Apart  from  grid-connected  and 
off-grid renewable energy systems, there are also 
opportunities to explore mini-grids in remote rural 
areas  where  renewable  energy  could  be  targeted 
to create agro-industries to improve incomes. 
Expanding off-grid technologies across 
the country
After  several  years  of  promoting  renewable 
energy technologies, efforts are still concentrated 
in the very large cities like Accra and Kumasi. The 
majority of solar PV system retailers are either in 
Accra or Kumasi and are not very visible to smaller 
communities. Not many business models market 
solar  PV  systems  on  a  tariff  basis,  most  require 
households and businesses to purchase and own 
the system, which raises the financing challenges 
discussed above. To create broader awareness of 
these technologies, renewable energy businesses 
must be expanded to other parts of the country.  
Renewable Energy Act and FiTs
The passage of the Renewable Energy Act in 2013 
and subsequent release of FiTs effectively removed 
35
Regulatory transparency
With the state generator entering the renewables 
sector,  there  is  always  the  temptation  to  bully  its 
way through with the utilities in obtaining PPAs. It 
could use its existing power plants to influence the 
negotiating  process,  which  could  create  conflict 
with the private sector. It is important that everyone 
who  meets  requirements  set  by  the  regulator  is 
given a fair chance of negotiating. When necessary, 
bids must be used to prioritise projects. Least cost 
and quality of service should be the prime criteria. 
It  is  important  that  the  regulator,  in  this  case  the 
Energy Commission, is not perceived as biased by 
the investor community.   
Social and environmental compliance
While promoting renewable energy investments, it 
is important that investors fully comply with strict 
environmental  and  social  impact  reduction.  The 
ambition  for  liquid  biofuel  has  already  sparked 
major  disputes  in  Ghana,  and  there  are  plenty  of 
stories of land grab. Other technologies requiring 
large areas of land, such as solar and hydropower, 
could  create  conflict  with  the  original 
land 
users.  This  is  especially  the  case  if  the  process 
for  obtaining  land  is  not  transparent  enough. 
Hydropower  projects  with  the  potential 
for 
flooding  must  be  particularly  well  monitored  and 
appropriate  compensations  paid  before  project 
construction is allowed to begin. 
36
V. REFERENCES
Ahiataku-Togobo,  W.,  and  A.  Ofosu-Ahenkorah  (2009),  “Bioenergy  Policy  Implementation  in  Ghana”, 
COMPETE International Conference, Lusaka.
Bazilian,  M.,  et  al.  (2012), “Energy  Access  Scenarios  to  2030  for  the  Power  Sector  in  sub-Saharan  Africa”, 
Utilities Policy, Vol. 20, pp. 1-16.
13  November  2012,  www.ghanaweb.com/
Ghana  Daily  Graphic  (2012),  “GhanaWeb”,  published 
GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/artikel.php?ID=256346, 15 November 2013.
Duku, M.H., S. Gu and E.B. Hagan (2011), “Biochar Production Potential in Ghana: A review”, Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, Vol. 15, pp. 3539-3551.
ECOWAS (Economic Community Of West African States) (2012), Ecowas Renewable Energy Policy, ECOWAS 
Center for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency, Praia.
ECOWAS (2013), “West African Power Pool”, www.ecowapp.org/?page_id=168, accessed 19 June 2014.
Energy Commission (2006), Strategic National Energy Plan 2006 - 2010, Energy Commission, Accra. 
Energy  Commission  (2010),  “Data  for  the  Development  of  GIS  Maps”,  Alternative  Business  Development 
Scenarios and Toolkit for Renewable Energy Planning and Policy, Energy Commission, Accra.
Energy  Commission  (2012), “Ghana: Sustainable Action for All, Action Plan”,  http://energycom.gov.gh/files/
SE4ALL-GHANA%20ACTION%20PLAN.pdf?
Energy Commission (2014), “National Energy Statistics 2000 - 2013”, Energy Commission, Accra.
ECREEE  (ECOWAS  Centre  for  Renewable  Energy  and  Energy  Efficiency)    (2012),  ECOWAS  Renewable 
Energy Policy (EREP), ECREEE, Praia, pp. 92.
Essandoh, E.O., E.Y. Osei and F.W. Adam (2014), “Prospects of Wind Power Generation in Ghana”, International 
Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Technology, Vol. 5, No. 10, pp. 156-179.
Ghana Ministry of Energy (2013), “Ministry of Energy and Petroleum”, www.energymin.gov.gh/?page_id=205, 
accessed 19 June 2014.
Ghana  Statistical  Service  (2012),  2010  Population  and  Housing  Census:  Summary  Report  of  Final  Results, 
Ghana Statistical Service, Accra.
Ghana Statistical Service (2013), Provisional Gross Domestic Product 2013, Ghana Statistical Service, Accra.
Ghana Statistical Service (n.d.), www.statsghana.gov.gh/,  accessed 19 June 2014.
GIZ (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH) (2013), “Opportunities for RE Market 
Development in Ghana”, www.giz.de/fachexpertise/downloads/giz2013-en-pep-informationsveranstaltung-pv-
ghana-behrle.pdf. 
Government of Ghana (2012), “Ghana Sustainable Energy for All Action Plan” http://energycom.gov.gh/files/
SE4ALL-GHANA%20ACTION%20PLAN.pdf, accessed 19 June 2014.
Government of Ghana (2013), Highlights of the 2014 Budget, KPMG, Accra.
GRIDCo (2011), Ghana Transmissions and Distribution Master Plan, Ghana Grid Company, Accra.
IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2013), West African Power Pool: Planning and Prospects 
for Renewable Energy, IRENA, Abu Dhabi.
Jensen, S. (2002), Test of solar dryers in Ghana, Danish Technological Institute, Risoe. 
Ministry of Energy (2010a), National Energy Policy, Ministry of Energy, Accra.
Ministry of Energy (2010b), Energy Sector Strategy and Development Plan, Ministry of Energy, Accra. 
Mohammed, Y.S., et al. (2013), “An Overview of Agricultural Biomass Based Potential for Decentralised Rural 
Energy in Ghana”, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Vol. 20, pp. 15-25.
Public Utility Regulatory Commission (2011), “Publication of Electricity and Water Tariffs in the Gazette”, www.
purc.com.gh/purc/sites/default/files/decemberbillingcycle2011_0.pdf.
United Nations Development Programme (2011), Human Development Report 2011, Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
Volta River Authority (2014), “Power Generation: Facts & Figures”, www.vraghana.com/resources/facts.php,  
accessed 19 June 2014.
WAGPA (West African Gas Pipeline Authority) (2011), “WAGPA”, http://wagpa.org/wagpa.html, accessed 19 June 2014.
37
ANNEX
Detailed description of recommended action 
ON-GRID
Action
Target setting
All renewable energy resources
Service-resource pair(s)
The Northern Electrification Program objective of meeting 10% of the 
total  energy  mix  through  renewable  energy  by  2020  was  translated 
into the generation master plan as 10% of the electricity mix. 
The ministry in charge of energy is responsible for co-ordinating a study 
assessing  the  grid  condition  for  accommodating  variable  renewable 
energy.  This  will  further  help  to  establish  technology-specific  targets 
and  related  definite  capacity  additions,  thereby  increasing  market 
confidence and competition. This should drive costs down.
Description 
Ministry of Power, Energy Commission, GRIDCo, all relevant stakeholders 
and potential investors.
Actors 
End 2015
Timing
Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders
Keys to success
Action
Grid integration of variable renewable energy
All renewable energy resources
Service-resource pair(s)
Ghana has developed a comprehensive grid code most recently revised 
in  2009  It  establishes  the  requirement,  procedures,  practices  and 
standards that govern the development, operation, maintenance and 
use of the high voltage transmission system. However, the grid code in 
its current form lacks two prerequisites that would further enable the 
integration of utility-scale variable renewable energy in the grid. These 
are generation forecasting and priority dispatch.
The ministry in charge of energy and the Energy Commission should 
carry  out  consultations  with  all  relevant  stakeholders  for  the  revision 
of  the  grid  code.  This  is  in  order  to  include  specific  conditions 
accommodating  renewable  energy  generators  to  provide  accurate 
data as well as for giving priority dispatch for renewable power.
Description 
 
The Ministry of Power and the Energy Commission is also to engage in 
developing standards and codes for grid-connected rooftop solar PV 
as well as supporting capacity building for local financial institution.
Ministry of Power, Energy Commission, all relevant stakeholders.
Actors 
Mid-2016
Timing
Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders
Keys to success
38
Action
IPP financial support mechanisms and payment guarantees 
All renewable energy resources
Service-resource pair(s)
The Renewable Energy Law provides for the establishment of a renewable 
energy fund known as the Ghana Renewable Energy Fund or REF. This 
is to offer financial incentives, capital subsidies, production subsidies and 
equity  participation  for  renewable  energy  power  generation.  It  is  also 
expected that the REF fills the gap between the FiTs and retail prices in 
order to reduce the burden on end-users. 
The  Energy  Commission  is  to  get  the  REF  up  and  running  given  the 
renewed interest of project developers since FiTs were adopted.   
 
The Government of Ghana should make provision for payment guarantees 
to  IPPs  which  will  affect  the  commercial  viability  of  renewable  energy 
projects. This is due to the fact that distribution companies ECG and NEDCo 
are saddled with debt. The two utilities are not able to meet their payment 
obligations to their present suppliers and this cannot credibly offtake any 
renewable energy investment. The ECG has already signed PPAs, but none 
of those projects has yet been implemented. Moreover, the instability of 
the Ghana cedi has some significant implications for the development of 
renewable  energy  projects.  This  is  because  investment  is  most  likely  to 
be  denominated  in  a  foreign  currency,  while  the  revenues  are  expected 
in cedi. It is therefore important that Ghana considers designing effective 
currency risk mitigation instruments to help increase investor confidence 
in financing renewable energy projects.
Description 
Ministry  of  Power,  Ministry  of  Finance,  Energy  Commission,  PURC, 
development partners, all relevant stakeholders.
Actors 
End 2016
Timing
Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders
Keys to success
Streamlining renewable energy IPP procedure
for entering the electricity market
Action
All renewable energy resources
Service-resource pair(s)
The  current  process  for  a  renewable  energy  IPP  to  enter  the  Ghana 
electricity  market  requires  it  to  interact  with  regulatory  agencies  in  the 
power sector once detailed feasibility studies have been completed. These 
are  the  Energy  Commission  and  PURC,  the  Environmental  Protection 
Agency, Ministry of Power, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning 
and  the  Ghana  Investment  Promotion  Agency.  These  provide  various 
licences, approvals, clearances and incentives linked to the development 
of the renewable energy project (see figure 11). This complex and lengthy 
procedure  can  lead  to  significant  administrative  and  transaction  costs 
which  may  discourage  potential  investors  and  project  developers  from 
entering the market. 
Description 
Ghana needs to set up a one-stop shop which may help reduce complexity 
and assist IPPs working through this bureaucracy. The Ministry of Power is 
to take the lead in this activity jointly with all key stakeholders in Ghana.
Ministry of Power, Ministry of Finance, Energy Commission, regulatory 
agencies, all relevant stakeholders.
Actors 
End 2016
Timing
Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders
Keys to success
39
OFF-GRID
Action
Designing clear policy for off-grid mini-grids
Off-grid solar
Service-resource pair(s)
The  Government  of  Ghana  has  been  implementing  the  Northern 
Electrification Programme with the target of achieving universal access 
by 2020 via grid extension. However, it is not possible to connect the 
200-plus island/lakeside communities in the Volta river to the national 
grid due to their geographical location. Moreover, many electrification 
projects  fail  due  to  a  lack  of  clear  definition  of  competencies  and 
responsibilities  as  well  as  political  power  and  relationships  between 
different  stakeholders.  There  is  very  little  expertise  in  mini-grid 
management in Ghana. This has become a concern lately  due to the 
challenges associated with the electrification of island communities in 
Lake Volta. Mini-grids are becoming interesting to NGOs and research 
institutions  because  they  could  rely  on  freely  available  renewable 
energy resources to generate electricity to remote rural communities. 
However, much more needs to be done to scale up the deployment of 
these technologies.
The  country’s  objective  to  increase  rural  electricity  access  would 
be  facilitated  by  creating  a  level  playing  field  for  local  private  sector 
involvement.  The  support  announced  through  the  REF  should  be 
clearly  defined,  and  reliable  operating  schemes  designed  for  small-
scale  decentralised  renewable  energy  mini-grids.  Competencies  and 
responsibilities,  as  well  as  political  power  and  relationships  between 
different stakeholders, should also be clearly defined. 
Description 
The  Ministry  of  Power,  alongside  the  Energy  Commission  and  PURC, 
need  either  to  set  up  special  tariffs  for  mini-grids  or  provide  follow-
up  support  to  private  operators  willing  to  invest  in  them  and  facing 
financial and technical constraints. They are not considered attractive 
to  foreign  investors.  Once  operating,  the  REF  could  be  an  option  as 
it  aims  to  provide  financial  incentives  for  mini-grid  renewable  power 
systems for remote areas and islands.
There is also a need to design reliable operating schemes based on the 
local political and infrastructural framework to realise a sustainable and 
functional socio-economic system for mini-grids in Ghana.  
Ministry  of  Power,  Ministry  of  Finance,  Energy  Commission,  PURC, 
Development Partners, all relevant stakeholders.
Actors 
End 2016
Timing
Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders
Keys to success
40
Enhancing political support for promoting
sustainable use of biomass energy
Action
Biomass for heating
Service-resource pair(s)
More than 70% of households in Ghana continue to rely on firewood 
and  charcoal  as  their  main  source  of  cooking  fuel.  Campaigns  to 
reduce  wood  fuel  consumption  within  the  biomass  sector  aim  to 
introduce  biodigesters  that  produce  methane  for  cooking.  They  also 
aim to promote improved cookstoves to increase the efficient use of 
traditional biomass sources. However, high interest rates on loans have 
prevented supply-side investors from expanding their businesses and 
raising production.
The government is to continue to create and support policy initiatives 
enabling an environment that provides accelerated development and 
promotion  of  sustainable  household  biomass  energy.  This  is  needed 
in  addition  to  the  current  policies  and  goals  focused  on  remedies  to 
deforestation caused partly by traditional cookstove use.
Description 
  
There  is  also  a  need  to  encourage  more  entrepreneurs  prepared  to 
invest,  and  to  support  them  by  capacity  building,  through  a  grants 
programme  and  by  providing  access  to  working  capital.  Matching 
government programmes are needed to develop fast-growing energy 
wood plots, improve charcoal production technologies and skills, and 
improve cookstoves production.
Ministry of Power, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Environment, Energy 
Commission, PURC, Private Sector, Development Partners, all relevant 
stakeholders.
Actors 
End 2015
Timing
Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders
Keys to success
Action
Supporting private sector involvement 
All decentralised renewable energy applications
Service-resource pair(s)
The  relatively  small  size  of  the  off-grid  market  does  not  make  it 
very  attractive  to  foreign  investors,  which  is  why  the  sector  would 
probably be left to local private operators with the support of donors 
and  development  partners.  Local  private  operators  face  technical 
and  financial  constraints.  These  include  a  lack  of  technical  expertise 
to  develop  bankable  proposals  and  insufficient  working  capital  due 
to  difficulty accessing loans. Other constraints are  high interest rates 
due  to  a  perception  of  high  risk  and  lack  of  local  financial  institution 
expertise in assessing off-grid renewable energy proposals. 
Description 
The  Ministry  of  Power  is  to  lead  a  capacity  building  programme 
for  local  private  operators  and  financial  institutions  to  develop  and 
evaluate bankable decentralised renewable energy project proposals. 
This includes, for instance, training on how to assess local conditions 
and systems, installation and maintenance.  
Ministry  of  Power,  Energy  Commission,  Private  sector,  Financial 
Institutions,  Training 
institutions,  Research  Centers,  all  relevant 
stakeholders.
Actors 
End 2016
Timing
Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders
Keys to success
41
Facilitating end-user access to technologies and improving 
awareness and acceptability of cookstoves
Action
All decentralised renewable energy applications
Service-resource pair(s)
As in most of African countries, the upfront cost of renewable energy 
technologies in Ghana, including those for alternative cooking fuels, are 
too high for end-users. These are mainly in rural population. 
To  facilitate  the  spread  of  renewable  energy  technologies  and  their 
acceptance  by  the  local  populace,  the  Government  of  Ghana  is  to 
establish  a  set  of  end-user  access  facilitation  options.  These  could 
include targeted subsidies and deferred payment schemes that could 
be pre-financed directly by service providers or through a microfinance 
institution. It also needs to establish sound business models for both 
stand-alone  systems  and  mini-grids  to  increase  the  viability  and 
sustainability of decentralised renewable energy projects and access to 
electricity services in rural Ghana. 
Description 
This should be achieved by getting the REF up and running alongside 
other  financing  support  mechanisms  like  group  lending  approaches 
and  sustainable  credit  programmes  for  low-income  operators  and 
farmers. Researchers should be supported in designing prototypes for 
solar dryers that could be manufactured locally.  
The  government  is  also  to  lead  awareness-raising  campaigns  and 
communications strategies improving end-user knowledge of the new 
opportunities and benefits of off-grid renewable energy systems. 
If consumers are to adopt improved cookstoves in the long term, the 
government  should  embark  on  critical  mass  education  to  increase 
product market penetration and acceptability.
Ministry of Power, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Education, Civil 
Society, NGOs, Development partners and all relevant stakeholders.
Actors 
End 2017
Timing
Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders
Keys to success
42
