 
 
Renewable Energy 
Policy Brief 
 
BOLIVIA 
JUNE 2015 
 
 
Copyright © IRENA 2015  
Unless  otherwise  stated,  this  publication  and  material  featured  herein  are  the  property  of  the  International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and are subject to copyright by IRENA.  
Material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided 
that all such material is clearly attributed to IRENA and bears a notation that it is subject to copyright (© IRENA), 
with the year of the copyright. 
Material contained in this publication attributed to third parties may be subject to third party copyright and 
separate terms of use and restrictions, including restrictions in relation to any commercial use. 
This publication should be cited as: ‘IRENA (2015), Renewable Energy Policy Brief: Bolivia; IRENA, Abu Dhabi’. 
 
 
About IRENA 
The  International  Renewable  Energy  Agency  (IRENA)  is  an  intergovernmental  organisation  that  supports 
countries in their transition to a sustainable energy future, and serves as the principal platform for international 
co-operation, a centre of excellence, and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge 
on renewable energy. IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable 
energy,  including  bioenergy,  geothermal,  hydropower,  ocean,  solar  and  wind  energy,  in  the  pursuit  of 
sustainable  development,  energy  access,  energy  security  and  low-carbon  economic  growth  and  prosperity. 
www.irena.org 
 
Acknowledgement 
This brief benefited from valuable comments by the following reviewer: Raúl Villarroel Barrientos, Responsible 
for Alternative Energy, Ministry for Hydrocarbons and Energy, Bolivia. 
Authors: Miquel Muñoz Cabré (IRENA consultant); Alvaro Lopez-Peña, Ghislaine Kieffer, Arslan Khalid and Rabia 
Ferroukhi (IRENA) 
 
For further information or to provide feedback, please contact IRENA’s  Policy Unit, P.O. Box 236, Abu Dhabi, 
United  Arab  Emirates;  Email: 
from 
www.irena.org/Publications. 
for  download 
info@irena.org 
  This  brief 
is  available 
 
 
Disclaimer 
This publication and the material featured herein are provided “as is”, for informational purposes.  
All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the material featured in this publication. 
Neither IRENA nor any of its officials, agents, data or other, third-party content providers or licensors provides any warranty, 
including as to the accuracy, completeness, or fitness for a particular purpose or use of such material, or regarding the non-
infringement of third-party rights, and they accept no responsibility or liability with regard to the use of this publication and 
the material featured therein.  
The  information  contained  herein  does  not  necessarily  represent  the  views  of  the  Members  of  IRENA,  nor  is  it  an 
endorsement of any project, product or service provider. The designations employed and the presentation of material herein 
do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region, country, territory, 
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries. 
 
2 | B o l i v i a  
 
 
1. Policy  
In  2009  Bolivia  adopted  a  new  Constitution 
which  explicitly  states  that  the  state  will 
develop and promote alternative energy in an 
environmentally  sound  way1.  The  Patriotic 
Agenda  (Agenda  Patriótica)  to  the  year  2025 
also establishes objectives which are linked to 
The 
renewable 
generation,  transport  and  distribution  of 
energy is defined as an exclusive faculty of the 
State, allowing for participation of the private 
sector.  The  new  Constitution  decentralizes 
many competencies. In the case of renewable 
energy,  competencies  are  distributed2  at  the 
federal 
(e.g.  national  grid,  hydro 
resources,  bio-resources  and  public  service3 
policies); 
rural 
electrification,  department-level  renewable 
energy projects) and municipal level (e.g. local-
level 
and 
permitting). Jurisprudence is still being built on 
distribution  of  responsibilities 
in  areas  of 
overlap. 
Electricity 
Development  for  Better  Living  (Law  300  of 
2012) aims to gradually increase the share of 
renewable energy in electricity generation. 
In  2011,  Bolivia  defined  the  Policies  for 
Renewable  Energy 
in  the  Electric  Sector, 
including action through four programmes: (1) 
deployment  of  renewable  energy,  (2)  rural 
electrification, 
the 
regulatory  framework;  and  (4)  research  and 
development  (R&D).  The  development of the 
to  develop 
framework  seeks 
regulatory 
promotion mechanisms, including preferential 
dispatch,  financing  mechanisms,  and  import 
renewable  energy 
tax  exemptions 
locally 
equipment 
2048 
manufactured. 
established  that  remuneration  prices 
for 
renewable energy producers will be set at the 
nodal level, according to a methodology under 
development  by  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and 
expected in 2015. A new renewable energy law 
is also under development. .  
energy 
development. 
(3)  development  of 
level 
for 
cannot 
2014  Decree 
that 
In 
be 
regional 
level 
(e.g. 
energy  projects 
renewable 
Fiscal  incentives  have  been  provided  on  a 
case-by-case  basis or  with  regional  and  time-
limited scope. For example, Law 3279 and Law 
31525 of 2005 provided 5 years of Value Added 
Tax  (VAT)  and  import  duty  exemptions  for 
renewable 
the 
Departments  of Beni  and Pando  respectively. 
Decree  280  of  2009  provided  import  duty 
exemption  for  solar  and  small-scale  wind 
power  equipment  from  the  EU  Euro-Solar 
cooperation project.  
Bolivia  has  a  target  to  deploy  183  MW  of 
renewable  electricity4  by  2025,  as  set  by  the 
2014 Bolivia Electric Plan 2020-25. Previously, 
the 2011 Policies for Renewable Energy in the 
Electric  Sector  (see  below)  aimed  to  increase 
renewable energy in the electricity mix by 10% 
in  5  years.  The  2007  National  Development 
installing 
Plan  (Decree  29272)  aimed  at 
120MW  geothermal  capacity,  although  that 
goal was not pursued. 
equipment 
energy 
in 
The  framework  for  electricity  generation  in 
Bolivia is the 1994 electricity law (Law 1604). It 
empowers  the  federal  government  to  set  a 
minimum participation for hydropower in the 
law 
electricity  system.  A  new  electricity 
reflecting  the  2009  constitutional  changes  is 
under  development.  The  2007  National 
Development  Plan  (Decree  29272)  aims  to 
diversify 
for  electricity 
generation. In 2009 Decree 29894 defining the 
Vice-ministry  of  Electricity  and  Alternative 
Energy,  mandated  to  develop  policies  for  the 
promotion  of 
The 
Framework Law for Mother Earth and Integral 
Concessional loans from international donors 
for  the  development  of  renewable  energy 
projects are accepted by law on a case-by-case 
basis.  For  example:  USD  23.7  million6  from 
Japan  for  the  development  of  a  50MW 
geothermal  power  plant  (Laguna  Colorada) 
were accepted through Law 568 of 2014; USD 
95  million  from  the  Development  Bank  of 
LatinAmerica (CAF) for the development of the 
124MW  San  Jose  hydropower  project  were 
accepted  through  Law  507  of  2014;  and  USD 
101  million 
InterAmerican 
Development Bank (IADB) for the development 
the  energy  mix 
from 
the 
renewable  energy. 
                                                           
1 Article 379 
2 Articles 298, 299, 300 and 302. 
3 Referred to as “basic services” in the Constitution 
4 Hydropower plants larger than 2MW are considered conventional, and as such do not qualify for this target. 
5 As modified by Law 3524 of 2006 
6 Original amount is ¥2.495 billion. Converted as for exchange rate of the day the law was approved. 
R e n e w a b l e   E n e r g y   P o l i c y   B r i e f  | 3 
 
 
for  Decent  Living 
hydro.  The  Electricity 
rural 
programme 
energy  access 
initiatives  and  projects, 
including  the  Decentralized  Infrastructure  for 
Rural Transformation project described below.  
of  the  80MW  Misicuni  hydropower  project 
were accepted through Law 12 of 2010. 
combined  pre-existing 
Support for feasibility studies is provided on a 
case-by-case  basis  by  the  government.  For 
example,  Decree  29191  of  2007  declared  of 
interest  and  provided  support 
the 
feasibility  studies  of  the  1.6GW  El  Bala 
hydropower  project.  Decree  29191  of  2012 
provided  support  for  feasibility  studies  of  a 
biomass power plant project. 
Transport 
In 2003, Law 2481 accepted funding from the 
World  Bank  for  the  project  Decentralized 
Infrastructure for Rural Transformation (IDTR), 
which ran until 2011. The project invested USD 
10.15  million  in  solar  PV  resulting  in  10174 
solar PV systems. The project used auctions to 
award 4-year installation and service contracts 
to  concession  companies.  The  auctions  were 
held simultaneously for 14 areas with a given 
budget per area, and the bids with the largest 
numbers of users per area were awarded the 
contracts.  In  2014,  the  second  phase  of  the 
IDTR project, named Electricity and Renewable 
Energy Access programme was launched with 
a  World  Bank  loan  of  USD  21.3  million8 
accepted by Bolivia through Law 581 of 2014. 
for 
There  are  currently  no  mandates  for  liquid 
biofuels 
in  transport.  The  2007  National 
Development  Plan  (Decree  29272)  aimed  to 
develop ten biodiesel pilot plants and at least 
one very small scale  biodiesel  pilot  plant was 
developed by the government the Department 
of Santa Cruz.7 
Energy Access 
Regionally-focused initiatives include the 2004 
Law 2820 to promote the use of wind and solar 
energy 
in  La  Paz 
federal 
department, 
subsidies,  and  Law  2628  of  2004  to  promote 
the  use  of  solar  energy  for  ice-making  in  the 
Pando region.
In 2008, Decree 29635 created the programme 
Electricity for Decent Living, setting the goals of 
achieving universal electricity access by 2015 in 
urban areas and by 2025 in rural areas. Interim 
goals  for  rural  areas  are  70%  of  electricity 
access  by  2015 and  87%  by 2020.  To  achieve 
these  goals  the  programme 
includes  grid 
extension,  solar  PV,  wind  power  and  small 
for  water  pumping 
including 
through 
                                                           
7 http://www.ciatbo.org 
8 Original amount is 32.4 million SDR (Special Drawing Rights) 
4 | B o l i v i a  
 
 
2. Statistics 
 
 
R e n e w a b l e   E n e r g y   P o l i c y   B r i e f  | 5 
 
 
 
Sources for these statistics: IRENA, IEA, UN 
 
 
6 | B o l i v i a  
 
 
Renewable Energy Policy Briefs 
This brief is part of an IRENA series  providing a comprehensive  and timely  summary of renewable 
energy policies in Latin America (including Argentina, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, 
Ecuador,  El  Salvador,  Guatemala,  Guyana,  Honduras,  Mexico,  Nicaragua,  Panama,  Paraguay,  Peru, 
Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela). 
The brief brings together the most up-to-date information on renewable energy public policies for the 
power,  heating  and  transport  sectors,  and  also  includes  a  section  on  energy  access  policies.  The 
objective of this brief is not to provide an assessment of the reported policies. The brief is primarily 
based  on  the  information  contained  in  the  IEA/IRENA  Joint  Policies  and  Measures  Database, 
complemented with information drawn from: (i) additional existing legislation, (ii) official government 
sources  such  as  plans,  reports  and  press  releases,  and  (iii)  input  from  country  policymakers  and 
experts. While the brief focuses on policies at the national level, sub-national policies are also included 
where  relevant.  Specific  projects  or  programmes  implemented  by  actors  such  as  international 
organisations, development partners and the private sector are beyond the scope of this brief. 
The information contained in this document is posted on IRENA’s REsource web portal, will be used 
to update the IEA/IRENA Joint Policies and Measures Database, and will form the basis of IRENA’s 
future policy work in Latin America.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R e n e w a b l e   E n e r g y   P o l i c y   B r i e f  | 7 
 
 
 
8 | B o l i v i a  
 
