 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page ii 
 
 
 
 
October 2009 
 
Page i 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Table of Contents  
 
List of Tables  
List of Figures 
List of Acronyms 
Acknowledgements  
Message from the Hon. Prime Minister 
Message from the Hon. Minister of Energy & Mining 
Jamaica’s Energy Management Framework 
Vision of Jamaica’s Energy Sector 2009 – 2030  
Executive Summary  
Introduction  
Overview and Context  
Global Trends and Emerging Issues Related to Energy  
Profile of Jamaica’s Energy Sector  
SWOT Analysis of Jamaica’s Energy Sector  
Jamaica’s Energy Demand Projections to 2030  
Jamaica’s Energy Policy Framework to 2030  
Goal 1: Jamaican’s use energy wisely and aggressively pursue opportunities for 
conservation and efficiency  
Goal 2: Jamaica has a modernized and expanded energy infrastructure that enhances 
energy generation capacity and ensures that energy supplies are safely, reliably, and 
affordably transported to homes, communities and the productive sectors on a sustainable 
basis 
Goal 3: Jamaica realizes its energy resource potential through the development of 
renewable energy sources and enhances its international competitiveness, energy security 
whilst reducing its carbon footprint 
Goal 4: Jamaica’s energy supply is secure and sufficient to support long-term economic 
and social development and environmental sustainability 
Goal 5: Jamaica has a well-defined and established governance, institutional, legal and 
regulatory framework for the energy sector, that facilitates stakeholder involvement and 
engagement   
Goal 6: Government ministries and agencies are a model/leader in energy conservation 
and environmental stewardship in Jamaica 
Goal 7: Jamaica’s industry structures embrace eco-efficiency for advancing international 
competitiveness, and move towards building a green economy 
Proposed Energy Sector Indicators and Targets  
Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation Framework  
Annexes  
Annex 1:  Key Accomplishments in the Energy Sector – 1995-2008 
Annex 2: Energy Statistics 2004 – 2008  
iii 
iii 
iv 
v 
vii 
viii 
viiii 
ix 
xi 
1 
4 
8 
12 
16 
18 
20 
25 
28 
31 
33 
37 
40 
42 
44 
48 
51 
52 
58 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page ii 
 
 
Annex 3:  List of Organizations Participating in National Consultations and Stakeholder 
Discussions 
Annex 4: Glossary of Key Terms  
62 
65 
 
List of Tables  
Table 1: Jamaica’s Energy Demand Projections to 2030 
18 
 
Table 2: Energy Sector – Indicators and Targets 
44 
 
Table 3: Key Energy Statistics 2004 – 2008 
59 
 
 
List of Figures  
10 
Figure 1: Household Consumption KWH/month 2000 – 2008 
 
12 
Figure 2: Petroleum Consumption by Activity, 2008 
 
13 
Figure 3: Jamaica’s Energy Supply Mix (2008) 
 
15 
Figure 4: JPSCO Transmission System 
 
23 
Figure 5: Vision and Goals for Jamaica's Energy Sector 
 
35 
Figure 6: Jamaica’s Energy Supply Matrix 2008 – 2030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page iii 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
 
List of Acronyms  
 
BAU 
BOE 
CARICOM 
CBO 
CHP 
CNG   
CSAP   
DSM 
ECE 
EEU  
GDP 
GEF 
GHG    
GOJ 
IAEA   
ISO  
IPCC   
JPSCO  
KMA   
KWH   
LNG 
MDA   
MEM   
Mt 
MW 
NGO   
NWC   
PCJ 
SIDS 
SWOT  
Business as Usual  
Barrel of Oil Equivalent  
Caribbean Community  
Community Based Organization 
Combined heat and Power  
Compressed Natural Gas  
Comprehensive Sustainability Assessment Policy 
Demand Side Management  
Energy Conservation and Efficiency  
Energy Efficiency Unit  
Gross Domestic Product  
Global Environmental Facility   
Greenhouse Gas  
Government of Jamaica  
International Atomic Energy Agency  
International Standards Organization  
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
Jamaica Public Service Company  
Kingston Metropolitan Area  
Kilowatt Hour  
Liquefied Natural Gas  
Ministry, Department and Agency 
Ministry of Energy and Mining    
Million tones  
Megawatts 
Non-Governmental Organization  
National Water Commission  
Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica 
Small Island Developing States  
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page iv 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements  
The development of this Policy was led by the Ministry of Energy and Mining, 
with the input of a wide cross-section of stakeholders in the public and private 
sectors as well as the non-government organizations (NGO) and community 
based organizations (CBOs). The work set out here has been accomplished by the 
willingness of many individuals and organizations to lend their time and 
expertise.  The Ministry of Energy and Mining wishes to acknowledge their 
contributions and to express its sincerest gratitude for all those who have helped 
this policy development process.  
 
The involvement of stakeholders through consultations, meetings and 
workshops ensured that all major issues were effectively explored and that the 
strategic direction outlined in the policy would meet Jamaica’s current energy 
needs and those required to 2030.  
 
We thank all the various entities and members of the public who reviewed the 
Energy Policy Green Paper 2006 - 2020 and forwarded to us, ideas, comments 
and suggestions; and those persons who participated in the national 
consultations, too many to list here. Your comments and suggestions were 
reviewed and many have been incorporated in this current version of the policy 
document.  
 
Special mention must be made of the following persons who spent many hours 
reviewing comments, researching, providing technical analysis, and writing this 
document: Dr. the Hon. Carlton Davis, former Cabinet Secretary and Consultant 
to the Ministry of Energy and Mining; Zia Mian, Director General, Office of 
Utility Regulations; William Saunders, Energy Consultant; Ruth Potopsingh, 
Group Managing Director, Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica; Ryan Evans, 
Cabinet Office; Leonie Barnaby, Office of the Prime Minister; Fitzroy Vidal, 
Senior Energy Engineer of the Ministry of Energy and Mining; Marcia Forbes, 
former Permanent Secretary of the Ministry; and Hillary Alexander, Permanent 
Secretary of the Ministry of Energy and Mining and the rest of her hard-working 
staff. 
 
 
 
 
Page v 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Message from the Hon. Prime Minister 
I welcome the opportunity to present Jamaica’s National 
Energy Policy 2009 – 2030.  The policy is timely especially 
in light of the increasingly important role of energy in the 
socio-economic development of our country.  Jamaica’s 
future is inextricably linked to finding cost-effective, 
environmentally sustainable energy solutions.  The 
formulation of this policy and importantly, its 
implementation, are critical in helping Jamaica to achieve 
national development.  
 
Developed using the clearly defined GOJ Policy Making 
Framework and Guidelines, the policy is designed to 
establish linkages with other sectors of the economy to achieve coherence and fulfil its 
goals.  As we pursue the path to developed country status by 2030, we have aligned our 
energy policy to facilitate international competitiveness of our industry structures, 
enhance human development prospects and contribute to environmental protection.  
The policy is consistent with promoting and enhancing the well-being of all Jamaicans. 
 
The National Energy Policy 2009 – 2030 examines the energy situation we face and 
proposes a range of options and strategies which the Government is committed to 
pursue over the short, medium and longer term. These options range from consciously 
incorporating energy conservation measures in our daily lives to modernizing the 
nation’s energy infrastructure.  The policy balances issues relating to energy demand 
and supply, energy security, safety, conservation and development of renewable energy 
technologies.  Through this policy Jamaica can help to lead the Caribbean and other 
small island developing states in aggressively changing dependence on petroleum.   
 
The work has just begun. I ask every Jamaican to come on board and be part of this very 
important implementation process to 2030 as we create “a modern, efficient, diversified 
and environmentally sustainable energy sector providing affordable and accessible 
energy supplies with long-term energy security and supported by informed public 
behaviour on energy issues and an appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional 
framework”.  
 
Bruce Golding, M.P.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page vi 
 
 
 
Message from Hon. Minister of Energy & Mining  
The search for cleaner, safer, more reliable, cheaper sources 
of energy and better ways to use it unites countries all 
around the world, large and small, rich and poor.  Energy is 
the critical issue of our time. 
 
This policy shows Government’s commitment to enabling 
Jamaican business and industry to access energy so that they 
can be competitive on the international market; and for 
individuals and households to have the energy they need to 
manage their daily lives in this modern economy. This policy 
will create and advance, “a modern, efficient, diversified and 
environmentally sustainable energy sector…” 
 
This National Energy Policy is fully consistent with Vision 2030 Jamaica – National 
Development Plan and will support the achievement of Jamaica’s national vision, 
“Jamaica the place of choice to raise families, live, work and do business.” 
 
A cornerstone of this policy is diversifying our energy base. We will find new ways to 
power our economy and to reduce the amount of energy we use. We will explore 
indigenous sources of energy and clean technologies, thereby injecting life into research 
institutions and generating new, “green” jobs at a time when new jobs are so sorely 
needed.  This policy will also enable us to reduce pollution and thereby protect the 
health of all Jamaicans as they go about their daily business. It will demonstrate that 
Jamaica is a responsible global citizen as we minimize our emissions of greenhouse 
gases, and reduce our carbon footprint.  
 
As former US President, Jimmy Carter said, “by acting now we can control our future 
instead of letting the future control us.” This policy must now be brought to life by 
specific strategies, programmes and actions, underpinned by a comprehensive 
monitoring and evaluation framework that will address areas such as: finding new 
sources of energy; creating new financial incentives; promoting energy conservation; 
creating green buildings and so on. 
 
We all have a part to play in ensuring that we achieve the goals set out in this policy - 
government ministries, departments and agencies, private businesses large and small, 
our bauxite industry, our manufacturing sector, teachers and other educational leaders, 
researchers, communities, students, our hoteliers, architects, engineers and contractors 
and most importantly you and me – all Jamaicans - helping to secure our energy future 
and leading this ‘land of wood and water’ toward sustainable prosperity. 
 
James Robertson, M.P.   
  
 
Page vii 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Jamaica’s Energy Management Framework  
 
Jamaica’s energy management framework and particularly this policy will support the 
implementation of Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan, particularly 
National Outcome #10 – Energy Security and Efficiency and is therefore consistent with, 
and part of the overarching vision for achieving developed country status by 20301. The 
National Energy Policy and its relationship to Vision 2030 Jamaica as well as 
Government’s policy-making framework are presented in the matrix below: 
  
  
 
  
“Jamaica, the place of choice to live, work, raise families and do business” 
  
(Jamaica's National Vision) 
 
 
“A modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable energy sector providing affordable and accessible 
energy supplies with long-term energy security and supported by informed public behaviour on energy issues and an 
appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional framework” 
 
(Vision of Jamaica's Energy Sector)
Goal 3:
Goal 5:
Goal 2:
Goal 4:
Goal 7: 
Goal 6:
Jamaica realizes its 
energy resource 
potential through 
the development 
of renewable 
energy sources 
and enhances its 
international 
competitiveness, 
energy security 
whilst reducing its 
carbon footprint
Jamaica has a well-
defined and 
established 
governance, 
institutional, legal 
and regulatory 
framework for the 
energy sector, that 
facilitates 
stakeholder 
involvement and 
engagement  
Jamaica has a modernized 
and expanded energy 
infrastructure that 
enhances energy 
generation capacity and 
ensures that energy 
supplies are safely, reliably, 
and affordably transported 
to homes, communities 
and the productive sectors 
on a sustainable basis
Jamaica’s 
energy supply is 
secure and 
sufficient to 
support long-
term economic 
and social 
development 
and 
environmental 
sustainability 
Jamaica’s 
industry 
structures 
embrace eco-
efficiency for 
advancing 
international 
competitiveness 
and moves 
towards building 
a green economy 
Goal 1:
Government 
ministries and 
agencies are a 
model/leader in 
energy 
conservation 
and 
environmental 
stewardship in 
Jamaica 
Jamaicans use 
energy wisely 
and aggressively 
pursue 
opportunities for 
conservation 
and efficiency 
  
Energy Strategies and Key Actions to 2030 
 
Implementation Framework (Energy Specific Plans, Vision 2030 Jamaica Action Plans/3yr 
Corporate Plans of Ministries, Agencies and Departments) 
  
  
 
 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework (Energy Indicators) 
 
 
Policy Review (3-yearly, and consistent with GOJ Policy Review Framework) 
 
                                                      
1 As articulated in Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan  
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page viii 
 
 
Vision of Jamaica’s Energy Sector 2009 – 2030  
  
 
A modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally 
sustainable energy sector providing affordable and accessible 
energy supplies with long-term energy security and 
supported by informed public behaviour on energy issues and 
an appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional 
framework2 
 
The long-term strategic vision is built on ten (10) fundamental elements as follows: 
 
1. 
An energy sector that provides affordable energy supplies to all consumers 
throughout Jamaica with the capacity to meet long-term growth in demand; 
and one that contributes to the international competitiveness of  the 
productive sectors of the economy 
 
2. 
An energy sector that is supported by greater awareness by the Jamaican 
public of the importance of energy and its use in their daily lives and the 
contribution that each can make to the responsible and efficient use of this 
vital commodity 
 
3. 
An energy sector that is focused on the modernization and expansion of the 
energy infrastructure (e.g. generation, transmission and distribution systems) 
to ensure safety, affordability, reliability and competitive advantage  
 
4. 
An energy sector that is driven by private sector investment within a policy 
and regulatory framework that fosters investments, competition, efficiency, a 
level playing field and transparency 
 
5. 
An energy sector that provides long-term energy security to producers and 
consumers in Jamaica, including security of supply and, to the fullest extent 
possible, long-term price stability 
 
6. 
An energy sector supported by databases that are accurate and precise to 
enable analysis, forecasting and overall management of the sector, especially 
information related to the transportation sector 
 
7. 
An energy sector that is environmentally sustainable with significantly 
increased use of economically viable renewable energy sources  
 
                                                      
2 Modified from Vision 2030 Jamaica Energy Sector Plan  
 
Page ix 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
8. 
An energy sector that reflects a sustained improvement in the ways in which 
energy is used, through greater energy efficiency, reduced energy intensity 
and better energy conservation and management 
 
9. 
An energy sector that possesses the flexibility and creativity to adopt and 
adapt to new and appropriate energy technologies (such as fuel cells, small 
nuclear plants) that may emerge over the long-term 
 
10. 
An energy sector with an appropriate institutional framework to support and 
facilitate the effective implementation of the policy supported by all relevant 
stakeholders, including the public and private sectors, educational institutions 
as well as non-governmental and community based organizations. The 
institutional framework will include among others: mechanisms for improved 
coordination and organization between and within energy agencies; capacity 
building to face the challenges regarding fossil fuel supplies and costs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page x 
 
 
Executive Summary  
 
 
 
T 
his document presents Jamaica’s National Energy Policy 2009 – 2030 which is 
designed to ensure that by 2030 Jamaica achieves:   
 
A modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable  
energy sector providing affordable and accessible energy supplies  
with long-term energy security and supported by  
informed public behaviour on energy issues and  
an appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional framework 
 
This Policy document represents the revision to the Energy Policy Green Paper 2006-
2020 based on national consultations and comments received by a wide cross-section 
of society as well as current realities facing Jamaica; and in keeping with the country’s 
long term plan to achieve developed country status by 2030 as articulated in Vision 2030 
Jamaica – National Development Plan.  
 
This Strategic Framework– the goals and strategies underpinning this National Energy 
Policy – is comprehensive and is expected to be durable to 2030 and beyond, yet be 
flexible and adaptable to meet new challenges and opportunities as they arise.  This 
Strategic Framework also addresses both supply and demand energy issues the country 
faces and as such places priority attention on seven key areas: 
1.  Security of Energy Supply through diversification of fuels as well as 
development of renewables 
2.  Modernizing the country’s energy infrastructure  
3.  Development of renewable energy sources such as solar and hydro  
4.  Energy conservation and efficiency  
5.  Development of a comprehensive governance/regulatory framework 
6.  Enabling government ministries, departments  and agencies to be model/leader 
for the rest of society in terms of energy management  
7.  Eco-efficiency in industries  
 
By focusing on the seven priority areas listed above, the National Energy Policy will 
ensure that the country minimizes the effects of volatile and rising crude oil prices, 
takes advantage of renewable resources and promotes conservation and efficiency in 
the use of energy resources amongst all sectors of the society. The ultimate outcome of 
achieving the seven goals of this policy will be the provision of more affordable energy 
supplies to Jamaican consumers, an improved competitive base for the country, as well 
as sustainable growth and development of the nation.  
 
 
Page xi 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Jamaica National Energy Policy 2009 – 2030: Securing Jamaica’s Energy Future will 
facilitate the achievement of the fundamental elements of the vision for Jamaica’s 
energy sector and is built on the following basic principles: 
  It provides a framework for the sustainable management of energy resources 
and for development of viable renewable energy resources, with the latter 
expected to represent  no less than 20% of the energy mix by 2030  
 
  It is long-term and comprehensive 
 
  It will advance new, environmentally friendly technologies to increase energy 
supplies, particularly in the transport sector, and encourage cleaner, more 
efficient energy production, conversion and use 
 
  It will establish linkages with other sectors of the economy to achieve policy 
coherence and fulfill its goals 
 
  It is fully consistent with other aspects of Government policy, particularly Vision 
2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan  
 
  It utilizes an integrated approach towards yielding a cleaner environment, a 
stronger economy, and a sufficient supply of energy for the country’s  future – 
balancing environmental protection with energy production  
 
  It  seeks to raise the living standards of Jamaicans and contribute to our country 
becoming “…the place of choice, to live, work, raise families and do business”, 
recognizing that to do so our country must fully integrate its energy, 
environmental, and economic policies, and move us into the realm of the green 
economy and onto the path to sustainable prosperity 
 
  It will enhance Jamaica’s regional and global competitiveness through efficiency 
in the use of energy 
 
The achievement of the Vision for the sector will be realized by translating the policy 
into strategies and specific areas of action such as diversification of our existing fuel 
sources, development of renewable sources of energy, biofuels and waste-to-energy 
programmes, to name a few. These strategies and actions will be administered via the 
corporate and operational plans through a range of organizations, starting with the 
Ministry of Energy and Mining and its agencies, and also including other Ministries, 
agencies and departments such as the ministries of Transport and Agriculture as well as 
the Ministry with the responsibility for the environment.   
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page xii 
 
 
Overview and Context 
The Jamaican economy is characterized by high energy intensity and low efficiency and 
is almost completely dependent on imported oil.  Petroleum consumption is 
concentrated in three areas, namely: bauxite/alumina, power generation and transport. 
 
The recent cycle of oil price volatility and the global emphasis on environmental issues 
have re-focused energy supply security and the environmental sustainability agendas 
for both energy import-dependent and exporting economies. Uncertainty of oil prices is 
prompting developing economies such as ours to rethink the fundamentals of our 
energy policies. Access to energy at affordable prices has thus become the focus of the 
energy security agendas of oil import-dependent economies.  
 
A comprehensive program of efficiency improvement and energy diversification is 
required for Jamaica to provide high-quality, affordable, environmentally-friendly 
energy and to reduce the country’s dependence on high-cost imported oil. 
 
Energy diversification will involve moving from an almost total dependence on 
petroleum to a strategic mix of other sources, including natural gas, coal, petcoke, 
nuclear, and renewable energy such as solar, wind, and biofuels.  In the short to 
medium term, natural gas would be the fuel of choice for generation of electricity and 
the production of alumina. This diversification will require an enabling regulatory and 
legislative environment and development of institutional capacity. In the longer term 
more sustainable and cheaper fuel options must, and will be identified and developed. 
 
Jamaica’s National Energy Policy will support Vision 2030 Jamaica – National 
Development Plan, provide the enabling environment for the achievement of the 
national outcome of “a secure and sustainable energy supply for our country” as 
articulated in the Plan and the implementation of the two national energy strategies: to 
diversify the energy supply and to promote energy efficiency and conservation. It would 
also provide support for the achievement of two other national strategies articulated in 
the Plan, namely “adaptation to climate change” and “to contribute to the effort to 
reduce the global rate of climate change”.  
 
The Energy Policy will ensure that linkages are established with other sectors such as 
agriculture, transport, construction, bauxite, and finance to achieve policy coherence 
and fulfill the country’s energy goals. 
 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy Framework 2009-2030 
The Strategic Framework underpinning this National Energy Policy is comprehensive 
and will be sustained to 2030 and beyond yet be flexible and adaptable to meet new 
challenges and opportunities as they arise. The framework includes the short- to 
medium-term as well as long-term strategic directions for the government, private 
sector and industry as well as civil society.  
 
 
Page xiii 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
The Vision and Strategic Framework contained in this National Policy reflect the 
contributions of the stakeholders represented on the Prime Minister’s Task Force on 
Energy; National Energy Task Force; the Vision 2030 Jamaica Task Force on Energy; 
and stakeholders and members of the general public who participated in the island-
wide consultations undertaken by the Ministry of Energy and Mining during the 
development of the Policy. 
 
The policy presents seven goals, the accomplishment of which will enable Jamaica to 
achieve the country’s energy vision of 
A modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable energy 
sector providing affordable and accessible energy supplies with long-term 
energy security and supported by informed public behaviour on energy 
issues and an appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional framework 
 
These goals are described below. 
 
Goal 1: Jamaicans use energy wisely and aggressively pursue opportunities for conservation 
and efficiency  
 
Achievement of this goal will result in improving efficiency in the key energy-
consuming areas of the power generation, bauxite/alumina production, transportation 
and building design and construction. Jamaicans will become more aware of energy 
conservation practices and will be helped in reducing energy consumption by: a 
comprehensive and well coordinated continuous public education programme; the 
introduction of incentives; greater availability of energy-saving products and devices; 
research that leads to adoption of, and adaptation to new and emerging energy 
technologies; improvements in energy infrastructure; and appropriate legislation. 
 
Goal 2: Jamaica has a modernized and expanded energy infrastructure that enhances energy 
generation capacity and ensures that energy supplies are safely, reliably, and affordably 
transported to homes, communities and the productive sectors on a sustainable basis 
 
When this goal is accomplished, Jamaica will have a modernized energy infrastructure 
consisting of energy-efficient plants and distribution systems including a protocol for: 
replacing old and inefficient generating plants; and a refinery that produces higher-
valued refined petroleum products in order to replace imports and compensate for the 
potential switch from oil-fired to natural gas power plants.  This will be in a liberalized 
energy industry that promotes competition governed by appropriate regulations.  
 
Goal 3: Jamaica realizes its energy resource potential through the development of renewable 
energy sources and enhances its international competitiveness and energy security whilst 
reducing its carbon footprint 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page xiv 
 
 
Opportunities for further development of indigenous renewable energy resources such 
as solar, hydro, wind and biofuels, will be explored with the goal of increasing the 
percentage of renewables in the energy mix to 20% by 2030. The development of 
renewable energy sources will not only reduce the country’s dependence on imported 
oil but will also provide new employment opportunities towards building Jamaica’s 
green economy. Increased use of renewables will also result in lowering the level of air 
pollution, ensuring a smaller carbon footprint for Jamaica and better enable compliance 
with international conventions on climate change.  
 
Goal 4: Jamaica’s energy supply is secure and sufficient to support long-term economic and 
social development and environmental sustainability  
 
Under this Goal, Jamaica will reduce the percentage of petroleum in the country’s 
energy supply mix from the current 95%.  Diversification priorities for the short, 
medium, and long term will be based on cost, efficiency, environmental considerations 
and appropriate technologies.  This will protect the country from disruptions in oil 
supply and price volatility. Components in the more diversified energy source mix will 
include both indigenous and foreign options such as natural gas, coal, petcoke, nuclear 
sources as well as renewable energy sources. The country will pursue its oil and gas 
exploration efforts with a view to incorporate any commercial volumes discovered into 
the country’s energy strategy.   There will also be the strengthening of existing 
multilateral, regional and bilateral partnerships and cooperative arrangements and 
develop new ones that best advance Jamaica’s energy interests.  
 
Goal 5: Jamaica has a well-defined and established governance, institutional, legal and 
regulatory framework for the energy sector that facilitates stakeholder involvement and 
engagement   
 
Achievement of this goal will remove policy inconsistencies and provide a coherent 
policy and regulatory framework to facilitate competition in the energy supply system, 
enable the introduction of diverse sources of energy into the system, and provide 
integrated monitoring and enforcement of regulations, all overseen by agencies and 
organizations with the capacity and tools to guide the energy sector. 
 
Goal 6: Government ministries and agencies are a model/leader in energy conservation and 
environmental stewardship in Jamaica  
 
Government ministries, departments and agencies will be models of efficient energy 
usage and environmental stewardship, resulting in a reduction in the high public sector 
consumption of energy and other resources and providing a stimulus for private sector 
and community action. 
 
Goal 7: Jamaica’s industry structures embrace eco-efficiency for advancing international 
competitiveness and move towards building a green economy 
 
Page xv 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
 
This goal recognizes that the private sector is the engine of a nation’s economy.  When 
this goal is achieved, private sector firms and industry will be equipped to implement 
innovative energy management programmes, using clean, energy efficient 
technologies and institutionalizing energy conservation practices. 
 
Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation Framework 
The implementation of this Policy will be led by the Ministry of Energy and Mining, with 
the support of several other departments and agencies of Government as well as non-
state stakeholders including the private sector, NGOs and CBOs. The involvement of all 
stakeholders is fundamental to the successful implementation of this Policy.  
 
The Ministry of 
Energy and 
Mining will have 
the dual 
responsibilities of 
articulating the 
policy and 
coordinating the 
monitoring of its 
implementation. 
The first role will 
require it to set 
out clear 
guidelines to its 
departments and 
agencies and 
other sister 
ministries and 
their departments 
and agencies. 
Petrojam Ethanol Storage Tank 
 
Aligned to this Policy will be strategic plans and action plans developed for each of the 
goals and aligned to the energy sector plan and the action plan developed under Vision 
2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan. It is expected that each strategic plan will 
be developed for three years and will be further aligned and find expression with the 3-
year rolling Corporate Plan and budget of the Ministry. 
 
In order to ensure that desired outcomes of the National Energy Policy are being 
achieved, the effectiveness of the policy will be periodically assessed to identify when a 
complete review or alteration is appropriate. 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page xvi 
 
 
Introduction  
 
T 
his document presents Jamaica’s National Energy Policy 2009 – 2030. It presents 
Jamaica’s first long term Energy Policy and is structured to ensure that Jamaica 
achieves by 2030:   
 
A modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable  
energy sector providing affordable and accessible energy supplies  
with long-term energy security and supported by  
informed public behaviour on energy issues and  
an appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional framework 
 
Over the years, energy policy in Jamaica has been outlined in various documents, with 
the most recent being the 1995 Energy Policy and the Green Paper – The Jamaica 
Energy Policy 2006 – 2020. This Policy document represents the revision to the Green 
Paper 2006-2020 based on national consultations3 and comments received by a wide 
cross-section of the society, current realities facing Jamaica, and is in keeping with 
country’s long term plan to achieve developed country status by 2030 – Vision 2030 
Jamaica – National Development Plan. In the development of the policy, use was also 
made of the Comprehensive Sustainability Assessment Policy (CSAP) Tool Framework 
2008 to ensure that a wide range of economic, social and environmental issues were 
adequately addressed in the policy towards enabling sustainability.  
 
For several countries, particularly developed countries with 
emission reduction targets, their energy policy is linked to 
or framed within the context of climate change mitigation 
and moving towards a low carbon economy. Although 
developing countries do not have emission reduction 
targets at present, the matter is now being discussed in the 
development of a new carbon trading regime post 2012 
when the provisions of the Kyoto Protocol end.  In any 
case, “no regrets” mitigation actions such as energy 
conservation and development of renewable energy 
sources have positive impacts in terms of economic, social 
and environmental considerations and are included in this 
Policy. 
Some Supply Side Issues 
Addressed: 
 
 
Energy resources  
Energy transmission 
and distribution  
Energy infrastructure  
 
 
Some Demand Side Issues 
Addressed: 
 
 
 
Energy consumption  
Energy efficiency  
Behavioural change  
 
 
The Policy identifies a mix of short- to medium-term as 
well as long term strategic directions and actions for the government, private sector 
and industry as well as civil society. It must be noted that many elements of this policy 
are currently being undertaken.  
 
                                                      
3 Based on the Consultation Code of Practice for the Public Sector  
 
Page 1 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
The Strategic Framework (that is, the sector goals and strategies) underpinning this 
National Energy Policy is comprehensive and is expected to be durable to 2030 and 
beyond yet be flexible and adaptable to meet new challenges and opportunities as they 
arise. The Strategic Framework also addresses both supply and demand energy issues 
the country faces and so places priority attention on seven key areas: 
1.  Security of Energy Supply through diversification of fuels as well as 
development of renewable energy sources 
2.  Modernizing the country’s energy infrastructure  
3.  Development of renewable energy sources such as solar and hydro  
4.  Conservation and efficiency in use of energy 
5.  Development of a comprehensive governance/regulatory framework for the 
energy sector 
6.  Enabling government ministries and agencies to be models/best practice for the 
rest of society in terms of energy management  
7.  Eco-efficiency in industries  
 
By focusing on the seven priority areas listed above, the National Energy Policy will 
ensure that the country mitigates the effects of volatile and rising crude oil prices, takes 
advantage of renewable and non-renewable resources and promotes conservation and 
efficiency in use of energy resources amongst all sectors of the society.  The ultimate 
outcome of achieving the seven goals will be the provision of more affordable energy 
supplies to Jamaican consumers, an improved competitive base for the country, as well 
as sustainable growth and development of the nation.  
 
Jamaica National Energy Policy 2009 – 2030: Securing Jamaica’s Energy Future will 
facilitate the achievement of the fundamental elements of the vision for Jamaica’s 
energy sector and is built on the following basic principles: 
  It provides a framework for the sustainable management of energy resources 
and for development of viable non-renewable and renewable energy resources, 
with the latter expected to represent  no less than 20% of the energy mix by 
2030  
 
  It is long-term and comprehensive 
 
  It will advance new, environmentally friendly technologies to increase energy 
supplies, particularly in the transport sector, and encourage cleaner, more 
efficient energy production, conversion and use 
 
  It will establish linkages with other sectors of the economy to achieve policy 
coherence and fulfill its goals 
 
  It is fully consistent with other aspects of Government policy, particularly Vision 
2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan  
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 2 
 
 
 
  It utilizes an integrated approach towards yielding a cleaner environment, a 
stronger economy, and a sufficient supply of energy for the country’s  future – 
balancing environmental protection with energy production  
 
  It  seeks to raise the living standards of Jamaicans and contribute to our country 
becoming “…the place of choice to live, work, raise families and do business”, 
recognizing that to do so our country must fully integrate its energy, 
environmental, and socio-economic policies, and move into the realm of the 
green economy and onto the path to sustainable prosperity 
 
  It will enhance Jamaica’s regional and global competitiveness through efficiency 
in the use of energy 
 
The achievement of the Vision for the sector will be realized by translating the policy 
into strategies and specific areas of action such as renewables, diversification, biofuels 
and waste-to-energy to name a few. These strategies and actions will be administered 
via the corporate and operational plans of a range of organizations, starting with the 
Ministry of Energy and Mining and its departments and agencies, and also including 
other Ministries and their departments and agencies such as the Ministries of Transport 
and Agriculture as well as the Ministry responsible for the environment.   
 
This Policy Development Process included the 
inputs of various stakeholders in the public and 
private sectors as well as from non-
governmental and civil society organizations. 
The policy development benefited from island-
wide consultations as well as information 
received from various groups including 
academia and industry groups.  
The Policy is structured as follows: 
  Executive Summary  
Member of Academia, provinding input at a national consultation 
 
Introduction  
  Overview and Context  
  Global Trends and Emerging Issues Related to Energy  
  Profile of Jamaica’s Energy Sector  
  SWOT Analysis of Jamaica’s Energy Sector  
 
Jamaica’s Energy Demand Projections to 2030  
Jamaica’s Energy Policy Framework to 2030  
Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation Framework  
 
 
  Annexes 
 
 
Page 3 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Overview and Context  
 
J 
amaica has provided almost all its citizens with access to electricity; 90% of  
households have access, whereas approximately one-quarter of the world’s people 
are unable to use electricity to meet their day-to-day needs.  However, the power 
generation sector that provides electricity to households,  businesses, industries and 
municipalities, accounts for almost a quarter of the country’s petroleum 
imports/consumption and is characterized by high cost, low reliability, low power 
generation efficiencies and high system losses.  
 
In general, the Jamaican economy is characterized by high energy intensity and low 
efficiency and is almost completely dependent on imported oil.  Petroleum 
consumption is concentrated in three areas, namely: bauxite/alumina, power 
generation and transport, with the latter using automotive fuels (gasoline and diesel oil) 
which are the most expensive fuel.  
 
A comprehensive program of efficiency improvement and energy diversification is 
urgently required for Jamaica to provide high-quality, affordable, environmentally-
friendly energy and to reduce the country’s dependence on high-cost imported oil. 
 
Energy diversification will involve moving from an almost total dependence on 
petroleum to increase the contribution of other 
sources, including natural gas, coal, petcoke, 
nuclear, and renewable energy such as solar, wind, 
and biofuels.  In the short to medium term, natural 
gas would be the fuel of choice for generation of 
electricity and the production of alumina. This 
diversification will require an enabling regulatory 
and legislative environment and development of 
adequate institutional capacity. In the longer term 
more sustainable and cheaper fuel options must, 
and will be identified and developed. 
Energy underpins our modern 
economy 
 
The recent cycle of oil price volatility and the global 
emphasis on environmental issues have re-focused 
energy supply security and the environmental 
sustainability agendas for both energy import-
dependent and exporting economies. Uncertainty 
of oil prices is prompting developing economies such as ours to rethink the 
fundamentals of our energy policies. Access to energy at affordable prices has thus 
become a top priority of the energy security agendas of oil import-dependent 
economies.  
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 4 
 
 
Energy services can be produced from both conventional (nonrenewable fossil fuel-
based) and renewable sources of energy.  Jamaica is almost completely dependent on 
imported oil. 
 
Traditionally, Jamaica has depended on petroleum supplies from Venezuela, Mexico, 
and Trinidad & Tobago, supplemented by purchases on the spot market.  However, our 
long term energy security is threatened by diminishing global oil reserves vis-à-vis 
demand and long-term sustained rising oil prices, political uncertainties in key oil-
producing regions; and the potential impacts of natural disasters on oil production and 
transportation infrastructure. 
 
A comprehensive and sustained 
program of efficiency 
improvement and energy 
diversification will be introduced 
to provide high-quality, 
affordable, environmentally-
friendly energy (to the maximum 
extent possible) towards 
reducing the country’s 
dependence on high-cost 
imported oil. In particular, the 
high price of electricity to 
businesses and other end users 
will be targeted.  As such, 
improved efficiencies in the 
conversion of primary fuels to 
electricity and its transportation, 
distribution and use is a major strategy to make the Jamaican economy more 
competitive in the regional and international market place. 
Solar Panels at Cornwall Regional Hosptial in Montego Bay 
 
Supporting Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan 
The National Energy Policy will support Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development 
Plan. This 21-year plan is based on a fundamental vision to make “Jamaica,  the place 
of choice to raise families, live, work and do business,” and on guiding principles 
which put the Jamaican people at the centre of the nation’s transformation. 
 
The Plan sets out fifteen national outcomes that are designed to enable a major 
transformation of Jamaica from a middle income developing country to one which 
affords its citizens world class standards in key areas such as health, education, 
nutrition, basic amenities (such as energy and water supply) and access to 
environmental goods and services (clean air, freshwater etc).  
 
One of the fifteen national outcomes is “Energy Security and Efficiency.”  
 
Page 5 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
 
Vision 2030 Jamaica presents two national strategies to “provide a secure and 
sustainable energy supply for our country.”  These are: 
1.  Diversify the energy supply 
2.  Promote energy efficiency and conservation 
 
Jamaica’s National Energy Policy will provide the enabling environment, including 
legislative support for the achievement of this national outcome of a secure and 
sustainable energy supply and the implementation of the two national energy 
strategies. 
 
Key Linkages with Economic Sectors  
The Energy Policy will establish linkages with other sectors of the Jamaican economy in 
order to achieve policy coherence and fulfill the achievement of the country’s energy 
goals. To this end, related policies and strategic plans to be developed, for example, 
those related to renewables, biofuels, public sector procurement, taxes and incentives, 
conservation and efficiency as well as transport and agriculture will be harmonized with 
this policy.  
 
Agriculture – The development of biofuels such as ethanol and biodiesel will be part of 
agriculture and land use policy and plans, especially given the conflicts between land 
and water use for food versus biofuels.  The agriculture sector uses 75% of the country’s 
water, obtained mainly from aquifers using electric/petroleum-fueled deep well pumps. 
Implementing water-conserving irrigation systems as well as encouraging energy 
conservation in the agricultural sector will not only result in less water being consumed 
for agriculture but will also reduce the energy needs of the agriculture sector as well.   
 
Consideration must also be given to use of treated recycled water from waste 
treatment plants in the agricultural and industrial 
sectors. 
 
Transportation –The transport sector strategy will 
discourage the importation of inefficient motor 
vehicles by linking the tax regime to mileage per 
gallon and the engine capacity.  The transportation 
policy will encourage measures such as energy 
conservation, including: efficient traffic 
management; car pooling; park and ride; use of 
clean fuels to minimize pollution; flexi-work hours 
and tele-commuting; an efficient public/urban 
mass transit transport system; encouraging non-
motorized transport; and, promoting vehicle and road maintenance programs. 
Supporting legislation and infrastructure for use of biofuels will be put in place. The 
Jamaica Urban Transit Company Buses 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 6 
 
 
transportation policy also will encourage more efficient modes of transport such as 
barges especially for bulky materials like aggregates. The possibility of enhanced 
coastal and rail transport will be kept under constant review. Once natural gas is 
introduced into Jamaica’s energy supply mix, the transport fleets, where applicable, will 
be converted to CNG and in the longer term a CNG supply network must be developed 
to enable private motorists to convert to natural gas based motor vehicles. 
 
Construction, Housing, Offices, Factories and Hotels – The construction industry will 
be held to the standards outlined in the Energy Efficient Building Code; this will require 
architects and engineers to design, build and renovate buildings and factories to 
incorporate energy efficient lighting and cooling systems and building material and 
employ energy-efficient construction methodologies. Consideration also will be given 
to providing incentives for constructing carbon neutral buildings that would use no 
energy from the national power grid. Energy conservation and efficiency must and will 
be promoted among, government entities, factories, offices, homeowners and 
hoteliers.   
 
Bauxite – Mechanisms will be provided to encourage the bauxite/alumina industry to 
take greater advantage of co-generation potential to supply energy to the national 
grid. New technologies also need to be introduced to reduce the energy cost of alumina 
production to make it internationally competitive. Greater application of combined 
heat and power (CHP) concept, already used in the this industry will be encourage to 
enable capture of waste energy, reduce cost and at the same time allow for export of 
surplus electricity to the national grid. 
 
Finance – The Ministry of Finance and the Public Service will develop and implement a 
program of incentives and fiscal measures to enable and support: investments in 
modern facilities and infrastructure in the energy sector; energy efficiency and 
conservation; and development of renewable energy options. The domestic financial 
sector will actively seek to participate in investing in energy sector development. It will 
be important for adequate information to be disseminated and incentives created to 
enable the participation of local financial institutions in the financing of energy 
projects, particularly those related to renewable energy, LNG and power generation 
plants. A system of shared decision-making will be stated and agreed upon. This will 
ensure that decisions of the Ministry of Finance related to energy will be collaborative 
and would also ensure that those decisions are consistent with the National Energy 
Policy.
 
 
 
Page 7 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Global Trends and Emerging Issues 
Related to Energy  
 
I 
n the World Energy Outlook 2008, the International Energy Agency (IEA) referred to 
the world’s energy system as being at a crossroads, with current global trends in 
energy supply and consumption being unsustainable—environmentally, 
economically and socially. The IEA identifies a need for an energy revolution to address 
two central energy challenges: securing the supply of reliable and affordable energy; 
and effecting a rapid transformation to a low-carbon, efficient and environmentally 
responsible system of energy supply. Although, access to energy is not one of the 
Millennium Development Goals, it is considered fundamental to facilitate the 
achievement of these said Goals. 
 
Climate Change 
It has been widely accepted that human-induced Climate Change is happening. The 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 
stated that “Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from 
observations of increases in global average air and ocean temperatures, widespread 
melting of snow and ice and rising global average sea level (2007).”  The burning of 
fossil fuels is the single largest contributor to emissions of greenhouse gases such as 
carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide that contribute to climate change and global warming. 
 
Jamaica signed and ratified the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and its 
Kyoto Protocol.  As a non-Annex I Party to the Protocol, Jamaica is not bound by 
specific targets for greenhouse gas emissions.  However, there are obligations to foster 
adaptation to the potential impacts. 
 
Although Jamaica does not significantly contribute to the global problem of climate 
change, as a small island developing state, the country is highly vulnerable to the 
effects of climate change.  Coastal inundation, sea level rise, and damage by extreme 
weather events are among the chief concerns for Jamaica arising from climate change.  
The country’s energy-related infrastructure, including power lines, generating plants, 
service stations and wind farms must have safeguards in place to handle these 
challenges. 
 
Under the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC), developed countries are required to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions to an average of 5% against 1990 levels over the period 2008-2012. These 
targets must be met primarily through national measures, but there are additional 
means of meeting the targets through three market mechanisms under the Protocol.  
The Clean Development Mechanism allows developed countries to purchase certified 
emission reduction credits from projects in developing countries which result in 
reduced emissions and contribute to sustainable development. 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 8 
 
 
 
Although developing countries do not have emission reduction targets at present, the 
matter is now being discussed at the global level in the development of a new carbon 
trading regime post 2012 when the provisions of the Kyoto Protocol end.   
 
Energy and the Environment  
The burning of fossil fuels is the single largest contributor to emissions of greenhouse 
(GHG) gases such as carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide that contribute to global 
warming and climate change.  The development and implementation of a national  
energy policy is therefore an important component for the achievement of sustainable 
national development and must balance issues relating to demand, supply, energy 
security, conservation and development of renewable energy technologies.  
 
Mitigation efforts such as energy efficiency and conservation programmes, and 
alternative energy sources such as solar, wind, hydropower, and biofuels to produce 
energy will not only reduce the country’s import energy bill, diversify its energy supply, 
and reduce its dependence on non renewable fossil fuels but also contribute to the 
reduction in global emissions of greenhouse gases and global warming and the 
disastrous consequences of climate change and its effects on the environment 
including, beach erosion, degradation or bleaching of coral reefs, marine species and 
other natural ecosystems that live along the coastline.   
 
The development, deployment and wide-scale use of new, clean technologies in 
industry for example, emitting fewer greenhouse gases and other air pollutants is also 
essential in pollution reduction and the protection of human health. 
 
There are several policy and regulatory initiatives concerned with energy use and 
environmental protection in Jamaica. The Policy on Environmental Stewardship of 
Government Operations has been drafted as part of the Government of Jamaica’s goal 
of enabling GOJ entities to become more efficient in their operations, generating 
significant cost savings while eliminating or minimizing adverse impacts on the 
environment.  The Environmental Stewardship Policy speaks to among other things, 
energy conservation, water conservation and fleet management - aspects of 
government operations that have an impact on the overall use of energy.  
 
An Environmental Management Systems Policy and Strategy Green Paper for Jamaica 
has been prepared. An Environmental Management System (EMS) is a management 
tool which enables an organization, whether in the public or private sector, to address 
the impacts of its products, processes and services on the environment, including its 
use of energy and management of waste.  
 
The Jamaica Ambient Air Quality Standards were promulgated by the Natural 
Resources Conservation Authority (NRCA) in 1996. Air Quality Regulations were also 
promulgated in 2006. Some of the main features of the air quality regulations include 
 
Page 9 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
an air pollutant discharge licensing system and the payment of discharge fees for 
emissions or discharges to the environment. The Air Quality Regulations include a 
requirement that all holders of a licence to discharge air pollutants, complete a 
Summary Report of Annual Actual Emissions for Regulated Pollutants and Greenhouse 
Gases. 
 
Carbon Trading/Auction 
Carbon credits are a key component of national and international attempts to reduce 
the growth in concentrations of greenhouse gases. A Carbon Emissions Trading Policy 
is now being developed to address Jamaica’s participation in the Clean Development 
Mechanism and its position regarding carbon neutral status in sectors such as the 
tourism industry. 
 
Energy Conservation and Efficiency 
Conservation and 
efficiency are often 
considered the 
most promising 
sources of energy 
available because 
they save energy 
for future use and 
buy us time to 
explore and 
develop new 
energy 
technologies.   
Household consumption kWh/month 
2000 - 2008 
 
h
t
n
o
M
/
H
W
K
n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
n
o
C
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
H
225.0
200.0
175.0
150.0
125.0
100.0
75.0
50.0
25.0
0.0
 
Household 
consumption 
kWh/month
 
l
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
 
Year
Energy 
conservation in this 
document refers 
to practices and 
actions that reduce the amount of energy that is used (e.g. walking instead of driving a 
car) whereas energy efficiency refers to changing technology so that less energy is used 
to accomplish the same task (e.g. driving a more fuel-efficient vehicle).  While 
education and changing attitudes are the core requirements for effecting energy 
conservation and can be accomplished at little or no cost, increased development of 
and access to energy-saving technologies and products are also required to increase 
energy efficiency and usually requires initial investment that will be recouped over the 
long-term. 
Figure 1: Household Consumption KWH/month 2000 – 2008 
 
In the case of Jamaica, average electricity consumption of Jamaican households as 
depicted in the figure above was 164 kWh/month in 2008, down from 200 kWh/per 
month in 2003. This reduction was due largely a response by citizens to high electricity 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 10 
 
 
prices in an attempt to reduce their monthly bills, but 
was also based on the implementation of various 
energy conservation initiatives and programmes that 
have been put in place over the last ten years 
including, training programmes in environmental 
stewardship implemented across the public sector and increased availability of energy 
efficient consumer products such as energy-saving bulbs.  
Oil, Coal and Natural Gas are likely to 
remain the main fuel sources used 
globally to 2030, despite increases in the 
use of nuclear and renewable energy. 
 
Renewable Energy 
Renewable energy sources diversify a country’s energy supplies and reduce its 
dependence on non-renewable fossil fuels which will eventually be depleted.  
Renewable energy sources are also cleaner than fossil fuels, emitting fewer greenhouse 
gases and other air pollutants that are responsible for harming human health.  The 
development of renewable alternative energy technologies is proceeding throughout 
the world due to increased demand driven by concerns around climate change and 
energy security by citizens in both developed and developing countries.  This is 
contributing to competitive cost structures for renewables although they remain, on 
average, more expensive than fossil 
fuels. 
 
The REN21 Renewables Global Status 
Report released in May 2009, showed 
that in 2008, for the first time, more 
renewable energy than conventional 
power capacity was added in both the 
European Union and United States, 
showing a "fundamental transition" of 
the world's energy markets towards 
renewable energy.4 It must be noted 
that all this development was 
supported through subsidies and government recovery plans. 
Wigton Wind Farm 
 
During 2008, a number of governments worldwide enacted new renewable energy 
policies, and many countries set ambitious renewable energy targets. Today, at least 73 
countries have renewable energy policy targets, up from 66 at the end of 2007. Jamaica 
will have its renewable energy policy in place by early 2010. Countries are viewing the 
renewable energy industry as a way to stimulate their economies and create jobs 
without increasing carbon emissions. 
 
 
                                                      
4 Renewables Global Status Report Update 2009 
 
Page 11 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Profile of Jamaica’s Energy Sector  
J 
amaica’s energy sector faces a number of challenges. The sector is characterized 
by: an almost complete dependence on imported petroleum; high rates of energy 
use; inefficient electricity supply systems; and an inadequate policy and regulatory 
framework. These issues must and will be dealt with as Jamaica moves to create by 
2030:  
 
A modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable energy sector 
providing affordable and accessible energy supplies with long-term energy security 
and supported by informed public behaviour on energy issues and an appropriate 
policy, regulatory  and institutional framework 
 
The energy sector in Jamaica is dominated by imported petroleum, which meets over 
90% of the nation’s energy needs. Due to the energy intensity of the aluminum/bauxite 
industry in Jamaica, per capita energy consumption is high when compared with most 
developing countries.  
 
Cooking & 
Lighting 
3%
Petroleum Consumption by Activity, 2008 
Other 
2%
Road & Rail 
21%
Bauxite/Alumina
30%
Shipping 
14%
Electricity 
Generation 
23%
Aviation 
7%
 
Figure 2: Petroleum Consumption by Activity, 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 12 
 
 
The main energy-related characteristics of Jamaican economy are: 
a)  High dependence on imported oil 
(in 2008 oil imports accounted for 
95% of the primary energy 
supplies mix (see Figure at right); 
This dependency makes Jamaica 
vulnerable to increases in the 
price of oil as was the case in 1973 
and more recently in the past six 
(6) years when the annual 
average spot peak price of crude 
oil on the international market 
increased by 288% from US$25 
per barrel in 2002 to US$97 in 
2008 
Wind 
Wind 
1%
1%
Hydro 
Hydro 
4%
4%
Petroleum 
Petroleum 
95%
95%
 
Figure 3: Jamaica’s Energy Supply Mix (2008) 
Energy Supplies Mix 
b)  The oil import bill in 2008 
increased significantly (49.6% higher than in 2007) due to increasing crude oil 
prices. For the first time the oil import cost surpassed Jamaica’s export earnings 
of US$ 771.3 million for the year 
 
c)  Approximately 5% of the energy supplies mix comes from other sources – 4% 
from hydro and 1% from wind 
 
d)  In 2008, three areas, namely bauxite/alumina (34.6%), power/electricity 
generation (23.1%), and transport (21.5%) accounted for the largest share of 
petroleum consumption by volume or 79% of the oil consumption.  In terms of 
cost, the transport sector is the single highest.  
 
e)  Internal energy per capita consumption, including the energy intensive bauxite 
sector is 8, and excluding the bauxite sector it is 5 
 
f)  Efficiency of energy conversion and use is low. The conversion efficiency of old 
steam generation plants is less than 30%. With modern technologies such as 
combined cycle turbines; this efficiency can be improved to over 50%.  System 
losses in transmission and distribution represent 23% of total output (as 
estimated by the Office of Utilities Regulation).  
 
g)  Growing demand for automotive fuels (gasoline and diesel oil) is at a rate of 
4.3% per annum. In 2008 the automotive fuels consumption was estimated at 
5.6 million barrels of oil equivalent - boe (21.5% of oil demand which cost about 
31% of foreign exchange expenditure) 
 
 
Page 13 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
h)  While Jamaica Public Service Company (JPS) retains a monopoly on the 
transmission and distribution of electricity the production regime has been 
liberalized to include generation of electricity by private producers for their own 
use or for sale to the national grid. In 2008, total generating capacity in Jamaica 
was approximately 818 megawatts (MW), which included 217 MW capacity 
provided by independent power producers 
 
i)  Lack of  an appropriate and dynamic regulatory framework to address the range 
of issues and challenges the sector faces, including: pricing of electricity and 
petroleum products; old generation plants; tax and pricing structure for road 
users; system loss; and the development of renewable generation capacity  
 
j)  Low power generation 
efficiency and reliability 
(about 40% of the 
generation capacity is 
over 30 years old and 
need to be replaced). The 
proportion of diesel oil 
based generation capacity 
in the total generation 
capacity mix (34%) is high 
and requires expensive 
fuel 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 14 
 
 
The Electricity Sector 
Figure 4: JPSCO Transmission System 
Jamaica has in excess of 1,200 km of transmission lines 
 
 
The Electricity Sector in Jamaica is vital to the stability of the society and plays a critical 
role in the viability and modernization of the Jamaican economy.  It is often considered 
as the main life blood for development and the improvement in the standard of living of 
the people.   
 
The generation stock of over 818MW is largely oil based and is comprised of over 30% 
of its capacity that goes well beyond its economic life.  30% of total generation is 
supplied by Private Power Partners under the Independent Power Purchase 
Agreements. 
 
The transmission system includes a network of more than 1200 km of 138 kV and 69 kV 
lines. The primary distribution system operates at voltages of 12 kV, 13.8 kV and 24 kV 
and altogether there are more than 12,000 km of distribution lines. 
 
Over the past few years JPSCo has experienced an increase in system losses. This 
increase is attributed to an increase in technical losses due to load increases as well as 
an apparent increase in non technical losses, which are estimated to be approximately 
12% of the energy supplied by JPSCo. 
 
 
Page 15 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
SWOT Analysis of Jamaica’s Energy Sector  
 
 
F 
or the energy sector in Jamaica, the identification of strengths and weaknesses 
represents the internal assessment of the sector while the consideration of 
opportunities and threats represents the analysis of the impact of the external 
environment on the sector. The SWOT analysis, along with the issues and challenges 
and the profile of the energy sector presented above, form the basis for identifying 
goals and strategies that will be employed to apply the strengths and address the 
weaknesses of the sector, and capitalize on the opportunities and mitigate the threats 
for the long-term development and sustainability of the sector.  
 
The SWOT analysis for Jamaica’s energy sector is presented in the matrix below. 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 16 
 
 
 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
 
 
  Jamaica has a well developed power supply and distribution 
system with more than 90% of the population having access 
to electricity 
  High dependence on imported petroleum 
  Lack of known indigenous fossil fuel sources 
  High energy import bill 
  High cost of electricity 
  Old/aging electricity generation plant - Over 40% of the power generation 
  Jamaica is endowed with a very high potential for the use of 
renewables in the form of solar, wind and biomass production 
  The country has a well established network of petroleum 
system is old and in need of replacement/retirement 
supply and distribution system 
  Aged technology of the local petroleum refinery  
  Lack of detailed and up-to-date data for determining renewable energy 
  The ethanol dehydration industry is well established 
  There are diverse opportunities for co-generation 
  Existence of a regulatory framework 
  The process of market liberalization has been established 
  The privatization of energy sector entities and private sector 
projects  
  Low refinery utilization factor  
  Electricity system experiences high heat rate (low generation efficiency) 
  High technical and non-technical electricity system losses 
  High energy intensity of economy relative to productivity (as measured by the 
participation 
  Jamaica had played a pioneering role in the development and 
energy intensity index – ratio of energy consumption to GDP) 
implementation of demand side management (DSM) 
programmes through the assistance of  the World Bank, GEF, 
CIDA and the Inter American Development Bank 
  Lack of timely implementation of energy sector plans and projects 
 
Inefficient energy use in production and consumption across all sectors 
  Low level of adaptation of new energy technologies 
 
 
Importation and use of energy-inefficient motor vehicles (based on type, size, 
age and fuel use) 
Inefficient and inadequate public transportation system in KMA and other 
urban and rural areas 
Inefficient movement of traffic in urban centres 
Inefficient land transport modes for cargo and passengers 
 
 
 
  Use of charcoal and firewood as energy sources 
  Dependence of alumina sector on bunker oil 
  Energy inefficiencies in alumina sector 
  Lack of consensus or certainty about long-term future of energy sector 
  Slow development of renewable energy resources 
  Low levels of public action on energy conservation 
  Weak enforcement powers of regulatory agencies  
Threats – External Environment  
Opportunities – External Environment  
 
 
  Existence of technologies to exploit natural energy sources 
  Favourable relations with energy-rich countries in CARICOM, 
  Continued volatility and high reliance on imported petroleum 
  Delays in the policy decision regarding diversification fuel and timing of  
the Caribbean region and other regions 
project implementation 
  High demand for renewable fuels in the United States 
  Continued international interest in energy investments in 
  Securing the necessary investments in an acceptable time-frame to enable 
diversification of fuel sources; replacing old and inefficient generators and 
refurbishing others; reducing transmission losses; and developing an efficient 
transportation system so as to reduce dependence on private transportation 
Jamaica 
  Ability to earn carbon credits under the Kyoto Agreement 
  Potential for development of renewable energy sources 
  Ongoing improvements in mass transit and public 
  Non-delivery of promised capacity from cogeneration  
  Linkage of Petrojam prices to Gulf reference prices 
  Jamaica’s economic status as price-taker in international energy markets 
  Potential impact of natural hazards on energy sector 
  Geo-political influences on international energy supply and demand 
  Contribution of greenhouse gases to climate change 
  Potential impact of emissions and contaminations from sector, including 
transportation systems 
  Renewable fuel technologies for motor vehicles 
  Opportunities for cogeneration and CHP particularly in 
respect of sale/export to the national grid 
 
 
contribution of greenhouse gases to climate change 
 
  Potential loss of international economic competitiveness of Jamaica due to 
high energy costs and inefficient energy use 
 
 
 
Page 17 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Jamaica’s Energy Demand and Projections 
to 2030  
  
 
Three growth scenarios have been developed to project future energy demand:  
1.  business as usual (S1) 
2.  implementing efficiency improvement and conservation programs (S2) 
3.  efficiency improvement plus fuel diversification (S3) 
 
Under business as usual (assuming the price of oil at US$ 100/barrel in 2008 dollars), the 
cost of imported energy is projected to increase from US$ 2.7 billion in 2008 to US$ 4.6 
billion by 2020.  
 
The implementation of an effective efficiency improvement and conservation program 
is projected to reduce the energy demand by two million barrels of oil equivalent (boe) 
in 2015 and by 6 million boe in 2020. The resulting reduction in the energy import bill is 
projected at US$129 million in 2015 rising to US$555 million by 2020. The introduction 
of a national diversification program is projected to increase the annual savings by 
US$711 million in 2015 and US$1.7 billion by 2020. Investments in these programs are 
considered cost-efficient. The projection summary is presented in the Table below. 
 
Table 1: Jamaica’s Energy Demand Projections to 2030 
Jamaica Energy Demand Projections - 2030 
Energy Demand (Million 
boe)  
 
GDP 
Growth 
Energy Demand Growth ( % 
pa)  
  
 
 
 
Year 
 % 
S 1 
S 2 
S 3 
S 1 
S 2 
S 3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
1.0 
2.7 
1.4 
-0.6 
6.5 
3.9 
0.7 
-7.0 
6.5 
3.9 
0.7 
-7.0 
6.5 
3.9 
0.7 
-7.0 
28.0 
29.1 
29.9 
27.8 
28.0 
29.1 
29.9 
27.8  27.8 
28.0 
29.1 
29.9 
27.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     2,613  
     2,068  
     2,072  
     2,195  
     2,325  
     2,463  
     2,609  
     2,893  
     3,179  
     3,493  
     3,838  
     4,218  
     4,635  
     2,613  
     2,068  
     2,072  
     2,177  
     2,288  
     2,405  
     2,528  
     2,764  
     2,999  
     3,254  
     3,530  
     3,830  
     4,079  
   2,613  
   2,068  
   2,068  
   2,149  
   2,232  
   2,320  
   2,410  
   2,582  
   2,750  
   2,929  
   3,119  
   3,322  
   3,538  
2009 
-2.3 
-5.0 
-5.0 
-5.0 
22.0 
22.0  22.0 
22.0 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
0.1 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
5.5 
0.2 
5.9 
5.9 
5.9 
5.9 
10.9 
0.2 
5.1 
5.1 
5.1 
5.1 
9.4 
0.1 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
7.2 
22.0 
23.4 
24.7 
26.2 
27.8 
30.8 
22.0  22.0 
23.2  23.2 
24.3  24.3 
25.6  25.6 
26.9  26.9 
29.4  29.4 
22.0 
22.9 
23.7 
24.7 
25.6 
27.5 
2016 
5.0 
9.9 
8.5 
6.5 
33.8 
31.9  31.9 
29.3 
2017 
2018 
2019 
5.0 
5.0 
5.0 
9.9 
9.9 
9.9 
8.5 
8.5 
8.5 
6.5 
6.5 
6.5 
37.2 
40.8 
44.9 
34.6  34.6 
37.6  37.6 
40.7  40.7 
31.2 
33.2 
35.3 
2020 
5.0 
9.9 
8.5 
6.5 
49.3 
44.2  43.4 
37.6 
2021 
5.0 
9.9 
8.5 
6.5 
54.2 
48.0  47.1 
40.1 
     5,093  
     4,426  
   3,768  
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 18 
 
 
Jamaica Energy Demand Projections - 2030 
Energy Demand (Million 
boe)  
 
GDP 
Growth 
Energy Demand Growth ( % 
pa)  
  
 
 
 
Year 
 % 
S 1 
S 2 
S 3 
S 1 
S 2 
S 3 
S1 
S2 
S3 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
5.0 
5.0 
5.0 
5.0 
9.9 
9.9 
9.9 
9.9 
8.5 
8.5 
8.5 
8.5 
6.5 
6.5 
6.5 
6.5 
59.5 
65.4 
71.9 
79.0 
52.0  51.1 
56.5  55.4 
61.3  60.1 
66.5  65.3 
42.7 
45.5 
48.4 
51.6 
     5,596  
     6,149  
     6,757  
     7,425  
     8,159  
     8,966  
     4,802  
     5,210  
     5,653  
     6,134  
     6,655  
     7,221  
   4,013  
   4,274  
   4,551  
   4,847  
   5,162  
   5,498  
2026 
2027 
2028 
5.0 
5.0 
5.0 
9.9 
9.9 
9.9 
8.5 
8.5 
8.5 
6.5 
6.5 
6.5 
86.8 
95.4 
104.
8 
72.1  70.8 
78.3  76.8 
84.9  83.3 
54.9 
58.5 
62.3 
     9,852  
     7,835  
   5,855  
2029 
5.0 
9.9 
8.5 
6.5  115.
92.1  90.4 
66.3 
    10,826        8,501  
   6,236  
2 
2030 
5.0 
9.9 
8.5 
6.5 
126 
98.1 
70.7 
100.
0 
    11,896        9,223  
   6,641  
Growth Scenarios:    S 1 - Business as Usual (BAU)  
 
 
 
S 2 - Efficiency Improvement Measures and fiscal Regimes  
S 3 - Efficiency improvement plus fuel diversification  
  
  
   0.933  
 
 
  
  
Increased Renewables 
22.0 
22.0 
22.0  22.0 
 
 
2010 
2011 
     2,072  
     2,172  
     2,072  
     2,154  
   2,071  
   2,126  
 
23.4 
24.7 
23.2 
24.3 
23.2  22.9 
24.3  23.7 
 
 
 
 
Assuming 6% renewables. 
GDP growth after 2020 constant 
 
2012 
2013 
2014 
     2,276  
     2,384  
     2,498  
     2,240  
     2,328  
     2,420  
   2,185  
   2,245  
   2,307  
26.2 
27.8 
30.8 
25.6 
26.9 
29.4 
25.6  24.7 
26.9  25.6 
29.4  27.5 
 
 
 
 
 
  Renewables 12.5% 
 
 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
     2,693  
     2,942  
     3,214  
     3,512  
     3,814  
     2,573  
     2,775  
     2,994  
     3,230  
     3,464  
   2,404  
   2,545  
   2,695  
   2,854  
   3,004  
33.8 
37.2 
40.8 
44.9 
49.3 
31.9 
34.6 
37.6 
40.7 
44.2 
31.9  29.3 
34.6  31.2 
37.6  33.2 
40.7  35.3 
44.2  37.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Renewables 15% 
 
 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
     4,191  
     4,578  
     5,001  
     5,430  
     5,823  
     3,758  
     3,979  
     4,291  
     4,601  
     4,871  
   3,199  
   3,387  
   3,586  
   3,774  
   3,922  
54.2 
59.5 
65.4 
71.9 
79.0 
48.0 
52.0 
56.5 
61.3 
66.5 
47.1  40.1 
51.1  42.7 
55.4  45.5 
60.1  48.4 
65.3  51.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Renewables 20% 
 
 
2025 
70.8  54.9 
2026 
76.8  58.5 
2027 
83.3  62.3 
2028 
90.4  66.3 
2029 
98.1  70.7  2030 
     6,319  
     6,944  
     7,630  
     8,385  
     9,214  
10,124 
     5,220  
     5,664  
     6,145  
     6,668  
     7,235  
7,850 
   4,125  
   4,394  
   4,679  
   4,983  
   5,307  
86.8 
95.4 
104.8 
115.2 
126.6 
72.1 
78.3 
84.9 
92.1 
100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5,652 
  Renewables 20% 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy Framework to 
2030  
 
E 
nergy in its many forms underpins the modern economy. It powers industrial 
production, transport, telecommunications and IT systems. It underpins our way 
of life by enabling the services of the modern home, such as refrigeration, 
cooking, air conditioning and entertainment. It is imperative for Jamaica’s economic 
and social development for the cost of energy to be reduced significantly over the 
medium term.  It is important to recognize that high energy costs are primarily 
associated with the cost of electricity generation, as Jamaica has relatively low gasoline 
prices and tax rates for a non-oil producing country.   
 
To realize the Vision of the energy sector this Policy will:  
  Ensure the security of energy supplies (availability and accessibility to adequate 
energy by all Jamaicans at affordable prices) to achieve sustainable long-term 
economic growth, a competitive edge and holistic development 
  Develop sustainable and cost efficient strategies to effectively manage the 
challenge of volatile oil prices and to reduce the cost of imported energy and 
consequently the cost to the consumer 
  Increase the efficiency of power plants in order 
to reduce the cost of electricity generation in 
the public system and the bauxite and alumina 
industry  
  Stabilize power generation capacity and 
transmission systems to ensure cost efficient 
and uninterrupted supplies (short, medium and 
longer term) 
  Promote energy efficiency and conservation 
(reducing oil intensity and energy 
consumption), particularly in the areas of 
power generation, bauxite/alumina production, 
transport, and water supply systems  
  Achieve energy and economic  sustainability, 
whilst fully addressing the 
national/regional/global environmental 
concerns  
  Undertake risk assessment and  management 
to inform the building of new transmission and 
distribution  infrastructure, the financing of 
new generation capacity and diversification of 
the energy supply mix  
Solar panel on outdoor lighting at Institute of 
Sustainable Development, UWI 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 20 
 
 
  Establish strong core institutional capacity to 
develop and implement a comprehensive sector 
strategy, the necessary clear and comprehensive 
regulatory framework, and relevant programs and 
projects 
  Build monitoring and supervisory capabilities in the 
energy sector 
  Develop a long-term strategy which fully recognizes 
where feasible and appropriate the importance of  
renewables for power generation capacity 
  Stimulate co-operation between the public and 
private sectors and academic institutions in energy 
research and development 
This National Energy Policy 2009 
– 2030 will pursue the overall goal 
of developing an energy sector 
that contributes to long-term 
economic competitiveness, 
improved quality of life for all and 
a healthy natural environment. 
This will be achieved by: 
 
  Reducing the over-
dependence on imported 
oil by examining other 
alternatives 
 
 
This Strategic Framework underpinning this National 
Energy Policy is comprehensive and will be sustained to 
2030 and beyond yet be flexible and adaptable to meet new 
challenges and opportunities as they arise. This will include 
the short- to medium-term as well as long term strategic 
directions for the government, private sector and industry 
as well as civil society.  
  Diversifying the country’s 
energy supply mix to 
achieve greater energy 
self-sufficiency by 
optimizing development 
and utilization of 
indigenous energy 
resources 
 
 
The Vision and its Strategic Framework contained in this 
National Policy reflect the contributions of the stakeholders 
represented on the Prime Minister’s Task Force on Energy; 
National Energy Task Force; the Vision 2030 Jamaica Task 
Force on Energy; stakeholders and members of the general 
public who participated in the island-wide consultations 
undertaken by the Ministry of Energy and Mining during 
the development of the Policy. 
  Taking advantage of 
emerging technologies that 
will reduce the country’s 
dependence on fossil fuels 
and improve the efficiency 
of generating electricity 
 
  Ensuring that energy is 
used efficiently by 
reducing energy lost and 
wasted and by using 
appropriate energy types 
 
During the medium term, diversification is necessary 
because the fundamentals indicate continued high and 
volatile prices for oil and less so with the alternatives 
(natural gas, coal and renewables). The objective now is to 
pursue natural gas because of: 
 
  Ensuring that energy 
  Availability  
  Cost of fuel and capital  
  Environmental impact criteria to inform alternatives   
chosen  
resource development and 
utilization in the country is 
accomplished with as 
minimal negative impacts 
as possible on the natural 
environment 
 
Over the long term Jamaica’s energy sector will develop the 
flexibility and capacity to adopt, adapt and develop 
 
 
Page 21 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
emerging technologies that support its policy goals.  The increase in oil prices has 
stimulated technological advances in developing alternative energy sources in the 
developed world, improving efficiency in energy production and consumption, and in 
other areas.  
 
Emerging technologies which could become relevant to the development of the energy 
sector in Jamaica over the planning timeframe to 2030 include fuel cells, second 
generation bio-fuels, efficient solid state thermoelectric converters for solar energy and 
small  nuclear technology plants in keeping with health, safety and sound 
environmental practices.  Unforeseen advances also could come from so-called 
"disruptive" technologies, which have the potential for significantly altering energy 
production, distribution and use. 
 
Vision for Jamaica’s Energy Sector to 2030  
 
A modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable 
energy sector providing affordable and accessible energy supplies 
with long-term energy security and supported by informed public 
behaviour on energy issues and an appropriate policy, regulatory 
and institutional framework 
 
Goals of National Energy Policy  
There are seven inter-related goals underpinning this policy, all designed to achieve the 
vision for the Energy Sector. Though not necessary listed in order of priority, together, 
achievement of these  goals will result in significant improvement in the energy 
efficiency of the  country, throughout the supply, storage, transportation , 
transmission, distribution, usage and the general handling of the energy resources 
within the country.  The result will be more affordable energy supplies, that is safe, 
secured, accessible and in harmony with the environment. These goals are listed below.  
 
Goal 1: Jamaicans use energy wisely and aggressively pursue opportunities for 
conservation and efficiency  
 
Goal 2: Jamaica has a modernized and expanded energy infrastructure that enhances 
energy generation capacity and ensures that energy supplies are safely, reliably, and 
affordably transported to homes, communities and the productive sectors on a 
sustainable basis 
 
Goal 3: Jamaica realizes its energy resource potential through the development of 
renewable energy sources and enhances its international competitiveness, energy 
security whilst reducing its carbon footprint 
 
Goal 4: Jamaica’s energy supply is secure and sufficient to support long-term economic 
and social development and environmental sustainability  
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 22 
 
 
 
Goal 5: Jamaica has a well-defined and established governance, institutional, legal and 
regulatory framework for the energy sector, that facilitates stakeholder involvement 
and engagement   
 
Goal 6: Government ministries and agencies are a model/leader in energy conservation 
and environmental stewardship in Jamaica  
 
Goal 7: Jamaica’s industry structures embrace eco-efficiency for advancing 
international competitiveness and moves towards building a green economy  
 
 
 
Page 23 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
A modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable energy sector providing affordable 
and accessible energy supplies with long-term energy security and supported by informed public 
behaviour on energy issues and an appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional framework
Goal 2:
Goal 3:
Goal 5:
Jamaica has a 
modernized and 
expanded energy 
infrastructure that 
enhances energy 
generation capacity 
and ensures that 
energy supplies are 
safely, reliably, and 
affordably transported 
to homes, 
communities and the 
productive sectors on a 
sustainable basis
Goal 7:
Jamaica realizes 
its energy 
resource potential 
through the 
development of 
renewable energy 
sources and 
enhances its 
international 
competitiveness, 
energy security 
whilst reducing its 
carbon footprint
Goal 4: 
Goal 6:
Jamaica has a 
well-defined and 
established 
governance, 
institutional, legal 
and regulatory 
framework for the 
energy sector, 
that facilitates 
stakeholder 
involvement and 
engagement  
Jamaica’s industry 
structures 
embrace eco-
efficiency for 
advancing 
international 
competitiveness 
and moves 
towards building a 
green economy 
Goal 1:
Jamaicans use 
energy wisely and 
aggressively 
pursue 
opportunities for 
conservation and 
efficiency 
Jamaica’s energy 
supply is secure 
and sufficient to 
support long-term 
economic and 
social 
development and 
environmental 
sustainability
Government 
ministries and 
agencies are a 
model/leader in 
energy 
conservation and 
environmental 
stewardship in 
Jamaica 
 
Figure 5: Vision and Goals for Jamaica's Energy Sector 
 
 
The Strategic Framework  
 The strategic framework charting the 
direction for the energy sector 2009 – 2030 
is presented below. The strategic 
framework includes: 
  Policy Goals 
  Sector Strategies and Key Actions 
to 2030  
  Key Implementing Agencies  
 
  
 
 
Wigton Wind Farm  
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 24 
 
 
PRIORITY AREA #1  
Goal 1: Jamaicans use energy 
wisely and aggressively 
pursue opportunities for 
conservation and efficiency  
 
CONSERVATION AND EFFICIENCY 
Achievement of this goal will result in improving the use of energy in the key energy-
consuming areas of power generation and bauxite/alumina production, transportation 
and building design and construction. Jamaicans will also become more aware of 
energy conservation practices and will be helped in reducing energy consumption by: 
continuous public education, the introduction of incentives; greater availability of 
energy-saving products and devices; research that leads to adoption and adaptation of 
new and emerging energy technologies; improvements in energy infrastructure; and 
appropriate legislation. 
 
Key Issues Addressed: 
  Low levels of awareness of energy conservation practices by both large and 
small consumers 
  Jamaica’s high energy intensity index 
  Low levels of energy efficiency in key sectors such as bauxite/alumina and power 
generation. 
  Low levels of energy efficiency from building designs, electrical installations and 
low levels of energy consumption by end use devices 
 
Strategies and Key Actions to 2030:  
  Provide incentives/disincentives for the development and use of innovative 
technologies to improve energy efficiencies   
 
  Provide incentives/disincentives for the use of innovative/clean technologies in 
power generation, mining and manufacturing to improve energy efficiencies 
   
  Create relevant legislation to support required investments in efficiency  
 
  Promote energy conservation and efficiency in the transport sector by: 
o  Promoting imports of more fuel efficiency vehicles  
o  Levying taxes on petrol at appropriate levels to encourage conservation  
o  Provision of adequate infrastructure for transition to alternative energy 
vehicles 
Infrastructure improvement and enforcement of maximum axel weight 
standards. 
Increasing mass transit opportunities and utilization  
o 
o 
 
 
Page 25 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
  Implement demand side management programmes that promote public 
awareness of the importance of responsible energy use 
 
  Facilitate the introduction of energy-saving devices e.g. LED, solar panels, solar 
street lighting 
 
  Employ energy-saving approaches in building 
design and construction  
 
  Promote energy conservation in the public 
sector, particularly in the water supply systems   
 
  Develop and implement effective education and 
training programmes on energy conservation at 
all levels of the education system 
  
Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFLs) 
  Infuse energy conservation issues in sectoral 
policy development (e.g. in tourism policy, 
health policy, water policy etc) 
 
  Implement appropriate tax and pricing structure for road users that reflect 
environmental costs and other externalities 
 
  Undertake studies and conduct consultations with stakeholders on taxation 
levels for petroleum fuels (such as gasoline, diesel, kerosene, natural gas) with a 
view to instituting a system designed to enhance efficiency and conservation. 
This system will be consistent with regional and international trends and best 
practices 
 
  Review (ongoing) previous and existing demand-side energy management 
programmes for performance, strengths, weakness and lessons learned 
 
  Develop institutional capacity to implement demand-side energy management 
programmes 
 
  Develop and implement a relevant and sustained public energy information 
programme and information database 
 
  Develop and implement programmes to influence market behaviour toward and 
promote efficient use of energy including the use of energy-efficient appliances, 
equipment, and building designs; setting and enforcing standards for public 
sector organizations; and public awareness and educational programmes 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 26 
 
 
  Update, apply and enforce the Energy Efficiency Building Codes to support 
efficient use of energy in buildings  
 
  Develop an energy information clearing house 
  
  Provide incentives for the installation of solar water heaters and solar lights 
installed where applicable, in the public and private sectors and in communities  
 
  Introduce mobile weighing monitoring mechanism to enforce the axel weight 
 
Key Implementing Agencies and Partners:  
  Ministry of Energy and Mining  
  Ministry of Transport and Works  
  Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica  
  Office of the Prime Minister  
  Bureau of Standards  
  Ministry of Finance and the Public Service  
  Management Institute for National Development 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
PRIORITY AREA #2  
Goal 2: Jamaica has a 
modernized and expanded 
energy infrastructure that 
enhances energy generation 
capacity and ensures that energy supplies are 
safely, reliably, and affordably transported to 
homes, communities and the productive 
sectors on a sustainable basis 
 
ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
When this goal is accomplished, Jamaica will have a modernized energy infrastructure 
consisting of energy-efficient plants and distribution systems including a protocol for 
replacing old and inefficient generating plants and a refinery that produces higher-
valued refined petroleum products in order to replace imports and compensate for the 
potential switch from oil-fired to natural gas power plants.  This will be in a liberalized 
energy industry that promotes competition governed by appropriate regulations.  
 
Key Issues Addressed: 
  Old and inefficient steam-generating plants  
  Jamaica’s high energy intensity index 
  High cost emergency solutions involving gas turbines using high-cost fuels 
  High cost of electricity 
  Heat rates inconsistent with international standards   
  Low levels of capacity utilization of refinery  
  Low efficiency of energy production and consumption 
  Unsafe practices as a result of theft in electricity and illegal operations in 
petroleum trade 
  Disaster preparedness and emergency management of the sector 
 
Strategies and Key Actions to 2030 
  Implement least economic cost solutions for the supply of energy, including 
source, conversion and distribution 
  
  Ensure continuity and consistency of energy supply and distribution at the most 
economically available prices 
 
  Through a competitive basis, retire the old generation plants and replace them 
with modern plants to improve the conversion efficiency 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 28 
 
 
  Establish a system to identify and replace old and inefficient units/plants with 
more fuel efficient and cost efficient technologies and plants 
 
  Establish a combined cycle capacity to replace old and inefficient units/plants 
with more fuel efficient and cost efficient technologies and plants 
 
  Upgrade the petroleum refinery (PETROJAM) to ensure that it functions as the 
least cost option for petroleum supplies to Jamaica, thereby increasing capacity 
utilization and output of lighter and higher-value refined petroleum products 
thus replacing imports and compensating for the potential switch from oil-fired 
to petcoke and natural gas power plants 
 
  Establish necessary enabling 
environment to encourage local 
and foreign financing of energy 
sector projects 
 
  Implement appropriate energy 
distribution and transmission 
systems  
 
  Strengthen regulatory 
enforcement powers to ensure 
timely implementation of agreed 
PETROJAM Oil Refinery 
benchmarks and standards 
 
  Unbundle generation and transmission & distribution creating an energy 
efficient electricity structure 
  
  Unbundle existing vertically integrated industry structures and establish and 
implement common carrier and common access principles, where 
demonstrated to be technically and economically feasible 
 
  Facilitate greater energy efficiency and lower energy costs in the bauxite and 
alumina industry and in the manufacturing sector  
 
  Review and complete rural electrification programme including use of 
alternative energy sources 
 
  Ensure continuity and consistency of energy supply and distribution  
 
  Review quality standards for energy supplies 
 
 
Page 29 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
  Make contingency arrangements to lower the risk of disruption to critical 
utilities and essential services in the event of disasters and other emergency 
situations 
 
  Strengthen the capacity of the government’s electrical inspectorate and the 
petroleum safety inspectorate to adequately monitor and control incidences of 
illegal operations  
 
Key Implementing Agencies and Partners:  
  Ministry of Energy and Mining  
  Office of Utilities Regulations  
  Jamaica Public Service Company Limited  
  Independent Power Producers  
  PEROJAM 
  Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica  
  Office of the Prime Minister  
  Jamaica Bauxite Institute  
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 30 
 
 
PRIORITY AREA #3  
Goal 3: Jamaica realizes its 
energy resource potential 
through the development of 
renewable energy sources and enhances its 
international competitiveness, energy security 
whilst reducing its carbon footprint 
 
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES   
Opportunities for further development of indigenous renewable energy resources such 
as solar, hydro, wind and biofuels will be explored under this goal. The 
strategies and actions undertaken will be designed to Increase the 
percentage of renewables in the energy mix with proposed targets of 
11% by 2012, 12.5% by 2015 and 20% by 2030. Increased percentage of 
renewable in the country’s energy mix will reduce the dependence on 
imported oil. Increased use of renewables also will result in lowering the 
level of air pollution, a smaller carbon footprint for Jamaica and better 
compliance with international conventions on climate change. 
 
 
Key Issues Addressed: 
  Dependence on imported energy supplies  
  Low levels of exploitation of renewable energy sources  
  Jamaica’s carbon footprint 
  Environmental degradation  
 
Strategies and Key Actions to 2030:  
  Develop diversification priorities based on cost, efficiency, environmental 
considerations and appropriate technologies and competitiveness 
 
  Prioritize renewable energy sources by economic feasibility criteria, 
environmental considerations including carbon abatement  
 
  Promote the development of efficient and low cost renewable plants with a size 
of 15 MW or more on a competitive basis through a level playing field 
 
  Introduce a strategy that ensures that less than 15MW of renewable energy 
plants will be built on no-objection basis using base opportunity cost and 
negotiable premium cap and 15MW or more to be obtained on a competitive 
basis through the OUR process 
 
Page 31 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
  Develop an inventory of all potential sources of wind, solar and renewable 
technologies and ranked according to their economics with full economic 
impact analysis 
 
  Introduce incentives, where feasible, and a plan of action for implementation to 
foster the development of wind, solar and renewable technologies. This will 
require the review by the relevant regulatory authority of existing renewable 
power generators to afford them such incentives that may be available, to 
encourage the sustainable development of the sector. The creation of an 
enabling legislative and regulatory framework will be a priority.  
 
  Encourage research, development and implementation of qualified renewable 
energy projects 
 
  Introduce ethanol blends to replace methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) as fuel 
additive 
 
  Comply with international conventions on climate change and global warming 
 
  Implement incentives to 
encourage tertiary institutions to 
develop research programmes for 
the application and 
implementation of renewable 
energy technologies 
 
Key Implementing Agencies and 
Partners:  
  Ministry of Energy and Mining  
  Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica  
  Office of Utilities Regulation  
  Centre of Excellence for 
Renewable Energy   
  Office of the Prime Minister  
  Scientific Research Council  
Launch of the Ethanol – 10 Programme in Jamaica 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 32 
 
 
PRIORITY AREA #4  
Goal 4: Jamaica’s energy 
supply is secure and 
sufficient to support long-
term economic and social development and 
environmental sustainability  
 
ENERGY SECURITY  
Under this goal, Jamaica will plan to increase its supply of energy to meet projected 
increases in long-term demand, whilst at the same time seek to increase its energy 
security to reduce its vulnerability to potential disruptions in energy supplies.  Jamaica 
also will reduce the contribution of petroleum to the country’s energy supply from the 
current 95%.  Diversification priorities for the short, medium, and long term will be 
based on cost, efficiency, environmental considerations and appropriate technologies.  
This will protect the country from disruptions in oil supply and price volatility. 
Components in a more diversified energy source mix will include both indigenous and 
foreign options and could include natural gas, coal, petcoke, locally derived oil, nuclear 
sources as well as renewables and will involve strengthening existing multilateral, 
regional and bilateral partnerships and cooperative arrangements and creating new 
ones that best advance Jamaica’s energy interests. Consideration will also be given to 
exploration for exploitable fossil fuel energy resources.  
 
Key Issues Addressed: 
  Dependence on imported petroleum 
   High imports of petroleum products  
  Energy security related to disruptions in supply and price volatility 
  National energy diversification programme  
  Reduction in emissions from the generation and transmission of energy  
  Air pollution 
 
Sector Strategies and Key Actions to 2030:  
  Determine the fuel diversification programme for the short, medium and longer 
term 
 
  Develop diversification priorities based on cost, efficiency, environmental 
considerations and appropriate technologies 
 
  Diversify energy sources by type and geographic location 
 
  Research and develop alternate fuels for the transportation sector (e.g. liquid 
fuels from organic matter and CNG)  
 
 
Page 33 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
  Facilitate the use of more fuel-efficient vehicles in the transport sector as well as 
the use of diesel, CNG when it becomes available and bio-fuels 
  
  Identify and develop indigenous non-renewable sources of energy and 
necessary enabling environment to encourage private sector participation 
 
  Develop a framework for the introduction of natural gas 
 
  Construct new energy-efficient generating facilities on a phased basis to meet 
increasing demand 
 
  Establish an enabling environment for the development of the renewable 
resources through private sector participation 
 
  Develop and implement a fast track generation plant retirement and 
replacement program 
 
  Review and revise existing regulations 
to make provisions that ensures 
adequate inventory levels to cushion 
any short-term disruption in supply 
 
  Secure long-term contracts for energy 
raw materials and energy products 
from regional and extra-regional 
suppliers 
 
  Review options for other potential 
indigenous non-renewable sources of 
Petrojam Storage Tanks 
energy 
 
  Develop and implement a public education programme through the print 
media, television, radio and island wide meetings/seminars 
 
  Undertake comprehensive oil and gas exploration programme 
 
  Review and apply appropriate models for production and development of 
potential oil and gas resources 
 
  Promote strategic partnerships between the public and private sectors to 
finance and develop energy diversification projects 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 34 
 
 
  Develop the institutional capacity and regulatory framework to explore the 
establishment of small nuclear power generation plants in the event that 
nuclear power generation proves feasible for Caribbean Small Island 
Development States (SIDS) 
 
  Engage in multilateral, regional and bilateral partnerships and cooperative 
arrangements that best advance Jamaica’s energy interests  
 
  Facilitate stronger links with energy sector and academic institutions to drive 
the adoption and adaptation of new technologies in the energy sector  
 
  Introduce National Vehicle Emissions Standards and Regulations to reduce 
vehicular emissions  
 
  Introduce  bio-diesel and ethanol blends to replace methyl tertiary-butyl ether 
(MTBE) as fuel additive 
 
Key Implementing Agencies and Partners:  
  Ministry of Energy and Mining  
  Office of Utilities Regulation  
  Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica  
  Centre of Excellence for Renewable  Energy  
  Office of the Prime Minister  
 
 
 
Page 35 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Jamaica’s Energy Supply Matrix to 2030  
The energy matrix below represents a realistic strategy for the Jamaica energy situation 
going forward to 2030. These percentages are mere projections and may be subject to 
change based on the introduction of new and renewable energy sources.  
 
The energy supply mix shows that in 2008 Jamaica’s supply mix consisted of 95% 
petroleum and 5% renewables. The supply mix is expected to have marked changes by 
2012 when petroleum is expected to represent 67% of the mix, natural gas 15%, 
petcoke/coal 5% and renewables 12.5%. By 2030, the share of petroleum in the supply 
mix is expected to be only 30%, with natural gas accounting for as much as 42% of the 
mix and renewables 20%. This information is present graphically in the figure below.  
 
Figure 6: Jamaica’s Energy Supply Matrix 2008 – 2030  
 
Energy Supply Matrix 2008 - 2030 
Petroleum
Natural Gas
Petcoke/Coal
Renewables
Other
3
0.5
2
5
12.5
15
20
5
5
15
5
26
42
95
67
52
30
2008
2015*
2020*
2030*
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 36 
 
 
PRIORITY AREA #5  
Goal 5: Jamaica has a well-
defined and established 
governance, institutional, 
legal and regulatory framework for the energy 
sector, that facilitates stakeholder involvement 
and engagement   
 
GOVERNANCE AND REGULATORY 
FRAMEWORK  
Achievement of this goal will facilitate the removal of policy inconsistencies and will 
provide a coherent policy and regulatory framework to facilitate competition in the 
energy supply system, enable the introduction of diverse sources of energy into the 
system, and provide integrated monitoring and enforcement of regulations, all 
overseen by agencies and organizations with the capacity and tools to guide the energy 
sector. 
 
Key Issues Addressed: 
  Limited protocols for the supply of electricity to the national grid 
  Competition in the energy supply to develop cost efficient mechanisms 
  Private sector participation in the energy production/distribution 
  Legal framework (laws, regulations)  
  Low capacity of organizations, agencies and regulatory bodies in the energy 
sector 
 
Strategies and Key Actions to 2030:  
  Amend existing legislation and regulations or promulgate new ones where 
necessary to ensure responsible market behaviour and promote industrial 
harmony 
 
  Rationalize the number of existing Acts governing the sector through the 
introduction of new modern industry legislation 
 
  Establish regulatory regimes for the petroleum sector in order to ensure 
efficient procurement, sourcing, indexation and pricing of petroleum and 
petroleum products on most competitive basis and in a transparent manner 
 
  Remove inconsistencies in the legislative framework of the energy sector 
 
  Empower the regulatory agencies with enforcement powers to improve the 
efficiency of the system and compliance with established benchmarks, 
procedures and standards 
 
 
Page 37 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
  Develop necessary regulatory framework for the introduction of diversification 
fuels 
 
  Reduce  system losses on the power system by introducing stiff penalties for 
power thefts and enhancing the enforcement powers of the regulatory agencies 
 
  Enhance the enforcement powers of the regulator to ensure compliance with 
established procedures and standards as well as the efficiency monitoring 
mechanisms on a continued basis 
 
  Develop the institutional framework to coordinate policy with energy initiatives 
and provide integrated monitoring and enforcement of regulations 
 
  Promote a market based approach and increased competition in the sector 
including a transparent procurement process for new capacity and sourcing 
from private producers (both renewable and non-renewable energy sources) 
 
  Develop regimes for pricing of electricity and petroleum products that will 
balance requirements for competitiveness with the long-term viability of the 
sector 
 
  Conduct studies to include net metering and wheeling in the tariff rates and 
introduce appropriate mechanisms for net metering and wheeling procedures 
and standards to encourage the development of renewable energy and 
cogeneration opportunities 
 
  Develop appropriate tax and pricing structure for road users that reflect 
environmental costs and other externalities 
 
  Promote a market based approach and increase competition in the sector by 
use of transparent procurement processes for new capacity 
  
  Implement policy regarding the development and export of co-generation and 
renewables electricity to the national grid by private sector and citizens at large  
  
  Review on an ongoing basis the existing legal framework for performance, 
strengths, weakness, and lessons learnt, to formulate and implement 
programmes of legal reforms 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 38 
 
 
 
  Review on an ongoing basis the existing internal regulatory framework for 
performance, strengths, weakness and lessons learnt, while recognizing the 
implications of external 
dimensions, to formulate and 
implement programmes of 
regulatory reforms 
 
  Review and modify existing 
institutional framework and 
industry structure for energy 
sector toward achievement of 
policy objectives 
 
  Provide appropriate incentives 
for industry stakeholders to 
facilitate sector development 
including diversified, renewable 
and low cost energy sources and 
demand side management programmes 
Petroleum Company of Jamaica Service Station 
 
  Monitor and regulate procurement and pricing of energy products and inputs 
 
Key Implementing Agencies and Partners:  
  Ministry of Energy and Mining  
  Office of Utilities Regulation  
  Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica  
  Office of the Cabinet  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
PRIORITY AREA #6  
Goal 6: Government 
ministries and agencies are a 
model/leader in energy 
conservation and environmental stewardship 
in Jamaica  
 
GOVERNMENT IS A LEADER IN ENERGY 
CONSERVATION  
Government ministries, departments and agencies will be models for environmental 
stewardship, resulting in a reduction in the high public sector consumption of energy 
and other resources and providing a stimulus for private sector and community action. 
 
Key Issues Addressed: 
  High public sector energy consumption  
  Weak and unsustainable energy conservation and efficiency efforts across 
Government  
 
Strategies and Key Actions to 2030:  
  Implement Government of Jamaica Policy on Environmental Stewardship 
(2008) 
 
  Ministries, departments and agencies develop and implement environmental 
stewardship action plans, with special emphasis on energy and fleet 
management  
 
  Develop a specific programme of energy management for the National Water 
Commission, the single largest consumer of energy in the public sector, focusing 
on intensification of loss reduction, improvement in pumping efficiency and the 
introduction of a distributed storage programme which will facilitate better 
management of pumping operations 
 
  Fast track the implementation of energy efficiency programmes (the 
recommendations of the energy audits undertaken) in hospitals and other areas 
of the public sector, based on the findings of various earlier studies and energy 
audits  
 
  Establish energy conservation and efficiency (ECE) protocols for the operation 
of public sector facilities and entities including the appointment of an energy 
coordinator for each facility 
 
  Expand the role of the Energy Efficiency Unit (EEU) within the Petroleum 
Corporation of Jamaica (PCJ) to provide technical assistance for ECE initiatives 
in the public and private sectors. 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 40 
 
 
 
Key Implementing Agencies and Partners:  
  Ministry of Energy and Mining  
  Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica  
  National Water Commission  
  Ministry of Transport and Works  
  Office of the Prime Minister  
  Cabinet Office  
  Ministry of Finance and the Public Service  
  Management Institute for National Development  
 
 
Page 41 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
PRIORITY AREA #7 
Goal 7: Jamaica’s industry 
structures embrace eco-
efficiency for advancing international 
competitiveness, and move towards building a 
green economy  
 
ECO-EFFICIENCY IN INDUSTRY  
This goal recognizes that the private sector is the engine of a nation’s economy.  When 
this goal is achieved, private sector firms and industry will be equipped to implement 
innovative energy management programmes, using clean, energy efficient 
technologies and institutionalizing energy conservation practices. 
 
Key Issues Addressed: 
  Lack of energy management programmes in private sector  
  Low levels of energy efficiency and conservation among industry structures  
  Limited use of cleaner technologies  
  Environmental Management Systems in Jamaican organizations  
  Move towards a green economy  
 
Strategies and Key Actions to 2030:  
  Provide incentives for the development and use of innovative technologies to 
improve energy efficiencies 
   
  Provide incentives for the use of innovative/clean technologies in mining and 
manufacturing to improve energy efficiencies 
 
  Facilitate greater energy efficiency and lower energy costs in all sectors  
 
  Provide incentives where applicable to encourage employment of high levels of 
capital to increase use of cleaner technologies 
  
  Establish, implement and enforce emissions standards 
 
  Develop the capacity of local companies to improve their processes and energy 
efficiencies 
  
  Promote the development and implementation of environmental management 
systems in the manufacturing sector (ISO 14001) 
 
  Develop “green jobs”  based on renewable energy resources  
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 42 
 
 
Key Implementing Agencies and Partners:  
  Ministry of Energy and Mining  
  Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica  
  Ministry of Industry, Investment and Commerce  
  Jamaica Trade and Invest  
  Ministry of Finance and the Public Service  
   National Environment and Planning Agency  
 
 
 
Page 43 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Proposed Energy Sector Indicators and 
Targets  
 
 
 
T 
he proposed indicators and targets for the Energy Sector over the period 2009 -
2030 are presented in Table 2 below. These indicators are the building blocks of 
the monitoring and evaluation system. Targets will be set in collaboration with 
the Ministry’s departments and agencies along with other key ministries (e.g transport 
and works) and their departments and agencies.  
 
Table 2: Energy Sector – Indicators and Targets 
Baseline 
2008 
Targets 
2015 
Comments 
Sector Indicators  
2030 
2012 
  
Energy Sources 
15392 
14000 
12700 
6000 
Energy intensity index (EII) 
BTU/US$1 Unit of output  
(Constant Year 2000 $US) 
Percentage diversification (%) 
Percentage of energy form 
indigenous sources, including 
co-generation (%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Renewable Energy  
11% 
 
 
5.6% 
12.5% 
20% 
Percentage of renewables in 
energy mix 
Energy Consumption from 
Renewable Sources as 
Percentage of Total Energy 
Consumption (%) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Electricity 
Average Heat Rate for 
Electricity Generation – Public 
Providers (BTU/KWh) 
Average Heat Rate for 
Electricity Generation – Public 
and Private Providers 
(BTU/KWh) 
System Losses in Electricity 
Transmission and Distribution 
–Technical (%) 
System Losses in Electricity 
Transmission and Distribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 44 
 
 
Sector Indicators  
Baseline 
2008 
Targets 
2015 
Comments 
2030 
2012 
  
Non-Technical (%) 
System Losses in Electricity 
Transmission and Distribution 
– Total 
Public Electricity System – 
Average Service Availability 
Index (%) 
Public Electricity System – 
Average Service Reliability 
Index (%) 
Public Electricity System – 
Capacity Factor (%) 
Public Electricity System – 
Load Factor (%) 
Public Electricity System – 
Customer Average 
Interruption Duration Index 
(minutes) 
Percentage of Total 
Households with Electricity 
(%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 
94 
100 
 
 
Efficiency Improvement of Large Customers/Sectors 
Bauxite Sector  
Energy Intensity Index of the 
Bauxite Industry 
(BTU/$US1.00 unit 
of output in Constant Year 
$US) 
Transport  
Percentage of vehicles using 
biofuels  
% of fuel efficient vehicles as a 
% of total vehicles on the 
roads 
Percentage of energy from 
biofuels  
% change in energy 
consumption by NWC  
Hotels  
Energy Efficiency Index  
Percentage of energy from 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 45 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Baseline 
2008 
Targets 
2015 
Comments 
Sector Indicators  
2030 
2012 
  
renewable sources  
 
Percentage of heating 
provided by solar water 
heating  
Industries  
Energy Efficiency Index  
Percentage of energy from 
renewable sources  
Percentage of energy from 
other indigenous sources  
% increase in the use of 
cleaner technologies by 
industry 
Cement Manufacturing  
Energy Efficiency Index  
Percentage of energy from 
renewable energy  
Percentage of energy from 
other indigenous sources  
Sugar  
Energy Efficiency Index  
Percentage of energy from 
bagasse 
Percentage of energy from 
renewable energy  
Percentage of energy from 
other indigenous sources  
Offices and Commercial Space  
Energy Efficiency Index  
Households 
Energy Efficiency Index  
Percentage of Household 
Income Spent on Fuel (%) 
Percentage of Household 
Income Spent on Electricity 
(%) 
Percentage of households 
using LNG  
Average percentage of energy 
consumption from indigenous 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 46 
 
 
Baseline 
2008 
Targets 
2015 
Comments 
Sector Indicators  
2030 
2012 
  
sources  
Environment 
5 
5 
4.5 
3.5 
Greenhouse gas emissions (Mt 
per annum) 
 
Other 
Annual Oil Imports as 
Percentage of Merchandise 
Export Earnings (%) 
Annual Oil Imports as 
Percentage of GDP (%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 47 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Framework  
 
 
T 
he implementation of this Policy will be led and facilitated by the Ministry of 
Energy and Mining, several other departments and agencies of Government as 
well as non-state stakeholders including the private sector, NGOs and CBOs. The 
involvement of all stakeholders is fundamental to the successful implementation of this 
Policy as it is fully recognized that the energy sector has many linkages with other 
sectors such as transportation, agriculture and environment.  
 
Key Roles and Responsibilities  
The key players in the implementation of Jamaica’s National Energy Policy and their 
roles and responsibilities are identified and articulated below: 
  
Ministry of Energy and Mining will have the dual responsibilities of articulating the 
policy and coordinating the monitoring of its implementation. The Ministry of Energy 
and Mining will provide leadership for the achievement of an efficient, diversified and 
sustainable energy sector through the implementation of this comprehensive energy 
policy that addresses Jamaica’s current and future energy needs in the context of its 
resources and global energy trends.  In addition, the Ministry along with its agencies 
shall be responsible for establishing the legislative and policy framework to support and 
to implement the strategies, plans and programs for achieving the seven policy goals.  
It will do this by setting clear guidelines to its agencies and other sister ministries and 
agencies for the general medium and long-term energy strategy planning. 
 
The Ministry and its agencies also will work with several other Government entities5 
and agencies as well as other partners and stakeholders in the public and private 
sectors to ensure policy coherence and efficient policy implementation. It will work 
alongside its agencies and other MDAs to review and revise energy targets based on 
the results of monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica will consistent with the Petroleum Act of 1979, 
work proactively towards the implementation of Jamaica’s National Energy Policy 
while promoting sustainable development, not only in energy, but also in other areas of 
national importance with the aim to fostering energy security. The PCJ will undertake 
the development and promotion of Jamaica's indigenous energy resources and all 
forms of renewable energy. In seeking to diversify Jamaica's energy sources, the PCJ 
will explore the use of non-traditional forms of fuel sources, such as Liquefied Natural 
Gas (LNG), and will build on its institutional capacity to be better able to undertake the 
varied and challenging initiatives.  
                                                      
5 Ministry with responsibility for the environment, NEPA, Ministry of Transport and Works, Forestry Department, Mines & Geology 
Division; National Water Commission etc.  
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 48 
 
 
 
The Ministry responsible for the environment and its agencies will collaborate with 
the MEM, the Ministry of Transport and Works, the Ministry of Health, in terms of 
environmental stewardship, pollution control, disposal of hazardous wastes, natural 
resource conservation.  Climate change mitigation efforts will also be encouraged and 
supported. 
 
The Ministry of Finance and the Public Service will work alongside the Ministry of 
Energy and Mining in the areas of providing incentives/disincentives for the 
development of the energy sector.  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework  
The Ministry of Energy and Mining will be accountable for implementing the National 
Energy Policy through various plans, programmes and interventions that are aligned 
with the Strategic Framework of the Policy and consistent with Vision 2030 Jamaica – 
National Development Plan. The proposed indicators and targets outlined in this policy 
represent the foundation of a robust results-based monitoring and evaluation system 
to ensure that the seven goals outlined will be achieved. This system will build on 
existing national and sectoral monitoring and evaluation frameworks and will be highly 
participatory.   
 
The Cabinet, as the principal body with responsibility for policy and the direction of the 
Government, has ultimate responsibility for implementation of the National 
Development Plan.    
 
Implementation Framework - Strategic Plans and Action Plans  
Aligned to this Policy will be various strategic plans and action plans that would enable 
the development of key actions to support the sector strategies articulated in this 
policy document. Strategic Plans and/or actions plans will be developed for each of the 
goals contained in this policy and aligned to the energy sector plan and action plan 
developed under Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan.  
 
These plans will provide detailed information on specific actions to be undertaken, on 
the implementing agencies or stakeholders, timelines and costs. It is expected that 
each strategic plan and/or action plan will be developed for three years, with the first 
one being 2009 – 2012 and will be further aligned and find expression with the 
Corporate Plan and Budget of the Ministry. Over the life of the policy, seven such 
strategic/action plans will be prepared. This approach will enable the Ministry to 
effectively review at the end of each period the currency of information in the policy 
document, and to make necessary changes to the overall direction of the policy.  
 
 
 
 
Page 49 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Policy Review  
A policy is a guiding principle established to sanction in advance actions to be taken in 
the future.  The consequences of policy actions are never fully known in advance and for 
this reason, it is essential to monitor and evaluate policy actions after they have 
occurred. In order to ensure that desired outcomes of the National Energy Policy are 
being achieved, the effectiveness of the policy must be assessed. This process will help 
to identify when a complete review or alteration is appropriate. 
 
It is expected that after the first six (6) months of implementation, the Ministry of 
Energy and Mining will conduct an assessment in order to identify and rectify problems 
that become evident at start up. Thereafter, policy reviews will take place as necessary 
based on results of ongoing monitoring and evaluation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 51 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 1 
 
Key Accomplishments in the 
Energy Sector – 1995-2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 52 
 
 
 
Electricity sector 
 
JPSCo was privatized with 80% ownership transferred to an overseas investor, 
Mirant Corporation of Atlanta, USA and operate under a new All Island Electricity 
License of 2001. 
  Since privatization of JPSCo, the company has installed 120MW of new combined 
cycle power generation capacity at Bogue in St. James. 
Independent power providers now account for 30% of electricity generation. The 
generation side of electricity was fully liberalized in 2004.  
 
  The Office of Utilities Regulation was established in 1997 as a multi-sector 
regulator for electricity and other utilities. 
  Under the Rural Electrification Programme, 7,000 km of low voltage distribution 
lines were constructed and approximately 70,000 rural homes electrified. 
Approximately 90% of households island-wide now have access to electricity. 
  Electricity prices now reflect true cost. However, Government’s policy continues 
to provide a lifeline rate, which benefits monthly consumers of less than 100kWh 
per month. This cross-subsidy is provided by those consumers using more than 
101kWh per month. 
 
Petroleum sector 
  Liquid petroleum gas (LPG) has replaced fuel wood as the primary household fuel 
in 84% of Jamaican homes, improving the standard of living and easing the rate 
of deforestation for fuel supplies. 
  The stamp duties were removed, making it easier for new traders to enter the 
market to import petroleum products into the country. The deregulation of 
petroleum imports has partially achieved its objectives, creating more 
competition between the marketing companies. 
  The Caracas Agreement was signed between the Governments of Jamaica and 
Venezuela in 2000, and was renewed annually, providing for 7,000 barrels/day. 
In August 2005 the PETROCARIBE Agreement replaced the Caracas Accord. 
Within the framework of the PETROCARIBE Agreement, Venezuela, a member of 
OPEC, will extend credit facilities to countries of the Caribbean on the basis of a 
bilateral fixed quota; there are no price concessions. 
  Under the PETROCARIBE Bilateral Agreement that Jamaica entered, a quota of 
21,000 barrels of oil per day may be accessed under special financing terms.  
  Government reviewed the experiences of the 1980s oil exploration and updated 
the analysis of exploration data using new technology. As a result of this review 
the Government issued a number of licences to overseas prospectors for both 
onshore and offshore exploration. 
  A feasibility study was conducted on the introduction of Liquefied Natural Gas 
(LNG) to the Jamaican market for use primarily in the electricity and bauxite 
sectors. The study was funded by the international community.  
 
Page 53 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
 
 
Renewable and Alternative Energy 
  The Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica (PCJ) established the Centre of Excellence 
for Renewable Energy (CERE) in 2006 to ensure that Jamaica will regularly 
implement new ideas and methods in renewable energy. 
Jamaica became part of the Caribbean Information Platform on Renewable 
Energy (CIPORE), the information and communication system for the exchange 
of Renewable Energy information for the region. It will provide information on 
renewable energy projects for the thirteen participating Caribbean territories. 
  The GOJ facilitated the expansion of this industry by the following concessions. 
o  Reductions of import duty from 30% to 5% on all renewable energy 
 
equipment.  
o  Zero rating for GCT purposed on renewable energy equipment.  
 
Co-generation 
  A cogeneration implementation strategy was drafted with special focus on the 
sugar industry utilizing bagasse as one of its main sources in the energy mix.  
  A total of 23.2 MW of cogeneration capacity was brought on stream of which 
12.2 MW was produced by Jamaica Broilers and 11 MW by Jamalco. 
Subsequently, the Jamaica Broiler’s production was suspended and Jamalco 
reduced its available export capacity to approximately 6 MW as a result of the 
expansion in production capacity of 250,000 tons. 
 
Wind 
  The Government of The Netherlands, as part of its overall policy objective to 
meet its target of reducing 6% of its GHG emissions below 1990 levels, 
collaborated with the Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica (PCJ) and Renewable 
Energy Systems (RES) Ltd. in to develop a 20.7 MW wind farm project in 
Wigton, Manchester. This system averages 7 MW due to variation in wind speed. 
This was a Clean Development Mechanism project under the Kyoto Protocol.  In 
the three years since it began operations in April 2004, the Wigton Wind Farm 
has sold €424,763 (J$39 million) of carbon credits. A further €251,490 (J$23 
million) generated in the past year is yet to be verified.  
  A small 225 KW wind system was introduced at Munro College in 1996, initially 
selling to JPSCo; however this system has since encountered technical problems 
and no longer provides supplies to the grid. 
 
Hydro 
  Government rehabilitated six of the mini-hydro plants, which were privatized to 
the JPSCo, and now account for 22 MW of capacity to the system. 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 54 
 
 
Solar 
  Two demonstration photovoltaic schemes supplying non-grid electricity to 45 
homes in deep rural Jamaica have been established; these communities are 
Middle Bonnet in St. Catherine and Ballymony in St. Ann. 
It is estimated that more than 5000 solar water heater units are now installed in 
Jamaica.  The surge has been due mainly to the DSM / World Bank funded 
programme. Under this programme special financing arrangements were made 
available to purchasers. 
 
  The National Housing Trust (NHT) is offering solar water heater loans of up to 
$100,000. Costs for a SWH unit begin at $75,000 for a family of four with a 
return expected within two to three years. Water heating currently accounts for 
up to 30 per cent of a domestic light bill. 
 
Biofuels 
 
In 2005, a US$10 million ethanol plant was commissioned and re-commenced 
production and export of fuel ethanol to the USA, using Brazilian feedstock. 
Jamaica became a participant in the Tri-Lateral Co-operation in the area of Bio-
fuels which will see technical assistance and support from the governments of 
Brazil and the United States of America to help satisfy our domestic demand 
from locally produced biofuels including bio diesel. 
 
  The Government created the Bio-fuels Task Force, a brainchild of the Ministries 
of Energy and Agriculture to pursue options that will benefit both the Energy and 
Agriculture sectors. 
  For the period 1996 to 1998, ten new digesters were constructed while five 
digesters were repaired. Over 150 assessments were carried out. In 2000 work 
was completed on a 20 m3 bio-digester at the Vere Technical High school 
campus. Using a feedstock of mainly pig slurry gas is produced to energize a 
chicken brooder, canteen and laboratory burners. The ministry of Mining and 
Energy and the School administration jointly funded this project. Plans were 
formulated to continue this kind of collaboration to construct and refurbish 
plants across the island. 
 
 
Energy Conservation and Efficiency 
  The government provided GCT exemption on over 30 items to increase energy 
efficiency and conservation.  
  The demand side management and energy efficiency programme introduced in 
1996 has had some positive impact on the residential lighting market. A study 
commissioned by the World Bank in 2005 to determine the impact of the 
demand side management (February 20, 2006) programme showed an 
estimated 28 MWh/year reduction in demand for electricity, eliminating the 
need for 6 to 8 MW of peak capacity. 
 
Page 55 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
 
In 1996, the Jamaica Bureau of Standards had the Energy Efficiency Building 
Code (EEBC), developed in 1992, declared a voluntary national standard. This 
EEBC represents the first effort at producing an energy efficient building code in 
Jamaica and the Caribbean. The logical next step is to have the code declared a 
mandatory national standard by the Government and to have the support of the 
various Parish Councils and the Kingston and St. Andrew Corporation in the 
enforcement of this standard. By applying the EEBC, there is a potential for a 
30% energy saving for commercial buildings, amounting to a reduction from the 
present 260-kilowatt hours per square meter each year, to 180-kilowatt hours 
per square meter when the EEBC is used.  
  Government approved an initial allocation of US$10 million to establish the 
Energy Fund to finance energy conservation and efficiency projects 
  The Government, through PCJ, undertook a project funded by the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to provide energy conservation 
measures at four hospitals and to conduct energy audits at five others. 
  The government distributed 4 million compact fluorescent light bulbs, a gift from 
the Government of Cuba, to Jamaican households.  
 
Transport sector 
 
Jamaica phased out lead in gasoline during the period 1998 - 2000; only 
unleaded gasoline is now available at service stations. 
Jamaica established the National Vehicle Emissions Standards in 1996.  This will 
need to be accompanied by appropriate regulations. 
 
  The Government has taken a decision to phase out MTBE6 as an octane enhancer 
in gasoline and to replace it with ethanol creating E10: a mixture of 10% ethanol 
and 90% gasoline. This phasing out commenced in the third quarter of 2006. 
 
International/legal sector 
 
Jamaica signed and ratified the Kyoto Protocol to the UN Framework Convention 
on Climate Change.  
  The Forest Conservancy (TFC), a newly formed Jamaican non-governmental 
agency, initiated a private forest plantation programme to allow Jamaicans to 
participate in carbon trading. This means that tree farmers will be able to sell 
Carbon Credits to foreign companies in developed countries which are trying to 
comply with pollutant emission standards arising from the Kyoto Protocol.  
 
 
 
                                                      
6 Methyl tertiary-butyl ether is a water-soluble additive to gasoline that can easily render large quantities 
of groundwater non-potable. 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 56 
 
 
 
Education sector 
  Tertiary-level courses and research on energy conservation, efficiency and 
renewable energy were established at the University of the West Indies, Mona 
and the University of Technology, Jamaica.  UWI established the Solid State 
Electronics Research Laboratory, which focuses on the development and 
utilization of alternate energy sources through photovoltaic cells.  The Physics 
Department offers undergraduate courses in solar power; Wind & Hydro power; 
and Integrating Alternative Energy. A new post graduate course in Energy 
Efficiency and Renewable Energy Technologies in the faculty of Pure and Applied 
Sciences was expected to commence in the academic year 2000 - 2001.  At 
UTech, a course in mechanical engineering entitled Energy Production Systems is 
offered and about 50% of it covers the sub-topic entitled Renewable Energy 
Resources. Energy conservation is included under this sub-topic.  In electrical 
engineering, modules on energy conservation and renewable energy are offered 
to undergraduate degree students. 
  The Ministry of Education has incorporated energy issues, including conservation 
and renewable energy in the Revised Primary Curriculum (Grades 1-6) and the 
Reform of Secondary Education (ROSE) (Grades 7-9) Science syllabus. 
  The Caribbean Examinations Council offers a course in Environmental Science for 
the Caribbean Advanced Proficiency Examination (CAPE) level; this course 
includes examination of energy issues. 
  The Joint Board of Teacher Education developed two teacher education courses 
on Environmental Education for teachers in early childhood / primary and 
secondary programmes; these courses include discussion of energy issues. 
  The Management Institute for National Development offers the “Holistic 
Governance: Sustainable Development in Action” Programme that includes 
courses in Environmental Management and Stewardship (which include topics 
related to energy) targeted at all levels of the public sector 
  Numerous non-formal environmental education initiatives are conducted in 
schools by NGOs and government agencies such as PCJ and NEPA, which raise 
awareness about energy issues including pollution, conservation and renewable 
energy. 
 
 
 
 
Page 57 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 2 
 
Energy Statistics 
2004 - 2008 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 58 
 
 
The table below provides key energy statistics over the period 2004 to 2008 
Table 3: Key Energy Statistics 2004 – 2008 
Energy Indicators  
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
5.6 
 
 
 
 
Percentage of renewables in energy mix
 
 
9.2 
10.56 
11.2 
10.3 
9.8 
Energy Consumption per Capita (BOE)
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
Greenhouse Gas Emission (Mt per 
annum) 
 
 
 
418.3 
457.4 
 
 
 
Electricity Consumption in the Public 
Sector (KWh) 
Total Energy Consumption (‘000 Barrels) 
 
 
 
 
 
Petroleum Based  
 
3 
6 
 
 
 
Aviation Gasoline  
 
1,789 
1,572 
1,984 
1,931 
1,599 
Turbo Fuel  
 
864 
886 
929 
903 
925 
LPG 
39 
39 
34 
11 
18 
Kerosene  
 
4,378 
4,583 
4,505 
4,301 
4,295 
Gasoline  
 
3,979 
4,538 
4,004 
3,827 
3,661 
ADO 
151 
249 
342 
234 
247 
ADO Bunker  
14,086 
15,288 
17,032 
17,516 
16,372 
Fuel Oil 
25,309 
27,161 
28,830 
28,723 
27,117 
Total Petroleum 
24,499 
26,292 
27,678 
26,039 
26,039 
Total Petroleum (BOE) 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative Energy  
 
134 
151 
166 
160 
158 
Hydropower   
MWh 
 
Page 59 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Energy Indicators  
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
83 
94 
104 
99 
98 
Hydropower             000 BOE 
32 
50 
55 
52 
49 
Wind    
             MWh 
20 
32 
34 
32 
31 
Wind                            000 BOE 
66 
53 
32 
36 
48 
Coal  
        000 Tonnes 
 
 
323 
259 
187 
176 
233 
Coal                           000 BOE 
196 
186 
 
 
 
Charcoal - BOE 
 
695 
467 
602 
591 
 
Bagasse - BOE 
 
585 
556 
 
 
 
Fuelwood - BOE  
 
1,980 
1,594 
927 
899 
362 
Alternative Energy - BOE    
 
26,401 
27,985 
28,605 
28,518 
26,401 
Total Petroleum and Alternative  Energy 
000 BOE 
 
 
 
 
 
Petroleum Consumption By Activity 
 
6,075,623 
6,247,835 
6,373,380 
6,079,884 
5,835,304 
Road and Rail Transportation  
 
 
368,356 
1,636,028 
3,239,911 
3,972,826 
2,805,615 
Shipping 
104,791 
37,066 
14,338 
28,477 
26,004 
Cement Manufacture  
 
1,792,975 
1,577,438 
1,983,596 
1,931,222 
1,598,706 
Aviation 
6,225,912 
6,555,261 
6,390,163 
6,654,238 
6,274,571 
Electricity Generation  
 
9,444,053 
9,799,121 
9,551,792 
8,807,899 
9,392,039 
Bauxite/Alumina Processing  
 
 
75,993 
40,283 
50,055 
61,491 
43,764 
Sugar Manufacturing  
 
902,939 
924,730 
963,531 
912,116 
931,853 
Cooking and Lighting  
 
Petroleum Refinery   
223,266 
164,247 
331,788 
362,947 
355,076 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 60 
 
 
Energy Indicators  
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
135,991 
163,261 
181,695 
198,995 
136,634 
Other Manufacturing  
 
 
186.022 
180,749 
83,935 
80,332 
73,584 
Other   
Prepared by the Energy Economics and Planning Unit, Ministry of Energy and Mining, 2009  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 61 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 3 
 
List of Organizations 
Participating in National 
Consultations and 
Stakeholder Discussions 
 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 62 
 
 
 
This Policy Development Process included the inputs of various stakeholders in the 
public and private sectors as well as from non-governmental and civil society 
organizations. The policy development benefitted from island-wide consultations as 
well as from information received from various groups including academia and industry 
groups.  The development process also benefitted from input and review of all 
Ministries of GOJ.  
 
Below is a list of the various organizations that participated in the national 
consultations. While we tried to capture all organizations here, if you have been 
inadvertently omitted, rest assured that your comments were not.  
  
3 JR, ‘C’ Company 
AIJCFA 
ALPART 
Andrew United Church 
Automatic Control Eng. Ltd. 
Automobile Dealers Assoc. 
Bahia Principe Hotel 
Baija Partners Ltd 
Barefoot Environmental Solutions 
BH Paints (W.I.) Ltd 
Boucher Park 
Braeton Citizens Assoc. 
Bridgeport Branch Library 
B-W Paints 
Campbell’s Greens Inc. 
Caretaker 
Catholic Pastoral Centre 
Chamber of Commerce  
Children’s World Academy 
Christa Villa Hotel 
Christiana Potato Growers 
Church of God of Prophecy 
Churches Co-op. Credit U. 
Constituency Office, East St. 
Thomas  
ECO-TEC 
El Greco Resort 
Fair Trading Commission 
Frome Technical High School 
G.E.I. 
Gleaner Co. Ltd. 
Global Travel 
Golden Shore Resort 
Golf View Hotel 
Green Energy Technologies 
Guardian Asset Management 
Half Moon Club 
Holiday Inn Sunspree 
Hotel Gloriana & Spa 
IP 
Isratech Ja. Ltd. 
JIS. 
JAECOM Limited 
Jamaica  4-H Clubs 
Jamaica 4-H Clubs 
Jamaica Broilers 
Jamaica Library Service 
Jamaica Observer 
Jamaica Railway Corp. 
JAS, Cave Valley 
JBU Brotherhood 
JBU Brotherhood 
Jimmy Palmer &Associates 
JLP Caretaker, Bath 
JN Small Business Loans 
JNBS 
JNBS Foundation 
JPSCO 
Kennedy Communications 
Kiwanis Club 
KSAC 
Lions Club 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
54. 
55. 
56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62.  MAC Limited 
63.  Manchester 4-H Clubs 
64.  Manchester Parish Council 
65.  Manchester Parish Library 
66.  Manchester PDC 
67.  Mandeville Weekly 
68.  Mannings School 
69.  Marcant Jamaica 
70.  Maxie Dept. Stores 
71.  Mayberry Investments 
72.  Mayor’s Office, Savanna-la-mar 
73.  MBJ Airports Ltd 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
 
Page 63 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
74.  Melrose Primary &Jr. High 
75.  Middleton Primary 
76.  Ministry of Transport & Works 
77.  Montego Community College 
78.  Morant Bay Vendor’s Assn 
79.  Moravian Church Ja. & Cay. Is 
80.  Mount Royal Dev. 
81. 
100.  Rural Agricultural Development 
Authority  
S.B. Citizens’ Assoc. 
S.E. Corp 
SDC 
SERHA 
Shaun Jones Texaco 
Small Business Assoc. 
Small Business Assoc. 
Solar Lighting & More 
Southboro Citizens Assoc. 
SSDO 
St. Thomas Baptist Youth 
St. Thomas Brotherhood 
St. Thomas Parish Council 
St. Thomas PDC 
STARDO 
STATIN 
Supt. of Police 
Technical Engineer, PCJ 
The Book & Star Place 
Torrington Community 
Transport Sector 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
113. 
114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 
118. 
119. 
120. 
121. 
122.  University of the West Indies  
123.  Westmoreland Parish Council  
124.  Westmoreland Parish Council 
125.  Wincar Dev. Constr.  Ltd 
126.  Winston Trading Co. Ltd. 
National Environment and Planning 
Agency  
National Housing Trust  
New Haven Citizens Assoc. 
New Testament Church 
Northern Caribbean University  
NSWMA 
PCJ 
PETCOM 
Planning Institute of Jamaica  
Portmore Chamber of Commerce 
Portmore Community College 
Portmore Cultural Development 
Committee  
Portmore Municipal Council 
Portmore Shopping Centre 
Porus Primary School 
Post & Telecom Dept. 
President, Vendors Assn 
Pyramid Tour Co.  
Robbie’s Restaurant 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
91. 
92. 
93. 
94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 
98. 
99. 
 
 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 64 
 
 
 
ANNEX 4 
 
Glossary of Key Terms  
Alcohol:  The  family  name  of  a  group  of  organic  chemical  compounds  composed  of  carbon, 
hydrogen,  and  oxygen.  The  series  of  molecules  vary  in  chain  length  and  are  composed  of  a 
hydrocarbon  plus  a  hydroxyl  group;  CH(3)-(CH(2))n-OH  (e.g.,  methanol,  ethanol,  and  tertiary 
butyl alcohol).  
Alternative-fuel  vehicle  (AFV):  A  vehicle  designed  to  operate  on  an  alternative  fuel  (e.g., 
compressed  natural  gas,  methane  blend,  electricity).  The  vehicle  could  be  either  a  dedicated 
vehicle designed to operate exclusively on alternative fuel or a no dedicated vehicle designed to 
operate on alternative fuel and/or a traditional fuel.  
Ash:  Impurities  consisting  of  silica,  iron,  alumina,  and  other  non-combustible  matter  that  are 
contained in coal. Ash increases the weight of coal, adds to the cost of handling, and can affect 
its  burning  characteristics  Ash  content  is  measured  as  a  percent  by  weight  of  coal  on  an  "as 
received" or a "dry" (moisture-free, usually part of a laboratory analysis) basis.  
Automotive fuels: Gasoline, diesel oil, LPG, CNG, and Biofuels.  
Average household energy expenditures: A ratio estimate defined as the total household 
energy expenditures divided by the total number of households.  
Base load: The minimum amount of electric power delivered or required over a given period of 
time at a steady rate.  
Base load capacity: The generating equipment normally operated to serve loads on an around-
the-clock basis.  
Base load plant: A plant, usually housing high-efficiency steam-electric units, which is normally 
operated to take all or part of the minimum load of a system, and which consequently produces 
electricity  at  an  essentially  constant  rate  and  runs  continuously.  These  units  are  operated  to 
maximize system mechanical and thermal efficiency and minimize system operating costs.  
BAU: Business as Usual scenario (assuming no policy action is taken).  
Bi-fuel vehicle: A motor vehicle that operates on two different fuels, but not on a mixture of the 
fuels. Each fuel is stored in a separate tank.  
Biodiesel:  Any  liquid  biofuel  suitable  as  a  diesel  fuel  substitute  or  diesel  fuel  additive  or 
extender. Biodiesel fuels are typically made from oils such as soybeans, rapeseed, or sunflowers, 
 
Page 65 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
or from animal tallow. Biodiesel can also be made from hydrocarbons derived from agricultural 
products such as rice hulls.  
Biofuels: Liquid fuels and blending components produced from biomass (plant) feedstocks, used 
primarily for transportation.  
Biomass: Organic non-fossil material of biological origin constituting a renewable energy source 
(e.g. Bagasse, Fuelwood, other cellulose material).  
BOE (boe): The abbreviation for barrels of oil equivalent (used internationally).  
British thermal unit (btu): The quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 pound of 
liquid water by 1 degree Fahrenheit at the temperature at which water has its greatest density 
(approximately 39 degrees Fahrenheit) 
Btu: The abbreviation for British thermal unit(s).  
Btu conversion factors: Btu conversion factors for site energy are as follows: 
Electricity: 
Natural Gas: 
Fuel Oil No.1:  
Kerosene: 
Gasoline: 
Ethanol: 
Methanol: 
Fuel Oil No.2:  
LPG (Propane):   
Wood:   
3,412 Btu/kilowatt-hour  
1,031 Btu/cubic foot 
135,000 Btu/gallon 
135,000 Btu/gallon 
120,215 Btu/gallon 
80,430 Btu/gallon 
61,225 Btu/gallon 
138,690 Btu/gallon 
91,330 Btu/gallon 
20 million Btu/cord.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bunker fuels: Fuel supplied to ships and aircraft, both domestic and foreign, consisting primarily 
of  residual  and  distillate  fuel  oil  for  ships  and  kerosene-based  jet  fuel  for  aircraft.  The  term 
"international  bunker  fuels"  is  used  to  denote  the  consumption  of  fuel  for  international 
transport  activities.  Note:  For  the  purposes  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions  inventories,  data  on 
emissions from combustion of international bunker fuels are subtracted from national emissions 
totals. Historically, bunker fuels have meant only ship fuel.  
Capacity  utilization:  Capacity  utilization  is  computed  by  dividing  production  by  productive 
capacity and multiplying by 100.  
Carbon credits: Carbon credits are a key component of national and international attempts to 
reduce the growth in concentrations of greenhouse gases. One carbon credit is equal to one ton 
of carbon. Greenhouse gas emissions are capped at a certain maximum level and then markets 
are used to allocate the emissions among the group of regulated sources. The idea is to allow 
market  mechanisms  to  drive  industrial  and  commercial  processes  in  the  direction  of  low 
emissions  or  less  "carbon  intensive"  approaches.  Greenhouse  gas  reduction  projects  generate 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 66 
 
 
credits  and  can  be  used  to  finance  carbon  reduction  initiatives  between  trading  partners  and 
around the world. 
There  are  two  distinct  types  of  carbon  credits.  Carbon  offset  credits  and  carbon  reduction 
credits. Carbon offset credits consist of clean forms of energy production, wind, solar, hydro and 
biofuels.  Carbon  reduction  credits  consist  of  the  collection  and  storage  of  carbon  from  our 
atmosphere  through  reforestation,  forestation,  ocean  and  soil  collection  and  storage  efforts. 
Both approaches are recognized as effective ways to reduce the global emission of greenhouse 
gases. 
Carbon dioxide (CO2): A colourless, odourless, non-poisonous gas that is a normal part of Earth's 
atmosphere. Carbon dioxide is a product of fossil-fuel combustion as well as other processes. It 
is considered a greenhouse gas as it traps heat (infrared energy) radiated by the Earth into the 
atmosphere  and  thereby  contributes to  the  potential  for  global  warming.  The  global  warming 
potential of other greenhouse gases is measured in relation to that of carbon dioxide, which by 
international scientific convention is assigned a value of one (1).  
Carbon  intensity:  The  amount  of  carbon  by  weight  emitted  per  unit  of  energy  consumed.  A 
common  measure  of  carbon  intensity  is  weight  of  carbon  per  British  thermal  unit  (Btu)  of 
energy.  When  there  is  only  one  fossil  fuel  under  consideration,  the  carbon  intensity  and  the 
emissions  coefficient  are  identical.  When  there  are  several  fuels,  carbon  intensity  is  based  on 
their combined emissions coefficients weighted by their energy consumption levels.  
Carbon  sequestration:  The  fixation  of  atmospheric  carbon  dioxide  in  a  carbon  sink  through 
biological or physical processes.  
Carbon  sink:  A  reservoir  that  absorbs  or  takes  up  released  carbon  from  another  part  of  the 
carbon cycle. The  four sinks,  which are  regions of the  Earth within which carbon behaves  in a 
systematic  manner,  are  the  atmosphere,  terrestrial  biosphere  (usually  including  freshwater 
systems), oceans, and sediments (including fossil fuels).  
Clean Development Mechanism: Known as CDM, the element of the Kyoto Protocol that allows 
developing  countries  to  trade  carbon  credits  derived  from  the  implementation  of  energy 
efficiency projects.  The CDM is designed to provide finance to projects that will contribute to 
sustainable development in the country where the project is located. To qualify under the CDM 
a  project  must  go  beyond  ‘business  as  usual’  and  reduce  emissions  below  what  they  ‘would 
have been’, assuming normal economic development.   
Climate  change:  A  term  used  to  refer  to  all  forms  of  climatic  inconsistency,  but  especially  to 
significant  change  from  one  prevailing  climatic  condition  to  another.  In  some  cases,  "climate 
change" has been used synonymously with the term "global warming"; scientists, however, tend 
to  use  the  term  in  a  wider  sense  inclusive  of  natural  changes  in  climate,  including  climatic 
cooling.  In the environmental literature, it often refers to human-induced climate change. 
Coal: A readily combustible black or brownish-black rock whose composition, including inherent 
moisture, consists of more than 50 percent by weight and more than 70 percent by volume of 
carbonaceous material. It is formed from plant remains that have been compacted, hardened, 
 
Page 67 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
chemically altered, and metamorphosed by heat and pressure over geologic time. Coal analysis 
determines  the  composition  and  properties  of  coal  so  it  can  be  ranked  and  used  most 
effectively.  
Coal  gas:  Substitute  natural  gas  produced  synthetically  by  the  chemical  reduction  of coal  at  a 
coal gasification facility.  
Coal  gasification:  The  process of  converting  coal  into  gas.  The  basic  process  involves  crushing 
coal to a powder, which is then heated in the presence of steam and oxygen to produce a gas. 
The gas is then refined to reduce sulphur and other impurities. The gas can be used as a fuel or 
processed further and concentrated into chemical or liquid fuel.  
Cogeneration:  The production of electrical energy and another form of useful energy (such as 
heat or steam) through the sequential use of energy.  
Cogeneration system: A system using a common energy source to produce both electricity and 
steam for other uses, resulting in increased fuel efficiency.  
Coke  (coal):  A  solid  carbonaceous  residue  derived  from  low-ash,  low-sulfur  bituminous  coal 
from which the volatile constituents are driven off by baking in an oven at temperatures as high 
as 2,000 degrees Fahrenheit so that the fixed carbon and residual ash are fused together. Coke 
is used as a fuel and as a reducing agent in smelting iron ore in a blast furnace. Coke from coal is 
grey, hard, and porous and has a heating value of 24.8 million Btu per ton.  
Coke  (petroleum):  A  residue  high  in  carbon  content  and  low  in  hydrogen  that  is  the  final 
product  of  thermal  decomposition  in  the  condensation  process  in  cracking.  This  product  is 
reported  as  marketable  coke  or  catalyst  coke.  The  conversion  is  5  barrels  (of  42  U.S.  gallons 
each) per short  ton. Coke from petroleum has a heating value of 6.024 million Btu  per barrel, 
also known as petcoke. 
Combined  cycle:  An  electric  generating  technology  in  which  electricity  is  produced  from 
otherwise lost waste heat exiting from one or more gas (combustion) turbines. The exiting heat 
is  routed  to  a  conventional  boiler  or  to  a  heat  recovery  steam  generator  for  utilization  by  a 
steam  turbine  in  the  production  of  electricity.  This  process  increases  the  efficiency  of  the 
electric generating unit. Combined cycle unit is an electric generating unit that consists of one or 
more combustion turbines and one or more boilers with a portion of the required energy input 
to the boiler(s) provided by the exhaust gas of the combustion turbine(s).  
Combined  heat  and  power  (CHP):  is  the  use  of  a  heat  engine  or  a  power  station  to 
simultaneously generate both electricity and useful heat, also known as cogeneration. 
Compact  fluorescent  lamps  or  bulbs  (CFL):  These  are  also  known  as  "screw-in  fluorescent 
replacements  for  incandescent"  or  "screw-ins."  Compact  fluorescent  bulbs  combine  the 
efficiency of fluorescent lighting with the convenience  of a standard incandescent  bulb. There 
are  many  styles  of  compact  fluorescent,  including  exit  light  fixtures  and  floodlights  (lamps 
containing  reflectors).  Many  screw  into  a  standard  light  socket,  and  most  produce  a  similar 
colour of light as a standard incandescent bulb. Compact fluorescent bulbs come with ballasts 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 68 
 
 
that  are  electronic  (lightweight,  instant,  no-flicker  starting,  and  10  to  15%  more  efficient)  or 
magnetic (much heavier and slower starting). Other types of compact fluorescent bulbs include 
adaptive circulation and PL and SL lamps and ballasts. Compact fluorescent bulbs are designed 
for residential uses; they are also used in table lamps, wall sconces, and hall and ceiling fixtures 
of  hotels,  motels,  hospitals,  and  other  types  of  commercial  buildings  with  residential-type 
applications.  
Compressed  natural  gas  (CNG):  Natural  gas  which  is  comprised  primarily  of  methane, 
compressed to a pressure at or above 2,400 pounds per square inch and stored in special high-
pressure containers. It is used as a fuel for natural gas powered vehicles.  
Cord of wood: A cord of wood measures 4 feet by 4 feet by 8 feet, or 128 cubic feet.  
Cubic foot (cf), natural gas: The amount of natural gas contained at standard temperature and 
pressure (60 degrees Fahrenheit and 14.73 pounds standard per square inch) in a cube whose 
edges are one foot long.  
Demand  Side  Management:  actions  that  influence  the  quantity  or  patterns  of  use  of  energy 
consumed by end users. 
Eco-efficiency: Creating more goods and services with less and less use of resources, waste and 
pollution; coined by the Business Council for Sustainable Development. 
Energy:  The  capacity  for  doing  work  as  measured  by  the  capability  of  doing  work  (potential 
energy) or the conversion of this capability to motion (kinetic energy). Energy has several forms, 
some of which are easily convertible and can be changed to another form useful for work. Most 
of the world's convertible energy comes from fossil fuels that are burned to produce heat that is 
then  used  as  a  transfer  medium  to  mechanical  or  other  means  in  order  to  accomplish  tasks. 
Electrical energy is usually measured in kilowatt-hours, while heat energy is usually measured in 
British thermal units (Btu).  
Energy conservation: Practices and actions that reduce the amount of energy that is used 
Energy efficiency: Changing technology so that less energy is used to accomplish the same task 
Ethanol (CH3-CH2OH): A clear, colourless, flammable oxygenated hydrocarbon. A type of alcohol, 
ethanol  is  typically  produced  chemically  from  ethylene,  or  biologically  from  fermentation  of 
various sugars from carbohydrates found in agricultural crops and cellulosic residues from crops 
or  wood.  It  is  used  as  a  gasoline  octane  enhancer  and  oxygenates  (blended  up  to  10  percent 
concentration). Ethanol can also be used in high concentrations (E85) in vehicles designed for its 
use. The lower heating value, equal to 76,000 Btu per gallon.  
Flexible fuel vehicle: A vehicle that can operate on:  
(1) alternative fuels (such as M85 or E85) 
(2) 100-percent petroleum-based fuels 
(3) any mixture of an alternative fuel (or fuels) and a petroleum-based fuel. 
 
Page 69 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Flexible fuel vehicles have a single fuel system to handle alternative and petroleum-based fuels. 
Flexible fuel vehicle and variable fuel vehicle are synonymous terms.  
f.o.b. value (coal): Free-on-board value. This is the value of coal at the coal mine or of coke and 
breeze at the coke plant without any insurance or freight transportation charges added.  
Fossil Fuel: Any naturally occurring organic fuel formed in the Earth’s crust, such as oil, coal, and 
natural gas. 
Gas  turbine  plant:  A  plant  in  which  the  prime  mover  is  a  gas  turbine.  A  gas  turbine  consists 
typically of an axial-flow air compressor and one or more combustion chambers where liquid or 
gaseous  fuel  is  burned  and  the  hot  gases  are  passed  to  the  turbine  and  where  the  hot  gases 
expand drive the generator and are then used to run the compressor.  
Gigawatt (GW): One billion watts or one thousand megawatts.  
Gigawatt-thermal (GWth): the amount of thermal (as opposed to electrical) power produced. 
Gigawatt-hour (GWh): One billion watt-hours 
Green  Economy7 - The Green Economy is an emerging marketplace that seeks to optimize the 
synergy among three sets of values: social, environmental and financial. This is most commonly 
referred to as the "triple bottom line." By definition, the Green Economy is:  
  Environmentally sustainable, based on the belief that our biosphere is a closed system 
with  finite  resources  and  a  limited  capacity  for  self-regulation  and  self-renewal.  We 
depend  on  the  earth’s  natural  resources,  and  therefore  we  must  create  an  economic 
system  that  respects  the  integrity  of  ecosystems  and  ensures  the  resilience  of  life 
supporting systems.  
  Socially just, based on the belief that culture and human dignity are precious resources 
that,  like  our  natural  resources,  require  responsible  stewardship  to  avoid  their 
depletion.  We  must  create  a  vibrant  economic  system  that  ensures  all  people  have 
access  to  a  decent  standard  of  living  and  full  opportunities  for  personal  and  social 
development.  
  Locally rooted, based on the belief that an authentic connection to place is the essential 
pre-condition to sustainability and justice. The Green Economy is a global aggregate of 
individual communities meeting the needs of its citizens through the responsible, local 
production and exchange of goods and services. 
 
Greenhouse  gas:  Gases  in  the  atmosphere  that  absorb  and  emit  radiation  within  the  thermal 
infrared  range.  Common  greenhouse  gases  in  the  Earth’s  atmosphere  include  water  vapour, 
carbon  dioxide,  methane,  nitrous  oxide,  (low-level  or  atmospheric)  ozone,  and  chloro-
fluorocarbons (CFCs).  These gases are the primary contributors to climate change. 
                                                      
7 From Global Citizen’s Centre – www.http://www.globalcitizencenter.org/content/view/2/1/ 
 
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 70 
 
 
Heat  content:  The  amount  of  heat  energy  available  to  be  released  by  the  transformation  or 
use of a specified physical unit of an energy form (e.g., a tonne of coal, a barrel of oil, a kilowatt-
hour of electricity, a cubic foot of natural gas, or a pound of steam).  The amount of heat energy 
is commonly expressed in British thermal units (Btu).  Note:  Heat content of combustible energy 
forms can be expressed in terms of either gross heat content (higher or upper heating value) or 
net  heat  content  (lower  heating  value),  depending  upon  whether  or  not  the  available  heat 
energy includes or excludes the energy used to vaporize water (contained in the original energy 
form or created during the combustion process).   
Heat  rate:  Amount  of  energy  input  needed  to  produce  one  kilowatt  hour  of  electricity.  The 
energy output of one kilowatt is 3,412. This when divided by the energy content of fuel needed 
to produce one kilowatt of electricity gives the efficiency factor. In 2007 JPSCo’s energy input to 
produce  one  kilowatt  hour  of  electricity  is  estimated  at  12,623  Btu.  This  translates  to  an 
efficiency factor of 24.5%. 
ICENS: International Centre for Environmental and Nuclear Sciences. 
Independent  power  producer  (IPP):  A  corporation,  person,  agency,  authority,  or  other  legal 
entity or instrumentality that owns or operates facilities for the generation of electricity for use 
primarily by the public, and that is not an electric utility.  
IPP/IPPs: Independent Power Producer/s  
Joule (J): The meter-kilogram-second unit of work or energy, equal to the work done by a force 
of  one  newton  when  its  point  of  application  moves  through  a  distance  of  one  meter  in  the 
direction of the force; equivalent to 107 ergs and one watt-second.  
JPSCo: Jamaica Public Service Company. 
Kilowatt (kW): 1,000 watts. 
Kilowatt-hour (kWh): A measure of electricity defined as a unit of work or energy, measured as 
1 kilowatt (1,000 watts) of power expended for 1 hour. One kWh is equivalent to 3,412 Btu.  
Kyoto  Protocol  to  the  UN  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change:  An  international 
agreement that sets binding targets for 37 industrialized countries and the European community 
for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. 
Liquefied natural gas (LNG): Natural gas (primarily methane) that has been liquefied by reducing 
its temperature to -260 degrees Fahrenheit at atmospheric pressure.  
Liquefied  petroleum  gases  (LPG):  A group of hydrocarbon-based gases derived from crude oil 
refining or natural gas fractionation. They include ethane, ethylene, propane, propylene, normal 
butane, butylenes, isobutane, and isobutylene. For convenience of transportation, these gases 
are  liquefied  through  pressurization.  They  are  usually  delivered  by tank truck and  stored  near 
the building in a tank or cylinder until used. One common use is cooking gas. 
 
Page 71 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
 
Megawatt (MW): One thousand kilowatts.  
Megawatt-hour (MWh): One thousand kilowatt-hours. 
MTBE: Methyl tertiary-butyl ether is a water-soluble additive to gasoline. 
Net metering: an electricity policy for consumers who own (generally small) renewable energy 
facilities,  such  as  wind,  solar  power  or  home  fuel  cells  which  enables  consumers  to  sell  the 
excess to the local utility, offsetting their purchases from the utility at other times. 
NWC: National Water Commission. 
Octane  rating:  A  number  used  to  indicate  gasoline's  antiknock  performance  in  motor  vehicle 
engines.  The  two  recognized  laboratory  engine  test  methods  for  determining  the  antiknock 
rating,  i.e.,  octane  rating,  of  gasolines  are  the  Research  method  and  the  Motor  method.  To 
provide a single number as guidance to the consumer, the antiknock index (R + M)/2, which is 
the average of the Research and Motor octane numbers, was developed.  
Oil Intensity Index: Volume of oil required to produce one dollar of constant GDP. 
OUR: Office of Utilities Regulation. 
PBMR:  Pebble  Bed  Modular  Reactor  (emerging  nuclear  technology  which  is  expected  to 
facilitate electricity generation from smaller sized and cost effective plants).  
PCJ: Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica. 
Peak demand: The maximum load during a specified period of time.  
Petcoke: See Coke (petroleum). 
Renewable energy resources: Energy resources that are naturally replenishing but flow-limited. 
They are virtually inexhaustible in duration but limited in the amount of energy that is available 
per unit of time. Renewable energy resources include: biomass, hydro, geothermal, solar, wind, 
ocean thermal, wave action, and tidal action.  
Spot market (natural gas): A market in which natural gas is bought and sold for immediate or 
very near-term delivery, usually for a period of 30 days or less. The transaction does not imply a 
continuing  arrangement  between  the  buyer  and  the  seller.  A  spot  market  is  more  likely  to 
develop at a location with numerous pipeline interconnections, thus allowing for a large number 
of buyers and sellers. The Henry  Hub in southern Louisiana is the best known spot market  for 
natural gas.  
System  (electric):  Physically  connected  generation,  transmission,  and  distribution  facilities 
operated as an integrated unit under one central management or operating supervision.  
 
S e c u r i n g   J a m a i c a ’ s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e    
Page 72 
 
 
System losses: Electric energy lost in the process of generating electricity as well as due to the 
transmission and distribution of electricity. 
Transmission and distribution losses (T&D Losses): Electric energy lost due to the transmission 
and  distribution  of  electricity.  Much  of  the  loss  is  thermal  in  nature.  There  are  two  types  of 
losses: a) technical, and b) non-technical. Generally an efficient system would have these losses 
in the 7.5%. to 8% range.  
Transport fuels: Auto fuels; kerosene or turbo fuel (J-1 and J-4) for aviation; marine diesel and 
bunker fuel for shipping; and electricity (railways). 
Transportation sector: An energy-consuming sector that consists of all vehicles whose primary 
purpose is transporting people and/or goods from one physical location to another. Included are 
automobiles;  trucks;  buses;  motorcycles;  trains,  subways,  and  other  rail  vehicles;  aircraft;  and 
ships,  barges,  and  other  waterborne  vehicles.  Vehicles  whose  primary  purpose  is  not 
transportation  (e.g.,  construction  cranes  and  bulldozers,  farming  vehicles,  and  warehouse 
tractors and forklifts) are classified in the sector of their primary use.  
UTECH: University of Technology, Jamaica. 
UWI: University of the West Indies  
Waste heat recovery: Any conservation system whereby some space heating or water heating is 
done  by  actively  capturing  by  product  heat  that  would  otherwise  be  ejected  into  the 
environment. In commercial buildings, sources of water- heat recovery include refrigeration/air-
conditioner  compressors,  manufacturing  or  other  processes,  data  processing  centres,  lighting 
fixtures,  ventilation  exhaust  air,  and  the  occupants  themselves.  Not  to  be  considered  is  the 
passive  use  of  radiant  heat  from  lighting,  workers,  motors,  ovens,  etc.,  when  there  are  no 
special systems for collecting and redistributing heat.  
Watt  (W):  The  unit  in  which  power  (the  rate  at  which  energy  is  used)  is  measured.  See  also 
kilowatt. 
Watt-hour (Wh): The amount of Watts of energy used in one (1) hour. See also Kilowatt-hour. 
Wheeling:  The ability of an energy consumer to select their own energy supplier, or "wheel in" 
energy from one or more different suppliers; the movement of electricity through a local grid for 
use in another area. 
Wind  energy:  Kinetic  energy  present  in  wind  motion  that  can  be  converted  to  mechanical 
energy for driving pumps, mills, and electric power generators.  
Wind  power  plant:  A  group  of  wind  turbines  interconnected  to  a  common  utility  system 
through  a  system  of  transformers,  distribution  lines,  and  (usually)  one  substation.  Operation, 
control,  and  maintenance  functions  are  often  centralized  through  a  network  of  computerized 
monitoring systems, supplemented by visual inspection.  
 
Page 73 
Jamaica’s Energy Policy 2009-2030 
