Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships . . .: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management . . .: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation: Page: 8
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
 
I.  UNDP  within  the  United  Nations  Multi-country  Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework 
 
1.  In 2016, Guyana was reclassified as an upper middle-income country following the 
discovery of large oil and gas reserves, which is expected to increase economic growth 
significantly  in  the  short  to  medium  term.  Primarily  due  to  oil  and  gas  revenues, 
Guyana recorded a high growth rate of 43.4 per cent in 2020 (International Monetary 
Fund,  April  2021),  despite  the  impact  of  the  coronavirus  disease  (COVID-19) 
pandemic. In addition, the country’s short- to medium-term prospects seem to be very 
favourable as economic growth is projected at rates of 20.4, 48.7 and 32.0 per cent for 
2021, 2022 and 2023, respectively.1 Its estimated recoverable resource stands at over 
9 billion oil-equivalent barrels (Oilnow.gy). 
2.  The country has made significant development advances in the last two decades. 
In 2020, Guyana was recorded as having a Human Development Index of 0.682 which 
ranked it 122 of 189 countries. The last multidimensional poverty index (2019-2020) 
showed that only 1.7 per cent of the population was classified as multidimensionally 
poor.2 In 2021, the percentage of people living in extreme poverty (less than $1.90 per 
day) was 4.7 per cent,3 1.7 percentage points higher than the target of 3 per cent for the 
eradication of extreme poverty set in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
More importantly, the country has extended awareness of the need to prudently manage 
the proceeds from the oil and gas sector to secure a development path that leaves no 
one behind while managing the sector in an environmentally sustainable manner.  
3. 
In  parallel,  Guyana  is  updating  its  Low  Carbon  Development  Strategy,  which 
includes appropriate adaptation measures for a country highly vulnerable to climate 
change risks.4 Moreover, benefits to be accrued from this initiative are expected to earn 
the  country  significant  financial  resources  from  the  provision  of  its  environmental 
services to the world through the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest 
Degradation  (REDD+)  programme.  These  resources  will  be  used  for  development 
interventions  such  as  education,  health,  agriculture,  housing,  water  and  sanitation, 
infrastructure and energy. 
4.  Guyana thus presents a promising development context, and this decade could well 
prove to be  transformational for fair, inclusive and resilient development conditions 
across the country. Nonetheless, challenges remain, exacerbated by the joint onset of 
the COVID-19 pandemic and severe flooding during 2021, both clear reminders of the 
value  of  preventive  resilience  in  national  policies.  Vulnerable  groups  include 
indigenous communities, female-headed households, people with disabilities, migrants 
and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex persons5 (National Gender 
Equality  and  Social  Inclusion  Policy,  2018).  These  groups  have  experienced 
exacerbated economic hardship as a result of the pandemic.  
5.  For the economy to provide sufficient, sustainable and dignified livelihoods, the 
non-oil sectors need to diversify and enhance their productivity and competitiveness. 
A key government strategy is to accelerate job creation, given that the unemployment 
rate in the second quarter of 2021 was 15.4 per cent.6 While the oil and gas industry is 
__________________ 
1  International Monetary Fund. 2021. World Economic Outlook, October 2021. Washington, DC: 
 
International Monetary Fund. 
2  United Nations Development Programme and Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative. 2021. 
Multidimensional Poverty Index, 2021. United Nations Development Programme, New York, and Oxford 
Poverty and Human Development Initiative, Oxford, UK 
 
3  Sustainable Development Goals Report 2021: Guyana Profile.  
4  World Bank Guyana Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2020. 
5  “LGBTI+” comprises lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex and non-binary or other gender 
 
 
 
denominations.  
6  Guyana Labour Force Survey Bulletin, Second quarter, 2021. 
 
21-17641 
2/16 
 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
projected to create about 3,850 direct jobs and 23,100 indirect jobs by 2025 (0.7 and 
3.9 per cent of the workforce)7 a large share of new jobs will require investment in non-
oil sectors. Low value-chain development and quality standards in micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises should be addressed, helping these groups to access export 
markets, given the small domestic market.  
6.  Guyana  is  highly  vulnerable  to  climate  change  and  natural  disasters,  given  its 
geographical  location.  According  to  the  United  Nations  Satellite  Centre,  the  coastal 
plains, where 90 per cent of the population live, are prone to floods and storm tides. 
Consequently,  Guyana  needs  to  invest  in  climate-resilient  infrastructure  and  adopt 
climate-smart  practices  as  part  of  its  climate  adaptation  measures.  Moreover, 
sustainable management of the country’s rich natural resources is critical for tangible 
development progress. While reduced-impact logging is the norm, forest inventories 
are  ongoing  for  managing,  monitoring  and  international  reporting.  Progress  on  the 
country’s low-carbon trajectory commitments is hindered by energy inefficiency and 
limited access to renewable energy systems. There is limited management of toxic and 
ozone-depleting  chemicals.  Mercury  pollution  remains  a  concern  for  mining  in  the 
hinterlands, affecting miners, indigenous peoples and indigenous women in particular. 
Guyana  has  committed  to  reducing  the  consumption  of  hydrochlorofluorocarbons 
(HCFCs) by at least 35 per cent from 2020.8  
7.  Social protection programmes and effective public health services provided by the 
State are key for well-being and reduced social inequality, and need to be expanded to 
cover  groups  including  informal  sector  workers.  The  public  health  system  was 
substantially challenged to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. One in ten households 
could  not  access  medical  treatment/services,  mainly  because  health  facilities  lacked 
supplies. 9 HIV/AIDS continues to be a public health challenge10 and people living with 
HIV  and  AIDS  continue  to  be  subjected  to  significant  levels  of  stigma  and 
discrimination. Improved health outcomes require better supply chain management of 
supplies  and  medicines  (procurement,  distribution  and  tracking),  including  the 
effective roll-out of COVID-19 vaccines. Mental health is another major issue: Guyana 
had the highest rate of age-standardized suicide mortality in the Americas in 2019, at 
40.8 per 100,000 (Pan American Health Organization 2019).  
8.  Another  issue  to  address  is  that  data  on  gender-based  violence  is  fragmented 
among  key  actors,  rendering  analysis  for  decision-making  difficult.  Constitutional 
reform  remains  important  for  most  political  stakeholders  and  requires  consensus  on 
issues/challenges.  
9.  Throughout its long history in Guyana, UNDP has developed its ability to work 
and partner with a wide range of government and local institutions and international 
organizations, while drawing on the strength of the United Nations country team. For 
example,  UNDP  has  partnered  with  the  Ministry  of  Human  Services  and  Social 
Security,  the  National  AIDS  Programme  Secretariat  and  civil  society  organizations 
(CSOs) for a variety of interventions including the National Dialogue on HIV and the 
Law; improved delivery of services during the pandemic for persons living with HIV 
and AIDS; and the implementation of the  Business Unusual Fund through the Joint 
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).  
10.  Multidimensional support was provided by UNDP to Amerindian communities, in 
partnership with the Ministry of Amerindian Affairs, the Office of the Prime Minister, 
__________________ 
7  World Bank Guyana Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2020, 
8  HCFC phase-out management plan approved by the Multilateral Fund for the implementation of the 
 
 
Montreal Protocol. 
9  COVID-19 socioeconomic impact assessment (2020). 
10  Guyana First Voluntary National Review, July 2019. 
 
 
21-17641 
3/16 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
 
the  Government  of  Norway  and  United  Nations  Children’s  Fund  (UNICEF).  It 
included  initiatives  on  livelihood  opportunities,  land  titling,  energy  services  and 
extending Internet access. A notable example was the Amerindian Development Fund 
project, which provided micro-capital grants to over 150 communities to develop and 
execute community development plans for economic/productive ventures (e.g., village 
shops,  transportation,  forest-based  artisanal  crafts,  fisheries,  etc.),  benefiting  over 
56,000 Amerindian persons (half of them women). 
11.  A number of lessons were learned during the previous programme, as identified in 
the  country  programme  performance  summary.  Policy  support  is  important  for 
addressing  systemic  issues  that  can  compromise  the  sustainability  of  results, 
particularly in the hinterland and other remote areas. Building institutional capacities 
in  government  entities  should  be  a  common  part  of  projects  involving  them,  from 
inception to exit strategies, to achieve and maintain expected outcomes. The protracted 
period  of  political  instability  that  delayed  the  transition  of  the  new  Administration 
(December 2018 to August 2020) showed the value of relativizing programme delivery 
while rebuilding trust and reactivating the special partnership status of UNDP with the 
Government.  Finally,  the  developmental  effects  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  in 
Guyana, as in most countries, are significant and will continue to be felt for some time. 
The three directions of change articulated in the new UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025 
(structural transformation, leaving no one behind, building resilience) and key enablers 
like digitalization will guide UNDP Guyana towards an effective pandemic response 
as it looks ahead to the 2030 Agenda.  
12.  Going forward, UNDP will support key areas of the United Nations Multi-country 
Sustainable  Development  Cooperation  Framework  (UNMSDCF),  i.e.,  economic 
resilience,  safety  and  security,  environment/natural  resource  management  and 
equality/well-being.  UNDP  will  build  on  its  comparative  advantages,  for  instance, 
having used a multidimensional strategy to  address environmental sustainability and 
resilience in the last cycle with several ministries and agencies. Through its integrator 
role,  UNDP  supported  United  Nations  system-wide  efforts  led  by  the  Resident 
Coordinator, for example leading the assessment of the socioeconomic impact of the 
pandemic  on  households.  UNDP  will  continue  to  leverage  its  innovation  expertise 
through  its  Accelerator  Lab  for  country-to-country  solutions  stimulated  by  local 
innovators.11 It will engage the UNDP Strategic Innovation Unit to support partners 
with systemic transformation. To support national progress on digital transformation, 
it will draw from knowledge/tools in the new UNDP Digital Strategy and support from 
the UNDP Chief Digital Officer.  
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
13.  The  strategy  of  UNDP  Guyana  to  advance  human  development  is  based  on 
reducing  economic,  social  and  gender  inequalities;  supporting  effective  governance 
and  social  protection;  and  enabling  sustainable  low-carbon  trajectories  (including 
climate change adaptation), all supported by digital transformation and strengthened 
data.  
14.  This  strategy  is  based  on  national  development  priorities,  which  include:  (a)  a 
diversified and resilient productive sector, with emphasis on job creation and support 
to small and medium-sized businesses; (b) catalytic and transformative infrastructure; 
(c)  a  low-carbon  development  strategy  consistent  with  oil  and  gas  production,  and 
environmental management and resilience; (d) enhanced and expanded social services, 
__________________ 
11  Peach, K., et al, (2021). Collective Intelligence for Sustainable Development: Getting Smarter Together. 
 
21-17641 
4/16 
 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
particularly in health and education; (e) improved governance, safety, security and the 
rule of law; and (f) navigating and responding to COVID-19 as long as necessary. 12 
15.  The new country programme for the period 2022-2026 is closely aligned with the 
UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025 and designed to contribute to the common outcomes 
of the  UNMSDCF.  Thus, in addition to the four programme areas  described below, 
UNDP will aim to contribute to initiatives led by other United Nations agencies, such 
as with UNICEF on water, sanitation and hygiene for hinterland communities; with the 
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the United Nations Entity for Gender 
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) on reducing gender-based 
violence;  and  with  UNAIDS  on  the  provision  of  services  to  persons  living  with 
HIV/AIDS and key population groups who are vulnerable to HIV.  
Area 1. Economic resilience and shared prosperity  
16.  The theory of change for this outcome is that if sustainable livelihood opportunities 
are provided to vulnerable groups,  then the country will generate a more productive 
business ecosystem that improves people’s standard of living. This could be achieved 
by  promoting  more  diversified  businesses  (in  the  context  of  a  growing  oil  and  gas 
sector), and if there is increased access to Internet and e-government services. 
17.  UNDP  will  contribute  to  enhancing  access  to  sustainable  livelihoods  and  entry 
points for decent work for people in vulnerable groups by building capacities in official 
entities and civil society to deliver effective programmes. For example, it will continue 
to work with the Ministry of Amerindian Affairs in the land titling process to increase 
the number of Amerindian communities with institutional measures in place to generate 
and strengthen livelihoods. In this effort, UNDP will work with the Ministry of Labour 
and United Nations agencies, including the International Labour Organization. 
18.  Towards a greater diversification of the non-oil economy, UNDP will collaborate 
with the Ministry of Tourism, Industry and Commerce and the Small Business Bureau 
to strengthen policies that promote business development and the integrating of micro, 
small and medium-sized enterprises into value chains and markets (via certification, 
business formalization and training).  
19.  UNDP  will  work  with  the  Office  of  the  Prime  Minister  to  support  digital 
transformation, i.e., through access to connectivity and e-services (including electronic 
money  transfers),  especially  for  the  hinterlands  and  the  poor  in  other  remote 
communities, and pursue the reduction of the gender digital divide and the financial 
inclusion  of  women.  Critically,  the  Office  of  the  Prime  Minister  will  be  directly 
responsible  for  connectivity  services  in  target  communities  and  the  Ministry  of 
Tourism, Industry and Commerce for hosting services for micro, small and medium-
sized  businesses,  while  the  Ministry  of  Amerindian  Affairs  will  be  responsible  for 
executing  land  titling  arrangements.  Indigenous  people,  women  and  youth,  among 
others, will benefit from expanded livelihood and small business services, particularly 
through online platforms. 
Area 2. Safety and security  
20.  The theory of change for this outcome is that if State and non-State actors involved 
in the justice sector operate with greater transparency, participation and effectiveness, 
and they are enabled by improved capacities (including for data collection and analysis) 
to better address and reduce crime (including specifically from gender-based violence), 
then  there  should  be  a  reduction  in  crime  (particularly  from  gender-based  violence) 
__________________ 
12  President’s address to 12th Parliament and Budget Speech (12 February 2021). 
 
21-17641 
5/16 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
 
through prevention and timelier access to more effective justice services. In the longer 
term, this will translate into an improved environment for security and social inclusion. 
21.  Building on the judicial system needs assessment conducted in 2019-2020, UNDP 
will  support  the  Guyana  Police  Force,  prosecutors  and  the  courts  to  strengthen 
mechanisms for the administration of justice, including the incorporation of advanced 
digital tools, to increase effectiveness and accountability in exercising the rule of law. 
UNDP  will  support  State  and  non-State  actors  involved  in  systemic  reform,  human 
rights and social inclusion. 
22.  To reduce crime and violence, UNDP will support a comprehensive approach to 
gender-based violence to address the root causes of violence against women and girls, 
with an emphasis on prevention. UNDP will work with the Ministry of Home Affairs 
and  Ministry  of  Human  Services  and  Social  Security,  UNFPA,  UNICEF  and  UN-
Women (these last three within the multi-agency Spotlight programme) to introduce 
and  expand  preventive  measures,  address  legislative  and  policy  gaps,  improve 
institutional  capacities  and  augment  service  delivery  systems,  especially  in  remote 
communities. It will enhance data collection and systems and encourage a stronger civil 
society  response.  Judicial  stakeholders  will  contribute  to  designing  required 
mechanisms, while the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Human Services and 
Social  Security  will  advance  improved  data  collection  systems.  Women  and  girls 
experiencing  multiple  forms  of  violence  (including  discrimination)  are  expected  to 
benefit from enhanced policies to prevent gender-based violence. 
Area 3. Natural resource management and resilience to climate change 
23.  The theory of change for this outcome is that if national and local authorities have 
improved capacities and legal frameworks for natural resource management (including 
in the oil and gas sector) and for handling chemicals and other pollutants, and there is 
increased  access  to  renewable  energies  and  recycling  technologies,  and  there  are 
adequate  policies  and  community  mechanisms  for  climate  change  mitigation  and 
adaptation, then the resilience of the country’s natural resources and ecosystems will 
be improved, as will the resilience and prosperity of the people who depend on them.  
24.  UNDP  will  support  strengthening  institutional  management  capacities  and 
legal/policy frameworks to manage natural resources and handle toxic chemicals and 
pollutants.  It  will  support  the  Hydrometeorological  Service  of  the  Ministry  of 
Agriculture  to  implement  the  Kigali  Amendment  to  the  Montreal  Protocol  on 
alternative  refrigerants  for  the  cooling  sector.  With  the  Environmental  Protection 
Agency, UNDP will strengthen enabling frameworks for  mainstreaming biodiversity 
and  mercury  reduction  in  small-scale  gold  mining  operations.  It  will  support  the 
Ministry of Natural Resources in the national forest inventory methodology and data 
platform.  The  Ministry  and  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  will  promote  the 
adoption of environmentally responsible mining and sustainable forest management. 
25.  UNDP  will  continue  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  Ministry  of  Natural 
Resources  to  manage  natural  resources  sustainably  and  update  related  policies  and 
frameworks.  
26.  Regarding  climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation,  UNDP  will  support  the 
evolution  and  implementation  of  the  national  Low  Carbon  Development  Strategy, 
working with the Office of the President and the Ministry of Public Works to advance 
sustainable energy access and policies, for example, by mainstreaming low-emission 
technologies. It will support forest monitoring to advance land-use and environmental 
services, including through REDD+. UNDP will promote gender-responsive disaster 
risk reduction initiatives with the Civil Defence Commission and local administrations, 
expanding community-based early warning systems and policies. The Commission and 
21-17641 
6/16 
 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  will  adopt  advanced  technology/tools,  such  as  early 
warning models, to limit the impact of extreme weather  events. These interventions 
will enable informed decision-making that reduces risks and increases productivity for 
farmers and other groups. 
Area 4. Equality and well-being  
27.  The  theory of change  for this outcome is  that  if national  institutions strengthen 
their capacities to deliver health services via improved information and supply chain 
systems,  and  government  and  civil  society  actors  enhance  their  social  protection 
policies, mental health and HIV services, then people in Guyana will have better access 
to universal, shock-responsive and quality health care.  
28.  UNDP will work with the Ministry of Health and the Georgetown Public Hospital 
to  support  universal  access  to  quality  health  services  by  strengthening  health 
management  systems  through  introducing  digital  solutions  and  better  handling  of 
supply chains for medical products. It will partner with the National AIDS Programme 
Secretariat, which provides technical oversight for HIV services, expanding access to 
such services for persons living with HIV/AIDS and their caregivers, including through 
CSOs. UNDP will support the Ministry of Health in developing an investment case for 
expanded mental health services benefiting Guyanese society. The Ministry will lead 
the  design  of  new  health  management  system  components  and  the  mental  health 
investment case.  
29.  UNDP will collaborate with the Ministry of Human Services and Social Security 
to develop policies for a more comprehensive  social protection system that includes 
more women, persons with disabilities and informal sector workers, among others, to 
help individuals better withstand crises at any stage throughout their lives. The Ministry 
will design social protection options consistent with those policies. 
III.  Programme and risk management  
30.  The main risks to the successful implementation of this programme are financial, 
operational and environmental/sanitary. 
31.  The financial risks refer to funding limitations for achieving programme goals. As 
an  upper-middle-income  country  with  emerging  oil  wealth,  Guyana  has  seen  its 
traditional  donor  space  shrink  and  this  is  expected  to  continue.  The  bulk  of  the 
programmatic finances for the last two  country programmes came from government 
cost sharing, including the Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund. UNDP will continue to 
engage  the  Government  on  transformative  projects  and  promote  the  country’s 
participation  in  regional  and  subregional  initiatives  (e.g.,  within  the  transboundary 
Amazon  basin)  to  achieve  the  intended  programme  results.  A  redesigned  resource 
mobilization strategy will encompass traditional donors (Global Environment Facility, 
European Union, the Governments of Japan, Norway and the United States) and new 
ones. 
32.  Operational risks present potential difficulties in managing the programme and its 
actions. The country office  will conduct an objective  assessment of its capacities to 
identify  areas  where  support or  training  may  be  required. Lessons  learned  from  the 
previous programme will help the office to critically address possible formulation and 
implementation  challenges,  including  the  choice  of  delivery  modalities  for  new 
initiatives. Strengthened capacities of some national partners to manage interventions 
will be explicitly included in project design wherever assessed relevant for enhanced 
execution and sustainability through clear exit strategies.  
33.  Political risks in the near future are not deemed significant but could exacerbate 
operational risks  that arose  during the previous  country programme. The vote of  no 
21-17641 
7/16 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
 
confidence in late 2018 and the delay in the announcement of the results of the 2020 
elections caused delays in political decision-making that carried over to the technical 
domain and resulted in a slowdown in the implementation timeline of some projects.  
34.  In terms of environmental and health risks, UNDP will seek in the short-term to 
support the Government through the Civil Defence Commission and in collaboration 
with the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 
in conducting a  damage and loss assessment  as part of its  response to the  floods of 
June-July 2021.  The COVID-19 situation is likely  to continue to affect community-
based  initiatives,  e.g.,  curtailing  travel,  particularly  in  the  hinterland  where  health 
systems are more vulnerable. UNDP will heed national COVID-19 guidelines while 
seeking  to  partner  with  stakeholders  on  the  ground  in  supporting  project  execution 
where possible, including using digital resources wherever feasible. UNDP plays an 
active role in the United Nations Emergency Technical Team responding to potential 
disasters in the country. In the longer term, UNDP Guyana will continue to work with 
other UNDP offices in the Caribbean subregion  towards enabling gender-responsive 
disaster recovery, climate and environmental resilience.  
35.  To ensure that the programme addresses gender inequality risks globally, UNDP 
will design a gender strategy that includes a gender analysis for each project (both for 
ensuring  positive  outcomes  for  women  and  men  and  a  substantial  participation  of 
women  in  project  implementation),  and  strengthened  capacity  on  gender  and 
development for staff and partners 
36.  UNDP  will  incorporate  participatory  elements  into  programme  governance.  Its 
design has considered diagnostic assessments in the 2019 voluntary national review of 
progress towards  the Sustainable Development Goals, the 2021 Caribbean Common 
Multi-country Analysis and national development priorities and lines of action defined 
by the Government. It was informed by consultations with key stakeholders from the 
Government,  civil  society  and  United  Nations  agencies.  UNDP  will  maintain  this 
participatory multi-stakeholder approach during the programme’s implementation, as 
well as participate in the results group monitoring the country implementation plans 
which operationalize the UNMSDCF. 
37.  This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national 
results  and  serves  as  the  primary  unit  of  accountability  to  the  Executive  Board  for 
results  alignment  and  resources  assigned  to  the  programme  at  the  country  level. 
Accountability of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect 
to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations 
policies and procedures and internal control framework. The grievance mechanism will 
be  available  to  institutions,  communities  and  beneficiaries  to  address  any  perceived 
adverse effects or concerns derived from UNDP actions in the country. 
38.  The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may 
be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to 
force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated 
fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions 
and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to 
the concerned projects. 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
39.  The  need  for  robust  data  remains  a  cross-cutting  challenge  for  successfully 
implementing this programme and advancing  the country’s sustainable development 
processes. Challenges in the availability, quality and timeliness of data and capacities 
for  data  analysis  are  significant  hurdles  for  planning  and  policy  formulation  and 
in  the  2019  voluntary  national  review. 
targeted 
interventions,  as  indicated 
21-17641 
8/16 
 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
Strengthening data systems needs to be addressed head on to enhance data collection, 
analysis and reporting capacities.  
40.  Strengthening  data  will  be  mainstreamed  across  the  programme’s  interventions 
and actions. One possibility will be to collaborate with neighbouring UNDP country 
offices facing similar challenges. UNDP can leverage its participation in the Global 
Partnership 
improve  capacities  and 
methodologies in the country to harness quality development data. UNDP will support 
the Ministry of Finance in conducting data gap analysis and data development plans of 
key  government  units  to  improve  data  available  for monitoring  and  evaluation.  The 
United Nations Guyana Inter-Agency Monitoring and Evaluation Group will support 
collective monitoring and reporting on the UNMSDCF indicators. 
for  Sustainable  Development  Data 
to 
41.  UNDP Guyana views monitoring and evaluation as developmental tools that can 
generate added value for UNDP. To improve monitoring and evaluation competencies 
in the office and with implementing partners, UNDP will deliver training in  results-
based management, data collection, management and analysis to enhance development 
effectiveness.  The  UNDP  gender  marker  will  be  used  to  monitor  programme 
performance and improve planning and decision-making to ensure gender equality is 
well integrated into programmes. 
42.  UNDP will utilize recommendations and findings from independent evaluations 
to  strengthen  project  design,  monitor  connections  among  programme  priorities  and 
make course corrections to the overall programme. UNDP will ensure the evaluation 
plan follows the Independent Evaluation Office guidelines (regarding project budget 
and duration) and ensure that each evaluation is funded.  
43.  The  programme  builds  on  a  robust  theory  of  change  supported  by  individual 
outcome-level  theories of change to facilitate  monitoring and evaluation and a clear 
line of accountability. The  programme will be tracked at  outcome and output  levels 
parallel to activity monitoring and spot checks for individual projects.  
44.  Digital 
tools  and  processes  will  enhance 
data/information gathering and analysis, particularly in light of the travel restrictions 
due to COVID-19. For example, Kobo toolboxes and other mobile-based digital tools 
will be piloted and scaled up as appropriate. 
innovation 
in  monitoring 
45.  Knowledge  management,  including  research,  is  central  to  the  work  of  UNDP. 
Access  to  the  UNDP  global  knowledge  network  is  a  key  attribute  of  the  UNDP 
comparative advantage. The Guyana office will access the experience and knowledge 
resources  of  other  country  offices,  communities  of  practice  like  the  Global  Policy 
Network  and  experts  through  the  UNDP  regional  and  global  rosters.  A  knowledge 
management  strategy  for  the  Guyana  office  can  provide  better  leverage  for  its 
knowledge products and assets, including those from research and technical assistance. 
 
21-17641 
9/16 
 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Guyana (2022-2026)  
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: A diversified and resilient productive sector, with emphasis on job creation and support to small-medium businesses; catalytic and 
transformative infrastructure. SDGs 1, 8, 17  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: UNMSDCF 1: More productive and competitive business ecosystems designed to improve people’s 
standards of living and well-being 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1. Structural transformation accelerated. 
Cooperation Framework 
outcome indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s) 
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities 
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines targets) 
Major partners / partnerships 
frameworks 
Estimated cost 
by outcome ($) 
Indicator 1.1 Proportion of youth 
(aged 15-24 years) not in 
education, employment or training 
(SDG 8.6.1, IRRF.O.1.11)13 
Baseline: 35.9% (2021) 
Target: 32% (2026) 
Bureau of Statistics 
Annual  
Output 1.1: National and subnational 
institutions and civil society systems have 
strengthened capacities to improve, 
provide and deliver effective, sustainable 
livelihood programmes to women, youth, 
persons living with HIV and AIDS, 
migrants and other vulnerable groups  
Ministry of Labour 
Ministry of Tourism, Industry and 
Regular  
$626,500 
Commerce (MINTIC) 
 
Other  
$17,500,000 
Ministry of Amerindian Affairs 
 
(MOAA)  
 
 
Ministry of Human Services and 
Social Security (MOHSSS) 
 
 
 
Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.2 Proportion of 
individuals using the Internet 
(IRRF.O.1.2) 
Baseline: 37% (2017) 
Target: 50% (2026) 
International Telecommunication 
Indicator 1.1.1: number of communities 
with institutional measures in place at the 
subnational levels to generate and 
strengthen employment and livelihoods 
(disaggregated by sex, age, region) 
Baseline: 123 (2021) 
Target: 142 (2026) 
Source: MOAA, Annual 
 
Union  
Small Business Bureau 
Guyana Telecommunications 
 
Agency  
Saint Francis Community Developers 
CSOs 
Annual 
 
 
 
Private Sector Commission 
 
 
National Toshaos Council  
 
Indicator 1.1.2: number of programmes 
focusing on women, youth, migrants, 
Indigenous people and other groups that 
promote and support the development of 
export quality products (disaggregated by 
sex, age, region) 
Baseline: 0 (2021) 
Target: 3 (2026) 
Source: MINTIC, MOAA, Annual 
 
ILO 
IOM 
UNFPA 
UNHCR 
 
__________________ 
13  Integrated results and resources framework from the UNDP Strategic Plan 2022-2025. 
 
10/16 
21-17641 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
Output 1.2: National and subnational 
institutional mechanisms, structures and 
policies strengthened to promote 
diversification and MSME development in 
an oil economy 
 
Indicator 1.2.1: number of programmes to 
expand and diversify MSMEs based on 
sustainable production technologies 
Baseline: 0 (2021) 
Target: 2 (2026) 
Source: MINTIC, Annual 
 
Output 1.3: Citizens have increased 
access to Government services through 
information and communication 
technology (ICT) at the national and 
subnational levels. 
 
Indicator 1.3.1: number of unserved 
communities/villages with ICT 
connectivity 
Baseline: 62 (2021) 
Target: 200 (2026) 
Source: OPM, Annual 
 
Indicator 1.3.2: number of public 
institutions that leverage digital 
technologies in ways that improve people’s 
lives: 
(IRRF.E.1.214) 
Baseline (2021):  
(a)  Nationally 2 
(b)  Subnationally 3 
Target (2026):  
(a)  10 
(b)  8 
Source: OPM, Annual 
 
 
__________________ 
14  Enabler E.1 in the Strategic Plan. 
 
21-17641 
11/16 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Improved governance, safety, security and the rule of law. SDGs 5, 10, 16  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 2: UNMSDCF 7: Regional and national laws, policies, systems and institutions improve access to 
justice and promote peace, social cohesion and security  
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. No one left behind 
United Nations Human Rights 
Indicator 2.1 Independent national 
human rights institutions with 
improved capacity for compliance 
with the Paris Principles 
(SDG.16.a.1)15 
Baseline:2 (2021) 
Target: 3 (2026) 
Regular  
$626,500 
Ministry of Legal Affairs (MLA) 
Ministry of Home Affairs  
MOHSSS 
Guyana Elections Commission  
Judiciary 
Parliament 
Output 2.1: Government and non-
government institutions working on access 
to justice and fulfilment of human rights 
enabled to improve effectiveness, 
transparency and participation.  
Council 
Government of Guyana 
4.5 years 
Other  
$2,800,000 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of institutions 
with enhanced capacities to support the 
fulfilment of nationally and internationally 
ratified human rights obligations:  
• the rule of law and justice  
• Human rights  
(IRRF.2.2.1) 
Baseline16: 2 (2021) 
Target: 3 (2026) 
Source: MLA, Annual 
 
 
Guyana Human Rights Association 
Electoral Reform Group 
Women’s groups 
 
 
MOHSSS  
Guyana Police Force  
Annual 
Indicator 2.2 Proportion of ever-
partnered women and girls aged 15 
years and older subjected to 
physical, sexual, verbal or 
psychological violence by a current 
or former intimate partner in the 
previous 12 months, by form of 
violence and by age (SDG.5.2.1, 
IRRF.O.1.6) 
Baseline: 1 in 10 (2019) 
Target: 1 in 15 (2026) 
 
UNCTAD 
UNFPA 
UNICEF 
UNODC 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of services and 
mechanisms developed and in place for 
enhancing access to justice in the judicial 
sector enabled by digital technologies  
Baseline: 0 (2021) 
Target: 3 (2026) 
Source: MLA, Judiciary, Annual 
 
 
 
 
Output 2.2: Government institutions and 
CSOs have strengthened their capacities to 
address and reduce gender-based violence 
 
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of entities with 
strengthened capacities to collect, analyse 
and utilize data to implement policies and 
__________________ 
15  0 = Not in place, 1 = Capacity low, 2 = Capacity neither low nor high, 3 = Capacity high, 4 = Capacity very high 
16  Same as previous footnote 
 
 
12/16 
21-17641 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
initiatives to prevent gender-based 
violence. 
(IRRF.6.3.3)  
Baseline: 
(a)  National entities 0 
(b)  Subnational entities 0 
(c)  CSOs 0 
Target: 
(a)  5 
(b)  5 
(c)  9 
Source: MOHSSS, Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: A national Low Carbon Development Strategy consistent with oil/gas production, and environmental management/resilience; catalytic 
and transformative infrastructure. SDGs 7, 12, 14, 15  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 3: UNMSDCF 6: Caribbean countries manage natural resources and ecosystems strengthening their 
resilience and enhancing the resilience and prosperity of the people and communities that depend on them  
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 3. Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk. 
Indicator 3.1 Degree to which 
country has a policy and regulatory 
frameworks and capacities (data 
etc.) for waste management.  
Using these criteria representing 
key bottlenecks in waste 
management.  
• presence of hazardous waste 
policies  
• waste characterization 
assessments conducted.17  
Baseline: 1 (2021) 
Target: 2 (2026) 
EPA 
MNR 
MOA 
Annual 
Output 3.1: Environment agencies and 
local government authorities have 
improved their management capacities of 
natural resources, chemicals, and 
contaminants  
Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR) 
Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) 
MOAA 
Office of the President 
Regular  
$626,500 
Other  
$7,200,000 
 
 
Civil Defence Commission (CDC) 
Environmental Protection Agency 
 
 
Indicator 3.1.1: Areas of landscapes or 
territories under improved practices, 
excluding protected areas (in hectares) 
(IRRF.4.1.2) 
 
(EPA) 
 
Department of Environment and 
 
Climate Change  
 
Baseline: 0 (2021) 
Target: 220 (2026) 
Source: EPA, Annual 
Ministry of Local Government and 
 
Regional Development 
 
Guyana Forestry Commission 
Guyana Lands and Surveys 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.2 Megawatts of new 
installed renewable energy in the 
country 
Baseline: 0.0215 (2021) 
Target: 1.1 (2026) 
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of metric tons of 
reduced mercury released and used in 
Artisanal and small-scale mining  
Baseline: 0 (2021) 
Target: 9 (2026) 
Source: MOA, EPA 
Annual 
Commission  
Ministry of Public Works (MPW) 
Guyana Energy Agency (GEA) 
Annual 
Hydrometeorological Department-
MOA 
GEA  
 
 
 
Municipalities 
 
 
 
__________________ 
17  0 = Not in place, 1 = Started, 2 = In progress, 3 = Almost complete, 4 = In place 
 
21-17641 
13/16 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
 
Indicator 3.3 Level of 
establishment or operationalization 
of an integrated 
policy/strategy/plan which 
increases the country’s ability to 
adapt to the adverse impacts of 
climate change, and foster climate 
resilience and low greenhouse gas 
emissions development in a manner 
that does not threaten food 
production (including national 
adaptation plan, nationally 
determined contribution, national 
communication, biennial update 
report, etc.). (SDG.13.2.1)18 
Baseline: 1 (2021) 
Target: 4 (2026) 
National voluntary report, Paris 
Output 3.2: Effective institutional 
frameworks in place for sustainable use of 
natural resources  
Guyana Women Miners Organisation 
Guyana Gold and Diamond Miners 
Agreement 
Every two years 
Office of the President 
Association 
Private Sector Commission 
 
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of institutional 
frameworks for natural resource 
management developed  
Baseline: 10 (2021) 
Target: 14 (2026) 
Source: MNR, Annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 3.3: The MNR has strengthened its 
capacities to monitor and enforce 
sustainable oil/gas sector regulations. 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.3.1: number of policies, 
legislation and institutional frameworks 
developed for the management of 
hydrocarbons 
Baseline: 1 (2021) 
Target: 4 (2026) 
Source: MNR, Annual 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.4 Number of disaster 
risk reduction strategies in line 
with the Sendai Framework for 
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–
2030 (SDG.11.b.1) 
Baseline: 1 (2021) 
Target: 3 (2026) 
CDC 
Annual 
 
 
Output 3.4: Business enterprises and 
communities have increased access to 
clean, renewable and affordable energy. 
 
Indicator 3.4.1: number of service 
providers offering clean, renewable and 
affordable energy services  
Baseline: 2 (2021) 
Target: 4 (2026) 
Source: MPW, Annual 
 
Indicator 3.4.2: Number of people, who 
benefited from services for clean, 
affordable and sustainable energy 
(disaggregated by sex, region) 
(IRRF.5.1.2)  
__________________ 
18  0 = Not in place, 1 = Started, 2 = In progress, 3 = Almost complete, 4 = In place 
 
14/16 
21-17641 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
Baseline: 
(a)  Urban 8,000 
(b)  Rural 0 
Target: 
(a)  10,000 
(b)  1,500 
Source: Office of the President, Annual 
 
Output 3.5: National and subnational 
governmental entities institute effective 
policies, and local communities put in 
place effective mechanisms for improved, 
gender-responsive disaster risk 
management 
 
Indicator 3.5.1: Early warning and 
preparedness measures in place to manage 
the impact of disasters  
(IRRF.3.1.2) 
Baseline19: 1 (2021) 
Target: 2 (2026) 
Source: CDC, MOA, Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Enhanced and expanded social services, particularly in health and education; navigating and responding to COVID-19 as long as 
necessary – SDG 3, 10 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 4: UNMSDCF 4. People in the Caribbean equitably access and utilize universal, quality and shock-
responsive, social protection, education, health and care services 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. No one left behind,  
Indicator 4.1 Number of new HIV 
infections per 1,000 uninfected 
population, by sex, age and key 
populations 
Baseline: 500 (2018) 
Target: 26 (2026) 
National AIDS Programme 
Secretariat (NAPS) 
HIV service providers 
Annual 
Output 4.1: National institutions have 
improved health management systems 
MOHSSS 
Regular 
$626,500 
 
NAPS 
 
Other 
$250,000  
Indicator 4.1.1: Degree of introducing a 
digital solutions package for vaccine 
delivery and supply chain management 
systems 
(IRRF.1.4.2) 
Baseline: 220 (2021) 
Target: 3 (2026) 
 
CSOs: Persons living with HIV and 
AIDS, LGBTI+ 
 
 
__________________ 
19  0 = Not in place, 1 = Started, 2 = In progress, 3 = Almost complete, 4 = In place 
20  0 = Not in place, 1 = Work started, 2 = Work in progress, 3 = Work almost complete, 4 = Introduced/deployed 
 
 
21-17641 
15/16 
 
DP/DCP/GUY/4 
 
 
Source: MOH, Annual 
Output 4.2: National and subnational 
institutions and CSOs have systems and 
policies in place to deliver HIV and mental 
health services 
 
Indicator 4.2.1: number of CSOs providing 
HIV and services to key population groups 
Baseline: 2 (2021) 
Target: 5 (2026) 
Source: NAPS, Annual 
 
Indicator 4.2.2: existence of an investment 
case to provide mental health services 
Baseline: No 
Target: Yes 
Source: MOH, Annual 
 
 
16/16 
21-17641 
