Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 9
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
I.  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework 
 
1.  This  country  programme  document  stems  from  the  United  Nations  Development 
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) 2023-2027 for the Dominican Republic and is based on 
extensive  consultations  with  public  and  private  actors,  civil  society,  academia,  United 
Nations  and  the  international  community  to  safeguard  linkages  with  national  and  local 
priorities.  
2. 
In the decade preceding the pandemic, the Dominican Republic had one of the fastest 
growth  rates  in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  (LAC)  and  was  classified  as  an  upper-
middle-income country (UMIC). Its high Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.767 placed 
it  80th  out  of  191  countries.  In  2021,  the  country  was  amongst  the  ten  fastest-growing 
economies worldwide with 12.3 per cent growth and one of six LAC countries that recovered 
pre-pandemic gross domestic product (GDP) levels.1  
3. 
Improvements in distributive inequality at national, rural, and urban levels were reflected 
by the 2021 decrease in the Gini Index from 0.433 (2016) to 0.393. National commitment to 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) was cemented in two voluntary national reports 
(VNR): The National Development Strategy (END-2030) and National Pluriannual Public 
Sector Plan (PNPSP) for 2021-2024. The 2021 VNR reported 91 per cent alignment between 
the SDGs and national planning. 
4.  The comprehensive reform agenda of the government aims to increase social security 
and protection, improve public administration, governance and transparency, ensure judicial 
independence,  and  foster  citizen  security,  education,  and  digital  transformation.  Despite 
adopting relevant regulations and public policies, implementation has been challenging given 
the  limited  institutional  response  capacity  and  lack  of  data  for  evidence-based  decision-
making.  Restricted  local-level  planning,  management  and  financial  capacities  hamper 
territorial development, especially in border regions with persistent gaps in service access.  
5.  Despite  recent  advances  and  quick  post-pandemic  recovery,  persistent  inequality  and 
insecurity  hinder  transformation  towards  a  sustainable,  equitable  and  productive  society, 
shared prosperity, closure of social gaps, care for the environment and reduction of climate 
footprint.  Prevailing  structural  barriers  contribute  to  social  exclusion,  especially  in 
employment, social security protection, and access to social services and justice.  
6.  The precariousness of the formal labour market and high informality (58.1 per cent in 
2021, according to the Dominican Central Bank) prevents the enjoyment of social rights by 
all. More than 85.2 per cent of the productive force is made up of micro, small and medium 
enterprises (MSME).2 The pandemic pushed MSME to total or partial closure and reduced 
cash flow, evidencing MSMEs' limited diversification potential and digital capacities. The 
Dominican Republic is 93rd out of 130 countries in the Global Innovation Index. 
7.  An open economy, the Dominican Republic is exposed to external shocks, affecting short 
and  medium-term  economic  and  social  development.  As  a  Small  Island  Developing  State 
(SIDS), it is vulnerable to disasters and climate change, evidenced by frequent tropical storms 
and hurricanes. Continued loss of biodiversity, ecosystems degradation, and greenhouse gas 
(GHG)  emissions,  driven  by  unsustainable  consumption  and  production,  exacerbate 
vulnerability to systemic risks. This exposes around 1.6 million people already impacted by 
multidimensional  poverty,  lack  of  social  services,  and  the  digital  divide  to  additional 
vulnerabilities. 
 
1 Data from the United Nations Common Country Assessment (CCA) (draft) 2022 and Results-Oriented Annual Reports 2018-2021. 
2 National Statistics Office (ONE). 
2/16 
22-27503 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
8.  The pandemic has deepened pre-existing challenges. Between 2019-2020, 41 per cent of 
the poorest decile households lost six times more income than the wealthiest decile. In 2021, 
urban inequality was greater (0.401) than rural (0.357). Inequality-adjusted HDI drops 19.4 
per cent. The Gender Inequality Index is higher (0.429) than the LAC average (0.381) and 7th 
highest in the region. 
9.  According to the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Development (MEPyD), by 2021, 
high feminization of poverty implied 125.4 poor women for every 100 men, 3.4 per cent of 
women in extreme poverty, and 25.8 per cent in general poverty. The women’s labour market 
participation gap was 24.2 per cent and open unemployment was 12 per cent (vs. 3.9 per cent 
for  men).  Women  spent  an additional  31.2  hours  per  week  on  caretaking  and  housework. 
Only 23.4 per cent of parliamentarians were women. 
10.  More than 10 per cent of the population suffers from a disability and faces barriers to 
daily  functioning,  exclusion  from  education,  employment  and  social  participation,  and 
limited access to social security and protection. The populations farthest left behind (people 
from  the  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender,  intersex  and  queer  [LGBTQI+]  community, 
youth, elderly, migrants and people living with HIV, people living with disabilities, people 
deprived  of  liberty,  informal  workers,  dependents  in  need  of  care)  are  more  exposed  to 
violence, structural discrimination and inequalities in access to fundamental services.3  
11.  Along  with  the  private  sector,  the  international  community,  and  civil  society  UNDP 
supports  the  government  reform  agenda  towards  a  systemic transformation  of  the  country 
into a more productive, inclusive, sustainable and resilient society capable of withstanding 
external shocks and protecting the environment while ensuring the rights for all, especially 
those at risk of being left behind. UNDP supported disaster management, early recovery and 
preparedness  by  strengthening  national  and  local  institutional  capacities,  response 
mechanisms and protocols. 
12.  Uniquely positioned as the comprehensive analytical and operational backbone of the 
United Nations, UNDP mobilized global technical expertise and know-how to support post-
pandemic  recovery  and  accelerate  the  achievement  of  the  SDGs  in  collaboration  with  the 
United Nations Resident Coordinator Office (UNRCO) and institutions like MEPyD. With 
several United Nations funds, programmes, and agencies, European Union, the Interamerican 
Development  Bank  and  the  World  Bank,  UNDP  contributed  research  and  data  including 
socioeconomic impact assessments and the Recovery Needs Analysis for the United Nations 
COVID-19 Strategic Response Plan.   
13.  UNDP partnered with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and World Food 
Programme (WFP) to develop an adaptative social protection platform; the United Nations 
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), International 
Labour Organization (ILO) and United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) to pilot a national 
care policy, and ILO on the Green Jobs Assessment for continued work on ‘Just Transition’ 
and greening the labor force through the Climate Promise. 
14.  UNDP supported the Social Protection System to continue and expand social security 
programs, preventing thousands of families from falling into poverty. The “In Motion” and 
Inclusive Recovery Programmes of the UNDP and the Ministry of Industry, Commerce, and 
MSME (MICM) supported 7,000 MSMEs through innovation, digitalization, and economic 
reactivation.  
15.  UNDP  was  instrumental  in  the  (i)  development  of  the  Sustainable  Production  and 
Consumption Roadmap, mainstreamed in the PNPSP 2021-2024 and adopted by the private 
sector;  (ii) provision  of  critical  medical  equipment  to  more  than  one  million  people;  (iii) 
development of a comprehensive strategy for private sector alignment with the SDGs; (iv) 
 
3 CCA 2022. 
3/16 
22-27503 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
support to more than 4,000 household agroforestry initiatives; (v) provision of isolated rural 
households  with  sustainable  energy  solutions;  (vi)  development  of  a  portfolio  for  a  more 
diversified,  sustainable  and  inclusive  tourism  value  chain  using  the  ‘Problem  Space’ 
methodology,  and  (vii)  conservation  of  6,470  ha  of  forest  and  43  per  cent  reduction  in 
national consumption of ozone-depleting substances.  
16.  As a Golden Seal-certified office, UNDP was at the forefront of national efforts to reduce 
gender inequality in public and private sectors, impacting 77,000 people through the Gender 
Equality Seal (GES). UNDP strengthened the care system for female victims of violence and 
the data collection capacity of the Ministry of Women. UNDP  fostered political participation 
of 8,590 women candidates through the “Know your candidate” platform during the 2020 
elections. Committed to leaving no one behind, UNDP strengthened the capacities of state 
and  civil  society  organizations,  enhanced  awareness  of  vulnerable  group  inequalities  and 
needs,  and  promoted  their  inclusion  in  public  policies.  UNDP  supported  gender 
mainstreaming  in  the  nationally  determined  contributions  Action  Plan  and  launch  of  the 
Gender and Climate Change Roundtable, supported by UNDP Climate Promise. 
17.  The  UNDP  Efficient  Government  Programme  fostered  transparent  and  effective 
management in more than 30 public institutions. UNDP supported digitalization in the justice 
and education sectors, development of the strategic plan for the judiciary, and formulation 
and  monitoring  of  citizen  security  policies.  In  line  with  the  government  territorialization 
strategy, UNDP strengthened municipal management and development planning and fostered 
local production and resilience. 
18.  The  UNDP  innovation  agenda,  spearheaded  by  the  Acceleration  Lab,  yielded 
emblematic solutions, including the (i) co-construction of a National Innovation Policy, (ii) 
launch of the multi-actor ‘Ozama Rescue Platform’ including the operation of the Interceptor-
004  to  champion  integral  solid  waste  and  plastic  waste  solutions,  and  (iii)  mapping  and 
exploring of waste solutions for sustainable production and consumption.  
19.  UNDP developed South-South and Triangular Cooperation partnerships with the Central 
American Integration System, Guatemala, Costa Rica, Cuba, Haiti, Honduras, El Salvador, 
on social protection, teenage pregnancy, citizen security, cross-border development, social 
and economic inclusion of vulnerable groups, and SDG localization. 
20.  Several evaluation lessons informed UNDP partnership and digitalization strategies: (i) 
multi-stakeholder  and  multi-sector  alliances,  especially  with  the  private  sector,  to  help 
achieve collective goals and increase effectiveness and efficiency,4 and (ii) closing digital 
gaps to reduce inequalities requires additional, comprehensive solutions related to quality, 
infrastructure, knowledge, accessibility and use.5 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
21.  The overarching vision of this people-centered programme is sustainable, inclusive, and 
resilient growth backed by transparent and accountable institutions capable of responding to 
the needs and improving quality of life for all. The vision is derived from UNSDCF priorities 
aligned with the 2030 Agenda: People, Prosperity, Planet and Peace and the development 
pillars of the END-2030 and the PNPSP. The programme is aligned with the UNDP Strategic 
Plan and Regional Programme through the signature solutions approach. Future-smart UNDP 
is underpinned by digitalization, innovation, systems-thinking and financing for development 
adapted to the specific needs of vulnerable populations and territories to leave no one behind.   
 
4 Evaluation of the contribution of UNDP to the implementation of the strategy of distance education and digitization of education of the Ministry of 
Education of the Dominican Republic, Final Report, 2021 and Evaluation of the UNDAF, 2022 (Draft). 
5 Conserving Biodiversity in Coastal Areas Threatened by Rapid Tourism and Physical Infrastructure Development, Final Report, 2021. 
4/16 
22-27503 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
22.  UNDP is well positioned to support the country, working with duty-bearers and rights-
holders  through  its  thought  leadership  on  sustainable  development,  analytical  capacities, 
advocacy, policy advice and technical assistance, and its strong operational backbone. UNDP 
will  emphasize  efficiency,  accountability,  integrity  and  transparency  in the processes, and 
implement  mutually  reinforcing  multi-level  strategies,  including  portfolio  approaches,  to 
address barriers to resilient, sustainable and rights-based development and tackle the complex 
challenges of a UMIC. UNDP will leverage its capacity to mobilize collective intelligence 
and articulate different actors and sectors at national and territorial levels.  
23.  UNDP  will  work  with  the  public,  private,  academia,  civil  society  actors,  and  the 
international community to promote structural and innovative transformations in line with 
the  government  reform  agenda  towards  a  “new  and  improved  normality,”  focusing  on 
sustainability and the inclusion of vulnerable groups. UNDP will prioritize border, coastal 
and mountain communities, touristic and agri-productive zones, risk-prone and vulnerable 
urban  and  rural  municipalities,  and  territories  engaged  in  SDG  localization,  according  to 
national priorities. 
24.   Under the strategic guidance and coordination of the UNRCO, UNDP will expand its 
alliances  across  the  United  Nations  Development  System.  This  includes  work  on  social 
protection systems together with UNICEF and WFP; care policies, gender equality and youth 
empowerment with UNFPA and UN-Women; MSMEs, sustainable tourism and disaster risk 
management  with  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization;  inclusion  of  vulnerable  group 
rights, including migrants with the International Organization for Migration, Office of the 
United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights,  and  the  United  Nations  High 
Commissioner for Refugees; transition to a low emissions economy with ILO and United 
Nations Environment Program, and inclusion of vulnerable groups, sustainable development 
and climate action with support from United Nations Volunteers. 
25.  UNDP will collaborate with the United States Agency for International Development to 
foster citizen security, transparent and effective public administration and LGBTQI+ rights; 
European Union and member states promoting green, inclusive and resilient development, 
and  International  Financial  Institutions  on  strengthening  social  security  and  protection 
systems, financing for development, and green economy. 
26.  UNDP  will  engage  the  private  sector  to  promote  sustainable  production  and 
consumption, foster inclusive value chains, a green and inclusive economy, and financing for 
development to accelerate the achievement of the SDGs. UNDP will partner with civil society 
organizations  on  inclusion,  gender  equality  and  citizen  empowerment  for  effective 
governance.  UNDP  will  work  with  academia  on  solutions  to  complex  development 
challenges.    
27.  UNDP and the government will expand South-South cooperation with SIDS on blue and 
green economy and resilience; Mexico, Colombia, and Central and South American countries 
on social security and protection, innovation and digitalization, social and economic inclusion 
and national evaluation capacities.  UNDP will partner with Nordic countries on innovation, 
circular economy and digitalization through triangular cooperation. 
28.  UNDP will work on four interconnected UNSDCF cooperation areas: 
Inequality and social inclusion 
29.  Aligned  with  END-2030  priorities  on  opportunities  for  all,  gender  equality,  social 
security and protection, and digital transformation, this outcome addresses persistent poverty, 
inequality,  limited  fulfilment  of  rights  and  access  to  opportunities  caused  by  limited 
institutional  capacities  for  evidence-  and  rights-based  social  development,  lack  of 
disaggregated data, limited awareness of vulnerable groups on their rights and duties, and 
inefficient mechanisms for inclusive social participation.  
5/16 
22-27503 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
30.  The  theory  of  change  states  that  IF  public  policies  are  inclusive,  equitable  and 
sustainable, people are empowered for participatory and inclusive social transformations, and 
social  services  are  inclusive,  universal,  resilient  and  gender-responsive,  THEN  the 
capabilities of people left behind are increased and poverty and inequality reduced.  
31.  Connecting  outcomes 1, 2 and 4, UNDP will work with national and local stakeholders, 
on  the  design,  implementation,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  inclusive,  equitable  and 
sustainable public policies for poverty reduction and social protection, especially for those 
affected by informality and unemployment. UNDP will promote digital solutions, capacities, 
data and tools to ensure rights-based policies and inclusive access to social services.  
32.  In partnership with the public actors including municipal, civil society, and private sector 
stakeholders,  UNDP  will  develop  innovative  solutions  and  participation  mechanisms  to 
empower  people  in  promoting  human  rights,  gender  equality,  and  inclusive  social 
transformation.  
33.  Together with social security and protection institutions, MEPyD, ministries of health, 
labour  and  education,  and  the  National  Institute  of  Integral  Attention  to  Early  Childhood 
(INAIPI), UNDP will promote access to social services, universal and life-cycle-based social 
security and protection to increase access for women and vulnerable groups, and establish a 
national  care  system  and  foster  shock  resilience.  This  includes  geo-referenced  mapping, 
piloting, evaluating care and social protection policies, and generating data and evidence for 
decision-making, advocacy, and communication.  
Inclusive growth and shared prosperity 
34.  Alongside  Outcomes  1  and  3,  this  one  will  tackle  the  dynamic  but uneven  economic 
growth, unable to benefit all territories, sectors and people, combined with low productivity, 
non-inclusive labour markets and informality, all of which perpetuate poverty and inequality. 
Responding  to  END-2030  priorities  for  territorially  and  sectorally  integrated,  innovative, 
diversified,  quality-oriented  and  environmentally  sustainable  economy  that  generate 
opportunities  for  all,  the  outcome  will  address  limited  gender  and  rights-approaches  in 
employment  policies  and  training;  restricted  empowerment  and  economic  participation  of 
women  and  vulnerable  groups,  insufficient  innovation,  digitalization,  sustainability  and 
inclusion  of  the  economic  development  model  non-  inclusive  financing  mechanisms  and 
limited instruments for sustainable and green prosperity. 
35.  The theory of change outlines that IF markets and policies are inclusive and gender-
responsive,  informality  is  reduced,  financing  for  development  is  available,  the  productive 
sector, including MSMEs, is more sustainable, resilient and productive, and social security 
and protection coverage is universal (Outcome 1) THEN people, especially women, youth, 
and other vulnerable groups, have greater opportunities for productive employment, decent 
work and sustainable livelihoods. 
36.  In  partnership  with  the  ministries  of  labour,  women,  MICM,  and  National  Disability 
Council (CONADIS), UNDP will leverage the Gender and the Inclusion Seals to mainstream 
gender  and  equity  in public and private  sectors  to remove  barriers  to  labour  inclusion  for 
women,  youth,  and  people  living  with  disabilities  and/or  in  poverty.  UNDP  will  support 
Dominican Export and Investment Center (PRODOMINICANA) and the National Council 
for  Competitiveness  (CNC)  to  increase  competitiveness,  promote  exports  and  attract 
investments. 
37.  Jointly  with  MEPyD,  MICM,  Ministry  of  Finance,  General  Budget  Directorate 
(DIGEPRES),  National  Council  of  Private  Enterprise  (CONEP),  and  Public-Private 
Alliances Directorate, UNDP will develop data and innovative tools to increase financing for 
development. UNDP technical assistance and advocacy will foster whole-of-society action 
to accelerate the achievement of the SDGs. 
6/16 
22-27503 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
38.  UNDP will provide technical and operational support to the National Council on MSME 
Promotion,  Ministry  of  Women  and  companies  to  enhance  MSME  productivity, 
competitiveness,  sustainability  and  resilience,  focusing  on  women-owned  enterprises  and 
priority  sectors  such  as  tourism  and  agroindustry.  UNDP  will  strengthen  the  digital 
capabilities of entrepreneurs to increase their productivity, resilience and sustainability and 
spearhead innovative methods and tools like investment maps and ‘In Motion’.  
Climate change, risks and environmental sustainability 
39.  In line with END-2030 priority on sustainable production and consumption culture, this 
outcome  complements  Outcome  2  by  addressing  the  high  environmental  impact  and 
socioeconomic  repercussions  of  the  existing  economic  model  and  the  fossil-based  energy 
matrix;  insufficient  mitigation,  adaptation  and  resilience  to  climate  change,  weak 
multidimensional and gender-responsive risk management, and urban vulnerability. UNDP 
will  target  barriers  caused  by  institutional  capacity  gaps  for  the  effective  application  of 
normative and regulatory frameworks at sector and territory levels, limited gender, human 
rights  and  territory  vision  in  climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation  instruments,  and 
insufficient  funds  for  comprehensive  risk  management,  climate  change  mitigation  and 
adaptation, and sustainable management of natural resources.  
40.  The  theory  of  change  posits  that  IF  climate  action  is  accelerated,  production  and 
consumption  patterns  are  sustainable,  inclusive  and  gender-responsive,  natural  capital  is 
protected, and resilience to risks is increased in a gender-responsive and inclusive manner, 
THEN people and institutions better manage ecosystems threats, disasters and climate risks, 
contributing to an inclusive and sustainable economic model. 
41.  UNDP will provide technical and operational support and innovative digital solutions to 
the ministries of environment and agriculture, the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM), 
MEPyD, the Ministry of Tourism (MITUR), and the National Council for Climate Change 
and  Clean  Development  Mechanism  (CNCCMDL)  to  foster  the  implementation  of,  and 
revisions to, the nationally determined contributions . Partnering with local communities and 
municipalities  for  climate  change  adaptation  and mitigation, UNDP will  focus on  people-
centered climate change solutions and increase their agency for climate action and transition 
towards a renewable energy matrix.  
42.  UNDP will support the transition toward a blue and green economy by strengthening the 
capacities of key public and private sector institutions National Association of Hotels and 
Restaurants  (ASONAHORES),  CONEP,  and  National  Network  of  Business  Support  for 
Environmental Protection (ECORED) for sustainable consumption and production. UNDP 
will  develop  gender-responsive  innovative  solutions  for  conserving  natural  capital  and 
biodiversity, contributing know-how, data, and mobilizing green financing. 
43.  UNDP will strengthen the capacities of national and local institutions and high-risk urban 
and rural communities to increase their resilience to risks. UNDP will develop technological 
tools for integrated and inclusive national and local risk management, and support innovative 
data collection and management solutions for disaster risk management and early warning 
and recovery, including geo-reference and satellite mapping. 
Human rights, citizen security and institutions 
44.  Outcome 4 underpins  all outcomes  and,  together  with Outcome 1  supports  the END-
2030  priority  of  achieving  a  social  and  democratic  state  governed  by  the  rule  of  law  by 
targeting  institutional  inefficiencies,  including  limited  accountability,  transparency  and 
efficiency, scarce participation and social cohesion, manifestations of violence and human 
rights violations, and limited access to justice. 
45.  The theory of change states that IF institutions are transparent, accountable, effective, 
gender-responsive and respond to people’s needs, participation mechanisms are enhanced, 
7/16 
22-27503 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
and citizen security and access to justice are improved, THEN people will enjoy their right 
to participation and protection in an inclusive, efficient and accountable democratic state. 
46.  UNDP  will  partner  with  state  institutions,  including  the  ministries  of  the  presidency 
(MINPRE), foreign  affairs  and public  administration, MEPyD,  the Government Office on 
Information  and  Communication  Technologies  (OGTIC),  National  Ethics  Directorate  and 
local  governments  for 
transparent,  accountable  and  efficient  results-based  public 
management. UNDP will enhance public sector innovation and digital ecosystems, including 
information  management  systems  for  evidence-based  decision-making  while  fostering 
inclusive public services to improve citizens’ access to services and information. 
47.  UNDP will support state mechanisms for effective, participatory, inclusive and gender-
responsive governance to accelerate the achievement of the SDGs, improve social cohesion, 
and  fight  discrimination.  UNDP  will  partner  with  national  and  local  institutions  and  civil 
society to support the government territorial development agenda and build multi-stakeholder 
mechanisms and spaces for citizen participation and leadership focusing on women, youth, 
and people living with disabilities and/or in poverty and exclusion. 
48.  Working  with the  Judiciary, Ministry of Interior  and  Police  (MIP), Public  Attorney’s 
Office,  Ombudsman,  and  municipal  gender  and  security  committees,  UNDP  will  develop 
innovative solutions and data to improve citizen security and eliminate gender-based violence 
(GBV) and discrimination. UNDP will provide technical, operational and policy support to 
remove  barriers  to  access  to  justice  and  political  participation  of  women,  minorities  and 
vulnerable groups. 
III.  Programme and risk management  
49.  This  country  programme  document  outlines  UNDP’s  contributions  to  national  results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed 
in  the  organizational  Programme  and  Operations  Policies  and  Procedures  and  Internal 
Control Framework. 
50.  The  programme  will  be  nationally  executed.  If  necessary,  national  execution  may  be 
replaced  by  direct  execution  for  part  or  all  of  the  programme  to  enable  response  to  force 
majeure. Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT), will be used in a coordinated 
fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications  for  programme  and  development  effectiveness  will  be  charged  to  the 
concerned projects. 
51.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MIREX) is the political counterpart and international 
cooperation manager, and the government technical coordinating agency is MEPyD. National 
and subnational authorities identified in the UNSDCF are implementing partners.  
52.  The programme is safeguarded through rigorous risk management in compliance with 
the Enterprise Risk Management policy and a range of early warning instruments, including 
monitoring  of  the  political,  socio-economic  and  pandemic  situation  and  risks,  Social  and 
Environmental Standards, and the Accountability Mechanism.  
53.  Main  risks  identified  in  the  UNSDCF  and  Country  Programme  Document  include  a 
change in government and/or development priorities, limited external aid flows characteristic 
of UMICs, environmental, economic and epidemiological shocks, and social investments that 
are not focused on impact. UNDP risk mitigation strategies serve as opportunities for testing 
new  solutions  and  addressing  capacities,  knowledge  and  financial  gaps  while  adjusting 
programme priorities. 
8/16 
22-27503 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
54.  Together with national and international stakeholders, UNDP will leverage South-South 
and Triangular cooperation and public-private partnerships to diversify funding sources and 
to innovate. Climate and environmental risks affecting the socio-economic dynamics of the 
country  will  be  addressed  through  multi-actor  governance  responses  using  prevention, 
preparedness,  and  recovery  strategies  and  solutions  tested  during  the  pandemic  and  other 
disasters. 
55.  A potential lack of ownership and resistance to change caused by limited social cohesion 
offers  an  opportunity  to  engage  local  governments  and  communities.  Programmatic  and 
operational risks caused by digital inequality and exclusion of women and vulnerable groups, 
limited  digital  infrastructure,  open  government  and  connectivity  will  be  translated  into  a 
robust  digitalization  and  institutional  strengthening  strategy.  Lack  of  quality  data  will  be 
addressed by strengthening national data generation and analysis capacities. 
56.  UNDP will establish a grievance mechanism for staff, stakeholders and beneficiaries and 
activate  a  Stakeholder  Engagement  Plan  as  a  social  and  environmental  mitigation 
mechanism.  UNDP  Quality  Assurance  mechanisms  will  ensure  the  voices  of  the  most 
vulnerable and excluded are integrated into programme implementation. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation 
57.  UNDP  policy  and  quality  criteria  will  be  applied  to  monitor  and  evaluate  country 
programme  interventions.  To  ensure  national  ownership  of  processes  and  results,  foster 
learning  and  accountability,  inform  public  policies,  and  strengthen  national  capacities  for 
evidence-based  decision-making,  UNDP  will  conduct  periodic  performance  reviews  and 
annual  report  dissemination  in  coordination  with  MIREX  and  MEPyD,  and  engage 
stakeholders in monitoring and evaluation efforts, data generation, and analysis. 
58.  Appropriate UNSDCF and programme indicators will assess progress towards outcomes 
using official data sources from national and international statistics and reports, databases of 
projects, state institutions, academia, and civil society. Indicators disaggregated by sex, age, 
the 
geographic  location  and  other  variables  will  be  collected  and  entered 
programme/project database annually. 
into 
59.  UNDP will use gender analysis, gender marker, and gender-responsive indicators to plan 
and  monitor  gender-related  investments  and  results  and  allocate  at  least  3  per  cent  of  the 
programme budget to projects to cover monitoring, evaluation and communication expenses. 
60.  Evaluations will follow UNSDCF and programme evaluation plans, UNDP evaluation 
policy, and United Nations Evaluation Group guidelines in agreement with the government. 
In coordination with MEPyD, UNDP will strengthen national data generation and monitoring 
and evaluation capacities to build robust evidence. 
 
9/16 
22-27503 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for the Dominican Republic (2023-2027) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Pillar 2 - Society with rights and equal opportunities. 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP UNSDCF Outcome 1: The State strengthens a comprehensive response to the reduction of poverty and inequalities with a 
multidimensional, rights, gender equality and territorial approach, leaving no one behind. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 - No one left behind, centering on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human 
development 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S) 
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY 
OF DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including 
indicators, baselines targets) 
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS 
FRAMEWORKS 
ESTIMATED COST 
BY OUTCOME ($) 
Output 1.1.: Stakeholder capacities 
strengthened to design, implement, monitor 
and evaluate inclusive, equitable and 
sustainable public policies.  
Regular 
$215,000 
Ministries: MINPRE, 
MEPyD, Education, Health, Women 
and Labour 
National Statistics Office (ONE) 
Social Cabinet  
INAIPI 
Local governments 
Civil society 
Private sector 
United Nations 
World Bank 
Indicator 1a: Proportion of the 
population living in monetary general 
and extreme poverty. 
MEPyD 
Annual 
 
Other 
$69,844,000 
 
 
Baseline (2021):  
Monetary general poverty 
National: 23.85% 
Men:21.80% 
Women:25.75% 
Urban:23.70% 
Rural:24.70% 
NNA:33.1% 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.1.: Number of innovative 
tools developed to integrate inclusion, 
equity and sustainability in public 
policies. 
Baseline (2022): 6 
Target (2027): 10 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monetary extreme poverty 
National:3.06% 
Men:3.32% 
Women:3.38% 
Urban:2.90% 
Rural:3.60% 
NNA:4.8% 
 
 
 
• 
Indicator 1.1.2.: Number of initiatives 
implemented to guarantee inclusion, 
equity and sustainability of public 
services. 
Baseline (2022): 4 
Target (2027): 6 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Administrator of Social Subsidies 
Annual 
 
 
 
Target (2025):  
National monetary poverty:18.8% 
National extreme poverty: 2.0%  
 
• 
Indicator 1.1.3.: Number of people 
with digital access and capabilities. 
Baseline (2022): 1,400,000 
Target (2027): 1,900,000 
Source: UNDP, Ministry of Education, 
Ministry of Labour 
Frequency: Annual 
 
IRRF Outcome 2, Indicator 2 
Proportion of population covered by at 
least one social protection benefit, 
disaggregated by sex 
 
Baseline (2021): 43.9% 
Target (2027): 50% 
 
Output 1.2.: Vulnerable groups equipped 
with participatory and inclusive solutions for 
empowerment, promotion of human rights 
and social transformations. 
 
 
10/16 
22-27503 
 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
Indicator 1.2.1.: Number of 
mechanisms installed to ensure human 
rights approach in access to services. 
Baseline (2022): 4 
Target (2027): 10 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
• 
 
• 
Indicator 1.2.2.: Number of measures 
developed for the empowerment of 
people and engagement of grassroots 
and volunteer groups for social 
transformation. 
Baseline (2022): 8 
Target (2027): 10 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
• 
Indicator 1.2.3.: Number of men and 
women benefiting from spaces for 
empowerment in human rights. 
Baseline (2022): Total: 500 
Target (2027): Total: 800 
Men: 300 
Women:500 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Output 1.3.: Social Security and Protection 
System strengthened to promote gender 
equality, inclusion, universality, and 
resilience. 
 
Indicator 1.3.1.: Number of initiatives 
expanding access to social protection 
systems for women and vulnerable 
groups. Baseline (2022): 4 
Target (2027): 8 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
• 
 
Indicator 1.3.2.: Number of initiatives 
for the implementation and expansion 
of a national care system. 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 4 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
• 
11/16 
22-27503 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Pillar 2 - Society with rights and equal opportunities; Pillar 3 - Territorially and sectorally integrated, innovative, diversified, plural, quality-oriented and 
environmentally sustainable economy. 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP UNSDCF Outcome 3: The population, with an emphasis on women, youth and other groups in vulnerable situations, has 
greater access to inclusive opportunities for productive employment, decent work and sustainable and resilient livelihoods, in a context of economic and digital transformation that drives greater 
productivity, competitiveness and innovation, without leaving any territory behind. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 - Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions.  
IRRF Tier 1, 4: Annual growth rate of 
real GDP per employed person (%) 
Baseline (2019): 2.31% 
Target (2027): 3.55% 
MEPyD 
Regular 
$214,000 
Ministries of Finance, Women, 
Labour 
MEPyD 
MICM 
OGTIC 
CONEP 
Association of Industries of the 
Dominican Republic 
Export and Investment Center of the 
Dominican Republic 
DIGEPRES 
PRODOMINICANA 
CNC 
Public and private sector  
Private banks 
United Nations 
Output 2.1.: Employment-related public and 
private institutions strengthened to 
mainstream gender and inclusion.  
 
 
Other 
$23,437,000 
 
 
 
 
• 
Indicator 2.1.1.: Number of public and 
private institutions recognized/certified 
under the GES and inclusion seal. 
Baseline (2022): 215 
Target (2027): 415 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 3b: Unemployment rate, by 
sex and age  
Baseline (2020):  
Women: 8.7 %, Men:3.9 % 
15 to 24 years: 14 % 
25 and over: 4 % 
Target (2027): TBD 
Central Bank of the Dominican Republic 
MEPyD 
SDG Portal 
Annual 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.2.: Number of measures 
to make visible and tackle structural and 
cultural barriers to labour inclusion of 
women and vulnerable groups. 
Baseline (2022): 3 
Target (2027): 5 
Source: UNDP, Ministry of Labour 
Frequency: Annual 
 
• 
 
 
Output  2.2.:  Public  and  private  institutions 
enhance  investment  and  financing  for  the 
SDGs. 
 
Indicator 2.2.1.: Number of 
mechanisms developed for 
public/private investment and SDG 
financing. 
Baseline (2022): 1 
Target (2027): 3 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
• 
 
Output 2.3.: MSMEs equipped with policies 
and 
increased  productivity, 
competitiveness, sustainability and resilience.  
tools 
for 
 
Indicator 2.3.1.: Number of measures 
fostering productivity, competitiveness, 
resilience, sustainability and gender-
• 
 
12/16 
22-27503 
 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
responsiveness of MSMEs in the 
prioritized economic sectors. 
Baseline (2022): 8 
Target (2027): 10 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 2.3.2.: Number of men and 
women with strengthened digital skills 
for sustainable competitiveness. 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 3,000 
Men: 1,800 
Women:1,200 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
• 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Pillar 4 - Society with sustainable consumption and production culture 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP UNSDCF Outcome 4: People, communities, national and local institutions, and strategic sectors manage disaster risk with a 
multidimensional approach, face the challenges of climate change and promote the sustainable management of ecosystems and urban and rural human settlements, in a resilient, inclusive environment, 
with gender equality, responsible with the planet and future generations. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 - Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk 
Indicator 4d: Total annual GHG 
emissions. 
Baseline (2015): 34,486.03 Greenhouse 
gas-Carbon dioxide equivalent 
(GgCO2eq) 
Target (2025): 32,634.80 GgCO2eq 
National GHG Effect Inventory  
Biennial Transparency Report 
Output 3.1.: Public institutions strengthened 
with new mechanisms to accelerate climate 
action. 
Regular 
$215,000 
Ministry of Environment 
Ministry of Agriculture 
MEPyD 
MEM 
MITUR 
ASONAHORES 
CONEP 
ECORED 
CNCCMDL  
National Emergency Committee 
Municipalities 
Civil society 
Private sector 
United Nations 
 
 
Other 
$41,019,000 
 
 
 
• 
Indicator 3.1.1.: Number of inclusive 
and gender-responsive instruments and 
digital solutions for the implementation 
of nationally determined contributions. 
Baseline (2021): 3 
Target (2027): 8 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 4e: Forest area as a 
proportion of the total area. 
Baseline (2021): Forest area including 
cocoa and coffee 42.8 % 
Not including cocoa and coffee 37.7 % 
Target (2025): 44 %, including coffee 
and cocoa (PPSP 2021-2024) 
National Forestry Inventory 
 
 
• 
Indicator 3.1.2.: Number of men and 
women benefiting from local climate 
change adaptation and mitigation 
solutions. 
Baseline (2021): Men: 1,923, Women: 
1,318 
Target (2027): Men: 4,723, Women: 
3,318 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
13/16 
22-27503 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
Output  3.2.:  Public  and  private  sectors 
equipped with solutions for protecting natural 
capital  to  transition  to  a  green  and  blue 
economy. 
 
• 
Indicator 3.2.1.: Metric tonnes (mT) of 
Substances controlled by the Montreal 
Protocol. 
Baseline (2019): 2606.72 mT 
Target (2027): 2251.6078 mT 
Source: HPMP III Plan; Kigali strategic 
proposal 
Frequency: Biannual 
 
• 
Indicator 3.2.2.: Number of initiatives 
developed to strengthen stakeholder 
capabilities for responsible production 
and consumption. 
Baseline (2021): 6 
Target (2027): 10 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
• 
Indicator 3.2.3.: Number of hectares 
(ha) managed with sustainable 
production practices 
Baseline (2021): 6,470 ha 
Target (2027): 14,470 ha 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
• 
Indicator 3.2.4.: Number of gender-
responsive initiatives contributing to 
conserving natural capital and 
biodiversity. 
Baseline (2021): 25 
Target (2027): 45 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Output 3.3.: Public and private institutions 
have more robust capacities for the 
comprehensive and inclusive management of 
risks and crises/shocks. 
 
• 
Indicator 3.3.1.: Number of tools 
contributing to gender-responsive risk 
management and recovery preparedness 
at the national or local levels. 
Baseline (2020): 12 
 
14/16 
22-27503 
 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
Target (2027): 17 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
• 
Indicator 3.3.2.: Number of 
participatory gender-responsive 
initiatives to increase local resilience 
against climate and disaster risks. 
Baseline (2019): 1 
Target (2027): 3 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY: Pillar 1 - A social and democratic governed by the rule of law 
COOPERATION  FRAMEWORK  OUTCOME  INVOLVING  UNDP  UNSDCF  Outcome  6:  The  State  strengthens  democratic  governance  and  citizen  participation,  promotes  efficient  and 
transparent public management, improves equal access to justice, and combats corruption and organized crime throughout the territory. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 - Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions 
World Economic Forum 
Annual 
Indicator 6a: Institutional Strength 
Index (ISI) (values from 1 to 100, the 
higher the number, the greater 
institutional strength). 
Baseline (2019): 50.1 
Target (2025): 56.4 
Output 4.1.: Public administration system 
strengthened for transparent, accountable, 
and effective management. 
Regular 
$214,000 
Ministries of finance, education, 
women, labour, and police  
Local governments 
Legislature  
National Accountability Office  
National Migration Council 
National Council for Children and 
Adolescents  
CONADIS 
National Council on Elderly  
Political parties 
Civil society 
Private sector 
United Nations 
 
Other 
$29,842,000 
 
 
 
• 
Indicator 4.1.1.: Number of institutions 
with information management systems 
for transparency and evidence-based 
decision-making. 
Baseline (2021): 10 
Target (2027): 20 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
Central Electoral board (JCE) 
Annual 
Indicator 6d: Percentage of 
Dominicans participating in general 
elections: 
a) Presidential, senatorial and provincial 
level 
b) Municipal level 
Baseline:  
a) 55.29 % 
b) 49.14 % 
Target (2027): 
a) 70% 
b) At least 55% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Indicator 4.1.2.: Number of inclusive 
digital public services to facilitate 
access for the citizenry. 
Baseline (2021): 1 
Target (2027): 10 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JCE (a,b,c,d), Central American 
Parliament (PARLACEN) 
Annual 
Indicator 6c. Percentage of women 
elected in public positions (IRRF Tier 
Two, Outcome 1, Indicator 4): 
Baseline (2021): 
a) Mayoresses (12.03%) 
b) Alderwomen (30.24%) 
c) Senators (12.50%) 
d) National deputies (24.72%) 
e) Territorial deputies (0%) 
 
Output 4.2.: Institutional mechanisms 
improved for effective, participatory, 
inclusive and gender-responsive governance 
to accelerate SDG achievement. 
 
• 
Indicator 4.2.1.: Number of measures 
facilitating territorial development 
planning for the SDGs. 
15/16 
22-27503 
 
DP/DCP/DOM/4 
 
 
f) Deputies to the PARLACEN (20%) 
Baseline (2021): 3 
Target (2027): 5  
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Target (2025): 
a) Mayoresses (41.50%) 
b) Alderwomen (41.50%) 
c) Senators (41.50%) 
d) National deputies (41.50%) 
e) Territorial deputies (TBD) 
f) Deputies to the PARLACEN (TBD) 
 
• 
Indicator 4.2.2.: Number of multi-
stakeholder mechanisms promoting 
citizen participation for inclusive 
governance. 
Baseline (2022): 13 
Target (2027): 18 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
• 
Indicator 4.2.3.: Number of people 
benefitting from participation and 
leadership spaces, emphasizing women 
and vulnerable groups (LGBTIQ+, 
migrants, youth, etc.). 
Baseline (2022): 11,412 
Target (2022): 15,000 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Output 4.3.: Public sector equipped with 
innovative solutions for the improved rule of 
law, political participation, justice and citizen 
security. 
 
• 
Indicative Indicator 4.3.1.: Number of 
initiatives to remove barriers to access 
to justice and political participation of 
women and vulnerable groups. 
Baseline (2022): 5 
Target (2027): 10 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
• 
Indicator 4.3.2.: Number of tools to 
improve citizen security and eliminate 
GBV and discrimination against 
vulnerable groups. 
Baseline (2021): 3 
Target (2027): 6 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
16/16 
22-27503 
