 
 
 
 
Draft National 
Energy Policy 
NITI Aayog, 
Government of India 
 
Version as on 27.06.2017 
0 
 
NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
CONTENTS 
Chapter 1 
Preamble 
Page 1 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
Objectives 
Page 4 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
Energy Demand 
Page 10 
 
 
 
Box 1 
Rural Electrification 
Page 17 
Box 2 
Clean Cooking Access 
Page 19 
Box 3 
Grid Integration of Renewable Energy 
Page 23 
 
 
 
Energy Supply 
 
 
Fossil Fuel Based Energy Sources 
 
 
Chapter 4 
Oil and Gas 
Page 27 
Chapter 5 
Coal 
Page 34 
 
Non Fossil Fuel Based Energy Sources 
 
Chapter 6 
Renewables 
Page 41 
Chapter 7 
Nuclear 
Page 47 
Chapter 8 
Page 51 
Electricity 
 
 
 
 
Facilitating Mechanisms 
 
Chapter 9 
Regulators 
Page 60 
Chapter 10 
Infrastructure 
Page 64 
Chapter 11 
Human Resource Development 
Page 68 
Chapter 12 
Technology and Research & Development 
Page 72 
Chapter 13 
Overseas Engagements 
Page 76 
 
 
 
Chapter 14 
Air Quality 
Page 80 
 
 
 
Chapter 15 
India Vision 2040 
Page 85 
 
 
 
Annex 
NITI Ambition Scenario 2040 
Page 90 
1 
 
List of Tables:  
  Table 1 – Energy Demand  
  Table 2 – Renewable Energy Integration and Efficient Grid Operation Strategies  
  Table 3 – Domestic Production of different Fuels in India  
  Table 4 – Energy Demand  
  Table 5 – Segregation of Energy Demand by Fuel  
  Table 6 – Electricity Demand 
  Table 7 – Share of Electricity in Energy Demand  
  Table 8 – Demand for different Hydrocarbons 
  Table 9 – Domestic Production of Hydrocarbons 
  Table 10 – Electricity Capacity 
  Table 11 – Primary Energy Supply 
  Table 12 – Electricity Generation 
  Table 13 – Conversion Factors 
 
List of Figures: 
  Figure 1 – Trend of Domestic Coal Production in India 
  Figure 2 – GDP Trajectory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a 
 
NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
List of Abbreviations 
 
Air Conditioners 
AC 
Average Cost of Supply 
ACS 
Accelerated Depreciation 
AD 
Business As Usual 
BAU 
Billion Cubic Metres 
BCM 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
BEE 
Compounded Annual Growth Rate 
CAGR 
Cross Border Electricity Trade 
CBET 
Coal Bed Methane 
CBM 
Carbon Capture and Storage 
CCS 
Central Electricity Authority 
CEA 
City Gas Distribution 
CGD 
Coal India Limited 
CIL 
Central Mine Planning and Design Institute 
CMPDI 
Carbon Dioxide 
CO2 
Concentrated Solar Power 
CSP 
Coal to Liquid 
CTL 
Chief Technical Officer 
CTO 
Direct Benefit Transfer 
DBT 
Direct Benefit Transfer – Liquefied Petroleum Gas  
DBT-L                                           
Decentralized Distributed Generation 
DDG 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Jyoti Yojana 
DDUGJY 
Domestic Efficient Lighting Programme 
DELP 
Dimethyl Ether 
DME 
Demand Side Reduction 
DSR 
Department of Science and Technology 
DST 
Exploration and Production 
E&P 
Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
EESL 
Energy Service Company 
ESCO 
Electric Vehicles 
EV 
Fast Breeder Reactor 
FBR 
b 
 
NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
Fuel Supply Agreement  
FSA 
Gas Authority of India Limited 
GAIL 
Gross Domestic Product 
GDP 
Greenhouse Gas  
GHG 
Geological Survey of India  
GSI 
Human Development Index 
HDI 
Heavy Duty Vehicle 
HDV 
High Efficiency Low Emission 
HELE 
Human Resource Development 
HRD 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
IAEA 
Indian Bureau of Mines 
IBM  
International Energy Agency 
IEA 
India Energy Security Scenarios 
IESS 
Integrated Gas Combined Cycle 
IGCC 
Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited 
IREDA 
Kilogram of Oil Equivalent 
Kgoe 
Kilo Watt Hours 
kWh 
Levelized Cost of Electricity 
LCOE 
Light Duty Vehicle 
LDV 
Light Emitting Diode 
LED 
Liquefied Natural Gas  
LNG 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
LPG 
Light Water Reactor 
LWR 
Million Barrel of Oil Equivalent 
Mboe 
Mine Developer cum Operator 
MDO 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
MoEF&CC 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
MoPNG 
Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation 
MoSPI 
Million Tons of Coal Equivalent 
Mtce 
Million Tons of Oil Equivalent 
Mtoe 
Mega Watts 
MW 
National Action Plan on Climate Change 
NAPCC 
Nationally Determining Contributions 
NDCs 
c 
 
NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
New Exploration Licensing Policy 
                 NELP 
National Energy Policy 
NEP 
Non-Governmental Organization 
NGO 
National Institute of Solar Energy 
NISE 
National Institute of Wind Energy 
NIWE 
National Mission on Clean Cooking 
NMCC 
National Mission on Enhanced Energy Agency 
NMEEE 
Non-motorized transport 
NMT 
National Oil Company 
NOC 
Nuclear Power Corporation of Indian Ltd. 
NPCIL 
National Research Development Corporation 
NRDC 
National Sample Survey 
NSS 
National Thermal Power Corporation 
NTPC 
Open Acreage Licensing Policy 
OALP 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
OECD 
Oil Industry Development Board 
OIDB 
Oil Marketing Companies 
OMC 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
ONGC 
Perform, Achieve and Trade 
PAT 
Petroleum Conservation Research Association 
PCRA 
Power Grid Corporation of India 
PGCIL 
Pressurized Heavy Water Reactor 
PHWR 
Plant Load Factor 
PLF 
Prime Minister Ujjwala Yojana 
PMUY 
Piped Natural Gas 
PNG 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
PNGRB 
Power Purchase Agreements 
PPA 
Public Private Partnership 
PPP 
Public Sector Undertaking 
PSU 
Public Works Department 
PWD 
Research and Development 
R&D 
R&R                    Resettlement & Rehabilitation 
Renewable Energy 
                  RE 
d 
 
NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
Renewable Energy Service Company 
RESCO 
Renewable Purchase Obligation 
RPO 
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
SAARC 
State Nodal Agency 
SDA 
Solar Energy Corporation of India 
SECI 
State Electricity Regulatory Commission 
SERC 
Sport Utility Vehicles 
SUVs 
Transmission and Distribution 
T&D 
Telecommunication Engineering Centre 
TEC 
Terwatt Hour 
TWh 
Ujwal Discom Assurance Yojana 
UDAY 
Urban Local Bodies 
ULB 
Ultra Mega Power Project 
UMPP 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
UNFCCC 
United States of America 
US 
Viability Gap Funding 
VGF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e 
 
NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
Chapter 1 
Preamble 
1.1 
Energy  is  acknowledged  as  a  key  input  towards  raising  the  standard  of  living  of 
citizens  of  any  country,  as  is  evident  from  the  correlation  between  per  capita 
electricity  (a  proxy  for  all  energy  forms)  consumption  and  Human  Development 
Index (HDI). Accordingly, energy policies of India have over the years directly aimed 
to raise per capita energy (and electricity) consumption, even while the main focus of 
the  country’s  development  agenda  has  been  on  eradication  of  poverty.    With  nearly 
304  million  Indians without access  to  electricity, and  about  500 million people, still 
dependent  on  solid  bio-mass  for  cooking,  it  may  be  acknowledged  that  the  country 
has to still go a long way on securing its energy security objective. While India strives 
to  achieve  a  double  digit  growth  rate  in  its  national  income,  making  clean  energy 
available to all of its citizens, ought to be included as a key component of the poverty 
alleviation programmes. 
 
1.2 
The  National  Energy  Policy  (NEP)  aims  to  chart  the  way  forward  to  meet  the 
Government’s  recent  bold  announcements  in  the  energy  domain.  All  the  Census 
villages  are  planned  to  be  electrified  by  2018,  and  universal  electrification  is  to  be 
achieved, with 24x7 electricity by 2022. The share of manufacturing in our GDP is to 
go  up  to  25%  from  the  present  level  of  16%,  while  the  Ministry  of  Petroleum  is 
targeting  reduction  of  oil  imports  by  10%  from  2014-15  levels,  both  by  2022.  Our 
NDCs  target  at  reduction  of  emissions  intensity  by  33%-35%  by  2030  over  2005, 
achieving a 175 GW renewable energy capacity by 2022, and share of non-fossil fuel 
based capacity in the electricity mix is aimed at above 40% by 2030. In view of the 
fact, that energy is handled by different Ministries that have the primary responsibility 
of setting their own sectoral agenda, an omnibus policy is required to achieve the goal 
of energy security through coordination between these sources. This is also expected 
to mainstream emerging energy technologies, and provide  consumer energy choices. 
The  NEP  builds  on  the  achievements  of  the  earlier  omnibus  energy  policy  –  the 
Integrated Energy Policy (IEP), and sets the new agenda consistent with the redefined 
role of emerging developments in the energy world. 
 
1.3 
A  number  of  far-reaching  developments  have  taken  place  in  the  local  and  global 
energy space which have to be reflected in our own policy framework. There is a need 
to  support  the  trends  which  usher  in  efficiency  by  a  pro-active  policy.  While  steps 
have already been taken by the Government to embed many such developments in the 
sectoral  energy  policies,  however,  it  is  desirable  to  develop  a  clear  roadmap  so  that 
there  is  clarity  amongst  all  the  stakeholders  on  the  Government’s  long-term  energy 
agenda. Long term investors, both on supply and demand sides, need clarity on stable 
energy policy outlook. The following global developments call for policy clarity: 
 
 
1 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
1.3.1 Changes in the energy mix 
The world is moving away from overwhelming dependence on fossil fuel, and 
within the fossil fuels, away from coal and oil in favour of gas. Against an 88% 
total share of fossil fuels globally in the primary energy mix in the year 2005, 
the same fell to 86% in the year 2015.  The share of oil has in particular fallen 
from 36% to 33%, while that of natural gas has increased from 23% to 24%, and 
that of Renewable Energy (including nuclear and large hydro) has gone up from 
12.5%  to14%  in  the  period  2005-15.  The  above  trends,  principally  owing  to 
climate change concerns, are expected to be maintained over the medium term. 
 
 
1.3.2 Abundance in supply of natural gas  
The  success  of  horizontal  drilling  combined  with  the  technology  of  hydraulic 
fracture, has come to be established in the US where the production of natural 
gas went up from 511 BCM in 2005 to 767 BCM in 2015. This has boosted the 
already rising production of natural gas in the world from 2791 BCM in 2005 to 
3539 BCM in the year 2015. As the price of gas is lower than that of oil, and is 
also one-third lesser as carbon emitting than oil, the ascendency of gas vis-a-vis 
oil is likely to continue in the near foreseeable future. 
 
 
1.3.3 Over supplied oil and gas markets   
Due to multiple reasons including the two factors listed above, along with other 
commodity prices, oil and gas prices have softened, and this is triggering energy 
policy reforms  across the world. The prices of oil and gas have fallen by 50% 
and 70%, respectively over 2014. Many oil importing countries including India 
have  been  able  to  attempt  bold  petroleum  pricing  reforms,  and  are  in  a  sound 
fiscal position to attempt larger energy policy reforms. 
 
 
1.3.4 Maturity of renewable energy technologies  
The  sharp  decline  in  the  prices  of  wind  and  solar  technologies  in  the  recent 
years  by  about  60%  and  52%  respectively  between  2010  and  2015  (in  kWh 
terms),  has  led  to  a  change  in  the  relative  importance  of  energy  sources. 
Tropical  countries,  including  India,  are  richly  endowed  with  the  above 
resources,  and  can  harness  them  in  an  innovative  manner  to  meet  energy 
requirements  at  decentralised  locations.  In  the  recent  auctions,  solar  and  wind 
energy prices have achieved bus bar grid parity at the generation end. 
 
 
1.3.5 Climate change concerns 
The  adverse  effects  of  climate  change  are  much  more  discernible  than  ever 
before, with a better understanding of the relationship between energy use and 
poor environmental outcomes. While the global agenda is of common concern, 
there is a heightened consciousness of the need to fix poor air quality standards 
in  Indian  cities,  which  is  being  reflected  in  tough  administrative  actions  and 
court mandated orders. 
 
2 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4 
All  the  above  developments  offer  a  challenge  to  the  existing  energy  pathways,  and 
also  offer  an  opportunity  to  respond  by  building  in  sustainability  in  the  new  energy 
infrastructure.  There is a raging debate as to whether the latter could be developed in 
a  more  decentralised  manner.    Whether  or  not  the  past  global  practice  of  large 
generation  plants  with  capital  intensive  evacuation/transmission  infrastructures,  can 
now  be  better  done  with  low  cost  decentralised  solutions,  the  new  energy  pathways 
must  be  enabled  to  accept  decentralised  solutions.    As  per  the  energy  modelling 
exercise undertaken by the NITI  Aayog  —  India Energy Security Scenarios (IESS), 
2047, the energy  demand of  India is  likely to  go up by  2.7-3.2  times between 2012 
and 2040, with the electricity component itself rising 4.5 fold (Annex 1).  India has an 
opportunity to incorporate emerging technologies in the new infrastructure, to be able 
to exploit these technologies as they mature and costs falls. 
 
1.5 
In  the  light  of  the  energy  challenges  faced  by  the  country,  and  the  global  energy 
related developments, the NEP proposes to set out the national energy objectives and 
the  strategy  to  meet  them.  The  overall  objectives  have  been  discussed  in  the 
succeeding chapter, which is then followed by a detailed discussion, on how the NEP 
integrates different sources of energy with interventions on demand side, as well as in 
areas such as infrastructure, regulation, technology, etc. While India strives to attain 
energy consumption levels equivalent to those of the developed countries, we are also 
conscious  of  the  present  small  base.  It  is  proposed  that  the  present  policy  may  be 
framed  for  the  medium  term  to  be  able  to  guide  the  investors  and  the  other 
stakeholders,  who  are  likely  to  play  a  major  role  in  the  energy  sector.  During  the 
medium term, we may strengthen the energy infrastructure and aim at scaling up over 
the longer period. Therefore, the medium term time span of the NEP (2017-2040) will 
provide  clarity  to  the  energy  sector  actors,  and  help  lay  the  foundation  for  India  to 
match  the  energy  consumption  parameters  of  developed  countries  over  the  longer 
period. 
The IESS has been used to generate multiple scenarios of the likely energy demand for the 
country up to the year 2040 on a 5 yearly basis.  These have been developed keeping in mind 
energy efficiency, behavioural changes and elasticity of energy demand to GDP.  The above 
exercise has  revealed that  in  2040,  energy demand could  be brought  down  over the default 
scenario  by  17%  by  suitable  interventions.    It  has  also  revealed  that  even  if  efforts  were 
stepped up to enhance domestic energy supply, coupled with heroic effort to reduce energy 
demand, India’s overall primary energy import dependence could still rise to 36-55% by 2040 
from 31% in 2012. The following chapters propose policy action which could help India raise 
its per capita energy consumption from nearly 521 kgoe (2014) to 1055-1184 kgoe in the year 
2040.  The  above  parameters,  would  lead  us  to  meet  the  NDC  goals  of  renewable  energy 
capacity, emission intensity and non-fossil fuel share in the electricity mix of India in the year 
2030. 
 
 
3 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
Four key objectives 
 
2.1 
There  are  four  key  objectives  of  our  energy  policy:  Access  at  affordable  prices, 
Improved  security  and  Independence,  Greater  Sustainability  and  Economic 
Growth.  
 
2.2 
Considering  poverty  and  deprivation  in  India,  access  to  energy  for  all  at  affordable 
prices is of utmost importance. We are yet to provide electricity to nearly 304 million 
people,  and  clean  cooking  fuel  to  nearly  500  million  people,  which  still  depend  on 
Biomass. The policy aims to ensure that electricity reaches every household by 2022 
as promised in the Budget 2015-16 and proposes to provide clean cooking fuel to all 
within a reasonable time. While it is envisaged that financial support will be extended 
to ensure merit consumption to the vulnerable sections, competitive prices will drive 
affordability to meet the above aims. 
 
2.3 
Improved  energy  security,  normally  associated  with  reduced  import  dependence,  is 
also an important goal of the policy. Today, India is heavily dependent on oil and gas 
imports  while  also  importing  coal.  In  so  far  as  imports  may  be  disrupted,  they 
undermine energy security of the country. Energy security may be enhanced through 
both diversification of the sources of imports and increased domestic production and 
reduced requirement of energy. Given the availability of domestic reserves of oil, coal 
and gas and the prospects of their exploitation at competitive prices, there is a strong 
case  for  reduced  dependence  on  imports.  In  due  course,  we  may  also  consider 
building strategic reserves as insurance against imported supplies.  
 
2.4 
The  goal  of  sustainability  acquires  added  importance  and  urgency  in  view  of  the 
threat  of  catastrophic  effects  of  climate  change  as  well  as  the  detrimental  effects  of 
fossil fuel usage on local air quality. In India, sustainability is also closely linked with 
energy  security.  Our  fossil  fuel  requirements,  which  comprise  nearly  90%  of  our 
commercial  primary  energy  supply,  are  increasingly  being  met  by  imports.    This 
means  that  cutting  fossil  fuel  consumption  would  promote  the  twin  goals  of 
sustainability and security.  Hence the policy lays heavy emphasis on de-carbonisation 
through the twin interventions of energy efficiency and renewable energy. 
 
2.5 
Finally,  the  energy  policy  must  also  support  the  goal  of  rapid  economic  growth.  
Efficient energy supplies promote growth in two ways.  First, energy is the lifeblood 
of  the  economy.    It  is  an  important  enabling  factor  of  growth  and  its  availability  at 
competitive  prices  is  critical  to  the  competitiveness  of  energy-intensive  sectors.  
Second,  being  a  vast  sector  in  itself,  its  growth  can  directly  influence  the  overall 
growth  in  the  economy.    For  example,  petroleum  products  have  been  an  important 
4 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
direct  contributor  to  our  growth  in  recent  years  by  attracting  large  investments  in 
refining/distribution, and also fuelling economic activity.  
 
2.6 
In general, these four goals may or may not move in harmony with one another.  We 
noted  above  that  energy  security  and  sustainability  are  mutually  reinforcing  in  our 
case  since  our  energy  imports  are  predominantly  fossil  fuel  based.  Reduction  in 
imports  and  in  emissions  can  both  be  achieved  through  an  expansion  of  renewable 
energy consumption.  On the other hand, as long as fossil fuels remain the cheapest 
source of energy, the goal of energy accessibility at affordable prices would come in 
conflict  with  the  goal  of  sustainability  and  possibly  energy  security  as  well.    Until 
such  time  as  the  costs  of  generating,  transmitting  and  distributing  renewable  energy 
drop sufficiently to allow its delivery to the customer at lower cost than energy from 
fossil  fuel  sources,  a  conflict  is  likely  to  exist  among  the  above  three  objectives. 
Energy efficiency is, however, one goal that reinforces all the four objectives. Hence, 
we  identify  it  as  a  common  area  of  intervention  across  all  demand  sectors  in  the 
Strategy. 
 
2.7 
Having identified the four broad objectives of our energy policy, we need to link them 
to propose actions on the ground.  Figure 1a and 1b provide a schematic division of 
possible areas of intervention.  The areas are classified according to the source (coal, 
oil  gas  or  renewable)  or  form  (electricity)  of  energy  and  the  stage  of  value  chain.  
Stages  of  value  chain  are  divided  into  upstream,  midstream  and  downstream.    For 
example, upstream stage of electricity is generation while midstream and downstream 
stages are transmission and distribution.  Likewise, exploration and production define 
the  upstream  stage  of  oil  while  refining  and  distribution  are  midstream  and 
downstream  stages  of  it.    Final  consumption  is  analysed  according  to  four  major 
consumption sectors: businesses, households, transportation, and agriculture. 
 
2.8 
Our schematic division allows us to identify seven areas of intervention: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Energy Consumption by businesses, households, transportation and agriculture 
Energy Efficiency/de-carbonisation measures on the demand side 
Production and distribution of coal 
Electricity generation, transmission and distribution 
Augmenting  supply  of  oil  and  gas,  both  by  domestic  E&P,  and  through 
acquisition of overseas acreages 
(vi)  Refining and distribution of oil and gas.  
(vii) 
Installation, generation and distribution of renewable energy 
 
2.9 
Our  discussion  of  the  policy  in  the  following  chapters  heavily  relies  on  the  above 
areas of intervention.  
 
2.9.1.  An  important  aspect  of  interventions  in  virtually  all  areas  we  have  identified 
concerns governance, particularly as it relates to pricing and regulatory policies.  
5 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
In  the  past,  insufficient  attention  has  been  paid  to  robust  institutions,  optimal 
pricing  and  regulation  issues  in  India.    The  present  policy  focuses  more 
centrally  on  this  aspect.    There  are  important  gains  to  be  had  from  the 
introduction of well-functioning institutions to enable efficient decision-making, 
pragmatic pricing and regulatory reforms at various stages of value addition in 
the chains associated with different energy sources. 
 
2.9.2.  Energy  efficiency,  which  entails  using  less  energy  for  the  same  service,  is  an 
important  element  in  energy policy.  For  example, the recent  campaign  by the 
government  to  replace  regular bulbs by  LED bulbs  has the potential  to  reduce 
energy load by 20 GW and save  nearly 100 billion kWh worth of energy each 
year  after replacement  of all incandescent  bulbs. The urgency of action on the 
enhancement  of  energy  efficiency  stems  from  the  fact  that  our  CO2  emissions 
and  energy  imports  could  go  up  substantially  in  the  ‘do-nothing’  scenario. 
Improved  energy  efficiency  alone  can  reduce  our  energy  demand  over  BAU 
(business as usual) scenario by 17% in 2040. These projections by India Energy 
Security  Scenario  (IESS)  2047  also  indicate  that  demand  reduction  through 
energy efficiency could be further supplemented by actions on domestic supply. 
Recognizing  the  importance  of  energy  efficiency,  the  policy  addresses  energy 
efficiency in detail in a separate chapter. 
 
2.9.3.  There also remains the issue of time horizon of the policy.  The policy focuses 
on  two  horizons:  a  short  term  horizon  going  up  to  2022  and  a  medium  term 
going all the way up to 2040. The time frame upto 2022 is short enough that it 
allows us to discuss interventions that are required right away while the period 
upto 2040 is long enough to contemplate bolder interventions that are required 
to fully modernize India’s energy sector. 
 
 
2.9.4.  The  objectives  of  the  energy  strategy  are  inextricably  linked  with  those  of  the 
economic policy of the Government. Hence, the complexity of the energy sector 
is  no  less  than  the  national  challenges  of  development  and  growth.  The 
economic transformation of India has to be supported by transformation of the 
energy sector, too. While striving for competitiveness of manufacturing in India, 
even  the  welfare  objectives  have  to  be  expeditiously  met.  In  the  past,  the 
challenge  of  meeting  both  objectives  resulted  in  sacrificing  one  for  the  other. 
Global experience tells us that the two are actually two sides of the same coin, 
and the two are complementary. The NEP aims at efficiently delivering intended 
benefits to vulnerable sections of the society as has been eminently displayed in 
the  energy  sector  itself  (DBT-L),  while  not  making  our  industries  un-
competitive.  Towards  the  above  objective,  the  NEP  draws  heavily  from  the 
country’s economic strategy. 
 
6 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
2.9.5.  The  NEP  proposes  actions  to  meet  the  objectives  in  such  a  way  that  India’s 
economy  is  ‘energy  ready’  in  the  year  2040.  Technological  advancements  and 
global  energy  markets  are  rapidly  changing.  Our  own  bold  economic  reforms, 
which are likely to lead to robust economic growth at double-digit annual rates 
over  the  next  decade,  promise  to  transform  the  way  energy  is  consumed  and 
supplied.  All  four  major  energy-consuming  sectors—industry,  household, 
transport,  and  agriculture—will  undergo  dramatic  changes  in  the  coming 
decades.    On  the  energy  front,  they  should  be  able  to  internalise  volatility  in 
energy  prices,  which  is  often  the  case  when  markets  get  integrated  globally. 
Urbanization is expected to go up to 47%, while current share of manufacturing 
in  the  GDP  will  double  to  30%  by  the  year  2040.    The  population  of  India  is 
predicted to go up to 1.6 billion by 2040. All these developments will result in 
the  energy  demand  increasing  by  2.7-3.2  times  between  years  2012  and  2040.  
The NEP must deliver the energy demanded at all times  to support the desired 
economic outcomes. 
7 
 
NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
Figure 1a: Areas of Supply Sector Intervention 
Robust 
Governance/Regulation, 
 
 
                                                         Upstream                                          Midstream                                 Downstream 
 
Make in India 
 
Enhance refining and distribution through increased infrastructure. 
Determination of fuel prices on market price basis. Achieve 
universal clean cooking coverage through multiple fuel options. 
 Oil & Gas 
 
Enhance E&P with 
adoption of best R&R 
practices. Attract private 
capital by offering a 
stable regime. Institute a 
robust regulatory regime. 
 
 
 
Efficient Transportation & Distribution through better Rail 
infrastructure. Value addition of raw coal through washeries. 
Pursue technologies to establish commerciality of Indian coal 
gasification. 
Increased grid integration of renewables and adoption of battery 
and pumped storage.  Efficient market for uptake of renewable 
electricity. Achieve flexibility in coal power plants. 
CoalCoal 
Coal 
 
 
Enhance capacity and 
generation, including of 
Nuclear power, large hydro, 
biomass and offshore wind. 
Higher adoption of ultra-
super-critical/IGCC. Policy 
support for de-centralised 
generation/CCS. Promote 
uranium exploration. 
 
Renewable Energy 
 
 
Need for a robust Transmission & Distribution Infrastructure, 
efficient Electricity Market and improved financial status of 
DISCOMs. Achieve Universal Electrification. 
Electricity 
 
 
Fostering Cross Border Trade of Petroleum Products and Electricity especially with neighbours (Nepal, 
Bhutan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, China and Pakistan) which would enhance our energy security.  
Cross Border Trade 
 
8 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1b: Areas of Demand Sector Intervention 
 
Robust 
Governance/Regulation 
 
Energy Efficiency/Decarbonisation 
Make in India 
Investment 
Infrastructure 
 
 
More Investment required in efficient 
manufacturing technologies in Cement, 
Iron & Steel etc. 
Higher capex in plants and 
infra for inducting 
efficient technologies  
Roll out PAT cycles and adopt BAT. 
Encourage fuel switching towards 
reduction in solid fuel use by 
electrifying processes.  
 
Industry 
 
 
Investing in induction cookers/LPG 
bottles/efficient biomass cookstoves, 
pellet manufacturing and electricity 
distribution infra to enable shifts to 
cleaner cooking fuels 
Improvement in Efficiency of 
biomass cook stoves and gas stoves. 
Moving towards cleaner fuel 
including electric cook stoves. 
Setting up of refineries and 
pipeline infra for 
delivering 
LPG/electricity/cookstoves 
 
Cooking 
 
 
Electric Charging stations, 
Hydrogen filling stations 
for FCVs and more CNG 
stations. 
Raise CAFÉ standards and move to 
EV and public transport 
 
Investing in manufacturing of efficient 
vehicles/EV/hybrids and higher spends on 
fuel efficient vehicles.  
Transport 
 
 
Improve Energy Efficiency of all 
electrical appliances and apply 
ECBC to all Buildings with high 
energy use including retrofits. Raise 
Thermal Efficiency of Buildings 
Higher investment in buildings and 
domestic appliances with higher energy 
efficiency . 
Enhancing availability of 
better insulation and 
construction materials. 
 
Buildings 
 
 
Laying sub-transmission infra 
for electrification of irrigation 
pumps including solar pumps 
and manufacturing facilities 
for efficient tractors. 
Investment in efficient irrigation pumps 
including solar/electric pumps for 
irrigation. 
Agriculture 
Better efficiency of Pumps and 
Tractors 
9 
 
NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
Chapter 3 
Energy Demand: Efficiency and Conservation  
 
3.1. In relation to its population, India is poorly endowed with energy resources.  Its share in 
the world population is 17% but the shares in the world gas, oil and coal reserves are 
only 0.6%, 0.4% and 7%, respectively.  This has meant heavy dependence on imports 
even  at  a  rather  low  level  of  energy  consumption.    It  is  surprising  that  despite  this 
severe  supply  constraint,  only  recently  have  we  begun  to  pay  serious  attention  to 
demand-side interventions that would help economize on the use of energy.  There are 
at  least  two  demand-side  interventions  that  can  help  cut  energy  usage:  behavioural 
change  that  results  in  reducing  the  demand  for  energy-based  service  and  the 
introduction  of  alternatives  that  maintain  the  level  of  service  but  reduce  the  energy 
required  for  its  provision.    The  former  is  called  energy  conservation  and  the  latter 
greater energy efficiency.  An example of energy conservation is the shift to fan from 
air-conditioning,  which  cuts  the  need  for  energy  by  lowering  the  level  of  service 
received.    Similarly,  an  example  of  improved  energy  efficiency  is  the  shift  to  LED 
bulbs  from  regular  bulb,  which  maintains  the  service  but  cuts  energy  consumption.  
Often conservation and efficiency effects come jointly.  For example, when houses are 
designed to allow better flow of air and the use of air-conditioning is foregone, there is 
partial decline in service (comfort level) indicating both conservation and efficiency. 
 
3.2. The recently adopted Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) as signatory to the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) emphasize the 
importance of demand side factors. In its submission, India gave particular importance 
to  behavioural  change  leading  to  energy  conservation,  something  that  has  received 
insufficient attention in the developed countries.  The NEP aims to internalize this shift 
in our energy policy. 
 
3.3. Energy  consumption  in  India  is  characterized  by  low  per  capita  level  and  a  large 
disparity  between  urban  and  rural  areas.  In  2015-16,  our  per  capita  energy  and 
electricity consumption at 670 kgoe and at 1075 KWh/year, respectively, are just one-
third  of  the  world  average.  Nearly  25%  of  our  population  today  is  without  access  to 
electricity  and  40%  without  access  to  clean  cooking  fuel.  In  2014,  the  share  of 
electricity  in  final  energy  demand  was  only  17%  compared  with  23%  in  the  member 
countries  of Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development  (OECD). This 
low share means that a large proportion of energy consumption takes the form of solid 
and liquid fuels, exacerbating the air quality at the demand centres. Because electricity 
has the virtue of delinking emission from the point of consumption, for many uses, it is 
a preferred form of energy.  
 
 
 
10 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
3.4. India Energy Security Scenarios 
 
3.4.1.  India  Energy  Security  Scenarios  or  IESS  2047  allows  us  to  predict  energy 
consumption  in  the  final  year  of  the  policy,  2040,  under  alternative  scenarios 
with respect to efforts towards achieving greater energy efficiency.  In Table 1, 
we  show  these  estimates  under  a  range  of  two  sets  of  assumptions:  a  baseline 
effort  and  a  significantly  more  ambitious  effort  towards  achieving  energy 
efficiency and conservation. The baseline scenario (BAU) generates the higher 
demand bound and the ambitious scenario is represented by the lower bound.  
 
3.4.2.  In the ambitious scenario, energy consumption ends up being 17% below that in 
the  baseline  case  illustrating  the  power  of  energy  conservation  and  efficiency.  
In  this  scenario,  the  share  of  electricity  in  the  final  energy  demand  at  26%  is 
also significantly higher than the 23% share in the baseline case suggesting an 
environmentally  cleaner  outcome  at  the  point  of  consumption.  In  per  capita 
terms, annual energy consumption rises from 670 kgoe in 2015-16 to 1055-1184 
kgoe  in  2040.  Correspondingly,  per-capita  annual  electricity  consumption 
increases from 1075 KWh in 2015-16 to 2911-2924 kWh in 2040. At the above 
levels,  our  economy  would  still  be  much  more  efficient  than  many  developed 
countries while meeting satisfactory levels of energy demand of our citizens. 
 
3.4.3.  With  the  GDP  composition  across  different  sectors  changing  with  growth, 
energy  shares  of  different  consuming  sectors  shift.  Buildings,  industry  and 
transport sectors together are the main gainers in both scenarios.  But the gains 
of  individual  sectors  vary  considerably  in  the  two  scenarios.    The  maximum 
efficiency gains accrue in transportation sector whose share in the total energy 
consumption  in  2040  turns  out  to  be  23%  under  the  ambitious  scenario 
compared with 25% in the baseline scenario. 
 
3.4.4.  The  most  dramatic  shift  occurs  in  the  cooking  sector.    Here  we  see 
environmentally  cleaner  energy  replacing  the  current  biomass  fuels.  Energy 
share of cooking drops from 22% in 2012 to just 3.3% in 2040 in the baseline 
case and 3.5% in the ambitious scenario. From health perspective, this is a most 
valuable shift. 
Table 1: Actual energy consumption in 2012 and projected consumption under 
alternative scenarios in major sectors in 2022 and 2040 
Sectors 
TWh 
Buildings 
Industry 
Transport 
Pumps& Tractors 
Telecom 
Cooking 
Total 
% reduction in energy 
demand in 2040 
2012 
2022 
2040 
BAU 
1769 
8764 
3828 
728 
207 
524 
15820 
Ambitious 
1460 
7266 
3243 
592 
164 
467 
13192 
Ambitious 
525 
3600 
1628 
388 
124 
684 
6949 
BAU 
568 
4010 
1736 
423 
131 
829 
7697 
 
238 
2367 
929 
237 
83 
1072 
4926 
17% 
Table 1 
11 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
3.5. The  following  considerations  underline  the  importance  of  demand  side  factors  in 
formulating the NEP:  
 
3.5.1.  Different  combinations  of  sectoral  shares  are  possible  for  any  given  level  of 
growth.  Each  combination  of  shares  would  imply  a  different  energy  basket. 
Additionally, it is expected that dramatic shifts would take place in the primary 
energy mix of India with the shares of biomass and fossil fuels dropping sharply 
and that of renewable sources rising correspondingly.  
 
3.5.2.  The energy basket would shift with increase in income.  For example, networked 
devices  will  exert  a  large  pressure  on  electricity  share.  Likewise,  per  capita 
transport demand would rise. The NEP must take into account behavioural shifts 
that would accompany increases in income. 
 
3.5.3.  So  far  rural  areas  have  lagged  in  availability  of  efficient  energy  solutions.  The 
NEP should pay greater attention to the provision of basic infrastructure in rural 
areas. 
 
3.5.4.  The above factors when combined with increase in urbanization will put added 
pressure  on  the  energy  system  and  bring  adverse  air-quality  effects  in  a  large 
number  of  towns.  City  plans  must  respond  to  the  needs  of  an  efficient  energy 
system in cooking, transport and electricity segments. 
 
3.5.5.  Appropriate  price  signals  help  in  getting  demand  side  response  (DSR).  This  is 
vital both from shifting demand (smoothening demand curve) and also achieving 
energy efficiency and conservations gains.  
 
3.5.6.  Because  of  accelerating  growth  trajectory  of  India  in  the  years  to  come,  an 
efficient  energy  demand  side  management  system  will  be  a  useful,  and  more 
economical intervention, giving  India an opportunity to  ‘lock-in’ savings  while 
building a major section of its energy consumption ecosystem.  
 
3.6.  Towards Energy Efficiency and Conservation Policy 
 
3.6.1.  The  National  Mission  for  Enhanced  Energy  Efficiency  (NMEEE),  launched 
under the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) has not been able 
to  achieve  its  intended  goals  due  to  poor  inter-sectoral  linkages.  Energy 
efficiency  programmes  cannot  be  run  on  a  stand-alone  basis  and  require  close 
coordination between energy supplying and consuming sectors, as well as with 
technology  development,  management  apparatus  and  finance  streams.  A 
revamped  National  Mission  would  be  launched  which  would  have  stronger 
linkage  than  before  between  the  related  sectors,  and  provide  for  a  robust 
supervisory and review mechanism. 
 
12 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
3.6.2.  The adoption of efficient practices across all energy consuming sectors calls for 
a well-planned strategy with four specific components: 
  First,  the  policy  objectives  need  to  be  clearly  identified  which  would 
lead to the right implementation strategy.  
  Second,  the  regulatory  and  statutory  mechanisms  need  to  be  made 
robust so that along with consumer preferences, even the manufacturing 
and  trade  sectors  conform  to  state  of  the  art  technology  and  energy 
practices.  
  Third, choosing the right intervention tools and programmes will be an 
important component of this strategy.  
  Finally, a robust institutional mechanism ought to be created which can 
evaluate,  monitor  and  promote  a  nation-wide  energy  efficiency 
programme.  
 
3.7.  Setting Objectives 
 
3.7.1. Energy efficiency programmes ought to be evaluated against set targets which 
requires  a  robust  data  base.  In  order  to  develop  a  baseline  status  of  energy 
efficiency in different demand sectors, the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 
would conduct a study directly or by an out-sourced agency. The scope of the 
study would include all energy demand sectors of the economy, and extend to 
existing  processes  and  technologies,  level  of  energy  efficiency,  readiness  to 
move  to  more  energy  efficient  technologies,  current  cost  considerations, 
current  level  of  skillsets  and  whether  they  would  require  upgradation/change 
when new technologies are introduced.  
 
3.7.2.  The  BEE  would  specifically  look  at  convergence  with  existing  national 
programmes  and  plan  appropriate  interventions:  100  Smart  Cities,  Housing 
for All by 2022, Power for All by 2022, 175 GW of renewable energy by 
2022  etc.  to  achieve  synergy.  The  initiatives  such  as  Smart  Cities  and  solar 
pumps should mandate using only the most efficient appliances. 
  
 
3.7.3.  The  goals  will  be  commensurately  set  with  the  cost-effective  potential.  The 
following guidance will inform the setting of goals:  
  Making the globally most cost effective technology the norm in India in 
the next five to seven years. 
  The goal criteria should include key co-benefits.  
  Decision on whether goals would be mandatory or voluntary.  
  A focus on constructing measurable goals that can be easily monitored in 
the specified timeframes.  
  Goals should identify stakeholders/agencies that would be held liable in 
case the target is not met. Introduction of a penalty mechanism would be 
incorporated into the goal setting criteria. 
 
3.7.4.   Specific goals will be set for the following major energy consuming sectors: 
  DELP program for AC, pump, and fans  
  Revision of AC standards 
13 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
  National buildings program for residential and commercial buildings 
  Expansion  of  the  PAT  program  and  adoption  of  BAT  to  reduce  the                
industrial energy consumption.  
  Expansion of fuel efficiency standards to other modes of transport like 
 Trucks and  
  Standards for HDVs and periodic revision of LDV standards.  
 
3.8.  Addressing Existing Regulatory and Legal Barriers 
 
3.8.1.  There is a need to analyse the present ecosystem governing energy efficiency 
such  as  policies,  laws,  institutions  and  arrangements.  On  the  policy  front, 
there  is  no  overarching  energy  efficiency  policy.  This  has  hampered  the 
adoption  of  efficient  practices  across  energy  consuming  sectors.  It  is 
envisaged that an omnibus policy will be announced to cover all the energy 
producing and consuming sectors. 
 
3.8.2.   The  current  energy  efficiency  statutory  framework,  which  is  primarily 
defined  by  the  Energy  Conservation  Act  of  2001,  has  provided  a  robust 
initial  framework  for  facilitating  energy  conservation  and  adoption  of 
efficient technologies and practices. There is a need to empower BEE so as to 
enable it to implement the Act more effectively across all energy consuming 
sectors. 
 
3.8.3.  The National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency had proposed to put in 
place new initiatives  in  order to  enhance  energy efficiency such  as  tradable 
energy  saving  certificates,  innovative  financing  mechanisms  that  capture 
future  energy  savings  and  introduction  of  fiscal  instruments.  The  above 
proposals have not been translated into effective instruments. There is a need 
to mandate energy efficiency measures with tighter provisions and introduce 
fiscal measures to incentivize the adoption of efficient measures. 
 
3.9.  Launch of Appropriate Tools 
 
3.9.1.  Awareness  creation  will  be  an  essential  component  of  the  renewed  energy 
efficiency  programme.  As  there  is  an  upfront  cost  in  adopting  energy 
efficiency, unless there is a reasonable degree of confidence of the long term 
benefits,  which  can  be  enforced  through  credible  mass  public  campaigns, 
there will be slow adoption. 
 
3.9.2.   Financial  interventions  varying  according  to  the  type  of  consumer  will  be 
framed. A focused financing initiative such as offering line of credit to EESL 
or  other  agencies,  loan  guarantees,  grants,  making  energy  efficiency  as  a 
priority  lending  sector,  partial  risk  sharing  of  Energy  Efficiency  programs 
etc. would be taken up. 
 
 
14 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
3.9.3.  Energy  Services  Companies  (ESCO)  are  crucial  in  creating  the  Energy 
Efficiency  value chain.  However, for the ESCO business model to take off, 
enforcement  of  the  existing  codes  is  crucial  as  a  driver  for  actions  by 
consumers. EESL or other agencies ought to provide partial loan guarantees 
to ESCOs for de-risking their performance based contracts. 
 
3.9.4.  Clear  policies  need  to  be  made  regarding  end  of  life  with  respect  to  major 
energy  consuming  equipment  in  industrial,  automobiles  and  buildings 
sectors.  Very  old  and  extremely  inefficient  equipment  and  appliances  and 
vehicles,  can  undo  the  efficiency  gains  of  any  aggressive  energy  efficiency 
policies. 
 
 
3.9.5.  Mandatory energy use disclosure programs, such as energy use reporting by 
commercial  and  large  residential  buildings  at  the  time  of  real  estate 
transactions  and/or  property  filing,  could  be  helpful  in  making  energy 
consumption as one of the decision variables in such transactions.  
 
3.9.6.  All key appliances, equipment, and vehicles should be covered by mandatory 
standards and labelling programs by 2020. 
 
 
3.9.7.  Over the next five years, DELP type programs should be implemented for 10 
most  electricity  intensive  appliances  and  equipment  with  a  target  of  super-
efficient technology to be 50% of all new purchases.  
 
3.9.8.  On  Building  codes,  it  will  be  simplified  and  code  compliance  strengthened 
while  clear  division  of  responsibilities  across  central,  state  and  ULB 
departments  will  be  delineated.  Residential  buildings  will  also  be  brought 
under the fold of ECBCs. 
 
 
3.9.9.  As  regards  Industrial  energy  efficiency,  clear  targets  will  be  fixed  for 
deepening  and  widening  of  the  PAT  program;  PAT  must  cover  80%  of  all 
industrial  consumption,  including  the  unorganised  sector,  by  2020.  The 
efficiency  targets  for  ensuing  PAT  cycles  will  be  raised  in  tune  with 
technological advancements in processes.   
 
3.9.10.  Awards  and  tax  rebates  for  facility  and  enterprise  energy  efficiency  are  an 
effective  way  to  create  awareness  and  promote  competition  between 
consumers. The existing Award scheme will be extended across sectors and 
States. 
 
 
3.9.11.  Grid  interactive  demand  response  by  smart  appliances,  buildings/industrial 
consumers,  or  EV  chargers  can  provide  critical  services  to  the  grid, 
especially  for  Renewable  Energy  grid  integration  or  during  peak  demand 
periods.  Such  programs  can  capture  significant  co-benefits  of  efficiency 
policies and technology upgradation. 
 
15 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
3.10. Institutional Arrangements 
 
3.10.1.  The role of State Governments in achieving efficiency in energy generation 
and  consumption  is  recognized.  The  Government  will  endeavour  to  create 
and strengthen robust State Nodal Agencies (SNAs), and strive to achieve an 
active  cooperation  in  implementing  energy  efficiency  programmes,  which 
has not been the case so far. 
 
3.10.2.  In order that energy efficiency becomes a major instrument of the NEP, there 
will  be  a  need  to  raise  the  resource  allocations  for  key  energy  efficiency 
agencies  both  at  the  central  (such  as  BEE,  EESL)  as  well  as  state  (SDAs) 
level – both in terms of staff as well as program funds.  
 
3.10.3.  Institutional capacity building to run these programmes will need to be raised 
manifold. There are multiple agencies in charge for overseeing/implementing 
energy  efficiency  programs  especially  in  the  buildings  sector,  for  example, 
BEE, PWD, SDA and ULB;  greater inter-agency coordination is  called for. 
Coordination is needed with agencies across energy sectors, such as PCRA, 
too. 
 
3.10.4.   Data acquisition, monitoring, and load/consumer surveys are critical for goal 
setting  as  well  as  effective  implementation.  The  energy  efficiency  related 
institutions must have expert manpower capabilities for such technical jobs. 
 
3.10.5.  A technical institute /research body focused on energy efficiency (similar to 
the  National  Institute  for  Wind  Energy)  will  be  created  for  providing 
technical and analytical expertise for policy and regulation making.  
 
3.10.6.  Energy efficiency sector is a technical one wherein the role of R&D is very 
significant.  There  ought  to  be  support  for  Research,  Development  and 
Deployment through public funding, both to private and public sectors. 
 
3.10.7.  In  order  to  capture  the  levels  of  energy  efficiency  in  the  states  and  also 
motivate  them  to  perform  better  by  challenging  them,  NITI  Aayog  would 
establish an index of States by rating them across a range of energy efficency 
related parameters. 
3.11 Price Signals 
DSR is best achieved through pricing cues. It has to be ensured that movements in wholesale 
prices are passed on to the retail market. This will happen only if robust electricity markets 
are ushered in and regulators support such practices. While subsidising the vulnerable section 
of  consumers,  it  will  be  ensured  that  the  objective  of  attaining  energy  efficiency  is  met 
through  appropriate  tools  including  sharing  the  gains  with  the  consumers.  This  will  also 
ensure that additional capacity is avoided to meet peaking needs by shaving off peak demand. 
 
 
 
16 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Box 1:  Rural Electrification 
India  is  paying  great  developmental  costs  due  to  its  energy  poverty.  Lack  of  access  to 
electricity in homes marks a failure of the country’s energy policies and impacts education, 
health  and  economic  development,  especially  in  rural  India.  The  NEP  aims  at  achieving 
100% electrification by  2022, and will take this  to  be the main plank of  the overall energy 
strategy. As per the results of the 68th Round of NSS Survey (2011-12), only 4% of the urban 
households did not use electricity as the primary source of lighting. But,  more than 26% of 
the  rural  households  are  in  this  hapless  state  which  shows  an  inclination  towards  kerosene 
based lighting solutions. A total of near 304 million people in the country are without access 
to electricity.  The Government has launched the DDUGJY as its principal vehicle to achieve 
the above goal by 2022, by first achieving 100% village electrification by 2019. Studies have 
revealed that in spite of major strides made by the earlier schemes in providing connections 
and  now,  DDUGJY,  the  problem  of  electricity  ‘access’  did  not  improve  appreciably.  An 
inherent challenge in the process is ensuring the coverage of households as opposed to only 
villages. Several states with high electrification rates still have poor household electrification, 
and certain hamlets, not covered in the national sample surveys and the DDUGJY, housing a 
considerable section of the populace, are also without access to energy. Government schemes 
may deploy public apparatus to create the necessary infrastructure, but sustaining supply is a 
dynamic challenge. 
Electrification can be viewed to be a combination of a set of facets: Setting up of electricity 
infrastructure,  providing  connectivity  to  households,  adequate  supply  of  desired  quality  of 
power, supply of electricity at affordable rates, and proving clean, and sustainable power in 
an  efficient  fashion.  But,  universal  electrification  and  sustained  access  has  faced  the 
following challenges, some real and other assumed ones: 
  The capex requirement is prohibitive 
  The rural consumer is indifferent towards electrification 
  There is a large affordability issue 
  Rural supply is reckoned as a welfare activity, and not a commercial one 
  Solar  lighting  is  an  effective  solution  for  household  electrification,  but  not  cost 
effective in many cases, especially if battery back-up is also provided 
  Differential resource endowments and economic growth patterns of states. 
 
The  above  challenges  have  to  be  de-mystified  as  they  have  harmed  the  cause  of  rural 
electrification  by  creating  a  false  impression  of  a  large  perceived  challenge.  Some  of  the 
above  beliefs,  especially  those  pertaining  to  poor  commerciality  are  erroneous.  Rural 
consumer  values  electricity  as  much  as  anyone  else,  and  are  perfectly  willing  to  pay 
reasonable tariffs. Studies show that the willingness to pay for reliable electricity services in 
rural areas is high, and exceeds the long-run marginal cost of supply. Energy related expenses 
incurred  by  poorly  served  consumers,  both  in  rural  and  urban  settings,  are  suggestive  that 
formal energy supply would in fact be an income-saver for them. However, there are several 
other challenges, which are not usually acknowledged, and are listed below: 
  Connection  is  not  the  only  factor  —  even  duration,  quality  and  reliability  are 
important. This may require dovetailing grid supply with off-grid one 
17 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
  Many rural consumers are unable to pay bills in one go, especially as their earnings 
accrue  in  a  staggered  manner.  Hence,  the  divide  between  BPL  and  APL  in 
electrification schemes may not work. 
  Rural consumers also need flexibility in supply to be able to avail more supply should 
they add appliances or deploy power for productive use. 
  Lack of an efficient maintenance mechanism is a major dampener. 
  Solar lanterns tend to be more cost effective than the outgo on kerosene subsidy. 
 
Keeping all the challenges in mind, it is envisaged that the Government will first endeavor to 
provide  grid  based  supply  to  all  households,  and  renewable  based  supply  will  be  resorted 
only  in  exceptional  circumstances.  There  is  also  a  need  to  redefine  the  concept  of 
‘Electrification’, as occurs in  the DDUGJY, to  include stages  of electrification in  a village, 
with  the  village  being  deemed  completely  electrified  if  and  only  if  ALL  households  of  a 
village  have  an  electricity  connection,  which  witnesses  reliable  supply  of  electricity  atleast 
for  a  set  number  of  hours.  Although  rural  consumers  may  be  extended  capital  subsidy  for 
initial  connectivity, as is  being done through DDUGJY, the same should be equitable, well 
targeted and have an exit strategy, with the consumer being reckoned as a revenue generating 
variable thereafter. The non-BPL households may also be offered support, albeit at a different 
level. Innovative billing and metering practices will be offered to them to be able to pay in a 
staggered  manner.  Adoption  of  DBT  will  meet  the  twin  goals  of  curbing  wasteful 
consumption and also deliver subsidy to the meritorious efficiently.  
At  the  Centre,  an  ‘Energy  Access  Fund’  can  be  established  to  address  the  urgent  need  to 
convert  capital  subsidies  into  operational  incentives.  This  could  serve  as  a  motivator  for 
sustained  performance  of  energy  systems.  It  could  enable  a  transition  towards  an  incentive 
linked mechanism for better delivery of energy services. 
Rural consumers have as much a right to receive efficient service as anyone else, and discoms 
ought to buttress their manpower towards this challenge. In areas where the reach of the grid 
is  limited  due  to  geographical  constraints,  incentivizing  the  sector  of  micro-grids  in  areas 
where the same makes economic sense, by identifying a business model/ policy framework to 
encourage  independent  developers,  NGOs,  and  social  businesses  to  scale  up  their  efforts  is 
also  a  key  area  of  intervention.    Micro-grids  may  play  another  role,  even  in  electrified 
villages. They offer a value proposition in meeting peak electricity requirement in electrified 
villages, and may be in business until the supply quality aspect is resolved.  
 
 
18 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Box 2: Clean Cooking Access 
Clean cooking refers to efficient and affordable fuel, the combustion of which does not harm 
family health due to indoor air pollution, and is also not onerous on women in its collection 
and  use.  In  India,  household  electrification  and  provision  of  clean  cooking  fuel  have  been 
twin challenges, with the former having received priority over the latter. This has led to poor 
redressal  of  this  issue,  resulting  in  near  40%  of  our  population  without  access  to  clean 
cooking  fuel.  The  situation  in  rural  areas,  with  a  significant  section  of  the  populace  below 
poverty line, is  grim, and is  changing quite slowly.  The PM  Ujjwala Yojana is  expected to 
overcome  this.  Our  end  aim  should  be  fuel  substitution  of  sources  of  energy  like 
firewood/chips,  dung  cake,  kerosene,  coke/coal  etc.  to  cleaner  sources  of  energy  like  LPG, 
PNG  and  Electricity.  Even  where  biomass  is  being  used,  the  cookstoves  are  inefficient.  A 
programme  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  biomass  cookstoves  is  of  vital  importance.  As  per 
NSS Report 567 (68th Round, 2011-12), between 1999-2000 and 2011-12, the drop in use of 
solid biomass in cooking in rural households was only 8.2 percentage points to 67.3%, while 
the  uptake  of  LPG  went  up  from  5.4%  to  15%  (roughly  1%  per  year).  In  urban  areas,  the 
substitution  has  been  faster  with  only  14%  of  the  households  still  using  solid  biomass.  In 
addition to availability, the adoption of cleaner sources of energy and improved cookstoves is 
hindered  by  behavioral  patterns  like  differentiated  cooking  practices,  and  local  preferences 
with  regard  to  preparation.  An  interesting  revelation  in  the  NSS  Report  is,  that  kerosene 
serves  as  cooking  fuel  only  for  1%  and  6%  of  the  total  rural  and  urban  households, 
respectively.  The  grim  picture  above  points  to  the  necessity  of  the  National  Energy  Policy 
taking  on  this  agenda  as  one  of  its  most  significant  ambitions,  and  suggesting  a  robust 
strategy  forward  for  provision  of  clean  cooking  fuel  for  all  in  the  quickest  timeframe  in  a 
mission mode. The launch of the ‘PM  Ujjwala  Yojana’ (PMUY) has  come as a shot in  the 
arm  towards  meeting  the  target  of  achieving  universal  clean  cooking  coverage.  The  NEP 
recognizes LPG as a major component of the clean cooking solution. However, looking to the 
historical cooking practices and abundance of agri-and forest-based biomass, there is a need 
to devise a strategy for its deployment in a clean and efficient manner. Biomass offers several 
advantages over fossil fuels such as LPG and PNG in the cooking space. 
Clean  cooking  fuel  has  been  the  biggest  casualty  of  lack  of  coordination  between  different 
energy  Ministries.  The  clean  cooking  fuel  policy  option  for  rural  areas  has  been  virtually 
none, with a poor LPG component (1% growth per year). As if biomass is going to remain as 
the  staple  fuel,  the  major  focus  has  been  only  on  efficient  cook-stoves  through  MNRE 
schemes,  which  owing  to  several  reasons,  did  not  reach  the  rural  populace  in  a  significant 
manner. On the other hand, for urban areas, LPG has been the fuel of choice. Moreover, there 
has  been  no  national  programme  for  clean  cooking  fuel,  and  no  administrative  Ministry 
responsible  for  this  vital  aspect!  The  announcement  in  the  Union  Budgets  (2016-17  and 
2017-18) of separate allocation of money for subsidy towards LPG connections in the name 
of rural women is a right step (PMUY).  
The challenges faced by this sector are as follows: 
  Clean cooking fuel was not high on national priority until the launch of PMUY. This 
has  led  to  persistence  of  solid  biomass  as  the  preferred  fuel  for  over  40%  of  the 
country’s population, combined with inefficient cookstoves. The above is responsible 
for a huge health implication, largely on women and infants.  
19 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
  There  is  a  clear  rural-urban  divide  in  the  use  of  modern  cooking  fuels.  Rural 
households do not have a choice (or multiple) of cooking fuel solutions the way urban 
households have been provided. The former need stacking of cooking fuels just like 
the latter.  
  As  nearly  50%  of  country’s  LPG  consumption  is  imported,  absence  of  an  assured 
market  keeps 
the  market  of  non-subsidised  bottles  under-supplied.  Import 
infrastructure and supply chain, will pose a challenge for LPG imports to be ramped 
up significantly under the PMUY. 
Inspite of 3 decades of Government intervention, less than 1% of the rural households 
use improved cookstoves. Additionally, despite the large market potential, there are a 
limited  number  of  manufacturers  of  clean  cookstoves  in  the  market  (many  lack 
design/  testing/  standard  protocols)  and  none  of  them  have  received  the  scale  and 
profitability.  Along  with  the  same,  issues  of  R&D,  fiscal  support  to  manufacturing 
and after sales services deter expansion of the market. 
 
  The  subsidised  cookstove  with  natural  draft  has  poor  emission  specifications,  while 
the one with forced draft is not acceptable to the consumers due to poor design and 
non-availability  of  biomass  pellets.  There  is  a  higher  budgetary  allocation  for  the 
former as it is cheaper even though it does not address the objective. 
  Electricity,  natural  gas  (PNG  in  urban  areas)  and  biogas  have  so  far  not  been 
considered as serious cooking fuel options, while kerosene is rightly discouraged. 
Information  asymmetry  about  the long-term  benefits  of clean cooking fuels,  and the 
negative impacts of traditional fuels and cookstoves. 
 
  Market-based clean cooking solutions have not evolved due to a poor eco-system. The 
same needs to be kick-started with a comprehensive strategy. 
 
It is evident that the problem is of a large magnitude, and there is no clear strategy. Instead of 
promoting  clean  fuels,  we  have  been  concentrating  on  a  half-hearted  efficient  cookstove 
programme. The import implications of LPG as the primary clean cooking solution will also 
mean  energy  insecurity,  along  with  other  things.  However,  sorting  out  a  large  anomaly  in 
LPG distribution (that  will  hopefully be corrected by  DBT and de-duplication), could  help. 
As  per  OMCs,  there  were  201  million  active  domestic  LPG  connections  as  of  1.04.2017 
which  amount  to  around  80%  of  the  total  households.  But,  as  per  NSS  Report,  only 
approximately  71%  households  in  Urban  areas  and  21%  households  in  Rural  areas  in  the 
country were found to be regularly using LPG. Hence, there is a large volume of LPG, which 
could be rationalized and offered to rural consumers without a significant import implication 
and un-authorised use of subsidised supplies. 
 
And, what about the rural consumer’s preference? Studies have revealed that LPG is in great 
demand,  even  at  a  commercial  price.  However,  just  like  billed  electricity,  many  rural 
consumers  cannot  pay  for  the  14.2  kg  LPG  refill  at  one  go.  The  distribution  of  the  LPG 
cookstove and related initial infra through Union Budget subsidy has successfully bridged the 
initial  reluctance  of  the  rural  poor.  Here  lies  the  opportunity  for  us  to  develop  a  successful 
market based clean cooking programme, wherein costs can be shared. The Government will 
anyway have to dispense equitably with the rural areas, and subsidise just as it does the urban 
consumer. The National Energy Policy proposes the following: 
 
20 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
  A  National  Mission  on  Clean  Cooking  (NMCC)  will  be  launched  which  will 
coordinate efforts on cooking fuels, efficient cookstove and related R&D with an aim 
to achieve full clean cooking fuel coverage by 2022. This will be housed in the NITI 
Aayog. Energy Ministries, State Governments and industry will be taken on board. 
  Rural households form bulk of the problem, and need a specialized strategy as their 
cooking needs are varied, including water heating and fodder preparation. Stacking of 
fuels is the norm, and is acknowledged. Hence, every home will have more than one 
cooking fuel.  
  With Universal Electrification aimed for 2022, electricity cannot be overlooked as a 
clean cooking fuel, with admissibility to cooking subsidy. Also, keeping in mind the 
additional  capacity  of  electricity  required,  if  fuel  substitution  were  to  take  place  in 
favor  of  electricity,  the  efforts  of  other  initiatives  of  the  Government  like  the 
renewable energy targets, should be dovetailed into this to ensure clean energy at the 
source and the end.  
  Appropriate  appliances  including  induction  cookers  will  be  encouraged.  The 
specifications  of  electricity  connections  under  the  DDUGJY  would  be  altered  to  be 
able to support the same.  
  Efficient  biomass  cookstoves  will  be  an  important  component  of  the  strategy  of 
multiple cooking fuels. As electricity reaches homes, forced draft version will be the 
norm  and  there  will  be  no  need  for  solar  power  to  run  the  fan  in  such  cookstoves 
(biomass  based  cooking).  Normal  draft  will  be  discouraged.  Solar  powered  forced 
draft  cookstoves,  suitably  developed  to  meet  cooking  practices  in  villages  being 
electrified with off grid solutions, will be deployed. 
  Studies have revealed that in many areas even biomass is being bought, and it is not 
that it is accessible for free everywhere. Expenditure incurred (wage opportunity lost) 
in  collecting/buying  biomass  is  not  significantly  higher  than  cost  of  clean  fuels. 
Hence, there is an appetite to pay for the latter. 
  The Government is committed to make subsidy available evenly for urban and rural 
citizens, especially if they are poor. Subsidy will be extended for a slew of measures, 
including  a  variety  of  fuels,  efficient  cookstoves  and  for  provision  of  supply  chain 
linkages.  However,  this  subsidy  will  be  tailored  according  to  the  different  needs  of 
remote and rural regions, allowing high flexibility and efficiency. 
  An  ecosystem  of  mass  market  for  cookstoves,  electric  cooking  appliances,  bottled 
LPG in various refill sizes, setting up of fuel distributorships across the country and 
strengthening city gas networks in urban areas will be encouraged. Clean cooking is a 
vast market, which will be tapped with its economic spin-offs. 
  The  problem  of  maintenance  of  the  aforementioned  clean  cookstoves  (biogas/ 
improved)  would  be  addressed  in  rural  areas,  so  as  to  maximize  adoption.  The  on-
going Skill India Mission will be synergized with it.  
  Creation of a database driven intervention strategy, which includes the sales records, 
consumer database, and projects the benefits accrued in terms of reduced emissions 
and import dependence is essential for designing future interventions.   
  Promotion  of  an  enterprise  based  model  for  operating  biogas  plants  in  rural  areas 
would  increase  usability  and  provide  co-benefits  of  employment  and  livelihood 
opportunities. 
 
The  cooking  sector  is  set  for  a  sea-change  during  the  time  frame  of  the  NEP,  with  solid 
biomass  giving  way  almost  entirely.  With  increasing  population  pressure  and  expansion  of 
agriculture,  firewood  is  no  longer  easily  within  reach  everywhere.  Adoption  of  modern 
21 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
harvesting technologies is not yielding agri-waste for fuel like before. However, in the over 
two decade time-span of this Policy, biomass cannot be overlooked and efficient cookstoves 
have to be included in the basket of solutions.  Rural consumers will also stack cooking fuels, 
that  suggests  that  an  array  of  cooking  fuels  should  comprise  the  national  cooking  fuel 
strategy, with accompanying supports. This strategy will also have positive ripple effects on 
public health, gender, livelihoods and environmental aspects of the country.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Box 3: Grid Integration of Renewable Electricity and More Efficient Grid Operation 
Challenge of Grid Integration 
Grid integration means minimizing and/or managing the variability and uncertainty aspects of 
Renewable  Energy.  Unlike  fossil  fuel  based  electricity  that  can  be  generated  steadily, 
renewable  sources  like  wind  and  solar  cannot  be  made  to  generate  on  demand  (or  be  shut 
down  for  later  exploitation).  The  renewable-based  generation  may  actually  rise  or  fall 
suddenly (e.g. solar), or over seasons more predictably (e.g. wind), causing inconvenience to 
grid  managers.  Technically,  Renewable  Energy  is  described  as  an  intermittent  source  of 
electricity, where intermittency consists of two distinct aspects:  
• 
“Predictability/Uncertainty”  refers  to  the  lack  of  accurate  knowledge  about  future 
Renewable Energy generation (e.g. sudden drop in solar power).   
• 
“Variability”  is  the  known  natural  variation  in  Renewable  Energy  generation  (e.g., 
wind peaking during monsoon and reduced availability in other seasons), just as exists 
on the demand side currently (e.g., low demand at mid- night and high demand during 
late afternoon).   
An  Expert  Group  constituted  by  NITI  Aayog  has  determined  that  meeting  the  175  GW 
renewable installed capacity target by 2022, would not be as much a financial challenge as a 
technical  one.  Internationally  —  where  Renewable  Energy  accounts  for  increasingly  large 
shares  of  power  system  generation  —  various  changes  to  grid  design,  technology,  and  its 
operation  have  been  implemented  that  allow  successful  utilization  of  renewable  electricity. 
Many  of  these  strategies  are  inherently  useful  for  improving  the  overall  efficiency  of  grid 
operations and reducing overall costs to consumers, whether Renewable Energy accounts for 
a large (more than 25%) share of the generation mix or not. Some of these changes are one-
time  changes  while  others  would  evolve  over  time  as  load  shapes  and  the  resource  mix 
continue to change. Some of the key strategies are summarized in Table 2 below.   
Table 2: Renewable Energy Grid Integration and Efficient Grid Operation Strategies 
Strategy 
Impact on 
Uncertainty 
Impact on Variability 
One-time 
Upgrade grid technology 
Minimize 
Manage 
Upgrade grid operation protocols  Minimize 
Manage 
Expand “Balancing Areas” 
Minimize 
Minimize and manage 
23 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Upgrade grid planning practices 
Minimize 
Minimize 
Ongoing 
Balancing resources — estimation, 
procurement, dispatch 
Manage 
Manage 
 
Strategy 
In India, it is expected that in 2022, renewable electricity would comprise more than 15% of 
electricity generated in the country. The share is expected to be much higher in eight states — 
TN, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan and MP. The 
challenge imposed by such high Renewable Energy share on the power systems, unless 
managed, would put-off grid operators resulting in impact on Renewable Energy absorption 
by the grid, thus impacting investors. The Centre and States would collaborate to address this 
problem in close coordination. In this direction, NITI Aayog has already created a twin 
coordination mechanism under the Vice Chairman and CEO, NITI Aayog, respectively, in 
partnership with Union Ministries and State Governments to coordinate the multiple efforts 
already under-way. The following strategy will be adopted: 
1.  Upgrade  grid  technology:  System  operators  at  all  levels  (i.e.  state,  regional  and 
national)  should  have  visibility  of  all  the  Renewable  Energy  generation  systems  in 
their areas, and grid status in neighboring balancing areas as well, and also the ability 
to easily coordinate with them.  
i. 
The  capabilities  of  the  transmission  companies  (i.e.  central  and  state 
transmission utilities) and  Load Dispatch Centers (LDCs) (i.e. POSOCO and 
State  LDCs)  will  be  upgraded  by  deploying  sensors  for  generating  real-time 
high geographic resolution data on grid conditions.  
These  data  generation  sensors  will  be  coupled  with  sophisticated  analytical 
engines that provide the necessary information for grid operations.  
ii. 
iii.  Centralized  Renewable  Energy  forecasting  mechanisms  will  be  tightly 
integrated with system operations.  
iv.  Advanced  decision-making  and  control  systems  will  be  implemented  that 
enable  system  operators  to  respond  significantly  faster  to  changed  grid 
conditions.  
 
2.  Upgrade  grid  operation  protocols:  Various  aspects  of  system  operations  will  be 
updated. The following steps will be taken:  
i.  Grid Codes: System operators will update their grid codes to ensure that  Renewable 
Energy  additions  do  not  affect  the  grid  adversely,  and  to  explicitly  acknowledge 
attributes  unique  to  Renewable  Energy  generators  and,  consequently,  build-in 
appropriate  capabilities  so  that  Renewable  Energy  generation  is  not  adversely 
impacted. 
24 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
ii. 
Scheduling and Dispatch: Scheduling and dispatch will be upgraded from the current 
15-minute  basis.  System  operations  technologies  and  protocols  will  be  updated  to 
enable five-minute scheduling and dispatch of all resources connected to the grid and 
automated  incorporation  of  Renewable  Energy  forecasts.  This  will  lower  consumer 
costs and also lower ancillary service requirements.  
 
3.  Expand  Balancing  Areas:  Larger  balancing  areas  can  help  reduce  variability  by 
offering more balancing resources/demand, making it easier to manage. However, due 
to  jurisdictional  issues,  regulation  and  management  is  currently  being  done  at  state 
level. A single national-level load dispatch center that is nonprofit, independent, and 
regulated  by  CERC  would  be  empowered  for  managing  the  entire  national  grid  as 
one, with appropriate markets and regulatory frameworks in place.   
4. Promote  flexible  demand  and  supply  resources:  Power  systems,  especially  those  with  a 
high share of Renewable Energy, require access to sufficient flexible resources (e.g., 
demand  response,  gas  turbines,  flexible  thermal generation,  hydroelectricity,  etc.)  to 
ensure continued stability of the grid at each moment.  
i. 
The amount of balancing resources needed and how these can be procured and 
dispatched  will  be  ascertained  through  regular  studies.  Grid  simulations  will 
be conducted routinely to identify resource pools (both built and un-built).  
Procurement  mechanisms  will  be  implemented  to  ensure  these  resources  are 
connected for use in assuring grid stability.  
Finally,  mechanisms  for  fair  price  discovery  and  compensation  of  flexible 
resource providers (e.g. ancillary services) will be established. 
ii. 
iii. 
 
Process 
The above strategy will require coordination between multiple agencies at the central 
level,  and  similarly  a  number  of  actors  at  the  state  level.  It  is  expected  that  the 
mechanism created by NITI Aayog may address this requirement.  Typically, MNRE 
is  in-charge  of  creating  renewable  capacity  and  is  a  client  of  the  Ministry  of  Power 
that owns the grid. Then, at the central level, the CERC works independently to issue 
regulations, which will enable the grid integration. A key challenge is that most of the 
action  need  to  happen  at  the  State  level,  where  power  is  generated  and  has  to  be 
evacuated and consumed. Therefore, the apex agency will need to bring the states and 
centre together. The following process is contemplated: 
  Suitable  provisions  in  the  National  Electricity  Policy  and  Tariff  Policy  will 
enjoin upon the CERC/SERCs to issue regulations to enable the policy related 
interventions. 
  CTU/STU will upgrade the technologies and make necessary investments to 
handle the intermittency through appropriate technical interventions. 
  R&D will be supported  for storage solutions  at  macro-  and micro-levels for 
the discoms and individual consumers to address the challenge of variability. 
 
25 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
  Different kinds of reserves (spinning and capacity) will be created and the 
costs socialized to provide the back-up power to help manage the variability. 
Conclusion 
India’s  zeal  to  step  up  renewable  capacity  has  to  be  matched  with  capability  to  manage 
intermittency.  The  problem  is  aggravated  by  differential  resource  potential  across  states, 
which  cannot  be  easily  overcome  by  RPOs.  Policy  enablement  will  play  a  key  role  in 
development  of  balancing  supplies.  The  government’s  financial  support  to  transmission  — 
inter- and intra-statal — will help in catalyzing capacity growth as well as grid balancing. In 
addition,  a  number  of  other  steps  as  listed  above,  will  have  to  be  simultaneously  taken. 
Flexible operation of thermal power plants  – both coal and gas based – is likely to create a 
synergy  between  the  conventional  and  renewable  sources,  rather  than  hostility.  Even  the 
stranded  gas-based  capacity  may  find  a  market  for  their  power.  In  addition,  a  close 
coordination between  generation and transmission will be needed, especially if  India has to 
succeed in raising the share of renewable electricity yet higher by the terminal year of NEP 
— 2040. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Energy Supply 
Fossil Fuel Based Energy Supply 
Chapter 4 
Oil and Gas 
 
4.1 Because  oil  and  gas  are  generally  found  jointly,  policy  discussions  often  focus  on 
them jointly. Due to a number of differentiators, including carbon content per unit of 
heat, more gas availability and lower cost in calorific terms, today gas is preferred to 
oil. From global shares of oil and gas of 33% and 24% in energy consumption in 2015 
respectively,  the  IEA  estimates  the  respective  shares  of  oil  and  gas  to  converge  at 
25% each by 2035. In India, the shares of oil and gas in energy consumption in 2015-
16 were 26% and 6.5%, respectively. It is expected that in the medium term while the 
share of oil may not come down, share of gas would rise. A supportive regime for gas 
has to be put in place for the same to rise to 8-9% by 2040, which will translate into a 
large  supply  in  absolute  numbers.  Table  3  provides  the  production  potential  of 
different fuels in India based on the present extent of knowledge of the hydrocarbons 
potential.  The  NEP  proposes  specific  actions  for  oil  and  gas  to  achieve  the  stated 
objectives herein. 
 
Table 3: Domestic Production Potential of Different Fuels in India 
 
2012 
2022 
2040 
 
BAU 
904 
44 
46 
Ambitious 
1006 
46 
53 
BAU 
1190 
54 
95 
Ambitious 
1385 
61 
124 
 
 
582 
38 
48 
Coal (Mtce) 
Oil (Mtoe) 
Gas (BCM) 
  
 
4.2 Continued expected importance of oil and gas to the Indian economy underscores the 
need for a robust strategy for assuring supply. Previous policy statements  did aim at 
increasing  domestic  production  and  reducing  import  dependence.  However,  while 
consumption  of  each  has  registered  sharp  increase,  production  has  increased  only 
moderately.  From  2005-06  to  2015-16,  oil  production  increased  by  15%  while 
consumption of petroleum products increased by 62% and, gas production remained 
static, though there was an upswing in gas consumption between 2009-12 due to gas 
supplies  from  KG  D6  after  which  the  production  has  been  constantly  declining, 
whereas 
import 
dependence  and  vulnerability  to  external  price  and  supply  shocks  in  energy  domain 
has  increased.  In  keeping  with  the  overall  Objectives  of  the  NEP,  robust  policy 
interventions  have  to  be  made  which  will  arrest  the  trend  and  enhance  domestic 
production.  The  above  scenario  also  calls  for  demand  side  interventions  discussed 
earlier.  
increased  by  38%.  Consequently,  India’s 
the  consumption 
 
 
 
27 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
4.3 Upstream 
 
4.3.1 
India  has  nearly  3.17  million  square  km  of  sedimentary  area,  out  of  which 
only 19% has been moderately-to well-explored. In order to quickly appraise 
the  entire  sedimentary  area,  there  is  a  need  to  offer  geological  data  to  the 
prospective  Exploration  and  Production  (E&P)  companies.  The  Director 
General of Hydrocarbon will complete this appraisal by applying Oil Industry 
Development  Board  (OIDB)  funds  expeditiously.  The  sponsored  data 
acquisition will be supplemented by multi-client speculative surveys. 
 
4.3.2  As the National Data Repository gets  commissioned, it will become possible 
to launch Open Acreage Licensing Policy (OALP). The terms for bidding for 
acreage under OALP will be finalized by the end of this financial year (2017-
18) so that exploration can be intensified and the entire area can be awarded 
for exploration by 2022. In order to encourage bids, the terms will favour the 
first bidder for the available acreage.  
 
 
4.3.3  There is  a potential for  opening up the upstream data business  to  the private 
sector by easing controls on data sharing. Even proprietary data ought to come 
into  public  domain  after  specified  timelines.  This  will  also  help  in  improved 
success rate in exploration of areas in close proximity to discovered areas. The 
Government  will  release  all  geological  and  other  technical  non-proprietary 
data to specialist data companies, for use by research agencies and oil and gas 
sector companies for existing exploration and promotion of acreage. 
 
4.3.4  A number of NELP contracts are in existence. But, as of March, 2017 only 19 
discoveries  have  come  into  production.  Many  blocks  with  discoveries  and 
unfulfilled  exploratory  commitment  have  come  under  stress  due  to  two 
reasons - sub-optimal size of discoveries and violation of prescribed timelines. 
There  is  a  need  to  monetise  discoveries  and  intensify  exploration  in  the 
awarded  acreages  that  have  come  under  stress  by  resolving  the  above  two 
issues. 
 
4.3.5  Out  of  the  26  sedimentary  basins,  only  7  basins  are  producing  ones  while 
exploration has not been initiated in 15 of them. In order to attract risk capital 
in exploration activity to the latter, a more attractive regime including ‘uplift’ 
which allows a multiple of the exploratory spend in cost recovery, may need to 
be  offered.  Hence,  a  differential  fiscal  exploratory  regime  will  be  developed 
keeping in mind the risk profile of the basin. 
 
4.3.6  The existing NELP contracts provide for cost recovery for which an elaborate 
approval  process  exists  which  has  been  found  to  be  unwieldy  and  irksome. 
Greater  empowerment  for  quicker  decision  making,  more  transparency  and 
standardized norms can alone provide the necessary expediency. Steps will be 
taken to provide for an efficient decision making apparatus. 
 
4.3.7  The  upstream  regulatory  regime  and  contract  administration  need  to  be 
separated  for  an  arms-length  administration  of  upstream  matters.  The  former 
28 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
function will be distanced from the Government and placed in a statutory body 
while  the  latter  will  remain  with  the  Government.  However,  the  latter  needs 
technically competent advice, for which a specialist wing may be created out 
of the existing DGH on the lines  of Central  Electricity  Authority  (CEA)  and 
Telecommunication  Engineering  Centre (TEC) in  the areas of electricity and 
telecom, respectively. 
 
4.3.8  The  role  of  markets  in  determining  prices,  consumer  categories/consumers, 
pipeline alignment and efficiency in capital expenditure will be enhanced. The 
new upstream contracts are already providing for above freedoms. Regulatory 
oversight and audit mechanisms are expected to address public concerns.   
 
4.3.9  There is a need to migrate the existing hydrocarbons regime (both Nomination 
and  PSCs)  to  the  emerging  framework  of  market-determined  prices  and 
marketing freedom.  However, this cannot be done overnight  and needs to be 
achieved  in  gradual  phases.  This  is  expected  to  remove  the  anomalous 
situation  of  multiple  gas  prices  with  the  attendant  legacy  of  gas  allocation. 
Releasing  cash  directly  on  lines  of  DBT  can  meet  the  government’s  aim  of 
subsidising farmers in the purchase of gas-based urea.    
 
4.3.10  Upstream infrastructure is often a challenge for E&P companies especially for 
smaller  finds  and  for  discoveries  in  offshore  and  difficult  terrains.  The 
Government  will  issue  guidelines  for  mandatory  sharing  of  surplus  infra  on 
the  lines  of  ‘common  carrier’  downstream  infrastructure.  This  will  help  in 
quicker  monetization  of  smaller  discoveries  and  make  infra  investments 
financially viable, too. Nearly 200 discoveries exist under the nomination and 
PSC regimes, which have not been put to production. These discoveries must 
be monetized or surrendered for re-cycling under OALP in the next 2-3 years. 
 
4.3.11  Production from NOCs needs to be given special attention as they are holding 
older  acreages,  many  of  which  are  depleting.  Looking  to  the  fact  that  such 
nominated  acreages  are  producing  68.4%  and  73.5%  (2015),  respectively  of 
India’s oil and gas production, there is an urgency to encourage this segment. 
At the same time, there exists a potential to fully appraise these properties for 
tapping  of  the  balance  resources.  The  Government  will  encourage  closer 
association  of  NOCs  with  private  sector  to  rejuvenate  the  mature  fields,  and 
extract full value from them, too. New forms of contractual arrangements on 
risk sharing basis will be considered to achieve the above objective. 
 
4.3.12  Induction  of  latest  technology,  improvement  in  the  skill  set  of  industry 
personnel,  adequate  supply  of  technical  manpower  of  related  disciplines, 
availability  of  service  industry  and  eco-system  of  supporting  private  sector 
supplies  call  for  an  integrated  collaborative  strategy  from  the  industry  and 
Government. The NOCs will be encouraged to evolve new forms of alliance to 
access these technologies. 
 
 
 
29 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
4.4 Downstream 
 
4.4.1  At the end of financial year 2016, domestic refining capacity was nearly 25% 
higher  than  the  country’s  demand  for  petroleum  products.  This  surplus 
capacity is a high foreign exchange earner and assures us energy security. In 
recent years, from 2010-11 to 2015-16, the pace of capacity expansion was at 
a CAGR of 3.5%, against a CAGR of 5.4% in demand for petroleum products. 
India may become a net importer of refined products in the near future. Hence, 
there  is  a  need  for  the  Government  to  encourage  capacity  expansion  and 
setting  up  of  Greenfield  refineries,  preferably  at  coastal  locations,  through 
measures,  including  facilitating  market  access  for  new  refineries.  Further, 
support  can  be  given  to  investors  in  the  refining  sector  by  resolving  issues 
related  to  land  acquisition  and  infrastructure.  However,  this  expansion  will 
have  to  bear  challenges  to  liquid  fuel  demand  from  new  technologies, 
especially EVs in mind.  
 
4.4.2  Petrochemical  sector  is  closely  linked  to  availability  of  feedstock  from 
refineries.  A  revamped  coordinated  strategy  for  integrated  refinery-cum-
petrochemical  development  along  the  coastline  will  be  separately  launched 
with  a  view  to  exploit  the  logistical  advantage  of  imported  crude  supplies. 
This  will  also  sit  well  with  the  Government’s  emphasis  on  ‘port-led’ 
development of coastal regions. 
 
4.4.3  Storage  of  crude  and  petroleum  products  has  not  grown  in  India  in  keeping 
with  global  practice,  to  assure  crude  supplies  at  times  of  supply  disruption. 
Strategic stocks are available only for 5.33 MT against annual consumption of 
183.5 MT of products in 2015-16, which is expected to keep rising. Stocking 
of  crude  and  products  is  the  norm  in  countries  where  market  norms  are  the 
prevalent  practice.  The  Government  will  encourage  setting-up  of  90-day 
consumption requirement of strategic and commercial storages, both for crude 
and  petroleum  products  through  innovative  private  investment  strategies  as 
has  been  successfully  witnessed  recently  with  Gulf  suppliers  for  the 
Mangalore storage. 
 
4.4.4  With  rising  integration  of  South  Asia,  greater  inter-dependence  amongst  the 
countries  of  the  region  will  be  a  natural  outcome.  The  recently  concluded 
SAARC agreement in 2014 on South Asian electricity grid is an example. The 
surplus refining capacity in North India and North East holds the potential for 
supplying  neighbouring  countries,  which  will  be  actively  promoted  by  the 
Government.  The  role  of  pipelines  and  regional  product  demand  and  supply 
will be important for tapping the above market. 
 
4.5 Marketing 
 
4.5.1  Development of a vibrant gas market is the key to raising the share of gas in 
primary  commercial  energy  mix.  The  Government  has  already  declared  its 
intention of transitioning towards a gas economy. Availability of domestic gas 
supplies, which is likely to grow only over medium term, cannot be the  lone 
30 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
strategy. LNG and gas supplies via pipelines from West and Central Asia need 
to  be  assimilated  in  our  energy  system.  The  Oil  Marketing  Companies 
(OMCs), whose primary business so far has been liquid fuel, have to recognize 
the  role  of  gas  and  enhance  their  uptake  of  the  latter.  The  Government  will 
come  up  with  a  comprehensive  strategy  to  encourage  gas  as  a  substitute  for 
oil.  
 
4.5.2  A large gas-based power generation capacity lies stranded due to inability of 
the power sector to pass-on the variable cost of generating power from LNG. 
If these plants  could become operational, it would raise the utilisation of gas 
pipelines and LNG terminals, thereby boosting the share of gas in our energy 
mix.  This  may  also  assist  renewable  electricity,  which  is  in  the  need  of  a 
balancing  power  supply.  A  concerted  effort  of  Petroleum,  Power  and 
Renewable Energy Ministries is called for to exploit these assets. If necessary, 
the Government may extend purchase support to gas-based power on the lines 
of what was done to develop the wind/solar sectors. 
 
4.5.3  On the lines of a normative petroleum product storage infrastructure, even gas 
storage  will  be  required  if  consumers  have  to  be  assured  of  un-interrupted 
supplies. Depleted oil/gas fields of NOCs will be offered on competitive basis 
to  interested  gas  marketers,  both  for  strategic  and  commercial  storages.  This 
calls for a policy statement. 
 
 
4.5.4  OMCs  have  done  a  commendable  job  in  maintaining  petroleum  supplies 
throughout  the  country.  The  next  step  in  this  direction  is  to  encourage 
competition  by  entry  of  private  sector  in  a  big  way,  so  as  to  raise  efficiency 
and  consumer  satisfaction  levels.  Even  the  prices  of  non-sensitive  petroleum 
products,  including  ATF  will  become  more  reflective  of  movements  in  the 
international  crude  prices.  The  policy  framework  regarding  creation  of 
‘common  carriers’  and access  to  marketing infrastructure will be liberalized. 
This  will  pave  the  way  for  Petroleum  and  Natural  Gas  Regulatory  Board 
(PNGRB) to issue consistent regulations. 
 
4.5.5  With  a  view  to  promoting  LNG  uptake,  the  provisions  of  ‘open  access’  and 
‘regulated tariff’ in the PNGRB Act need to be extended to gas off-takers at 
the LNG terminals. The Government will issue necessary policy guidelines for 
the same. 
 
4.5.6 
In order to increase the penetration of natural gas, a National Gas Grid would 
have  to  be  rolled  out  throughout  the  country  and  VGF  support  would  be 
extended to the stranded gas pipelines towards achievement of the above goal. 
Further, the pace of award of City Gas Distribution (CGD) licenses will need 
to pick up to distribute piped natural  gas throughout urban India. Looking to 
the long-term commitment of funds in creation of this infrastructure, attractive 
investment terms may be offered. In this direction, the Government will issue 
appropriate  policy  guidelines  for  compliance  by  the  PNGRB.  This  will  be 
done on a priority basis since substitution of liquid fuel by natural  gas is  the 
key to  curbing  emissions while sparing  LPG for smaller markets  in  the rural 
areas. 
31 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
4.5.7  Availability  of  petroleum  products  in  rural  areas  needs  to  be  enhanced  for 
supply of clean cooking fuels on a sustained basis. The role of private traders 
in connecting these areas needs to be tapped by easing the licensing regime for 
petroleum trade. This is likely to lead to innovative marketing practices such 
as bottling of  LPG in varying volumes, introduction  of a variety  of payment 
terms  and  retail  practices,  suited  for  such  markets.  This  will  give  long-term 
stability to PMUY. 
 
4.5.8  The appropriate use of kerosene in the energy system has to be appreciated. Its 
use as a cooking fuel is  marginal as compared to lighting, especially in rural 
homes, which can easily be substituted by solar lamps. However, malpractices 
in its distribution, primarily due to price differential with other fuels, result in 
leakage of public finances and harm to transport sector. The Government will 
erect an efficient DBT based kerosene subsidy administration system, aimed at 
appropriate  target—consuming  sector  and  consumers,  while  restricting 
diversion.  
 
 
4.5.9  Pricing  plays  a  major  role  in  petroleum  sector.  Having  assured  international 
prices  of  crude  to  upstream  producers,  consumer  prices  of  both  oil  and  gas 
must  reflect  market  determined  prices.  At  present,  these  fuels  are  unable  to 
compete due to policy-induced price and tax distortions.  One example of the 
latter is import duties on LNG, which discourages the use of a clean fuel vis-à-
vis crude oil. Then, there are multiple prices in several commodities owing to 
duplicate  channels  of  distribution,  one  through  the  subsidy  route  and  second 
via free market channels as seen in LPG and natural gas. The above anomaly 
ought  to  be  rationalised  and  DBT  may  be  adopted  to  address  the  needs  of 
subsidy  disbursal,  thereby  doing  away  with  the  dual  pricing  regime.  The 
Government will put in place a comprehensive pricing policy to encourage oil 
and  gas  production  both  from  existing  and  new  fields,  and  adequate  returns 
along  the  value  chain,  by  removing  distortions  both  between  petroleum 
products and with other fuels. 
 
4.5.10  Wider  consumer  choice,  based  on  competitive  prices  is  the  goal  of  efficient 
markets.  It  is  expected  that  electricity,  gas,  liquid  fuels  including  LPG,  will 
witness greater competition across consumption sectors than before. The two 
most  significant  consumer  needs  (after  lighting),  transportation  and  cooking, 
will  be  the  first  candidates  for  inter-play  of  market  forces,  which  will  be 
reinforced  by  technological  advancements  in  areas  of  Electric  Vehicles  and 
induction  cooking.  The  Government  will  encourage  these  developments  by 
removing  distortions  in  pricing  and  taxation,  and  encouraging  trade  and 
creation of related infrastructure.  
 
4.6 Petroleum sector can play the role of a multiplier in many sectors of our economy. In 
this section we discussed those aspects of this sector, which have relevance to meeting 
the  energy  related  objectives  of  our  country.  In  the  above  process,  there  are  several 
other impacts on our economy, which call for a balanced view in taking decisions. Oil 
sector  taxation  has  a  major  role  to  play  in  bolstering  up  Union  and  State  finances, 
including  on  sharing  the  rents.  Fiscal  levies  also  serve  environmental  objectives  by 
serving  as  the  proxy  for  congestion  and  air  pollution  in  road  transport.  Our  large 
32 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
energy  imports  (mainly  of  oil  and  gas)  have  anchored  our  economic  relations  with 
many countries, including the two super-powers. Our NOCs contribute a large share 
of  the  value  of  our  capital  market,  and  their  re-organisation  decisions  have  large 
implication on stock exchanges.  Looking to  the above, a robust inter-ministerial  co-
ordination  mechanism  could  go  a  long  way  in  advising  the  Petroleum  Ministry  in 
decision-making and implementing them, too.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
Coal 
 
5.1. Amongst fossil fuels,  India is most well endowed with coal.  Approximately 7% of 
the  world’s  proven  coal  reserves  are  located  in  India,  which  enhances  its  stature 
amongst the basket of fuels. Additionally, coal is important to us for other reasons — 
large  thermal  power  capacity,  a  large  employer  and  negligible  price  volatility.  The 
large  power  requirement  and  solid  fuel  demand  in  process  industries  brings  to  fore 
the  need  for  efficient  coal  exploitation,  investment  in  related  infrastructure,  and  a 
forward-looking regime.  The large planned new coal based thermal capacity is likely 
to put pressure on coal resources. Coal based power generation capacity of 125 GW 
in 2012 is likely to go up to more than 330-441 GW by 2040 (192 GW in FY 2017). 
The  demand  for  these  plants  is  likely  to  be  first  met  by  domestic  coal,  which  will 
require  quick  exploitation  of  our  reserves.  As  per  assessment,  at  high  rates  of  coal 
demand,  domestic  coal  supplies  may  plateau  by  the  year  2035.  (Figure  2).    All  the 
above  call  for  fuller  coal  resource  assessment,  optimum  mining,  efficient  use,  and 
appropriate reckoning of the role of coal in our energy mix.   
 
Figure 2: Trend of domestic coal production in India 
Coal Production (MT) 
1600
1400
1385
1200
1190
1000
800
600
400
200
0
2012
2017
2022
2027
2032
2037
2040
BAU Pathway
Ambitious Pathway
 
Figure 1  
Source: Derived from IESS 
5.2. The share of coal in India’s commercial primary energy supply was 55% in 2015-16 
and is  expected to  remain high at  48-54% in  2040.  Imports  contributed 25% of the 
supply in 2015-16, and could remain high unless domestic production grows rapidly. 
The thrust of the NEP will be on interventions required to optimally exploit our coal 
34 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
resources,  while  addressing  the  overall  environmental  concerns  related  to  coal 
mining. Sustained levels of high domestic production would greatly advance India’s 
energy security. Coal gasification technology and methanol economy also hold value 
for  India to  commercially  tap our  coal  resources.  In the instant  discussion here, we 
recommend measures,  which directly relate to  enhancing coal  production, optimum 
use, and efficiency in use (high efficiency, low emission). 
 
5.3. While the role of coal in India’s energy future draws mainly from the long history of 
coal  in  India  and  abroad,  the  electricity  markets  of  the  world  including  India  are 
being  shaken  by  falling  costs  and  rising  efficiency  of  renewable  technologies. 
Experts agree that once the costs of supporting technologies such as battery storage 
(already  falling  at  the  rate  of  10%  per  year)  make  the  cost  of  variable  renewable 
power viable, coal based power will phase out. This makes the task of projecting the 
demand for coal difficult. In FY 2017, the addition of conventional power generation 
capacity  in  India  was  surpassed  by  addition  in  the  renewable  sector.  The  NEP 
proposes  that  different  fuels  are  allowed  to  compete  for  market  and  administrative 
directions  to  invest  or  not  invest  are  not  given.  At  present,  CIL  is  making  a  yearly 
investment  of  nearly  $1  billion  to  augment  capacity  to  meet  the  target  of  1  billion 
tonnes  of  coal  production  by  2019.  For  this  investment  to  be  viable,  coal-based 
power capacity must gradually rise to double from the present. It would be desirable 
that while facilitating the policy and fiscal regimes for coal production in India, we 
allow decisions to be made on the basis of market cues.  
 
5.4. Production 
 
5.4.1  Coal India Ltd (CIL) is expected to remain the principal vehicle of coal 
production in the country in the immediate future. It has to strive hard 
to achieve the target of 1 billion tonne production by 2019. However, 
with subdued demand for coal, we may not require the production level 
envisaged  above.  A  careful  assessment  of  demand  for  coal-based 
power  is  needed  so  that  the  over  $1  billion  annual  investment  being 
made  by  CIL,  in  raising  its  production  capability  is  not  left  stranded. 
Looking  to  the  fact  that  power  demand  is  growing  only  at  5%  per 
annum  presently,  the  coal  sector  is  allowed  to  respond  autonomously 
rather than pursue a target-led strategy. 
 
5.4.2  The issue of meeting full coal demand of the power plants with FSAs 
needs  to  be  resolved  so  that  these  plants  are  able  to  receive  their  full 
coal demand, and raise their PLFs. CIL will prioritise its allocation to 
these power plants. 
 
5.4.3  The  concept  of  ‘pass-through’  of  coal  price  in  power  sector  whereby 
coal  is  supplied  to  power  companies  at  subsidized  rates  compared  to 
the  market  price  so  that  they  may  sell  electricity  at  subsidized  prices 
35 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
does  not  encourage  efficient  mining,  and  is  also  responsible  for  low 
productivity of coal  in  CIL. A  change in  present  policy is  required to 
move towards market pricing.  
 
5.4.4  The pursuit of raising overall coal production will require an integrated 
strategy including for licensing commercial mining, appropriate pricing 
and  attractive  returns  over  investment.  The  above  will  have  to  be 
dovetailed  with  adequate  transportation  for  evacuation  of  coal  and 
setting  up  of  coal  washeries.  The  environmental  guidelines  on  coal 
quality will keep tightening, calling for washing/blending of all coal to 
meet the ash content specifications. An appropriate commercial model 
alone  can  attract  such  investment,  which  is  determined  by  a  coal 
market. 
5.4.5  The  present  coal  regime  in  India  continues  to  be  a  historical  relic. 
While  most  other  sectors  of  the  economy  have  evolved  to  adopt  free 
market  principles,  beyond  the  adoption  of  auctioning  of  mines,  coal 
sector has remained untouched by liberalizing reforms. In 2015-16, the 
total supply of coal was 840 million tonnes. Of this, 540 million tonnes 
was  supplied  by  the  seven  subsidiaries  of  CIL.  Singareni  Collieries 
Company  Limited  (SCCL),  jointly  owned  by  the  Government  of 
Telangana  and  the  Government  of  India,  supplied  another  60  million 
tonnes.  Of  the  remaining  240  million  tonnes,  imports  accounted  for 
nearly 200 million tonnes and private companies for 40 million tonnes. 
 
5.4.6  On  the  demand  side,  coal  users  include  generation  companies  that 
receive  coal  under  old  long  standing  Fuel  Supply  Agreements  (FSA), 
generation  companies 
through  reverse  auction, 
independent  power  producers,  captive  power  producers,  other 
industrial coal users and some small retail consumers.  Beyond a small 
e-auction  market,  our  coal  economy  is  run  almost  entirely  through 
administrative  allocation.    There  exist  multiple  prices  associated  with 
the  allocations  and  the  methodology  of  fixing  coal  prices  is  arbitrary.  
Coal India Limited charges prices that are significantly higher than the 
implicit  cost  of  mining  by  the  Independent  Power  Producers  (IPPs).  
Given  its  monopoly  on  coal,  CIL  is  able  to  pass  higher  costs  to  coal 
buyers and thus has no incentive to contain costs. 
that  buy  coal 
 
5.4.7 
In the medium to long run, it is essential that we move away from this 
opaque  coal  economy  and  introduce  greater  competition  in  it.    This 
requires  two  key  steps.    First,  we  must  corporatize  the  seven 
subsidiaries  of  CIL  into  independent  companies  and  allow  them  to 
compete  against  one  another  in  an  open  coal  market.    Second, 
progressively  fresh  production  from  new  mines  ought  to  come  from 
private  sector.  This  will  call  for  comprehensive  reforms  in  allocating 
36 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
coal blocks on commercial lines to independent companies specialized 
in  coal  mining.  These  two  steps  will  replace  the  current  system  of 
administrative  allocation  of  coal  by  a  vibrant  coal  market  with  prices 
performing  the  function  of  allocation.    The  resulting  competitive 
pressure will foster efficiency and bring about substantial reduction in 
coal price.  It is entirely conceivable that our coal industry will emerge 
as an exporter of coal. 
 
5.4.8  A  possible  downside  of  market-determined  coal  supply  may  be  its 
potential  adverse  impact  on  electricity  price  paid  by  vulnerable 
customers through an increase in  the price of  coal  paid  by  generation 
companies.    Our  assessment  is  that  reductions  in  coal  prices  due  to 
increased  efficiency  and  competition  are  likely  to  lower  rather  than 
raise  the  price  of  coal  for  generation  companies.    But  even  in  the 
unlikely  event  that  the  price  of  coal  for  generation  companies  rises 
thereby necessitating a temporary rise in their sale price of electricity, 
we  must  protect  the  vulnerable  electricity  customers  through  direct 
benefit transfer (DBT). Our ultimate objective is to provide electricity 
at  low  prices  to  vulnerable  customers  and  this  can  be  done  more 
efficiently by giving the subsidy to the latter through DBT.  Achieving 
the  same  goal  indirectly  through  the  provision  of  subsidized  coal  to 
generation  companies  creates  unnecessary 
the 
production process.  
inefficiency 
in 
 
5.4.9  The  installed  coal  based  generation  capacity  is  expected  to  grow  to 
330- 441 GW by 2040.  This is likely to translate into a coal demand of 
1.1-1.4 billion tonnes. The known levels of proven coal reserves (138 
billion  tons  as  of  31.03.2016)  may  only  be  able  to  support  an  annual 
peak  production  of  1.2-1.3  billion  tonnes  till  2037,  with  a  gradual 
decrease  thereafter.    This  fact  calls  for  intensifying  exploration  to 
enhance  the  proven  coal  reserves.  Multiple  institutions  such  as  GSI, 
CMPDI and IBM are responsible for exploration of coal in India. There 
is  a  need  to  synergise  the  efforts  of  all  these  agencies  to  undertake 
100% resource mapping of coal.   
 
 
5.5  Interim Measures to Achieve Transparency in Pricing 
 
5.5.1  The  reforms  to  create  a  genuinely  open  and  competitive  coal  market  as 
described  above  will  take  some  time.  Therefore,  in  order  to  address  the 
immediate concerns, there is need for determining the price of coal in a more 
transparent  manner,  the  procedure  of  which  would  be  in  the  public  domain. 
Moreover, the practice of differential pricing by CIL, wherein different prices 
are  charged  to  different  category  of  consumers  needs  to  be  dropped  with 
37 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
buyers competing for coal.  In the coming years, power demand of the country 
will  be  met  by  multiple  energy  sources  and  efficiency  requires  that  market 
forces determine their shares. This calls for market discovery of coal price and 
pricing  of  electricity  by  generation  companies  based  on  genuine  costs.  Any 
fear of a rise in price to vulnerable customers should be addressed by subsidy 
on power use through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT).  Distribution companies 
should pay full market-determined price to generation companies and receive 
the same from customers with the latter compensated through DBT.  
 
5.5.2  Allowing  the  market  to  determine  the  price  of  domestic  coal  will  also  help 
eliminate inefficiencies arising from administered prices of domestic coal vis-
à-vis imported coal.  As long as the delivered   price of domestic coal is lower 
than  that  of  imported  coal,  no  imports  would  take  place.    Imports  will  only 
come up to the point that the delivered import price equals the delivered price 
of  domestic  coal.    This  will  also  ensure  that  at  the  margin  the  costs  of 
electricity produced from using domestic and imported coal are equal. 
 
5.5.3 
In  the  immediate  future,  the  issue  of  coal  supply  to  ‘stranded’  power  plants 
must  be  addressed  on  priority  so  as  to  gain  benefits  from  the  investment 
already incurred.  The extant statute is being invoked  to ensure coal linkages 
for stranded assets as the first recipients.  In the case of power supplies under 
long-term  agreements,  the  principle  of  ‘pass  through’  of  cost  of  coal  from 
mines acquired through auction may be maintained.  This is required as per the 
law. However, for sales of coal to other customers in electricity generation and 
other industries, coal may be sold at market prices. 
 
5.5.4  The Government has already come out with a policy whereby mines have been 
allotted  to  state  governments.    The  latter  are  to  supply  coal  to  non-regulated 
sectors through coal auctions.  While this is an improvement over the current 
system  of  administrative  allocation  of  coal  at  administered  prices,  it  is 
important  to  remember  that  the  state  governments  need  not  have  the  best 
expertise  in  coal  mining.    It  is  important  that  coalmines  are  auctioned  at 
commercial  terms  so  that  we  get  the  benefit  of  the  most  efficient  mining 
technologies. In this respect, the proposals for the introduction of commercial 
mining are a welcome step. 
 
 
5.5.5  The  current  practice  of  reverse  bidding  whereby  generation  companies 
offering to sell electricity at the lowest price are awarded coalmines at below 
competitive prices also undermines efficiency.  This process once again results 
in  subsidized  price  of  coal  for  generation  companies  provided  the  latter  pass 
on  the  subsidy  to  electricity  customers.  As  already  discussed,  healthy 
development  of  the  coal  sector  requires  that  we  give  the  subsidy  directly  to 
intended beneficiaries instead of inputs along the production chain.  
38 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
 
5.5.6  The  UMPP  policy  calls  for  a  tie-up  between  the  coal  and  power  sectors.    In 
order  to  facilitate  grant  of  multiple  regulatory  permissions,  and  provide 
essential  inputs  such  as  land,  coal  and  water  available  to  the  proposed  large 
coal based power plants, the Government has launched ‘plug and play’ policy.  
As already discussed, we must move away from the linkage and provide coal 
on the basis of market price instead of the reverse bidding process. This  will 
also  sit  well  with  promoting  coal  production  by  offering  attractive  price  to 
CIL.  
 
5.5.7  The present policy of reverse bidding has the further drawback that it results in 
a loss of royalty income to coal bearing states. Realisation of market price by 
states  would  lead  to  a  rise  in  power  prices,  but  higher  accruals  to  the  state 
governments  through  royalty  payments.    The  extra  revenues  so  earned  can 
contribute to DBT transfers to vulnerable electricity customers.  
 
5.6  Other Interventions 
 
5.6.1  The potentials of exploiting coal bed methane (CBM) and in-situ gasification 
of non-producible coal (Underground coal gasification or UCG for short) have 
not  been  exploited  satisfactorily  in  India.    The  mandate  for  exploiting  CBM 
should be placed fully within the domain of the Ministry of Coal, principally 
because  the  efficient  concept  of  unified  licensing  policy  demands  that  even 
CBM  and  coal  ought  to  be  commonly  licensed.  Due  to  the  large  volume  of 
coal resources that cannot be exploited due to poor quality and other reasons, 
the prospect of tapping UCG is immense.  Similarly, other value-added outputs 
such as methanol/DME can also be produced from coal. A Committee may be 
appointed under the chairmanship of Member (S&T), NITI Aayog to develop 
the technology roadmap for gasification of coal and tapping coal by products 
such as methanol and DME.  
 
5.6.2  Third  Party  sampling  has  been  introduced  by  the  Government  to  test  the 
quality  and  quantity  of  delivered  CIL-supplied  coal  at  the  consumption  end.  
But further improvements are required in this regard. In particular, Railways, 
which transport coal, need to be party to this arrangement.  
 
5.6.3  Opening  up  the  coal  sector  to  encourage  commercial  mining  and  move 
towards  market-determined  prices,  can  only  succeed  if  decision-making  is  at 
arm’s  length.    This  makes  the  need  for  an  independent  statutory  Coal 
Regulator  even  more  acute.    The  Government  must  appoint  an  independent 
Coal  Regulator  for  healthy  and  comprehensive  development  of  this  sector  at 
the  earliest.  At  the  appellate  level,  the  responsibility  may  be  given  to  the 
existing Electricity Tribunal.  
 
39 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
5.6.4  The  link  between  coal  mining  and  adverse  local  environmental  implication 
calls  for  efforts  to  mitigate  the  ill-effects.    The  Government  has  already 
announced a robust agenda for sharing of the sovereign income from the coal 
sector with the local bodies and communities for adequate safeguarding of the 
eco system. The Government’s announcement in 2014 forbidding power plants 
situated beyond 500 Km from coalmines from using coal with more than 34% 
ash content is  a step in  the right  direction.  It  is  proposed to further  raise this 
bar in the future so that the fallout from transport of ash is minimized and the 
subsequent problem of ash/slag handling at power plants is avoided.  
 
5.6.5  Mine developers and operators (MDOs) are likely to play a critical role in coal 
mining, especially in the private sector. The MDO contract must be drawn up 
with  care  so  that  it  does  not  lead  to  disputes  and  issues  of  interpretation, 
hampering the growth of coal mining. With the opening of the coal sector to 
private  mining  and  trade,  dedicated  coal  mining  companies  may  also  be 
expected to enter this business. 
40 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Non-Fossil Fuel Based Energy Supply 
Chapter 6 
Renewable Energy 
 
6.1. With rising maturity of renewable energy technologies, aided by decline in their costs 
and  upon  environment  considerations,  the  Government  has  already  articulated  its 
decision to boost Renewable Energy capacity.  While a cumulative capacity target of 
175 GW has been declared for the year 2022, by 2040 a likely capacity of 597-710 
GW is expected to be achieved.  However, no targets are proposed beyond 2022 as 
the growth is expected to take place autonomously. The above capacity will translate 
into 50%-56% and 29%-36% Renewable Energy (excluding large hydro) capacity in 
installed capacity and generation from all power generation sources by 2040, in place 
of  14%  and  6.5%,  respectively  in  2015-16.  The  period  2017-2040  will,  therefore, 
witness  a  transformation  in  the  electricity  sector  of  India,  calling  for  policy  action 
across the entire value chain of generation, transmission and distribution. 
 
6.2. The  Renewable  Energy  policy  has  to  be  a  subset  of  the  larger  electricity  sector 
policy.  In the NEP, we are merely considering measures that are required to ensure 
that  the  large  envisaged  Renewable  Energy  capacity  integrates  well  with  the 
electricity system (See Box 3). In this regard, electricity markets are now expected to 
take over the role that Government subsidies have played so far. The sharp reduction 
in  tariffs  received  in  bids  for  solar  and  wind  power  points  towards  two  aspects  – 
exposing these technologies to  market  discipline, and also the need to  now address 
other  lagging  renewable  sources  such  as  hydro  and  biomass.  On  markets,  as 
renewable  technologies  mature,  they  ought  to  support  transmission  and  balancing 
concerns  on  their  own.  Therefore,  the  NEP  proposes  gradual  withdrawal  of  the 
provisions  of  ‘must-run’  status  and  other  supports  such  as  non-levy  of  inter-State 
transmission charges. It is envisaged that as consumers become agnostic to the source 
of  power,  renewable  energy  will  soon  blend  with  conventional  power  and  markets 
will determine dispatch rather than policy levers. 
 
6.3. Large Hydro-Power 
6.3.1 While proposing policy action, the common issues of the two major Renewable Energy 
sources  –  solar  and  wind  –  are  in  primary  focus.    However,  the  importance  of  other 
Renewable Energy sources is also well recognized. Large hydro-power can play a key role in 
balancing variable electricity due to its ability to store water in comparison with small hydro 
power,  which  are  essentially  run-of-the-river  projects.  There  is  merit  in  supporting  hydro 
capacities larger than 25 MW as well, which are presently not covered under the category of 
Small  Hydro-power  (SHP).  As  the  issues  of  the  hydro  sector  are  different  from  wind/solar 
technologies, dedicated attention needs to be given to former. Despite India being endowed 
with a large potential, this sector has been rather slow in delivering power to the nation, and 
the share of large hydro in the electricity mix has fallen from 12% in 2002 (at the end of the 
41 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
IXth  Plan)  to  10%  in  2014-15.  Arunachal  Pradesh  alone  is  touted  to  have  a  potential  of 
50,000 MW of hydro-power potential of which only 98 MW has been developed till March, 
2016.  Experience  tells  us  that  R&R  are  not  the  only  reason,  though  a  major  one,  for  poor 
development of hydro resources.  
6.3.2 This source of power has a large number of co-benefits including containment of flood, 
irrigation, fishery, ground water-charge to name a few. There are adverse consequences, too, 
which call for quality research at the stage of project development and provision of funds for 
implementation  of  safeguards.  It  is  envisaged  that  the  Central  and  State  Governments  will 
cooperate in reorienting the current hydro-power strategy for course correction. A salient part 
of the above will be financial rehabilitation of the on-going/stranded large hydro projects so 
that the funds already invested in them can be put to good use. The Government will consider 
a rehabilitation package for revival of the stranded hydel projects.  The project life of hydro 
projects will be considered for a longer time frame (60 years instead of the present 35 years), 
which will enable them to  access  long term  financing. Among other lessons, the  successful 
implementation  of  Indian Government projects  in  Bhutan is  a good example to  emulate for 
the proposed new strategy.  
 
6.4. The following measures will be initiated for a healthy growth and smooth integration 
of renewable sources of electricity in the Indian electricity system: 
 
6.5. Financial Measures:  
 
6.5.1. In  the  case  of  technologies  that  need  financial  support  to  compete  with 
conventional power, Performance linked incentives that do not involve upfront 
payment but encourage generation, will be promoted. Incentives like deferral 
of  tax  (accelerated  depreciation  subject  to  provisions  in  the  proposed  GST) 
appear to be appropriate tools over other measures.  Capital subsidy needs to 
be phased out and feed-in tariffs ought to drive growth of Renewable Energy. 
It is evident that in the short run, without RPO compliance, the growth of this 
sector will be slow. Over time as the cost of these technologies fall, there may 
be a balanced regional growth of these sources. Once markets drive renewable 
energy autonomously, there may be no need to enforce RPOs. This would also 
result in renewable energy shares differing across the States. 
 
6.5.2. The level of tariff support, until necessary, will be determined on the basis of 
marginal  cost  of  power,  which  has  so  far  been  imported  coal  based  power.  
However,  for  off-grid  solutions  including  stand-alone  systems,  the  support 
level  will  be  calculated  on  the  basis  of  average  cost  of  supply  (ACS)  from 
grid-based solutions. It has already been established that competitively derived 
prices  (both  for  wind  and  solar)  are  ideal  for  determination  of  the  level  of 
support and also to drive them down. 
 
42 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
6.5.3. It  is recognized that due to  inherent qualities  of  lower cost via economies of 
scale  and  ability  to  meet  varying  demand  for  power,  grid  based  electricity  is 
preferable  to  renewable  solutions.  Therefore,  efforts  will  be  made  to  first 
electrify villages by extension of grid.  However, small size of habitations and 
remote 
  The 
electrification of such habitations will not be postponed until grid reaches, and 
in the short run off-grid solutions will be provided. 
render  grid-based  solutions  unviable. 
locations,  often 
 
6.5.4. Renewable  Energy  Service  Companies  (RESCOs)  can  provide  capital, 
technology  and  maintenance  support  to  the  Renewable  Energy  sector, 
particularly,  in  the  case  of  roof  top  segment.    The  Government  will  issue 
appropriate  guidelines  for  ensuring  satisfactory  technical  standards,  model 
contracts and payment assurance for the RESCO business model. 
 
6.5.5. The  present  financing  models  are  placing  all  the  cost  of  balancing  the 
intermittent renewable supply on the DISCOMs. Tools such as RPO and REC 
impose  a  large  burden  on  the  latter.  The  Government  will  develop  suitable 
financing mechanisms to support them, including building it into the prices of 
renewable energy, in meeting the difference in the true cost of supply between 
conventional and renewable supply.   
 
6.5.6. With  increasing  deployment,  while  renewable  generation  technologies  have 
become  cheaper,  but  due  to  remoteness  of  sites,  the  cost  of  developing  local 
infrastructure  and  evacuating  power  continues  to  be  high.  The  Government 
will endeavor to support the non-generation segments of this business through 
facilitation  and  engagement  with  state  agencies.  Due  to  the  long  gestation 
period of Renewable Energy, financial support for the above segment may be 
needed  in  the  short  term.  Ultimately  it  is  expected  that  infrastructure 
development would be able to come up on its own. 
 
6.6. Renewable Energy for Energy Access 
 
In many situations, Renewable Energy based mini-grids and micro-grids offer viable, 
clean  and  efficient  solutions.  They  have,  however,  been  given  residual  role  in  our 
electricity  programmes.  In  those  habitations  where  grid-based  solutions  are  found 
unviable,  appropriate  enabling  environment  for  mini-grids/micro-grids  needs  to  be 
created, especially to allay the fear of investments being rendered a waste when the 
grid  reaches  the  habitation.  It  is  also  a  reality  that  rural  areas  suffer  the  brunt  of 
shortage  of  electricity  at  peak  hours  of  consumption.  Micro-grids  supported  by 
storage  solutions  can  be  handy,  even  in  grid-connected  villages,  to  meet  the  peak 
load  demand,  particularly  of  small  businesses.  Biomass-based  power  can  serve 
multiple  interests.  They  are  flexible  enough  to  provide  back-up,  can  meet  the  local 
power need and also prevent air pollution by avoidance of stubble burning which has 
43 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
assumed menacing proportions in North India. The NEP advocates framing of a Bio-
energy  Policy  that  encompasses  all  forms  of  biomass-based  energy  (solid  fuel, 
first/second  generation  biofuels  and  gasifying  biomass).  The  present  strategy  of 
promoting  ethanol  and  biodiesel  admixtures  in  liquid  transport  fuels  will  be 
continued,  even  while  the  Government’s  recent  focus  on  augmenting  the  supply  of 
ethanol through 2nd generation technologies will be pursued vigorously.  
 
6.7. Role of State Governments 
 
6.7.1. Renewable Energy has multiple downstream effects on different stakeholders.  
There  is  a  need  to  address  the  technical,  commercial  and  quality  of  power 
supply issues.  The distribution companies need to be reassured that roof top 
solutions do not pose a commercial threat to them. The State Governments will 
be encouraged to set prices in net-metering solutions in a manner that balances 
the interests of consumers and discoms. 
 
6.7.2. The  State  Governments  have  a  major  role  in  development  of  Renewable 
Energy as both local infrastructure and purchase support, can only be provided 
by States.  As far as the Central Government is concerned, it will support the 
  The 
state  agencies  and  not  directly  engage  in  generation  element. 
collaboration  to  promote  transmission  systems  (Green  Corridors)  is  a  good 
example  of  the  kind  of  support  being  given.  The  national  agencies  such  as 
SECI,  IREDA  and  government  R&D  institutions  will  continue  to  provide 
various  kinds  of  support  such  as  channelizing  funds,  providing  project 
execution know-how, and power purchase/payment assurance. 
 
6.7.3. So  far,  Renewable  Energy  sources  have  seen  concentrated  development  in 
resource-rich regions.  Consequently, sale of this energy to other parts of India 
has posed  a problem.   While falling costs  will reduce the unattractiveness  of 
this  source  of  energy,  however,  the  grid  instability  concerns  will  continue  to 
pose  a  challenge  for  concentrated  development  of  Renewable  Energy. 
Therefore, efforts will be made to promote generation by ensuring compliance 
of RPOs. This also holds the clue to financing needs of this sector as RPOs can 
easily  ensure  growth  of  Renewable  Energy  by  blending  it  with  conventional 
power.  It  is  also  hoped  that  with  steady  reduction  in  prices  of  wind/solar, 
States will become agnostic towards renewable power and there will no longer 
be any need to pursue any targeted growth. 
 
6.8. New Technologies 
 
6.8.1. Smart  grids  have  already  been  taken  up  on  pilot  basis  in  the  country.    Now, 
this  technology  will  be  rolled-out  across  the  country  so  as  to  provide  an 
efficient  electricity  distribution  system,  which  also  supports  Renewable 
Energy.  Appropriate  technology  solutions  may  be  needed  if  RE  has  to  drive 
44 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
the electric vehicle agenda. Along with adequate equipment, even institutional 
and  staffing  arrangements  will  need  an  upgrade.  There  is  a  need  to  set  up 
Renewable  Energy  Management  Centres  (REMCs)  in  all  States  to  handle 
issues arising out of variable renewable electricity. 
 
6.8.2. Renewable Energy can also be generated from off-shore locations for which a 
National  Off-shore  Wind  Policy  has  already  been  announced  in  2015.  
Similarly,  floating  solar  panels  on  reservoirs,  lands  held  by  government 
institutions  and  public  buildings  (including  government  housing)  may 
diversify  generation,  and  ease  stress  on  land.  Islands,  hilly  areas  and  remote 
locations  ought  to  be  the  prime  candidates  for  application  of  off-grid 
renewable sources of electricity supply. 
 
6.9. Development of an Enabling Ecosystem 
 
6.9.1. Rooftop solar has vast potential across different categories of consumers, both 
for  power  generation  and  supply  of  heat.  It  has  also  been  estimated  that  this 
technology is  already viable for  commercial and industrial  consumers.   Even 
in  urban  areas,  rooftop  solar  has  become  cost  effective  especially  in  higher 
tariff slabs.  However, subsidized tariff for domestic consumers creates a  dis-
incentive for adoption of roof-top solar and calls for subsidy support. A vibrant 
solar related eco-system needs to be developed to meet customer demand, and 
offer  satisfactory  services  for  these  technologies  to  achieve  a  mass  adoption. 
This is all the more essential if the target of achieving 40GW target by 2022 
from non-grid connected solar is to be achieved. 
 
6.9.2. The large  Renewable Energy  programme will require land, which is  a scarce 
commodity  in  many  States.    It  will,  therefore,  be  essential  to  promote  mega 
solar power plants only  on wastelands  and non-agricultural  tracts.   However, 
in order to achieve a wide dispersal of Renewable Energy and also to maintain 
grid stability, generation ought to be brought close to consumption centres, as 
far as possible. For this, small sized solar plants (up to 50 MWp) need to come 
up  across  the  country  in  rural  areas  especially  at  the  end  of  the  transmission 
lines.    This  will  reduce  the  size  of  plots,  which  ought  to  be  purchased  on 
commercial  basis,  and  will  not  be  dependent  on  state  intervention  in  making 
land available. The co-benefit would be lesser challenge to grid integration. 
 
6.9.3. Over  and  above  the  grid/off-grid  power  generation  potential,  multiple 
applications  of  Renewable  Energy  in  domestic,  commercial  and  industrial 
segments also need to be encouraged.  These applications can address energy 
demand  for  water  heating,  air  conditioning,  cooking,  lighting,  pumping  etc. 
and  supplement  energy  supply.    The  deployment  of  such  applications  will 
require  innovations  in  our  own  country.  The  Government  will  encourage  the 
same  through  appropriate  measures,  including  purchase  support.  As  Heating 
45 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
operations  consume  nearly  50%  of  the  energy  consumed  in  Industry,  solar 
applications have a large opportunity. 
 
6.10. 
Storage and Backup Solutions 
 
In order to counter the intermittency in supply of renewable energy, there needs to be 
a  push  towards  integrating  the  same  with  gas  based  power  plants  and  the 
development of storage technologies. A healthy backup capacity will ease consumer 
anxiety  and  help  renewable  energy  find  a  place  in  the  market.  Appropriate 
technology to introduce flexibility in coal-fired power plants will also be encouraged. 
However,  looking  to  the  stranded  gas-based  capacity,  the  Government  will  first 
endeavor  to  deploy  these  capacities.  One  option  could  be  only  to  contract  future 
renewable power blended with balancing capacity so as to provide steady supply. As 
the  cost  of  wind/solar-based  power  has  come  down,  blending  the  same  with  even 
LNG based balancing supply could be supported under the existing financial support 
schemes of SECI/State Governments. This will be in the fitness of things so as to de-
risk the DISCOMS  from having to  arrange back-up/balancing supply. A  scheme to 
give  feed-in-tariff  to  the  existing  stranded  gas  based  capacity  will  be  launched  to 
address  the  balancing  issues  of  renewable  power.  The  above  measure  can  help  in 
salvaging  the  existing  gas  based  capacity  and  also  reduce  the  challenges  that  come 
with variable renewable energy. Another related emerging technology is  of Electric 
Vehicles that can also double up as a storage device. Suitable application of time-of-
the-day  tariff  mechanisms  will  be  applied  to  encourage  EVs  to  store-up  renewable 
energy when it is available in excess of demand.  
 
6.11. 
The steep rise in the share of Renewable Energy in the electricity mix will call 
for a number of measures to adapt the grid. The measures listed above are expected 
to  allow  integration  of  this  variable  and  seasonal  electricity  source,  by  addressing 
both  commercial  and  technical  challenges.  Diversified  geographical  and  distributed 
generation helps in addressing the above challenges in a cost effective manner. NITI 
Aayog  will  offer  a  platform  to  bring  the  Central  Ministries  and  State  Governments 
together  to  solve  the  inter-agency  issues  related  to  integration  and  growth  of 
Renewable Energy in the country as per the Renewable Energy Integration Roadmap 
2030.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 
Nuclear 
 
7.1. In  order  to  meet  the  large  energy  demand  of  the  country,  India  has  rightly  been 
consistent  in  its  approach  of  promoting  all  sources  of  energy.    On  nuclear  power, 
while several countries have recently had a rethink, India has steadfastly seen it as an 
important contributor to its energy basket.  While India is richly endowed with clean 
sources  of energy, the intermittent  nature of renewable energy sources of solar and 
wind  limits  their  share  of  energy  mix.    Nuclear  energy,  being  the  only  base  load 
power  source  offering  green  energy,  needs  to  be  promoted  even  if  its  share  in  the 
overall  mix  is  not  high  enough  now.    Further,  the  development  of  Fast  Breeder 
Technology enables exploitation of a large part of the fuel energy through closed fuel 
cycle,  thus  offering  large  sustainable  energy  sources  for  many  centuries.    We  have 
had  an  enviable  safety  record  in  operating  nuclear  power  plants  for  nearly  five 
decades  and  in  the  light  of  recent  experiences  around  the  world,  we  have  further 
upgraded our safety systems.  In the recently concluded NDCs, India has indicated its 
intention to ramp up nuclear power capacity tenfold by 2030 to 63 GW.  In the light 
of  India’s  bold  ambition,  the  National  Energy  Policy  offers  the  strategy  to  achieve 
the target set for the country. 
 
7.2.  India  has  an  installed  nuclear  power  capacity  of  6,780  MW  (2016-17),  which 
contributes to over 3% of total electricity generated.  Construction of additional nine 
reactors is  in  progress,  which will ramp  up the nuclear capacity to  13,480 MWe of 
power.  In addition, the government has approved an additional 10 PHWR reactors of 
700 MWe each, which will give a boost to the domestic nuclear industry.  Two more 
reactors  of  1000  MWe  each  have  also  been  approved  for  construction  at 
Kudankulam, thus taking the total capacity to 22,480 MWe by 2030.   Even though 
the nuclear contribution is not high at this stage, however this lays a solid foundation 
for the rapid expansion of nuclear power addition through fast breeder reactors.  The 
collaborative  projects  to  install  LWRs  with  US  and  France  are  going  slow  due  to 
various reasons, even after the India-US accord of 2008. 
 
7.3. Clarity is needed on the following fronts: 
 
7.3.1  Economic viability 
Nuclear power plants are comparatively capital intensive and the focus on safety has 
further  increased  their  cost.  Imported  Natural  Uranium  is  cheaper  than  domestically 
mined  Uranium  because  of  rich  concentration  and  availability  at  shallow  depths 
abroad.    Fuel  cost  is  relatively  small  component  of  the  overall  LCOE  and  is  only  a 
small fraction of fossil fuel cost.  Besides, nuclear reactors have substantially longer 
life  compared  to  other  power  plants  and  are  quite  cost  effective  when  viability  is 
considered over the lifetime of projects.  There is continuous increase in the fuel costs 
in the case of fossil fuels, whereas the effect of fuel costs remains insignificant in the 
case  of  nuclear  power.    Hence,  while  the  nominal  cost  is  initially  higher  on  LCOE 
47 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
basis, this source of electricity is able to compete with fossil sources.  The older plants 
in India are providing some of the cheapest power to grids, which makes a strong case 
for this technology. However, large initial capex appears daunting, for which a stable 
and  investor  friendly  regime  with  private  capital  involvement  appears  feasible,  for 
which a change in statutory regime will be required. 
7.3.2  Technology 
India  had  publicly  declared  a  three  stage  programme  –  with  a  combination  of 
Pressurized Heavy Water Reactor (PHWR), Fast Breeder Reactor (FBR) and Thorium 
based  one.  The  above  strategy  was  a  direct  outcome  of  limited  domestic  Uranium 
availability.  At  some  point  of  time,  it  was  concluded,  India  has  limited  uranium 
reserves  (which  serves  as  the  fuel  for  the  first  phase  technology)  but  abundant 
reserves  of  thorium.    However,  with  stepped  up  uranium  exploration  activity,  the 
scenario  is  changing  fast  and  NEP  rightly  proposes  to  expedite  the  exploration  and 
mining of uranium reserves in  India which will help  in  the growth  of the first  stage 
reactors.    The  PHWR  technology  has  reached  a  level  of  maturity  and  the  pace  of 
expansion of the first phase sets the stage for quick growth of second stage reactors, 
which mainly depends on the reprocessed fuel from the discharged spent fuel of the 
first stage. Our ability to import uranium in the recent  years has already boosted the 
PLF of power plants. 
India  is  one  of  the  few  countries  interested  in  the  development  of  Fast  Breeder 
Reactors,  for  multi-fold  increase  in  capacity  creation  through  uranium-plutonium 
route. The entire technology involving design, construction &  operation of the  FBR 
and  all  the  associated  technologies  for  closing  the  fuel  cycle  such  as  reprocessing, 
fabrication  of  fuel  and  waste  management  were  developed  indigenously.  These 
technologies  could  be  made  possible  with  the  experience  gained  in  the  operation  of 
test  reactor  for  over  30  years  and  generated  the  confidence  to  launch  the  first 
commercial breeder reactor of 500 MWe, which is likely to  go critical in 2017. The 
second stage has a potential of over 500 GWe electrical power base, supplying energy 
for  few  centuries.  LWR  programme  with  foreign  collaboration  is  being  pursued  for 
increase in nuclear capacity in the short term taking advantage of foreign credit.   
 
As  thorium  is  not  a  fissile  material,  it  cannot  be  used  in  reactor  for  production  of 
power. So, thorium will be deployed for power production only towards the end of 2nd 
stage  of  nuclear  programme.  Till  then  India;  a  lead  country  in  thorium  R&D;  will 
pursue R&D in thorium technology and establish demonstration scale facilities.  
 
7.3.3  Liability 
The  issue  of  civil  nuclear  liability  has  assumed  significance  after  the  Fukushima 
disaster  in  2011,  which  resulted  in  large  human  and  economic  costs.    Our  plans  of 
attracting investment in this sector call for a fair distribution of liability between the 
nuclear technology supplier, operator and the Government.   This  issue has recently 
been sorted out by the newly introduced provision of the operator taking out an INR 
1500  crore  (~$220  million  @1=INR  68)  insurance.    Suppliers’  insurance  policy  is 
also in place. It is expected that the above will allay the fears of the suppliers, as even 
in  the  coming  years,  the  underlying  principle  of  the  operator  taking  care  of  a 
48 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
threshold  level  of  liability  will  continue.    This  is  expected  to  strike  a  fine  balance 
between all the stakeholders.  India has deposited its instrument of ratification of the 
Convention  on  Supplementary  Compensation  for  Nuclear  Damage  (CSC)  for 
adoption to provide an international framework.  
7.3.4     Public confidence 
India  has  nearly  five  decades  of  operating  experience  with  nuclear  power  plants  (over 
400  reactor  operating  years)  with  an  enviable  safety  record.  This  has  emboldened  the 
Government,  both  at  the  Centre  and  in  the  States  to  pursue  this  source  of  power.  
However,  so  far,  the  Government  has  itself  been  the  operator  through  public  sector 
companies.  If private sector is encouraged to set up these plants, there will be a need to 
assure  the  same  level  of  public  support  and  confidence  building  amongst  the  local 
communities. The establishment of Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority will go a long 
way towards fostering such confidence. 
 
7.4  Strategy 
 
7.4.1 
India needs  to  fast-track nuclear power to  meet  India’s  growing energy 
needs.    Government  of  India  has  taken  note  of  Department  of  Atomic 
Energy’s  action  plan  for  accelerated  growth  of  nuclear  power.  To  start 
with,  budgetary provision  has  been made  for providing to  the extent of 
INR  3000  crores/year.  The  Atomic  Energy  Act  has  been  modified  for 
forming  joint  ventures  between  non-DAE  Indian  PSUs and  DAE PSUs 
like Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd.  Presently, participation of 
private  sector  and  foreign  suppliers  in  nuclear  arena  is  restricted  to 
construction  activity  only  and  Atomic  Energy  Act  will  need  major 
modification for them to be involved  in operation/ownership of nuclear 
plants. 
 
7.4.2  Present  regulator,  Atomic  Energy  Regulatory  Board  (AERB)  functions 
independent of operator, Nuclear Power Corporation with Department of 
Atomic  Energy  as  the  administrative  ministry.    AERB,  operating  in  a 
scientific atmosphere, has technical support from world’s biggest pool of 
highly  qualified  scientific  and  technical  manpower  and  has  maintained 
highest  safety  standards  in  the  world.  Nuclear  Safety  Regulatory 
Authority Bill is under consideration of Government. 
 
7.4.3  The  designs  of  indigenous  PHWRs,  FBRs  and  imported  LWRs  are 
standardized,  time  tested  and  are  the  promising  nuclear  technology 
options in the long run. 
 
7.4.4  With  limited  domestic  uranium  availability,  India  has  already  entered 
into fuel supply agreements with foreign suppliers, both for domestic and 
imported  reactors.  Adequate  provisions  in  Power  Purchase  Agreements 
(PPAs)  are  expected  to  address  this  issue.  India’s  multiple  diplomatic 
engagements with nuclear fuel supplier nations are also expected to yield 
many  positive  results.  FBR  has  the  advantage  that  after  the  initial  fuel 
loading, the reactor generates more fuel than it uses and is not dependent 
on external supplies.   
 
49 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
7.4.5  The  capacity  growth  programme  will  be  determined  by  availability  of 
convenient  sites,  and  be  largely  driven  by  PHWRs,  LWRs  and  FBRs.    
The Government’s announcement of construction of 10 units (700 MWe 
each)  of  indigenously  developed  PHWRs  and  two  more  LWRs  (1000 
MWe  each)  at  Kudankulam  site  are  right  steps  towards  rejuvenating 
Indian industry and capacity addition.   
 
7.4.6  The  large  nuclear  programme  is  expected  to  significantly  contribute  to 
the ‘Make in India’ campaign.  NPCIL will support the nuclear industry 
for the manufacture of reactor components.  As the growth of LWRs is 
highly  prospective,  we  are  encouraging  joint  ventures  between  foreign 
and domestic entities to manufacture equipment in India. 
 
 
7.5  Nuclear power has  a  great  potential in  India to supplement  and in  the longer term 
even  substitute  coal  based  power  as  base  load.    However,  the  large  capital 
requirements in setting up these plants, which also raises the cost of power due to a 
high interest burden in the initial period, has to be borne in mind. The long coastline 
offers the opportunity to locate these plants on the coasts in different power markets.  
The  above  peninsular  region  is  deficit  in  electricity  and  could  take  advantage  of 
proximity of nuclear power plants. A stable policy regime will internationalize this 
sector and attract the much-needed capital.   
 
 
 
50 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8: 
Electricity 
 
8.1. Electricity is a key ingredient for economic growth and attainment of high quality of 
life. With electricity comprising only 17% of our final energy consumption in 2014 
(against  23%  in  OECD),  India  ranks  well  below  the  global  average  in  electricity 
consumption.  In  addition,  it  exhibits  greater  variance  in  electricity  consumption 
across  sectors  with  households  lagging  behind.  During  the  2001-2011  decade, 
household  electrification  grew  only  at  1%  per  annum.  Consequently,  a  household 
electrification  backlog  of  nearly  20%  remains.  It  is  in  this  context  that  the  goal  of 
universal  electrification  by  2022  offers  a  major  challenge.  The  2008  Integrated 
Energy  Policy  had  aimed  at  achieving  a  minimum  of  1  kWh/day  per  capita 
consumption  by  2012.    In  a  similar  vein,  the  National  Electricity  Policy  2005  had 
aimed at 100% access by 2010.  But both targets have been missed. The household 
consumption in rural areas stands at just above 1 kWh/day per capita in 2015.  
 
8.2. In  keeping  with  the  global  trend,  NEP  expects  the  share  of  electricity  in  energy 
consumption  to  rise  in  the  coming  years.  This  is  likely  to  result  partially  from 
declining prices led by declining cost of electricity from renewable sources and from 
progressively  greater  use  of  electrical  devices  due  to  rising  efficiency  of  them 
relative to appliances relying on other sources of energy. In the ambitious scenario, 
we  envisage  India’s  electricity  supply  rising  by  nearly  five  times  to  4800  TWh 
(2012-2040). However, by adoption of efficiency, even at a per capita consumption 
of around 3000 kWh/year in 2040 against much higher levels in the developed world, 
we  expect  that  electricity  will  comprise  26%  of  our  final  energy  demand  in  the 
ambitious scenario.  
 
 
8.3. By  meeting  the  energy  needs  of  a  prosperous  society  with  moderate  energy 
consumption, India will be setting an example to the world of how energy ought to 
be  produced  and  consumed.  Other  than  houses,  the  potential  for  electrification  of 
energy  demand  is  immense,  as  is  being  seen  in  the  developed  world.    This  is 
particularly  true  of  transportation  (Electric  Vehicles),  cooking,  agriculture  and 
industries.  Heat  is  estimated  to  account  for  50%  of  all  energy  demand  in  Industry, 
and  can  easily  be  supplied  efficiently  by  power  (preferably  through  renewable 
sources) rather than burning solid or liquid fuels. Greater use of electricity can also 
be an important source of de-carbonisation. Hence, there is a strong case for a shift 
towards electricity across demand sectors. 
 
8.4. The Electricity Act, 2003 brought far-reaching reforms in electricity sector including 
unpacking  of  erstwhile  electricity  boards 
transmission  and 
distribution  companies  and  the  advent  of  electricity  regulatory  commissions  at  the 
centre  as  well  as  in  states.  The  Act  also  set  the  stage  for  greater  participation  of 
into  generation, 
51 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
private sector though it has remained largely confined to generation. Distribution has 
been  privatized  in  Delhi  but  has  not  spread  much  beyond  it.  The  transmission  and 
distribution  segments  have  remained  inefficient  with  large  Transmission  and 
Distribution  (T&D)  losses  persisting  in  many  states.  Since  the  promulgation  of  the 
Act, the Government has had to bail out the distribution companies (discoms) thrice 
with the latest such bailout being the 2015 UDAY scheme. As electricity is a social 
good, it is quite understandable that when distribution companies are in distress, the 
Government  feels  obliged  to  respond.  However,  there  is  a  legitimate  concern  that 
such interventions make discoms and state governments complacent. Under UDAY, 
the  Government  has  negotiated  with  states  a  number  of  steps  towards  reducing  the 
cost  of  supply,  improving  access  and  bridging  the  gap  between  the  average  cost  of 
supply  (ACS)  and  average  revenue  realized  (ARR).  The  NEP  takes  the  view  that 
appropriate pricing can be an effective tool of achieving cost reduction. 
 
8.5. Had we stayed course originally chartered by the Electricity Act 2003, significantly 
greater  transformation  of  Indian  electricity  sector  would  have  been  accomplished. 
Fuel  supply  issues,  bureaucratic  attitude  in  state  electricity  companies  and  sub-
optimal decision making of Regulators have robbed the sector of its potential gains. 
Looking to the vitality of the sector, and failure of repeated efforts, there needs to be 
a careful consideration of the strategy going forward. Power sector continues to face 
challenges  of  poor  demand,  low  returns  on  investment,  and  stranded  generation 
assets.  As  a  result,  capital  is  not  coming  to  the  sector  with  a  likely  medium  term 
impact on power availability. The existence of a large number of captive generation 
plants  based  on  diesel,  one  of  the  costliest  fuels  for  electricity  generation,  is 
indicative of the absence of reliable supply of electricity through discoms.  
 
8.6. Reform of the Distribution Sector in the Medium Run 
 
8.6.1  Today,  we  face  the  paradoxical  situation  such  that  we  have  voluminous 
unsatisfied demand for electricity  and  yet  our  generation capacity is  grossly 
underutilized.    The  phenomenon  has  arisen  because  of  poor  financial  health 
of  discoms.  The  role  of  discoms  is  to  intermediate  between  supply  of  and 
demand  for  electricity.  They  buy  electricity  from  generation  companies  and 
sell it to  customers.  Electricity purchases from  discoms  usually require long 
terms power purchase agreements (PPA). When discoms are in poor financial 
condition, generation companies fear that they would be unable to make good 
on  their  promised  payments.    In  turn,  generation  companies  refuse  to  enter 
into PPAs with the discoms. The result is that the latter are unable to provide 
electricity even when customers are able and willing to pay for it.  Sooner or 
later, the government has to step in to bail out the discoms. 
 
8.6.2  The fundamental cause of repeated episodes of discoms going bankrupt is the 
absence  of  commercial  pressure  on  them.  Political  pressures  to  provide 
52 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
electricity  either  free  or  highly  subsidized  prices  to  certain  segments  of  the 
society have meant that revenues of discoms often fall well short of payments 
due to generation companies. Large volumes of transmission and distribution 
(T&D) losses due to theft and low efficiency of transmission and distribution 
reinforce  this  revenue  shortfall.    With  rare  exceptions,  discoms  are  public 
sector  entities  and  are  not  subject  to  the  usual  commercial  pressures. 
Typically,  they  are  able  to  borrow  from  public-sector  banks  with  implicit 
guarantee by the state governments to cover the revenue shortfall and pay the 
generation  companies  for  a  few  years.    But  over  time,  this  leads  to  the 
accumulation  of  debt  with  interest  payments  becoming  larger  and  larger.  
Eventually,  they  lose  credibility  as  buyers  of  electricity  forcing  the 
government to come to their rescue. 
 
8.6.3 
 The  ultimate  solution  to  this  problem  lies  in  ensuring  that  electricity 
distribution  is  subject  to  commercial  pressure.    This  can  be  achieved  by 
separating  the  distribution  of  electricity  from  ownership  of  the  distribution 
grid. Discoms would continue to own the grid while actual distribution or sale 
of electricity would pass on to private agents.  The latter would contract with 
generation  companies  to  buy  electricity  for  sale  to  final  customers  and  haul 
electricity  from  the  point  of  generation  to  the  point  of  consumption  on  the 
transmission and distribution grids for charges determined by regulators.  As 
in telecom sector, customers will have the freedom to choose their electricity 
distributor from among various private agents and go for the one who offers 
the  best  deal.  Electricity  distributors  will  thus  compete  for  customers.  
Discoms  will  give  open  access  to  distributors  to  haul  electricity  on  the  grid 
for a charge. 
 
8.6.4  A critical question under this arrangement concerns cross subsidy.  Currently, 
industrial  customers  are  charged  a  price  well  above  the  average  cost  of 
electricity generation.  This excess helps finance below-cost prices charged to 
other customers. The same cross subsidy can be provided under the proposed 
system  by  taxing  the  purchases  of  electricity  by  industrial  customers  and 
using  the  tax  proceeds  to  subsidize  vulnerable  customers.  An  advantage  of 
this  arrangement  is  that  it  is  far  more  transparent  than  our  current  practice.  
Even  more  importantly,  the  proposed  arrangement  will  enforce  efficiency 
through  competition  among  electricity  distributors.    It  will  also  free  up  the 
government  from  having  to  periodically  bail  out  discoms.    Because  private 
agents will insist on the transmission of electricity from generation company 
to the customer without undue losses along the transmission and distribution 
grid,  the  proposed  system  will  also  force  entities  owning  transmission  and 
distribution grids to operate efficiently as well.    It may be noted that states 
such  as  Karnataka,  which  currently  offer  open  access  to  electricity  grid, 
already practice cross subsidization through taxation. 
 
53 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
8.7  Complementary Reforms 
 
8.7.1  The recent reform under the Ujjwal Discom Assurance Yojana (UDAY) has 
outlined  a  path  to  restoring  the  health  of  discoms  in  the  immediate  future.  
While transferring 75% of discom debt to the state government budgets, this 
reform also attempts to bring down AT&C losses.  For the future, we need to 
work towards the separation of distribution grid and distribution of electricity 
as  discussed  above.    This  will  help  make  the  sector  self-sustaining  in  the 
future. 
 
8.7.2  To fructify the large investments necessary in electricity sector, we will need 
several additional reforms, however. The contemplation of private capital and 
management in the Distribution segment has not happened despite there being 
provisions for the same. The successful operation of this business by private 
operators in many cities ought to set an example for State Governments. It is 
now proposed that central Government utilities may be encouraged to partner 
with  state  utilities  in  the  distribution  business  also  with  a  view  to  forge 
forward integration. They could do so directly or partner with private sector.  
 
8.7.3  We  would  also  need  to  strengthen  the  State  Electricity  Regulatory 
Commission (SERC), which would regulate the charge on hauling electricity 
on the distribution grid and settle disputes arising between parties transacting 
at  different  points  of  the  supply  chain.  As  we  move  to  a  telecom-like 
competitive distribution system, during transition, the SERC may also need to 
set  tariff  for  different  demand  segments  (for  example,  households,  farmers 
and businesses).  The government concerned would pay electricity subsidies 
to chosen segments of the society (for example, farmers) through DBT, which 
is  an  efficient  subsidy  delivery  mechanism.  Our  eventual  goal  should  be  to 
bring  down  the  cross  subsidy  from  industry,  placing  the  burden  directly  on 
the budget.  This would contribute to making electricity-intensive businesses 
more competitive. 
 
8.7.4  Distribution  segment  needs  nursing  for  it  to  become  healthy.  A  number  of 
Government’s  top  priority  programs  such  as  175  GW  and  “Power  for  All” 
depend  on  a  healthy  distribution  segment.  The  NEP  calls  for  constant 
monitoring of UDAY and pave the way for the major reform  separating the 
wire  and  content  as  discussed  above.  Past  experience  tells  us  that  unless 
comprehensive distribution reforms are undertaken, the electricity sector may 
relapse  into  difficulty.  There  are  visible  signs  of  distress,  lack  of  robust 
demand  for  power  and  the  threat  of  large  renewable  supply  going  unused. 
Falling PLFs and rising  cost  of supply due to  rising RPO commitments and 
the  fixed  cost  burden  of  conventional  power  plants  are  threatening  the 
Government’s  power  augmentation  agenda.  The  NEP  advocates  that  as  has 
been experienced globally, the market be allowed to allocate resources, under 
54 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
regulatory supervision. It may not be possible for the Government to manage 
by  overt  presence  the  transition  of  power  market  while  simultaneously 
addressing multiple goals of universal access, clean energy, efficiency uptake 
of technology and security of supply.  
 
8.8  The power sector of tomorrow 
 
8.8.1  A question is often raised on the pathway India may adopt — a capex heavy 
centralised conventional electricity infrastructure, or a decentralized renewable 
energy  based  one.  Unlike  the  West,  where  demand  has  largely  stabilized, 
India’s power system is likely to grow many times over, and has the choice to 
adopt  its  strategy.  It  is  no  doubt  that  renewable  energy  costs  are  falling,  and 
further reductions in them are predicted. This offers an opportunity, especially 
if  large  transmission  costs  could  be  avoided  by  decentralized  generation. 
However,  the  challenges  that  come  with  this  infirm  source—storage  and 
intermittency—are still formidable. On the other  hand,  India has sizable coal 
reserves  and  with  appropriate  policy  moves,  could  absorb  natural  gas-based 
power,  too.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  the  vast  electricity  demand  of  India 
cannot  be met by decentralized solutions  in  a short time.  Large power plants 
bring  sizable  supplies  to  the  market  in  a  more  efficient  manner.  Solutions  to 
the challenges facing India that renewable technologies bring are still work in 
progress  and  Indian  consumer  cannot  wait  for  them.  Therefore,  India’s 
immediate  way  forward  has  to  be  a  mix  of  the  large  and  small,  central  and 
distributed,  and 
the  new 
infrastructure,  it  will  be  ensured  that  the  grid  can  absorb  and  distribute 
renewable electricity in the long run. 
renewables.  While  developing 
fossil  and 
 
8.8.2 The  three  main  segments  of  power  business  —  generation,  transmission  and 
distribution  — have their own  challenges and potential solutions  but  modern 
regulatory  practices  and  commercial  viability  have  to  be  at  the  centre  of  the 
latter.  Power  interfaces  other  sectors,  too,  especially  when  it  comes  to  fuel 
supply,  environmental  clearance,  land  allocation  and  financing.  The  NEP 
underscores  the  role  of  regulation  in  addressing  these  linkages  in  a  holistic 
manner. Renewable electricity, smart  grids, DSM, energy efficiency and new 
business models are likely to impact the infrastructure and revenues of power 
sector operators in a major way. Unless they are able to de-risk their projects 
by  a  stable  and  forward-looking  policy  regime,  investments  may  not  be 
forthcoming. And even if investments are forthcoming, the system may fail to 
encourage the adoption of efficient technologies. Two examples bring out this 
point clearly.  
 
  Micro-grids  have  not  grown  in  rural  areas  out  of  the  fear  that  the 
investments may be rendered waste once the grid reaches these areas. Grid 
based  technologies,  and  micro  grids  must  forge  an  alliance,  with 
55 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
regulation defining the role of micro-grids in the initial phase of universal 
access and coverage.  
  Similarly,  increasing  share  of  renewables  calls  for  integration  of 
geographical  regions  beyond  the  conventional  state-level  boundaries  of 
regulatory  jurisdictions.  The  role  of  Regulators  in  adopting  global  best 
practices  in  resolving  such  challenges  is  manifest.  The  expertise  and 
exposure of Central and State Regulators to such practices will have to be 
enhanced.    
 
8.8.3 Recent technological advances are likely to have a large impact on the quality, 
cost and efficiency of electricity supply. The two-way communication ability 
of  smart  meters  between  the  consumer  and  distributor  has  opened  the 
possibility  of  new  kinds  of  contracts.  Precise  data  can  be  generated, 
maintenance  can  be  made  efficient,  demand  side  responses  can  be  recorded, 
and  a 
including 
mainstreaming  of  renewable  power  can  now  be  undertaken.  The  role  of 
technology in generation and transmission has already made rapid advances. It 
is integration of renewable energy, which is posing new challenge that is being 
addressed  by  multiple  agencies,  both  at  the  central  and  state  levels.  It  is, 
however,  on  the  distribution  side  that  recent  developments  are  offering 
exciting options, as they allow innovative commercial tools such as differential 
pricing,  choice  of  supplier  and  power  purchase  planning  to  be  adopted.  New 
business models, spurred by renewable energy such as micro-grids and rooftop 
solar, are changing the way electricity will be bought and sold. This is bringing 
efficiency to the power market and is helping finance the sector.  
lot  many  other  non-consumer  based 
interventions 
 
8.8.4 Technological  advancement  in  mobility  including  hybrid  vehicles,  electric 
vehicles  and  fuel  cell  vehicles  are  likely  to  be  inducted  in  the  transportation 
  An  enabling  environment  for  charging,  grid 
system  of  the  future. 
management, two-way communication system and cyber security will need to 
be  provided  by  municipalities/discoms.  An  immediate  urgency  for  the  above 
interventions  has  arisen  in  the  Hundred  Smart  Cities  Programme  of  the 
Government, where the above protocols need to be addressed right away. 
 
8.8.5 Financing will continue to pose a challenge to the Indian electricity sector. As 
per IEA, the Indian energy sector will require an investment upwards of $3.6 
trillion  between  2015  and  2040.  With  India’s  infrastructure  poised  for  all-
round growth, funds will be allocated to the sector that minimizes risk for the 
given  return.  Because  we  have  not  allowed  various  segments  of  the  supply 
chain to operate on commercial basis, private investors have been hesitant to 
enter them.  As the NEP proposes to change it along the lines described in the 
previous  paragraphs,  this  would  change.  Attracted  by  commercial  returns, 
private investors may be expected to enter the sector on substantial scale. 
 
56 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
8.8.6 Separation  of  distribution  grid  from  distribution  of  electricity  can  also  allow 
captive  generation  to  turn  into  an  effective  source  of  power.  Under  the 
Electricity  act  2003,  captive  generation  has  been  freed  from  all  controls 
including  the  license  requirement  and  techno  economic  clearance  from  the 
Central  Electricity  Authority  (CEA).  Therefore,  once  captive  generation  is 
offered smooth access to electricity grid, its potential can be fully exploited.  
 
8.8.7 To-date,  market  pricing  has  been  the  biggest  challenge  to  the  power  sector.  
Cross subsidy from industry to other sources of demand and direct subsidies to 
certain  segments  have  been  widely  deployed  due  to  various  pressures.    The 
result  has  been  poor  performance  of  the  sector  with  the  quality  of  electricity 
supply being poor.  While it is often agreed that all segments of this business 
need  to  be  profitable,  proper  pricing  of  electricity  has  been  a  challenge. 
Surveys have revealed that those yet un-electrified desperately seek electricity 
not  only  for  the  quality  life  but  also  for  its  productive  use  to  raise  income 
levels.  There  is  a  high  value  attached  to  personal  use  as  well  as  possible 
productive use of electricity and there is  willingness  to  pay for it. The Tariff 
Policy and National Electricity Plans have successively highlighted the need to 
supply quality power at appropriate price. By not doing so, we have placed our 
industry  at  a  great  disadvantage.    Sectors  in  which  electricity  cost  is  a 
significant  proportion  of  the  total  cost  are  particularly  disadvantaged.  The 
Government  is  committed  to  closing  the  gap  between  ACS  and  ARR  in  the 
short run, and allowing markets to determine prices in the medium term. 
 
8.8.8  The  suggested  reforms  may  result  in  the  flight  of  large  consumers  through 
‘open access’ options to  cheaper sources including renewables. As the cross-
subsidy  contributions  from  industrial  and  commercial  consumers  dips,  the 
subsidy bill for vulnerable sections of the society cannot be left at the doorstep 
of State Governments.  While efficiency in  coal markets  and UDAY reforms, 
including reduction in AT&C losses, will bring down the revenue deficit, the 
Government  could  seek  cross-subsidy  contributions  from  large  domestic 
consumers.  Experience  of  evolved  electricity  markets  reveals  that  with 
opening  up  of  electricity  markets  there  was  a  reduction  in  costs  and  retail 
prices.  Therefore,  the  NEP  proposes  a  new  way  forward  for  the  electricity 
sector  in  tandem  with  reforms  in  the  coal  and  renewable  sectors,  to  take 
advantage  of  the  emerging  transformation,  with  the  confidence  that  the  twin 
objectives  of  reducing  cost  of  power  to  the  productive  segments,  can  be 
achieved without forsaking the welfare agenda of the Government. 
 
8.9  Role of different stakeholders 
 
8.9.1 At the outset, it may be stated that the Electricity Act provides for a National 
Electricity Policy which is to be prepared in a cooperative process with State 
Governments.  This  provision  needs to  be used effectively to  forge a national 
57 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
consensus  on  the  challenges  confronting  this  sector.  Electricity  is  in  the 
Concurrent  List  with  distribution  being  largely  a  state  subject.  The  first 
principle  being  advocated  by  the  National  Energy  Policy  is  that  after  near 
seven  decades  since  Independence,  it  is  time  that  the  States  take  greater 
responsibility in the provision of power. A perception has been created that the 
Union has greater responsibility in this sector and this has resulted in the States 
leaning more heavily on it. The result has been repeated episodes of massive 
losses, accumulation of debt and bailout packages by the centre. States need to 
take  more  ownership  in  the  electricity  sector,  however,  the  gap  between  the 
average cost of supply and average tariff, which was 76 paise per unit in 2011-
12, has decreased to nearly 50 paise per unit presently. The State Governments 
and SERCs have not been able to ensure financial wellbeing of the electricity 
distributors. As the state companies do not have investible surplus, the role of 
Central  Power  Sector  Utilities  is  also  being  invoked  across  the  electricity 
sector, now even in the emerging renewable electricity. It is envisaged that in 
the future States would take greater responsibility in the management of power 
sector, with the Centre playing a complementary role. The alignment of Centre 
and  States  may  be  finalised  through  a  revision  of  the  National  Electricity 
Policy.  
 
8.9.2 It  is  also  important  to  distinguish  the  roles  of  private  sector  vis-à-vis  the 
Government.  The  Electricity  Act  has  already  provided  clear  guidance  on 
policy,  regulation  and  business  segmentation.  However,  the  reforms  have 
remained  incomplete  in  the  sense,  that  some  sectors,  which  could  attract 
private  players,  continue  to  be  dominated  by  Government  companies. 
Transmission  and  distribution  fall  in  this  category.  In  some  sectors,  where 
government support could fast forward the reforms, there is poor momentum. 
Demand side management, smart meters, innovative pricing (by the time of the 
day),  robust  open  access  and  movement  away  from  cross-subsidies  are  some 
examples  where  reforms  could  offer  handsome  returns.  The  tragedy  of 
electricity sector has been that after a robust start in the early 2000s, reforms 
stopped  half  way  home.  The  role  of  private  sector  must  be  expanded  to  all 
investment  areas,  including  supplying  electricity  to  rural  areas.  The  likely 
separation  of  wire  from  content  is  expected  to  throw  up  more  investment 
opportunities in the distribution sector. Various models exist for participation 
of  the  private  sector  in  Distribution.  The  Ministry  of  Power  will  assist  the 
states  in  adoption  of  the  model  as  per  their  choice  by  developing  suitable 
protocols and model documents. 
 
8.9.3 It is also recognised that owing to electricity being in the nature of social good, 
and  presence  of  multiple  distortions  in  the  electricity  markets  -  all  of  which 
cannot be eliminated in the medium term, Government cannot leave this sector 
to markets alone. The Regulators may have to continue to play an active role 
for  protecting  the  consumers,  while  also  supporting  the  power  sector  stake-
58 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
holders.  Creation  of  adequate  capacity  is  a  strategic  responsibility  placed  on 
the Regulators, especially in the light of poor offtake of power at present, and 
rising  growth  of  renewable  capacity.  Markets  alone  may  not  be  able  to  send 
the right  signals  for long-term security of supply.  It  is,  however, emphasised 
that markets address these issues better than state intervention. 
 
8.9.4 Policy, regulation,  financial institutions, trained  personnel,  state  governments 
and  equipment  manufacturers  are  all  critical  to  building  a  robust  electricity 
sector.  While  many  of  these  diverse  elements  have  been  discussed  in  this 
chapter  and  others,  there  is  an  important  role  for  a  coordinating  institutional 
mechanism. Power sector needs a dedicated effective coordinating mechanism 
that  brings  different  power  sector  partner  Ministries  together.  There  is  also 
need for a federal mechanism that has States on board. With the all India grid 
getting  synchronized  effectively,  the  true  character  of  the  ‘Concurrent’ 
jurisdiction  will  come  into  play.  Universal  electrification,  24x7  power  and 
higher  uptake  of  renewable  call  for  a  more  effective  mechanism.  The  inter-
State  power 
the 
renewable)  on  a  regional  rather  than  state  basis,  wheeling  of  renewable 
electricity from resource rich states to the others, coordination between Central 
Transmission  Utility  and  State  Transmission  Utilities  and  human  resource 
issues can be best addressed by a standing mechanism, which is jointly owned 
by  the  Centre  and  States.  It  is  notable  that  while  power  business  has  been 
corporatized,  there  has  been  no  effort  to  attract  managerial  talent  to  these 
companies, particularly in the state sector. The Ministry of Power will create 
an institution that jointly  supervises and monitors the overall development of 
the country’s power sector.  
trade,  forecasting  and  scheduling  power  (especially 
 
 
59 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Facilitating Mechanisms 
Chapter 9 
Regulators 
 
9.1. Introduction 
 
NEP’s aim of competitive markets cannot be achieved without effective independent 
oversight. It is proposed to complete the regulatory space by putting in place statutory 
Regulators  for  coal,  oil  and  gas  (upstream)  on  the  same  lines  as  in  electricity.  The 
growth in India’s energy supply by a multiple of nearly more than three by 2040, has 
to  be  facilitated  by  assuring  investors  of  competent,  arms-length  and  effective 
decision-making.  In  a  developing  scenario,  investors  will  not  come  forward  unless 
they anticipate commerciality in the sector. On the other hand, consumer interests can 
also  be  addressed  by  the  same  strong  watchdog  mechanism.  Simultaneously, 
Regulators must implement  Government  policy  on current  issues such as access,  air 
quality,  affordability  etc.  The  other  objectives,  which  the  regulatory  apparatus  must 
meet, are: 
 
Internalize global cues in energy markets 
 
Integrate the sector with the country’s macro-economic policy 
  Translate the related statutes, NEP and sector policies into reality 
  Adopt  a  national  outlook  on  energy  issues,  while  simultaneously  addressing 
concerns of the states 
  Engage effectively with all stakeholders. 
 
9.2. Evolving Role 
 
Internationally,  the  role  of  Regulators  has  evolved,  from  independence  and 
promotion of free markets, to ushering in mandates of decarbonisation and protection 
of investments. In contrast with developed economies, Indian energy sector displays 
varying  degree  of  maturity  across  different  sub-sectors.  As  energy  demand  is 
diminishing in the former resulting in over-supply, Regulators are no longer engaged 
with  consumer  protection  rather  with  ensuring  commerciality  in  operations  and 
security  of  supply.  However,  in  India  the  demand  for  energy  is  rising,  albeit  at  a 
varying rate across sources, and consumer prices are a vital concern. It is rising at a 
high  rate  in  the  oil  and  gas  sectors,  while  it  is  subdued  in  coal  and  electricity 
segments  presently.  Within  the  latter,  renewables  is  on  the  upswing  and  even 
electricity  demand  may  go  up  in  the  years  to  come.  Therefore,  the  regulatory 
situation calls for a mixed approach. One aspect of their role is clear – they have to 
incentivise  investment  so  that  the  energy  system  of  the  country  grows  rapidly. 
Recognising  that  technology  and  markets  are  fast  integrating  energy  into  a 
commodity  market,  sub-sector  energy  Regulators  will  have  to  guide  their  energy 
sources  into a common market.  While in the immediate, the role of each Regulator 
may vary, several functions may be uniformly dispensed by all of them, such as that 
of HSE. 
 
 
60 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
9.3. New Regulators 
 
Coal  and  upstream  petroleum  sectors  have  lacked  independent,  statutory  regulators. 
Due  to  several  reasons,  including  strong  presence  of  PSUs  and  limited  number  of 
private  operators,  it  was  so  far  not  found  useful  to  place  the  latter  in  position.  But, 
now with increased private activity, the time is appropriate. Ideally, there ought to be 
a single Regulator to govern the energy market. But, in India, the market has not fully 
developed  with  a  vast  domestic  potential  remaining  to  be  exploited.  Hence,  the 
Regulators  need  to  devote  considerable  attention  to  development  of  supply.  And, 
looking to the large inherent complexities in different fuel sources, it is pertinent that 
there  ought  to  be  sectoral  Regulators.  However,  at  the  level  of  electricity,  all  fuels 
ultimately  converge  into  a  common  product  which  is  rightly  governed  by  a  single 
Regulator.  In  the  petroleum  sector,  there  is  every  merit  in  extending  the  remit  of 
PNGRB over selected statutory aspects of the upstream business, including HSE, data 
collection, joint development of reservoirs in adjacent blocks, sharing of infrastructure 
and  promotion  of  acreages.  However,  the  contract  administration  role  of  PSCs  will 
remain with the DGH. But for that, the former will have to be equipped with adequate 
and  competent  resources.  On  the  other  hand,  an  independent  Coal  Regulator, 
strengthened  with  full  powers, is  already  under the Government’s  consideration and 
needs to be put in place immediately. 
9.4. Sovereign Powers 
 
Even while the Government delegates several of its powers to regulatory authorities, 
owing to several reasons including ownership over natural resources, it cannot divest 
all its responsibilities. It also needs to address the concerns of energy poverty through 
various  subsidy  mechanisms.  Hence,  the  role  of  Government  in  the  energy  domain 
will remain manifest as listed below: 
  Policy  making  which  will  guide  the  overall  mandate  and  functioning  of 
Regulators 
  Statutory powers, to meet the objectives adopted in the policies  
  Fiscal powers to raise revenue from the energy sector 
  Award of exploitation rights to energy minerals and renewable resources  
  Obligation to promote the interests of vulnerable sections of the society 
 
9.5. Areas of Regulation 
 
India’s fast growing energy sector will undergo an evolution over time from a supply 
deficit  state  to  competition  between  sources,  also  influenced  by  development  of 
technology  and  falling  costs.  However,  along  the  way  under-utilisation  issues  will 
pose  challenges  as  are  being  faced  presently  by  power  generators  and  gas  pipeline 
operators.  The  new  technologies  are  also  encountering  difficulties  of  lack  of 
infrastructure,  higher  cost  than  older  sources  of  energy  and  absence  of  regulatory 
support. There is also a fear that highly competitive bids in the renewable sector may 
result in poor returns leading to incomplete projects. Weak provisions for obligatory 
purchase of solar/wind power, and non-inclusion of marketing infra of liquid fuels in 
61 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
the  definition  of  ‘common  carriers’,  are  some  examples.  In  the  long  run,  all 
Regulators will need to provide effective regulation in the following areas: 
 
 
  Developmental (expansion of grids, pipelines, CGD networks etc.) 
  Commerciality (attracting investment and adequate return on investment) 
  Consumer protection (access, availability, supply assurance including quality 
of supply, profiteering etc.) 
  Regulatory 
(fulfillment 
commitments, RPOs, other conditions of grant of licenses etc.) 
of  minimum 
aspects 
service/exploratory 
  HSE related provisions. 
 
Unlike many mature energy markets elsewhere, Indian energy Regulators must   undertake 
reduce  the 
developmental role to help bring in more players, enhance availability, help  
entry  costs  and  help  different  segments  of  the  business  integrate  well.Several  of  the  above 
areas are already included in the regulatory statutes with poor implementation. PNGRB is one 
example which has not been able to succeed in rapid roll-out of CGD networks. The Indian 
energy sector has higher expectations from Regulators as compared to the developed energy 
markets of the world where regulation is gradually giving way to open markets. 
9.6. Issues 
 
A number of common features are witnessed in well-developed energy markets. India 
also  aims  to  achieve  many  such  characteristics,  namely,  competition  between  fuel 
sources on calorific parity basis (provided non-fuel economics is also neutral), ease of 
entry and exit for players, free consumer choice of vendor, market determined prices 
etc. However, many of these features evolve over time when conditions ripen. Indian 
energy market is now ready for several new regulatory interventions as listed below: 
  Separation  of  content  and  carriage  in  electricity,  city  gas,  liquid  fuels  (at 
select locations) 
  Sharing  of  energy  infrastructure  by  inclusion  in  the  definition  of  ‘common 
carriers’  (storages  and  marketing  infra,  ATF  hydrants,  offshore  infra,  LNG 
terminals, aviation fuel infra etc.) 
  Grant of choice of service provider (LPG, kerosene, electricity etc.) 
  Data sharing especially in the area of oil/gas exploration 
 
9.7. Beside the above, the existing regulations need to be expanded to address the needs 
of our energy market to usher in strong market framework. The existing Regulators 
will provide for the following aspects, or clarify through Regulations: 
  Unbundling between gas transporters and marketers 
  Overlap between jurisdictions relating to competition issues 
  Adequate  returns  to  gas  pipeline  developers  in  the  initial  years  when  the 
throughput is miniscule 
Induction of latest technology 
 
  Robust data collection and dissemination 
  Health, safety and environment (HSE) 
 
62 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
9.8. Staff Issues 
 
The  experience  so  far  with  many  State  Electricity  Regulars  has  not  been  good  as 
exhibited  by  poor  decision  making.  The  long  intervals  in  raising  electricity 
tariffs,  poor  enforcement  of  RPOs  and  weak  regulatory  oversight  has  often 
been blamed on political meddling. The lack of training has compounded poor 
quality  of  manpower  in  some  cases.  The  above  calls  for  improvement  in 
quality  of  recruitment  of  Regulators  and  subordinate  staff,  and  rigorous  in-
service  training.  As  energy  is  a  technical  subject  constantly  evolving  due  to 
R&D, building top-class capabilities in the cadre which will update itself with 
latest  advancements  is  a  must.  Energy  sector  has  been  witnessing  vast 
technological  advances  which  requires  the  staff  working  in  regulatory 
organizations  to  be  trained  on  a  continuous  basis.  For  this,  cadres  will  be 
created in all Regulators, so that there is no overt influence of deputationists. 
Along with  budgetary support, the Regulators  will be allowed to  collect  fees 
from their sector, so that they ultimately obtain freedom from the former. The 
Government  will  provide  for  suitable  provisions  in  sectoral  policies  to 
mandate  achievement  of  its  objectives.  It  will  call  for  close  review  of 
performance of Regulators. 
 
9.9. Conclusion 
 
The  Government-Regulator  interface  will  be  strengthened  especially  with  regard  to 
bringing  upcoming  sources  of  energy  such  as  renewable  electricity,  value-added 
biomass,  CBM,  UCG  among  others.  While  the  above  fuels  would  statutorily  come 
under the ambit of existing Regulators, what will be needed is pro-active regulations 
to support these young fuels. It will be ensured that Regulators do not end up in any 
stake-holder capture, be it the consumers or the investors. In order to achieve energy 
security,  supply  security  is  essential.  The  sooner  are  the  regulations  issued,  swifter 
will be the response from industry. With regard to new Regulators (coal and upstream 
petroleum),  the  statutory  provisions  will  be  so  made  to  provide  for  effective 
Regulators. India needs large doses of private capital, both domestic and international, 
and this will be forthcoming only if we erect world-class Regulators.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
Energy Infrastructure 
 
10.1.  Energy infrastructure needs a dedicated consideration because often the business 
environment  for  energy  and  infra  are  different,  and  separate  policy  frameworks 
are  required.  Here,  we  make  a  distinction  between  energy  ‘production’  and 
‘transport’  assets,  with  the  latter  being  identified  as  infrastructure.  The  focus  of 
energy Ministries being on energy supply, often results in overlooking of specific 
requirement  of  the  latter.  An  omnibus  infrastructure  policy  may  not  be  able  to 
address  the  infra  needs  of  the  diversified  energy  sector.  For  example,  LNG 
terminals, charging station for E-vehicles, trunk gas pipelines and coal washeries 
cannot be supported merely as infra assets. Unless they are linked with the energy 
policy, they will not  come up by merely an infra support policy.  Hence, it is  in 
fitness  of  things  to  discuss  the  specific  policy  requirements  of  energy 
infrastructure  under  the  NEP.  By  definition,  all  infrastructural  assets  have  long 
life,  thereby  needing  a  stable  policy  environment.  They  involve  lumpy 
investments  and  usually  serve  as  ‘common  carrier’  or  cater  to  more  than  one 
client,  and  may  come  up  merely  by  a  financial  investor.  Their  monopoly  status 
needs  to  be  regulated  by  a  regulatory  framework,  just  as  their  own  financial 
viability  needs  assurance  of  business  over  long  tenures.  The  above  are  some  of 
the wide-ranging issues that are addressed under the following policy mandate.   
 
10.2.  Creating Local Interest 
 
With  the  jurisdiction  of  States  and  local  bodies  over  energy  infrastructure  in 
matters such as  land acquisition, environmental clearances, right  of user in land 
and fixing of charges levied by local bodies, closer alignment of Central and local 
interests  could  fast  forward  these  projects.  Energy  assets  should  not  be  seen  as 
central  Government’s  responsibility.  Cross  country  gas  pipelines  and  power 
transmission  lines  need  local  support  which  would  be  easier  forthcoming,  if  a 
value proposition  was also  offered to  the local  energy  consumers. This  calls  for 
creation of an economic interest of the local  residents as partners in the venture 
and  their  ownership.  For  example,  the  states  through  which  gas  trunk  pipelines 
pass, will be the first beneficiary of CGD projects and availability of gas should 
spur  fertilizer  and  power  units.  The  invocation  of  Central  laws  in  acquiring  the 
transit  rights  as  well  as  engagement  of  central  agencies  (PGCIL,  NTPC,  GAIL 
etc.)  should  not  in  any  way  alienate  the  local  communities.  Adequate 
compensation  and  energy  requirements  of  the  region  impacted  by  infrastructure 
development will be borne in mind. A shared interest ought to be created so that 
the  States  come  forward  to  expedite  the  necessary  approvals  for  energy  infra 
projects. 
 
 
64 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
10.3.  Statutory Clearances  
 
The Government  will not  distinguish  between private and public sector projects 
in invoking its powers of acquisition of ‘right of user/way’ to facilitate creation of 
energy infrastructure. The requirements of speed and avoidance of cost overruns, 
calls for application of Central laws to acquire land related rights. The template of 
the  recent  UMPP  model  of  ‘plug  and  play’  wherein  different  permissions  are 
secured before the projects are bid out will be adopted, especially where private 
sector  investment  is  to  be  attracted  in  the  energy  sector.  The  Government  will, 
therefore, invite investments on transparent criteria, and not distinguish between 
public  and  private  sectors.  Wherever  public  sector  has  been  given  a  differential 
treatment under statutory laws, the distinction will be phased out over time. 
 
 
10.4.  Evolution in Infrastructure type 
 
By  2040,  the  energy  mix  of  India  is  expected  to  become  renewable  intensive, 
with  46-52%  of  the  power  capacity  being  solar  and  wind  dominated.  This  calls 
for a different kind of infrastructure. The infrastructure would be made flexible to 
respond to evolving technology and energy mix by issuing enabling policy. Even 
local (DDG) solutions will mushroom in the nature of micro- and mini-grids. The 
project 
the  eco-system  for  award/contract 
finalization of energy infra projects are different for small, decentralized solutions 
as compared to  large conventional  energy  ones.  The Regulators would  factor in 
the  above  in  structuring  viability,  and  has  been  discussed  under  the  Regulation 
chapter. Energy infra policy of different sources needs to factor in the interests of 
small  and  large  infra  providers.  Micro  grids  will  need  encouragement  and  de-
risking  from  advent  of  the  conventional  grid  and  be  dovetailed  in  the  latter. 
Supply  chains  for  marketing  petroleum  products  in  rural  areas  may  need  a 
dedicated policy to deliver transport and cooking fuels in small markets. 
 
implementation  capacity  and 
 
10.5.  Capital 
 
Capital  requirement  in  the  energy  domain  is  the  biggest  challenge  before  the 
country.  This  is  aggravated  by  high  interest  rates  as  compared  to  developed 
economies. A near $150 billion capital investment is needed in energy sector on 
an  annual  basis  until  2040  (IEA).  This  has  to  be  met  without  impacting 
availability of capital in other sectors. The role of external commercial borrowing 
(ECB)  is  well  recognized,  for  which  suitable  hedging  mechanisms  will  be 
conceived.  Deployment  of  overseas  equity  in  financially  viable,  long  duration 
infra projects may be an answer to the high hedging costs. Moreover, a number of 
financial  tools  exist  to  enhance  returns  to  investors.  The  Government  will 
encourage  adoption  of  imaginative  tools  such  as  extended  debt  tenure,  VGF, 
tolling,  and  dollar  denominated  returns  to  attract  private  capital  to  the  energy 
infrastructure  sector.  The  NITI  Aayog  will  get  a  study  undertaken  to  determine 
 
65 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
the  capital  requirements  sector-wise  to  deliver  the  targeted  energy  supply  by 
2040,  and  recommend  the  strategy  to  attract  the  required  capital.  Ministry  of 
Finance  would  lead  the  initiative  to  promote  the  investment  opportunities  and 
attract investors, both in India and abroad.  
 
10.6.  Revenue Models 
 
Power transmission lines and natural gas pipelines will deploy the largest share of 
energy infrastructure capital. While the power sector has  an established revenue 
model which adequately remunerates investors of inter-state transmission lines, it 
is  the  last  mile  connectivity  for  renewable  electricity  which  faces  funding 
challenges. The Government will continue to provide financial budgetary support 
to the states for the above projects. As regards gas, a large capex requirement is 
needed  for  new  LNG  terminals,  trunk  gas  pipelines,  CGD  networks  and 
commercial storages. There is no commercial gas storage as of now, and if India 
is to be a major gas consumer, there needs to be assurance of supply in times of 
higher demand. As the gas market is under evolution, the capacity utilization risk 
is  fully  loaded  on  the  infra  investor  which  is  holding  them  back,  resulting  in 
stranded  assets.  The  Government  will  come  out  with  a  strategy  to  de-risk  these 
projects,  either  through  VGF  support,  or  through  an  attractive  revenue  model. 
Strategic/commercial  oil  storages  will  also  be  essential  for  energy  security.  The 
above  can  come  up  without  capital  support  from  the  Government,  provided 
attractive contractual models and storage sites can be offered. The  NITI Aayog-
led study will estimate the capex requirement for the above, and devise a suitable 
methodology for the same. The role of Regulators will be vital in the above, and 
has  been  discussed  separately.  Similarly,  coal  washeries  will  be  given  a  viable 
financial model to upgrade the high ash content Indian coal.  
 
 
10.7.  Civil Contractors 
 
Energy sector is poised for a take-off and the complexity of infra projects on offer 
is  likely  to  increase,  for  which  global  expertise  will  be  encouraged.  Trans-
continental gas pipelines/power transmission lines, and large LNG terminals will 
need  competent  civil  contractors.  India  has  few  local  contractors  who  can 
implement  high  value  projects  of  complex  nature  such  as  trunk  gas  pipelines, 
LNG  terminals,  oil/gas  storages  etc.  This  problem  is  expected  to  be  overcome 
naturally once large global principals come up  on their own or in joint ventures 
with local companies. They will be able to attract civil contractors from all over 
the  world  on  their  own,  too.  A  speedy  process  for  statutory  clearances,  as 
suggested  earlier,  would  also  send  appropriate  signals  to  globally  reputed 
contractors to take up Indian projects, which will be followed up by development 
of local competencies. The working environment will be improved with attractive 
contractual  arrangements  including  PPP,  annuity  models,  EPC  etc.  and  speedy 
dispute resolution mechanisms. 
 
66 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
10.8.  Infrastructure will play an important part in delivering energy to distant locations 
in  the  country.  It  is  obvious  that  with  an  over  three  times  expansion  in  energy 
supply, there will be  a concomitant growth in  infrastructure. As the energy mix 
evolves, the type of infra will also change, with its ensuing impact on investment, 
revenue model and technology. By nature, infra must precede energy supply, but 
will  not  be  erected  unless  the  latter  is  assured.  Therefore,  there  is  a  symbiotic 
relationship between energy and infrastructure. The Government will ensure that 
the  policy  frameworks  for  energy  supply  and  related  infrastructure  are 
harmonious.  
 
 
 
 
67 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 11 
Human Resource Development 
 
11.1. 
Energy sector is a fine example of integration between the interests of job creation 
and supply of a critical input. Unlike other economic sectors, a closer relationship 
can be  forged between academia  and energy sector, also  due to  the possibility of 
the  latter  to  fund  specialist  institutions.  India  has  a  challenge  to  provide  job 
opportunities  to  its  vast  young  population.  On  the  other  hand,  an  array  of 
specializations and skill sets are required for the many times over likely growth of 
the  energy  sector.  For  instance,  solar  and  wind  renewable  energy  is  estimated  to 
have created nearly 70,000 full time equivalent jobs in India so far (2016). A study 
has  revealed  that  if  India  achieves  its  new  target  of  100  GW  of  installed  solar 
energy  by  2022,  as  many  as  1  million  full-time  equivalent  jobs  could  be  created 
(NRDC, 2015). While energy is thematically one sector, but the kinds of expertise 
required  across  all  sub-sectors  are  quite  diverse.  The  petroleum  sector  requires 
specialists  in  geology,  geo-physics,  drilling  and  production,  while  the  electricity 
sector  requirements  are  in  instrumentation,  civil  engineering,  electrical  and 
electronics/IT. Similarly, the requirements of coal,  renewables and nuclear power 
are  different,  too.  General  management,  including  financial  management  in 
managing  the  utilities  and  energy  businesses,  has  been  an  ignored  area  so  far, 
which  also  calls  for  matching  the  skill  set  requirement  with  supply.  The  NEP 
proposes to address the vital aspects of HRD requirements of the energy sector. 
 
11.2.  On the other hand, the supply side has been equally unplanned. Only a handful of 
new,  dedicated  energy  Universities  have  come  up  in  the  past  2-3  decades,  with 
poor  collaboration  between  the  demanders  (industry)  and  suppliers  (academia). 
This  needs to  be  corrected by a  closer interaction so that the industry could  fund 
education, seek expansion in the offered courses, buttress the curriculum, and also 
provide  faculty  to  these  institutions.  There  are  successful  examples  of  such 
collaboration, such as in Brazil, where the petroleum sector underwent a complete 
transformation supported by enhanced availability of relevant expertise over time. 
However,  this  requires  integrated  planning  and  communication  between  different 
actors, for which a dedicated apparatus may need to be erected. The corporatization 
of the power sector demands a careful consideration of the skill set required to lead 
the businesses as commercial entities. The gradual adoption of market framework 
in the entire energy domain will require a similar re-orientation in the management 
cadres.  Both  technical  and  managerial  skills  will  be  the  focus  of  interventions  in 
creation of a new HRD cadre for energy sector.  
 
11.3.  Various  studies  have  revealed  that  the  growth  in  the  Indian  energy  sector  is 
expected  to  generate  millions  of  jobs  in  the  coming  decades.  It  is  also 
acknowledged, that without the availability of relevant expertise, our energy sector 
may  get  tripped.  Many  of  these  new  positions  will  be  in  the  nature  of  energy 
68 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
specialists,  while  at  the  other  extreme,  skilled  technicians  will  be  required  for 
routine  functions.  A  Skill  India  Mission  is  already  at  work,  and  the  NEP  must 
dovetail  the  opportunities  in  the  energy  sector  with  it.  As  regards  specialists,  an 
industry-academia collaboration is required to identify the niche areas and plan for 
their availability. In some sub-sectors, such as power, the government has already 
been  an  active  player  in  providing  trained  manpower  through  its  multiple 
institutions,  many  of  them  managed  by  public  sector  companies.  The  NEP  may 
consolidate the opportunities, requirements and the strategy for supply of relevant 
manpower to the entire energy sector. The following measures are proposed to be 
taken up in this direction:  
 
11.3.1. Creation of a strengthened database  
 
India’s energy sector is expected to keep growing at a fast pace for several 
decades, which will keep employing increased number of personnel. On the 
other hand, due to the changing profile of the energy mix, which may have 
a  larger  share  of  clean  energy  and  energy  efficiency,  the  desired  skill  set 
may  also  be  shaped  correspondingly.  An  exercise  will  be  undertaken  for 
analysis  of  the  energy  sector  staffing  needs,  available  institutions  and  the 
gaps  in  the  above.  The  above  analysis  will  take  into  account  the  common 
demand  of  other  sectors  from  the  technical  institutions  so  that  the  net 
availability of manpower for the energy sector may be estimated. 
 
 
11.3.2. Industry-Academia collaboration 
 
The  energy  sector  ought  to  acknowledge  manpower  as  a  vital  input  for 
which it may need to invest in their training and education. On the basis of 
the  data  to  be  generated  from  the  above  exercise,  the  energy  sector 
companies  would  fund/sponsor/support  educational  institutions  to  set  up 
colleges/Universities/ITIs/polytechnics in the specialized disciplines sought 
by  them.  In  order  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  integrated  energy  planning  and 
management,  existing  specialized  energy  discipline  Universities  will  be 
aided  to  become  omnibus  energy  Universities.  The  role  of  Industry 
federations would be significant in this continuous engagement, especially 
in  assuring  the  institutions  and  the  student  community  of  employment 
opportunities  after  the  end  of  the  courses.  The  number  of  positions  of 
Interns/Trainees  will  also  be  significantly  raised  for  a  closer  association 
between the industry and students, and early identification of talent. 
 
 
11.3.3. Institutional integration 
 
There are a plethora of institutions working in the domain of energy sector 
skills.  Currently  40  Sector  Skill  Councils  exist,  while  dedicated  training 
 
69 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
institutions  set  up  by  PSUs  supplement  the  private  academic  institutions. 
Few  State  Governments  have  taken  a  lead  in  setting  up  energy  related 
institutions  of  higher  learning,  which  needs  to  be  remedied  as  local 
Governments  best  appreciate the job  opportunities existing in  their energy 
installations. Convergence of  the prevailing initiatives  of the Ministries  of 
Labour,  Skill  Development  and  Entrepreneurship  with  energy  sector 
Ministries  will  be  undertaken.  A  taskforce  would  be  created  with 
representatives from the aforementioned central ministries, industry bodies, 
sector  skill  councils,  and  State  Governments  to  develop  a  strategy  for  the 
same.  
 
11.3.4. Quality and not just Quantity  
 
The  large  employment  prospects  in  the  energy  sector  must  not  be  mis-
construed  as  a  mere  supply  of  numbers.  In  order  to  ensure  top  quality  of 
manpower, our HRD initiatives will be so deployed that they incubate the 
best  in  class  professionals.  For  this,  collaborations  between  our  academic 
institutions  and  the  globally  best  ones  in  selected  domains  will  be  forged. 
Energy  sector  is  witnessing  rapid  change  as  technology  evolves,  and  our 
manpower  needs  to  be  abreast  with  them.  The  same  institutions  are  the 
source of researchers who will be a critical ingredient of our energy related 
R&D initiatives. In order to achieve the above ends, the quality of faculty, 
facilities  and  funding  needs  to  be  of  a  high  order.  It  is  expected  that  the 
support of Industry will much help to address the above requirements.  
 
 
11.4.  Role of State Governments 
 
As the Central Government alone cannot meet these large expectations, the role of 
State Governments in HRD is acknowledged and their support to this agenda will 
be taken in a big measure. The existing robust engagement of State Governments 
in  higher  education  needs  to  be  extended  to  specialized  technical  disciplines 
including the energy sector ones. Even the private sector institutions look upon the 
States to support their efforts to set up technical institutions. States will appreciate 
that their programmes of clean energy deployment, and other interventions related 
to the energy sector (e.g. Smart cities, Electric vehicle deployment, Decentralized 
renewable  energy  solutions  in  villages  etc.)  will  need  high  quality  energy 
professionals.  The  budgetary  outlays  in  energy  sector  schemes  meant  for 
manpower  training  and  deployment,  will  be  aligned  with  the  national  skill 
development towards development of high quality energy specialists. 
 
11.5.  Unlike many other sectors, the Government within its overall HRD agenda cannot 
alone meet the manpower requirement of the energy sector. Not only are the needs 
of  this  sector  highly  technical  for  both  the  Government  and  educational 
community, the largely well capitalized energy sector is often looked upon as one 
70 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
that ought to help itself. There is earnestness in the Industry as well, to engage with 
all stakeholders for a steady stream of supply of trained manpower. This calls for 
an active role for Industry in the HRD strategy for its own good, which can be well 
supported  by  the  vast  resources  at  its  command.  The  global  integration  of  the 
energy  sector  and  its  nature  being  such  that  R&D  plays  a  significant  role  in  cost 
cutting and enhancing the efficiency of operations, there is a vital role for a HRD 
policy  within  the  NEP.  A  strong  coordination  and  management  apparatus  for 
energy sector HRD, as proposed herein, is expected to fill this role. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 12 
Technology and Research and Development 
 
12.1  Technology  can  help  in  enhancing  supply  of  energy  at  affordable  price,  and    
deliver it efficiently and sustainably. While India has been at the forefront of technology 
deployment  but  not  of  development.  We  have  been  cognizant  of  the  importance  of 
technology  in  energy  as  is  evidenced  by  early  adoption  of  initiatives  on  smart  grids, 
LED, deepwater oil/gas exploration and a dedicated target for Concentrated Solar Power 
technology (CSP). It is a matter of pride that the private sector led the induction of many 
of these cutting-edge technologies, aided by the large Indian energy market. However, a 
lot more needs to be done. Recent disruptive technologies, such as hydraulic fracture of 
shales  for  oil/gas  extraction,  high  efficiency  low  emission  power  generation  (HELE), 
coal  to  liquid  (CTL)  and  high  efficiency  solar  photovoltaic  (SPV)  cells,  have  all  been 
developed elsewhere. If India were to promote technology development domestically, it 
could direct the efforts towards our local problems, rather than wait for the solutions to 
be  developed  abroad.  It  is  easier  for  us  to  induct  new  technology  when  creating  new 
infrastructure, rather than retrofitting. Therefore, India has the opportunity of erecting a 
brand new, technologically advanced energy system.   The NEP offers a perspective on 
the  strategy  to  achieve  the  objective  of  faster  uptake  and  development  of  technology, 
both from overseas and local sources. 
 
12.2         Buy or develop 
 
India needs technology, and if the relevant technology is not available anywhere, then we 
have to encourage R&D. That is why the NEP deals with the two topics of technology 
and R&D at the same place. India spends a fraction of the global  expenditure on R&D. 
This suggests that we need an ecosystem for absorbing latest technology from abroad. In 
some  sectors  such  as  oil  and  gas,  technology  is  developed  either  by  industry  players 
themselves  or  by  service  providers,  and  cannot  be  bought  out.  PSUs  are  dominant  in 
several Indian energy sub-sectors, and need to adopt imaginative procurement processes. 
Conversely, in  many cases,  India’s unique  energy  resource endowment  and challenges, 
may  require  a  dedicated  R&D  pursuit.  Here,  the  role  of  Government  assumes 
significance. In a nutshell, we will not be averse to procuring available technologies, and 
also be ready to pursue research and deployment, and even extend support to R&D where 
required.  The  India  sponsored  International  Solar  Alliance  (ISA)  is  a  good  example  of 
the latter. We have to provide for a pro-active policy approach for technology induction 
both by procurement and incubation. 
 
12.3       Technology gaps 
 
While energy technology is a vast area and it will require some effort to identify our own 
gaps  and  match  them  with  globally  available  technologies,  yet,  we  are  aware  of  some 
broad areas. On the demand side, energy efficiency holds a large promise for technology 
72 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
induction.  It  is  also  directly  inked  with  India’s  NDCs  as  efficiency  reduces  energy 
intensity.  Technological  interventions  in  transport,  industry,  agriculture  and  household 
can save costs, and reduce energy demand. EVs are an area of huge interest to India as it 
holds the potential of reducing the demand for liquid fuel.  On the supply side, which is 
the prime focus of the  NEP, we need technology  particularly in  augmenting our energy 
sources in areas of exploration, evaluation, development and production. India is poorly 
explored  for  oil  and  gas,  and  has  not  been  able  to  optimally  exploit  its  other  energy 
sources, too. New technologies such as gasifying coal at higher depths, tapping the heat 
value of solar energy, developing hydrogen as a source of energy, are  highly relevant to 
India.  The  opportunities  exist  beyond  new  technology  development,  to  deployment  as 
well.  Raising  the  efficiency  of  power  plants  by  induction  of  ultra-critical/IGCC 
technologies,  offshore  wind  energy,  grid  balancing  under  high  renewable  scenarios  and 
micro-grid development are some examples of deploying technologies already in practice 
in the world. In order to proceed effectively, a detailed analysis will be needed.  
 
12.4  Technology - Way Forward 
The way forward in induction of technology is discussed as follows: 
 
12.4.1  An  industry-academia  alliance  is  best  suited  for  identifying  areas  for 
technology induction. This initiative will be led by BEE in the demand sectors, 
and by sector-specific energy ministries in supply sectors. 
 
12.4.2  Energy  access,  exploration/evaluation,  production,  alternate  technologies  and       
energy efficiency will be the main areas of technology focus. 
 
 
12.4.3  A technology roadmap will be laid out for different energy sub-sectors through    
the exercise of the alliance as stated above. This will guide the efforts over the 
medium term especially as results can only be achieved over time. 
 
12.4.4  The  Government  will  supplement  private  sector  efforts  in  technology 
development 
in  different  energy 
its  dedicated  agencies/PSUs 
Ministries,  and  Department  of  Science  and  Technology  (DST)  as  well  as 
Department of Bio-Technology.  
through 
 
12.4.5  The Government may place its fund with the technology developers and allow 
operational freedom by maintaining an arms-length relationship. 
 
12.4.6  Diplomatic Missions abroad will be harnessed in tapping the  Indian diaspora 
in  providing  guidance  to  the  technology  related  efforts,  especially  from 
reputed technology centres at select locations. 
 
12.4.7  Many  technology  providers  are  unwilling  to  part  with  technology,  but  offer 
partnerships on a variety of terms.  In some cases, such procurement may not 
be amenable through established processes. Our PSUs will make imaginative 
73 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
arrangements to access technologies, and be open to engaging with technology 
providers on risk-reward basis. 
 
12.4.8  Technology related efforts will be dove-tailed with the Skill India Mission to 
have a symbiotic relationship between the two.  
 
12.4.9  The  energy  Ministries  require  technical  advice  at  top  levels  which  is  often 
missing.  Therefore,  a  position  of  Chief  Technology  Officer  (CTO)  will  be 
created  in  each  energy  Ministry  for  guidance,  supervision  and  technology 
related initiatives.  
 
12.5  R&D Strategy 
 
As discussed earlier, technology development and R&D efforts go hand-in-hand. 
Many  of  our  felt  needs  may  not  be  a  high  priority  area  for  the  scientific 
community  abroad.  The  strategy  for  developing  technologies  locally  through 
R&D will be as follows: 
 
12.5.1  The  Government  recognizes  its  role  in  supplementing  commercial 
R&D.  While  technology  may  have  many  suitors,  it  is  R&D  which 
struggles due to investment risk. Therefore, Government will enhance 
its support to energy R&D. 
 
12.5.2  The Ministries will deploy the new mechanism created for technology 
development herein to identify the areas of R&D pursuit.  
 
12.5.3  A  distinction,  however,  is  needed  to  be  made  between  fundamental 
research  and  R&D  for  applications.  India  offers  a  vast  potential  for 
research in energy sector deployment. 
 
12.5.4  Many  emerging  sectors  such  as  clean  coal  technologies,  CCS, 
hydrogen as a source of energy are been actively pursued abroad. The 
Ministries  will  support  joining  international  R&D  where  it  is  felt 
useful. 
 
12.5.5  Policy  research  has  a  great  relevance  in  deployment  by  suggesting 
practices  to  make  new  products/technologies  financially  viable. 
Hence,  the  Government  will  also  support  such  research  in  technical 
centres. 
 
12.5.6  Laboratories operated by CSIR and other scientific ministries will be 
mainstreamed  with  related  energy  Ministries  to  make  their  research 
productive.  A  linkage  will  be  provided  through  the  newly  created 
position of CTO. 
74 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
 
12.5.7  The  research  facilities  operated  by  energy  sector  PSUs  such  as 
ONGC,  NTPC,  and  CIL  hold  a  vast  potential  for  peer  reviewed 
research.  They  will  be  made  autonomous  for  greater  independence 
and accountability on the lines of National  Institute of Wind Energy 
(NIWE) and National Institute of Solar energy (NISE). 
 
12.5.8  Financial  incentives/tax  reliefs  will  be  offered  to  encourage  energy 
related research in the private sector.   
 
12.5.9  R&D cannot be incubated overnight. An ecosystem to support it will 
be created in due course, by forging a closer relationship between the 
industry and academia. Longer duration joint research projects will be 
initiated in consortium between government and companies.  
 
12.6  Technology and R&D are critical inputs for the Indian energy sector. The value 
proposition  of  the  above  in  improving  the  energy  parameters  of  the  country  is 
recognized.  Funds,  relevant  technical  manpower,  institutional  support  and  an 
appropriate ecosystem are vital for technology to flourish. The NEP proposes to 
bring  the  above  ingredients  together.  A  quick  resolution  to  harnessing  India’s 
energy  resources,  and  delivering  energy  to  its  vast  un-served  citizens  through 
low-cost options, can be fast-forwarded by technology supported by R&D. 
 
 
 
75 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 13 
Overseas Engagements 
 
13.1 
Introduction 
 
The  NEP  views  energy  security  in  terms  of  assured  supply.  Until  domestic 
sources, particularly the renewable ones, become available in larger volumes, our 
import  dependence  for  energy  supply  is  set  to  increase.  With  high  import 
dependence for commercial primary energy supplies, India has a vested interest in 
deep  overseas  engagement  across  stakeholders.  While 
import 
dependence is an inevitability, it also offers an opportunity. Our galloping energy 
demand needs investors, both domestic and overseas, to create the infrastructure, 
our  companies  can  tap  opportunities  abroad  to  bring  the  energy  supplies.  As 
import  dependence  rises  sharply  by  2040,  there  is  every  reason  that  Indian 
companies seize a large share of the overseas energy business. There are a number 
of  other  interests,  too,  as  enumerated  below  that  justify  an  effective  overseas 
energy strategy: 
  Accessing latest technology 
  Overland energy supplies through pipelines and transmission lines  
  Leveraging our large buying position to influence energy markets 
  Playing a lead position in international energy organisations 
  Climate policy diplomacy to protect our energy strategy 
  Collaborating in large international consortia based research. 
increased 
 
13.2  Due  to  a  variety  of  overseas  energy  interests,  the  number  of  stakeholders  and 
nature  of  engagement  is  also  broad.  We  have  developmental,  commercial  and 
strategic  roles  to  play  in  the  international  arena,  all  of  which  call  for  a 
comprehensive strategy. The launch of the International Solar Alliance by India at 
COP21,  is  one  example  of  the  emerging  role  of  India  as  a  world  leader  in 
promoting clean energy solutions, while assisting the emerging nations meet their 
energy  needs.  On  the  other  hand,  we  need  to  secure  stable,  long-term  and 
attractive  commercial  contracts  for  supply  of  oil,  LNG  and  electricity  from 
renewable sources, especially in the northern Himalayan region. Then, with Indian 
energy  demand  likely  to  comprise  nearly  40%  of  the  additional  global  demand 
upto 2040, we have a vested interest in influencing global energy architecture by 
participating  actively  in  international  energy  organisations.  The  energy  sector 
Ministries  and  Ministry  of  External  Affairs  will  pursue  the  overseas  strategy  set 
forth  in  the  NEP.  However,  an  overarching  coordination  mechanism  will  be 
created,  particularly  to  engage  across  energy  issues  with  institutions  that  handle 
omnibus energy issues at the global level.  
 
76 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
13.3  Mixed Results 
 
There has been a lack of clarity across the board on the objective of our overseas 
strategy, and success is usually measured merely on the parameter of acquisition 
of  overseas  assets.  Our  companies  have  been  engaging  internationally  for  over 
two  decades,  but  no  more  than  5%  of  our  domestic  oil  requirements  are  being 
produced from  their overseas assets.  However, in  the recent  past,  there has  been 
an overwhelming success in securing oil and gas assets by our companies, and this 
number  is  set  to  increase.  There  is  some  success  also  in  accessing  hydro-power 
from  the  Himalayan  neighbours.  The  poor  success  of  the  past  has  often  been 
viewed as a failure of our overseas energy strategy. While it is important to scale-
up our equity oil production, what is lost sight is that our National Oil Companies 
have  achieved  laurels  in  many  other  ways.  NEP  offers  clarity  to  our  overseas 
agenda.  We  are  the  world’s  fourth  largest  energy  consumer,  and  have  to  protect 
our  energy  interests  in  a  number  of  areas.  While  we  have  to  enhance  our 
commercial engagement, we have to also advance a variety of other interests.  
 
13.4  Challenges 
 
It is useful to list the challenges faced in the past while engaging internationally. 
An  appreciation  of  the  same  would  help  in  drafting  a  suitable  strategy.  The 
following appear as the prominent ones: 
  Lack of clarity on the objectives 
  Slow decision making in acquisition proposals  
  Geo-political disturbances, mainly in the Gulf  
  Lack of coordination between diverse energy Ministries 
  Poor utilization of the capability in our Missions 
 
Ineffective participation in international organisations 
 
13.5  Strategy 
 
It is proposed to address the above by adopting the following strategy: 
 
13.5.1  The  objective  of  our  overseas  energy  strategy  is  to  support  domestic 
energy  policy  through  international  engagements.  The  aim  is  to  reduce 
imports  and  diversify  them,  promote  the  interests  of  Indian  energy 
companies, attract investment, and engage effectively with international 
energy organisations. 
 
13.5.2  The  increasing  integration  of  the  world  reflected  in  rising  trade  of 
energy,  offers  an  opportunity  to  India  as  well.  We  will  diversify  our 
energy imports by securing long-term supplies across all energy sources 
—oil,  gas,  electricity,  nuclear  fuels  and  coal  —  from  all  regions, 
including our immediate neighbourhood. The above strategy of bringing 
77 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
energy supplies from our own overseas assets will fit in well with greater 
inter-play between market forces in domestic energy market. 
 
13.5.3  The  over-supplied  energy  markets  offer  an  opportunity  to  India  to 
leverage its large buying position for a number of energy sources. This 
will be effectively used to acquire assets and also seek beneficial energy 
supply contracts. Imaginative purchase contracts will be struck that give 
us price and volume flexibility. 
 
13.5.4  There exists an opportunity to forge strong links through energy trade in 
our  neighbourhood,  including  balancing  our  electricity  grid  by  inter-
connecting  with  the  south  Asian  grid,  as  well  as  sourcing  renewable 
energy from as far as central Asia, and as close as Sri Lanka and Bhutan. 
 
13.5.5  Overland  oil  and  gas  supplies  from  central  and  West  Asia  will  be 
secured by pursuing the  existing and new opportunities. The TAPI  and 
IPI gas pipeline projects must be pursued earnestly keeping in mind the 
evolving geo-political situation in the region. 
 
13.5.6  The  NOCs  will  be  given  greater  freedom  to  take  commercial  decisions 
without 
the  requirement  of  multiple  clearances,  consistent  with 
devolution of financial powers. Necessary diplomatic assistance will be 
given to support our companies. 
 
13.5.7  An  effective  diplomatic 
initiative  will  be  undertaken  with 
the 
international  community  to  protect  the  engagements  of  our  companies. 
Our  companies  can  also  benefit  from  a  commercial  orientation  where 
required, without losing time for government-to-government deals which 
are  usually  time-consuming.  This  will  also  improve  accountability  and 
speed up decision making. 
 
13.5.8  Unlike  many  large  countries  that  have  an  omnibus  energy  Ministry, 
absence of a unified face to the overseas counterpart in India leads to a 
challenge.  A  separate  coordination  mechanism  will  be  created  in  MEA 
to effectively promote India’s energy strategy internationally. Moreover, 
there is a need to realize the benefits of the presence of Indian technical 
diaspora  abroad.  Indian  Missions  would  seek  their  assistance  for 
technology and manpower access.   
 
13.5.9  When  engaging  internationally,  energy  security  should  take  primacy 
over  other  considerations,  especially  as  India’s  energy  imports  are 
expected  to  rise  alarmingly  in  the  medium  term.  Therefore,  we  will 
source  energy  to  promote  energy  security  on  the  basis  of  sound 
commercial decisions. 
78 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
13.5.10  Our  large  energy  programme  will  require  high  fossil  fuel  dependence 
even  while  we  ramp  up  renewable  energy  supplies  over  the  medium 
term.  The  energy  supply  and  affordability  agenda  calls  for  greater 
involvement of energy experts in engagement with international climate 
change  community.  The  line  Ministries  will  play  an  active  role  in 
overseas engagements. 
 
13.5.11  Energy  technology  and  policy  are  evolving  rapidly  across  the  world. 
Adoption  of  the  above  offers  opportunity  to  suppliers  and  consumers 
commonly.  Our  energy  Ministries  and  private  sector  need  to  engage 
effectively  with  international  community  to  access  the  above  through 
joint programmes.  
 
 
 
79 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 14 
Air Quality 
14.1 In recent years, regulatory action and court mandates have been demanding technology 
upgrades and ameliorative action for this sector like never before. This has impacted the 
bottom lines of energy related companies as well as energy prices. The NEP clarifies the 
Government’s stand on air quality concerns, with a view to convey its position so that the 
industry  can  take  appropriate  steps,  while  assuring  the  citizens  of  air  quality  concerns.   
Energy  use and environment are closely linked. As per  India’s  Biennial  Update Report 
(BUR),  nearly  75%  of  GHG  emissions  came  from  energy  sector  in  2010.  The  poor  air 
quality in India particularly in urban centres where energy is used in concentrated areas, 
calls for bold action through energy policy as a part of the overall environment strategy. 
While climate change is a more complex issue of global dimension, but local air quality 
is  a  direct  outcome  of  domestic  actions.  The  NEP  acknowledges  sustainable  use  of 
energy as one of its overarching objectives, with sustainable habitats as a co-benefit from 
deployment of sustainable energy sources. This calls for action on the two components of 
clean  energy  space  —  energy  efficiency  and  renewable  energy  —  both  of  which  have 
been discussed in detail elsewhere in the NEP. Often, the above interventions are looked 
upon  merely  as  means  to  augment  energy  supply,  without  acknowledging  the 
environmental co-benefit. The proposals herein address this precise issue by focusing on 
air  quality  concerns,  through  coordination  between  multiple  agencies,  while  meeting 
energy needs of the country.   
 
14.2 It  is  evident  that  air  quality  objectives  cannot  be  achieved  without  the  desired 
environment  related  investments  in  the  energy  sector,  both  in  generation  and 
consumption.  The  poor  commerciality  in  energy  business  (including  cost  plus  regime) 
led to  cost-cutting with harmful  effects  on air quality. The new norms of water and air 
quality  notified  by  the  MoEF&CC  desire  course  correction.  The  former  are  mindful  of 
the  cost  implication  being  liberal  towards  older  coal  power  plants,  but  do  provide  a 
roadmap  for  ultimate  improvement  in  emissions.  The  power  sector  is  likely  to  be 
impacted  adversely  and  may  need  to  retire  some  coal  plants  (over  25  years  of  age)  on 
commerciality-cum-efficiency consideration, or seek moderate hike in tariffs or put them 
in  reserve  category.  It  would  be  prudent  to  take  a  long-term  view  and  move  towards 
efficient operations while conserving scarce water resources and also meeting air quality 
emission norms. Transport sector is already moving in the direction of compliance, aided 
by soft crude prices.  
 
14.3 It  has  to  be  appreciated,  that  a  number  of  sectoral  policies  have  to  work  in  unison  to 
achieve  clean  habitats.  The  National  Environment  Policy  mainstreams  environmental 
concerns in  all developmental activities, and is  implemented through a slew of statutes 
and  regulations.  Indian  energy  sector  is  required  to  develop  future  energy  sources 
consistently  with  the  above  Policy.  On  the  other  hand,  the  NEP  assures  that  India’s 
energy demand will be fully met in a cost effective manner, providing the roadmap both 
on energy demand and supply sides. The air quality objective demands that inputs related 
80 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
to  technology,  behavioural  change  and  demand  reduction  are  integrated,  mainly  in  the 
following energy consuming areas — transport, household and electricity sectors — and 
urban planning. Even the agricultural practices, particularly post-harvest ones, have to be 
mindful  of  air  quality  concerns.  Within  the  above  sectors,  the  national  transport  and 
urban  policies  are  dedicated  towards  provision  of  effective  transport  facilities  and 
sustainable  habitats  to  the  citizens.  In  order  that  air  quality  is  not  vitiated  by  energy 
pathways in all energy consuming sectors, following steps will be taken: 
 
14.4 
Transport Sector 
 
14.4.1  Public transport  
 
14.4.1.1  Public transport system could reduce energy requirement. For this 
to  happen,  a  slew  of  measures  need  to  be  taken  including 
promoting  domestic  capacity  for  manufacturing  and  deploying  of 
buses and other public transport vehicles in the country. 
 
14.4.1.2  There  is  a  need  to  classify  public  transport  and  non-motorised 
transport  (NMT)  as  essential  service,  and  provide  subsidies  to 
public transport. 
 
14.4.1.3  Technological innovation and other strategies will be promoted to 
bring  down  the  cost  of  hybrid  and  electric  public  transport 
vehicles.  
 
14.4.1.4  CNG  vehicles  need  to  be  promoted  by  rolling  out  city  gas 
distribution  (CGD)  projects  and  pricing  liquid  transport  fuels  on 
market driven principles. Diesel vehicles may be discouraged until 
clean diesel becomes available on a nation-wide basis. 
 
14.4.1.5  Efficient 
implementation  of  fuel  efficiency  regulation  and 
improving fuel quality need to move in tandem.  
 
14.4.2  Private transport  
 
14.4.2.1  An  analysis  of  total  emission  over  life  of  different  modes  of 
transport options is critical to decide about the appropriate mode of 
transport. The policy to promote electric and hybrid vehicles needs 
to be supported. Other policy options should be explored to arrive 
at  optimal  solutions  and  incentives  to  decide  whether  to  support 
expensive  technology;  or  to  give  subsidies.  The  success  of 
efficiency  in  private  transport  depends  on  progress  in  mass 
transport  system  such  as  metro  rail.  Further  widening  taxation 
differential  between  cars  (higher  tax  for  big  cars/  SUVs)  will 
81 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
promote adoption of more fuel-efficient cars.  
 
14.4.3  Non-motorised transport  
 
14.4.3.1  Energy  consumption  of  transport,  particularly  urban  transport,  is 
directly  proportional  to  the  number  of  trips  multiplied  by  the  trip 
length;  so  the  solution  is  to  reduce  the  number  of  vehicular  trips 
and  check  pollution.  Building  transit-oriented  cities  much  help  in 
reducing  trip  lengths.  Further,  promoting  non-motorised  transport 
is  a  key  intervention,  which  is  a  behavioural  aspect.  Provision  of 
footpaths, and encouraging cycling is strongly recommended. 
 
14.5  Household Sector 
 
14.5.1  Clean  and  affordable  supplies  must  meet  the  household  sector  energy  needs.  The 
present distinction between well supplied urban centres, and poorly served rural areas 
has  to  give  way  to  an  even  dispensation.  The  following  interventions  are  a  must  in 
both urban and rural settings, which display different challenges of air quality arising 
out of different energy footprints.  
 
14.5.2  Electricity  is  the  most  efficient  source  of  energy  for  lighting,  cooling/heating  and 
cooking.  The  Government  is  committed  to  supplying  all  habitations  with  24x7 
electricity supply by 2022.  
 
14.5.3  Until  universal  electrification  is  achieved,  there  will  be  a  need  to  meet  the  lighting 
needs by clean non-electricity based solutions. As kerosene is a highly polluting fuel, 
off-grid solutions through renewable energy will be the preferred source. 
 
14.5.4  LPG  and  natural  gas  best  serve  cooking  needs,  until  electric  cooking  becomes 
acceptable  as  per behavioural  choice. This is  discussed elsewhere under  this Policy. 
The  role  of  efficient  cook-stoves  is  manifest  as  long  as  solid  biomass  serves  as  the 
cooking fuel, especially in rural areas. 
 
14.5.5  Cities need to  adopt  natural  gas as the transport and  cooking  fuel  for clean  air. The 
displaced  liquid  fuels  would  ease  petroleum  imports,  while  LPG  can  be  diverted  to 
rural areas. 
 
14.6 
Power Sector  
 
14.6.1  Electrification of energy demand 
Electricity  and  hydrogen  are  carriers  of  energy  and  do  not  pollute  the 
environment  at  the point of consumption. The share of electricity in  energy 
demand was 17% in 2014, and needs to be stepped up to check air pollution 
in habitations. Efforts  will be made to  substitute solid and liquid  fuels  with 
 
82 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
electricity  across  consuming  sectors.  This  would  help  in  demand  of 
renewable  power,  too,  whose  capacity  is  being  ramped  up  as  a  conscious 
policy. 
14.6.2  Phasing out old, inefficient coal fired power plants  
In  the  long  term,  India’s  power  generation  sector  faces  the  challenge  of 
adding  capacity  expeditiously.  However,  there  needs  to  be  environment 
consciousness  in  generation.  Older  plants  that  guzzle  fuel  and  emit  large 
volumes of fumes, especially close to cities, need to be phased out.  
 
 
14.6.3  Geographic concentration of power plants  
New power plants ought to be so sited that they do not damage air quality in 
human habitations. Water supply to power plants ought to be priced as per its 
scarcity  value,  so  that  concessional  water  tariffs  do  not  spur  growth  of 
thermal plants in water stressed regions.   
 
 
14.6.4  Clean coal technologies  
India’s dependence on coal is expected to remain high. But, the Indian coal is 
known to have high ash content and low calorific value, which aggravates the 
air  quality  via  poor  thermal  efficiency.  Two  major  technological  solutions 
need  to  be  worked  on  are  (1)  washing  of  coal  with  minimum  or  no  water 
consumption  and  (2)  gasification  of  coal  for  power  generation,  through 
IGCC.  Both  these  technologies  will  bring  down  the  particulates  as  well  as 
gaseous  pollutants.  At  present,  India  has  not  joined  the  global  research  for 
CCS  technologies  even  though  this  technology  has  high  relevance  for  us. 
India  needs  to  join  the  international  efforts  underway  through  the  consortia 
approach. 
 
    
14.6.5   Energy from Biomass 
              The  aggravation  of  urban  air  quality  standards  by  stubble  burning  can  be 
turned into an opportunity by promoting power plants based on agri-residues. 
A  comprehensive  Bio-energy  Policy  would  lay  the  roadmap  for  promoting 
these  plants  which  would  also  harness  this  resource,  while  addressing  air 
quality concerns.   
 
14.7 
Cross-border electricity trade (CBET)  
India’s northern neighbours have a huge hydro-power potential — Nepal 83 GW 
and  Bhutan  30  GW.  Exploring  cross  border  electricity  trade  among  the  South 
Asian nations by developing competitive market, will help India to optimize the 
utilization  of  its  grid  and  also  meet  electricity  need  through  clean  sources. 
Balancing  of  the  grid  will  be  better  due  to  varying  peaking  demand  across  in 
different time zones across the east-west expanse of the South Asian grid. 
 
 
 
83 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
14.8 
Urban Sector  
 
14.8.1  Improving  air  quality  cannot  merely  be  a  function  of  low  emission 
technologies,  and is  also impacted by efficiency  of transportation and uptake 
of  clean  energy.  Smart  city  planning  includes  providing  adequate  transport 
spaces  and transit orientation.  Circular roads, Metro rail and MRTS facilities 
ought to be provided in city planning.  
 
14.8.2  As  land  prices  are  generally  high  in  India,  it  is  important  to  provide  for  fuel 
stations and electric charging stations in city planning, and consider them to be 
public utilities in determining the land rates.  
 
14.8.3  The municipal charges for laying natural gas pipelines in urban areas ought to 
be based on no-profit basis as substitution of liquid fuels by gas is environment 
friendly.  
 
14.8.4  The  building  bye-laws  must  provide  for  laying  of  natural  gas  pipelines  and 
provision  of  gas  connections  in  homes  on  the  lines  of  power  and  water 
connections.  
 
14.8.5  The city plans must provide for storage (dumps) of fuels at safe locations away 
from  human  habitations  while  simultaneously,  being  well  connected  to 
transport facilities for receipt and evacuation of fuel.  
 
 
14.9  Other Interventions 
Beside  focused  action  on  above  specified  issues,  an  invigorative  ecosystem  is 
essential  to  drive  clean  energy  deployment  via  investments  in  multiple  areas. 
Global environmental concerns are spurring clean energy technologies and green 
growth.  Our  energy  pathways  must  be  ready  to  assimilate  the  emerging 
technologies which are likely to become affordable as they mature and scale-up. 
The  cost  of  externalities  will  also  need  to  be  factored  into  costing  so  as  to 
promote the viability of cleaner options. Urban administrations need to take note 
of  the  above,  and  harness  such  investments  in  economic  growth.  Additionally, 
there  is  a  need  to  address  the  heating  requirement  of  Industry  through  clean 
energy  sources,  as  heat  comprises  the  major  share  of  Industry’s  energy 
requirement. This calls for a ‘Heat Strategy’ which will be drafted by NITI Aayog 
deploying clean energy sources. Similarly, space cooling is likely to emerge as a 
major  energy  guzzler  and  a  dedicated  strategy  to  provide  efficient  cooling 
solution needs to be devised for the country. Looking to the inter-sectorial issues 
in  the  wide  area  of  clean  energy  as  discussed  above,  an  inter-ministerial 
empowered agency will be set up to oversee implementation of these provisions.  
 
84 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 15 
Conclusion 
India Vision 2040 
 
15.1.  The  NEP  aims  at  supporting  the  Indian  ambition  to  emerge  as  a  well-developed 
and  resilient  economy  with  high  level  of  human  development.  Additionally,  it 
helps prepare the nation to anticipate the technological and market related changes 
in  the  energy  sector.  What  will  India’s  energy  sector  look  like  in  2040?  India 
Vision 2040 aims to answer the above precise question. Demand-driven provision 
of energy at affordable prices, high per capita consumption of electricity and access 
to clean cooking energy and electricity with universal coverage, low emission and 
security  of  supply  will  characterize  the  energy  parameters  of  India  in  2040.  The 
energy  mix  will  also  undergo  a  transformation  with  preponderance  of  renewable 
technologies,  storage  solutions,  smart  grids  and  enlightened  consumer  behaviour 
becoming  the  order  of  the  day.  We  attempt  here  to  present  the  NITI  Ambition 
Scenario (NAS) 2040 — energy in India in 2040 — the expected energy status of 
India,  via  the  NEP.  The  NAS  has  been  developed  so  as  to  provide  a  range  of 
implications  for  the  Indian  energy  sector  (Annex  1).  The  range  represents  the 
outcome scenarios if India were to follow a business-as-usual path versus if it were 
to  transition  to  an  ambitious  one  —  cleaner  and  more  sustainable  pathway.  The 
policy mandate has to be linked to the latter. 
 
15.2.  Access and availability 
 
The  Annex  1  offers  an  overview  of  the  Indian  energy  sector  as  envisioned  for 
2040.  The  foremost  objective  of  the  NEP  is  to  banish  energy  poverty  from  India 
and make energy available to all its citizens. In 2040, nearly a hundred years since 
Independence, every Indian must have access to all forms of energy as per choice, 
in desired volumes. The total energy supply in the country is expected to go up by 
a multiple of around 3 times over 2012. This will translate into 1055-1184 kgoe per 
capita energy consumption, (it was 500 kgoe in 2012), including 2911-2924 kWh 
per capita electricity consumption (887  kWh in  2012).  A high level  of  efficiency 
ensures  that  even  at  a  moderate  level  of  per  capita  energy  as  well  as  electricity 
consumption,  an  average  Indian  is  able  to  fulfill  all  his  energy  needs.  The  good 
news is that with fuel switching in favour of electricity, its share is higher in energy 
demand in 2040. The above supply at approximately 3.6%-4.3% CAGR over 2012-
40,  is  expected  to  meet  the  energy  requirement  for  a  minimum  quality  of  life  of 
every  Indian.  Robust  energy  markets  will  enable  the  spread  of  infrastructure  to 
make energy available across the country. 
 
 
 
 
85 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
15.3.  Energy Security 
The energy mix of India will have a high share of renewable which will sustain the 
present  self-dependence  scenario.  India  had  imported  nearly  31%  of  its  primary 
energy in 2012, with 77% and 22% of oil and gas imports, respectively. The share 
of renewables (excluding biomass) was 3%. In 2040, with renewables comprising 
7%-10% of India’s energy mix, the overall import of primary energy is expected to 
rise  substantially.  Oil  and  gas  imports  will  be  responsible  for  the  rise  in  imports, 
and  are  estimated  to  rise  to  81-88%  and  35-51%,  respectively.  Therefore,  while 
registering a 2.7-3.2 times  growth in energy supply, the country’s dependence on 
overseas supply is expected to increase. On the other dimension of energy security, 
namely  supply  assurance,  with  widespread  expansion  of  energy  infrastructure, 
storage solutions and inter-connectors with other countries in the region, it is hoped 
that  there  will  be  high  levels  of  confidence,  devoid  of  supply  threats.  Even 
technology  is  expected  to  play  a  major  role,  as  the  share  of  electricity  in  final 
energy  will  have  risen  to  23-26%  in  2040  against  17%  in  2014,  with  almost  all 
demand sectors becoming amenable to its use. We are aware that power supply is 
inherently a more dependable source due to its inter-connectedness, and also due to 
local deployment of renewable electricity. 
 
 
15.4.  Equity 
Increased urbanization and rural transformation will have by and large removed the 
developmental  distance  between  the  rural  and  urban  settings.  The  modelling 
assumes similar levels of per capita energy consumption in rural and uraban areas 
by 2031-32. While their energy consumption parameters may be different, but rural 
areas would not lack commercial sources of energy. Solid biomass is expected to 
be  replaced  by  liquid  and  gaseous  fuels,  and  electric  cooking  will  be  a  major 
practice  across  the  country.  Around  30%  of  the  rural  households  will  remain 
dependent  on  solid  biomass  for  cooking.  The  Government’s  target  of  universal 
electrification  by  2022  would  have  addressed  the  issue  of  clean  energy  source, 
much before the terminal year of the NEP. As mentioned earlier, electricity will be 
the  major  form  of  energy  use,  and  the  large  off-grid  renewable  agenda  will 
contribute  significantly  to  its  widespread  availability.  Market  framework  will 
address  the  issues  of  delivery  mechanism,  which  are  presently  a  major  challenge 
for the public sector agencies.  
 
 
15.5.  Affordability 
The  pricing,  subsidy  and  affordability  aspects  of  energy  supply  will  undergo  the 
most  dramatic  change  of  all.  The  country  will  have  transitioned  to  direct  benefit 
transfer  (DBT)  to  the  meritorious,  and  also  make  it  possible  for  the  vulnerable 
sections to exercise choice in procuring their preferred source of energy. This will 
further promote markets and competition, which will have become the norm in the 
larger  context.  The  IESS  2047  modelling  exercise  reveals  that  the  transition  to 
cleaner energy in the case of India Vision 2040, will be a cheaper pathway than the 
default one  in  terms  of  consumer spends, however, capital  intensive.  Without  the 
 
86 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
7%-11%  share  of  commercial  energy  coming  from  renewable  sources,  Indian 
energy  market  would  have  become  more  dependent  on  global  volatile  energy 
markets  (imports  have  the  potential  to  reach  41-59%  of  primary  commercial 
energy  in  2040  from  36%  in  2012,  depending  on  the  pathway  that  the  economy 
follows).  Hence,  competitive  markets,  combined  with  higher  share  of  cheaper 
renewable  sources  and  efficient  subsidy  delivery  mechanism,  will  make  energy 
affordability a non-issue. 
 
15.6.  Energy mix 
In an increased electricity share, while in the immediate run-up towards universal 
coverage of electricity it may not be viable to tap rooftop solar for homes, but by 
2040 it would have become the norm. The share of solar and wind is expected to be 
14-18% and 9-11% in electricity, and 3-5% and 2-3% in the primary commercial 
energy mix respectively. The advent of EVs will have helped curb a rise in share of 
oil and environment friendly gas would substitute oil in many uses. However, the 
share of oil and gas would have almost maintained their shares of 26% and 6.5% in 
2015-16 to 25-27% and 8-9% in 2040, respectively. In spite of a more than three 
times  increase  in  gas  consumption,  owing  to  large  increase  in  total  energy,  the 
increase in gas would be less in percentage terms. While coal would have risen in 
absolute  terms  (nearly  double),  but  in  relative  terms,  it  would  have  reduced  its 
contribution  from  58%  in  2015  to  44-50%  in  2040.  The  overall  share  of  fossil 
fuels would have come down from 81% in 2012 to 78% in ambitious pathway in 
2040. 
 
15.7.  Energy markets 
In  2040,  the  Indian  energy  market  will  have  fully  evolved  with  supply  rising  to 
meet demand on the basis of competitive markets. The trend of rising private sector 
share in supplies of electricity, oil, gas, coal, and renewables — both in production 
and trade — will transform the market by 2040. The market size will be nearly 2.7-
3.2  times  the  present,  and  public  sector’s  contribution  will  have  been  much 
reduced,  other  than  in  coal  production  and  nuclear  power.  The  latter  will  be  an 
outcome  of  the  statutory  provisions  reserving  the  public  sector’s  business,  rather 
than of the economics of these sectors. As subsidies will be in cash rather than in 
kind, the private sector will also be able to deliver energy to the targeted sections 
of the society, and be an active participant of subsidy schemes. So far, subsidised 
energy  delivery  has  in  parts  been  reserved  for  the  public  sector.    India  will  be 
integrated  with  global  energy  markets  and  be  an  active  energy  trader  with  its 
neighbours,  including  central  and  west  Asian  ones.  Long  term  energy  supply 
contracts will be the norm, and prices will be aligned with international ones. 
 
 
15.8.  Structure of the Industry 
The  present  scenario  of  energy  companies  specializing  in  their  sub-sectors  is 
expected  to  undergo  a  change,  with  companies  integrating  both  forward  and 
backward.  With  increased  globalisation,  emergence  of  mega-super  majors  will 
 
87 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
threaten national companies, leading to amalgamations in the latter space, too. As 
the share of electricity is likely to increase from 17% in 2014 of energy demand to 
near  23-26%,  there  will  be  a  natural  tendency  of  integration  (both  forward  and 
backward)  for  energy  producers  (coal,  oil  and  gas)  to  tap  the  power  market  and 
become  generators, just  as power producers are  trending towards  picking up coal 
mines.  In  later  years,  as  generation/refining  plateaus,  there  will  be  a  tendency  to 
move  towards  distribution  as  well.  This  will  also  lead  to  consolidation  and 
emergence  of  large  integrated  energy  players,  reaping  the  economies  of  scale 
afforded by the large energy market. The role of markets having become manifest, 
energy  will  be  freely  traded  and  competition  will  achieve  benefits  for  the 
customers. The local endowment of energy resources will influence the energy mix 
in  nearby  markets  as  will  be  witnessed  in  the  north  and  north  east,  where  hydel 
power may play an important role. The coastal south and west India, being close to 
the oil/gas rich West Asia, will witness a more significant role of LNG, including 
imported coal based plants. However, the emergence of a robust national electricity 
grid will ensure a single power market. 
 
15.9.  Infrastructure 
Enhanced  energy  supply  will  require  a  large  expansion  in  energy  infrastructure 
along  the  entire  value  chain,  and  will  have  been  created  during  the  period  up  to 
2040. Just  as  the country  is  going in  for optic fibre backbone  across the country, 
gas  pipelines  and  electric  transmission  lines  will  have  net-worked  the  entire 
country.  LNG  terminals,  city  gas  distribution  grids,  strategic  and  commercial  oil 
and gas storages, renewable energy projects (both grid connected and rooftop) will 
have sprung up to  deliver energy to  all parts of  India.  India has the advantage of 
offering  a  new  market,  for  which  latest  technology  will  be  the  norm  in 
infrastructure  creation.  It  is  acknowledged  that  it  is  more  cost  effective  to  adopt 
latest  technology  when  building  new  rather  than  retrofitting,  which  is  the  case  in 
the  West.  The  advent  of  new  technology  and  cost  reduction  in  storage  options 
(battery  among  others),  will  facilitate  exploitation  of  the  abundant  renewable 
resource. The near 30-35% share of renewable energy in electricity mix will see a 
different kind of infrastructure — distributed and decentralized — than the capital 
intensive and centralized ones that exist in the West. 
 
 
15.10.  Government as an animator of markets 
The Government will have gradually moved into the role of a facilitator rather than 
an  active  player.  Energy  will  be  sourced  from  wherever  necessary,  domestic  or 
imported sources, and sold at market prices. The Government, directly and through 
its agents — PSUs and Regulators — will help create the conditions for suppliers 
and demanders to  meet  in the market.  The  role of Government  as a welfare state 
will  be  carried  out  efficiently,  by  not  loading  the  subsidies  on  businesses,  but 
through  its  own  coffers  where  necessary.  It  may  even  socialise  costs.  In  some 
processes,  such  as  technology  development,  R&D,  HRD  and  infrastructure, 
Government  may  step  in  to  reduce  capital  risks  both  by  policy  interventions  and 
 
88 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
providing seed capital, but will otherwise remain an animator rather than an active 
participant. The large capex of $3.6 trillion in  the energy sector upto  2040 (IEA) 
will be a major target to strive for by the Indian policy makers.  This translates into 
nearly  $150  billion  per  year,  mostly  in  the  electricity  sector,  which  is  a  quantum 
jump  from  the  present.  The  above  scenario  will  be  realized  by  2040  with  energy 
being  a  major  contributor  to,  and  a  recipient  of  support  from,  other  economic 
sectors. 
 
The NEP assumes a high GDP growth rate for India between now and 2040, and an 
equally high adoption rate of energy efficient measures. Hence, while there will be 
a significant growth in energy demand, but the energy intensity will be much lesser 
than now. This will be consistent with our NDCs. The large Indian energy market 
will drive competition between sources of energy and also within the same source. 
The role of markets in lowering the price of solar and wind energy and LED bulbs 
has already been witnessed, as has the role of markets in driving technology been 
recognized in the exploitation of shales in the US, through horizontal drilling and 
hydraulic  fracture.  Smart  grids  and  storage  solutions  hold  a  great  future  for  a 
country  like  India  that  wishes  to  achieve  a  large  share  of  renewable  electricity. 
Therefore,  markets  and  technology  are  expected  to  define  the  energy  scenario  of 
India in 2040, called the NITI Ambition Scenario (NAS), 2040. 
 
 
15.11   Monitoring and Coordination Mechanism 
 
            The  NEP  envisages  interventions  across  multiple  Ministries,  over  an  extended 
period  of  time.  This  will  call  for  a  standing  arrangement  for  overseeing  its 
implementation.  A  twin  mechanism  will  be  created  to  monitor  progress  of  the 
proposals  contained  in  the  NEP,  and  also  coordinate  the  efforts  of  different 
Ministries.  A  Steering  Committee  comprising  of  Ministers  of  the  relevant 
Ministries chaired by the Prime Minister will be created to review the progress of 
implementation.  This  would  be  serviced  by  the  NITI  Aayog.  The  second 
Committee  to  help  in  inter-ministerial  coordination  towards  implementing  the 
proposals would comprise Secretaries in the relevant Ministries, would be chaired 
by the CEO, NITI Aayog.  
 
89 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Annexure I 
NITI Ambition Scenario (NAS) 
 
The NEP aims at meeting the objectives as set out in Chapter 2. In order for India to realize 
the India Vision 2040, demand sectors ought to adopt efficiency, while domestic production 
of all sources will need to be stepped-up. The following discussion explains what results can 
be  realized  by  adoption  of  policy  prescription  outlined  in  the  NEP.  The  NITI  Ambition 
Scenario (NAS) is a set of two bounds of energy demand and domestic production, sector and 
source wise, respectively. The higher demand and lower domestic supply comprise the BAU, 
while  the  ambitious  scenario  comprises  lower  energy  demand  and  higher  domestic 
production  bounds.  Understanding  the  potential  scenarios  that  India’s  energy  sector  may 
witness  in  the  years  to  come  is  essential  both  for  planning,  and  policy  formulation  in  the 
sector. Additionally, the building blocks of the energy sector have huge cost implications and 
relatively  long  lock-in  periods.  The  NITI  Ambition  Scenario  aims  to  present  a  range  of 
possible energy implications for the country till the year 2040.  
Basic Premise of the NAS 
This  analysis  acknowledges  the  fact  that  the  results  of  several  national  energy  and  climate 
modeling  studies  for  the  Indian  energy  sector  may  diverge  widely,  depending  on  the 
modeling  approach  utilized.  Being  cognizant  of  the  same,  this  exercise  does  not  propagate 
any  particular  pathway  or  numbers.  The  NITI  Ambition  Scenario  uses  the  India  Energy 
Security  Scenarios,  2047  –  an  energy  scenario  building  tool  developed  by  NITI  Aayog,  to 
arrive at a range of possible energy futures for the Indian energy sector till the year 2040 
(www.indiaenergy.gov.in). The main aim of this analysis is to give a possible direction to the 
planning process of the country, and aid the formulation of interventions in terms of policy 
measures, institutional mechanisms etc.  
The range presents the scenarios which India may follow if it were to follow a business-as-
usual path versus if it were to transition to an ambitious pathway which is cleaner and 
more  sustainable.  The  assumptions  entailing  this  scenario  are  presented  in  the  following 
pages. The former is nevertheless ambitious, too, as it incorporates the Government’s recent 
announcements on Renewable Energy target, emission intensity reduction, share of non-fossil 
fuel capacity in the electricity mix etc. However, the latter is yet more ambitious on adoption 
of energy efficiency and clean energy. The above would also result in higher self–reliance in 
energy.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  IESS,  2047  is  simply  used  as  a  platform  for  the 
determination of this scenario. As the assumptions, and the GDP growth rate etc. of the NITI 
Ambition  Scenario  differ  from  that  which  are  pre-programmed  in  the  IESS,  2047,  suitable 
changes have been made in  the IESS,  2047 to  arrive at  a scenario from  which implications 
can then be derived. These changes are also discussed in the following sections.  
Fixed Assumptions  
The projections are based on certain assumptions relating to likely GDP growth, population, 
level of economic activity etc. which would impact the demand for energy. While short term 
90 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
projections can be made using historical growth rates, however, medium term ones require a 
deeper  analysis.  The  NAS  was  finalised  after  consulting  multiple  agencies,  and  those 
assumptions  were  adopted  which  appeared  to  be  most  reasonable.  A  majority  of  these 
assumptions are in line with India’s internationally declared targets. The following discussion 
elaborates the same so that the stakeholders may note the assumptions, and the basis of their 
adoption.  
1.  Assumptions around the Gross Domestic Product 
The GDP of the economy is assumed to grow at a CAGR of 8% between 2012 and 2040. 
The  growth  rate  gradually  picks  up  and  after  plateauing  in  the  short  term,  then  it 
descends.  The  growth  rate  of  8%  is  largely  in  line  with  India’s  Vision,  Strategy  and 
Action  Agenda  for  2031-32  and  various  other  International  commitments.  The  growth 
rate of India is assumed to increase to 8.3% in 2027-32 interval and then comes down to 
8.1%  in  2037-40.  This  growth  rate  is  a  deviation  from  the  three  scenarios  pre-
programmed in the IESS, 2047. Exercise to determine how the activity demand of sectors 
change  with  a  higher  level  of  GDP  were  undertaken  to  arrive  at  the  level  of  service 
demand for each sector.  
 
GDP Trajectory
9.0%
8.0%
7.0%
6.0%
5.0%
4.0%
3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
 -
8.1%
8.2%
8.3%
8.2%
8.0%
6.8%
2012-17
2017-22
2022-27
2027-32
2032-37
2037-40
 
 
Figure 2 
2.  Population and rate of urbanization  
The population of India is assumed to grow from 1.2 billion in 2014 to 1.6 Billion in 2040. 
(Population Foundation of India, Scenario B) The urbanization rate, in line with the patterns 
followed by many major economies, is assumed to increase to 47% in 2040.  (United Nations 
World Urbanization Prospects 2014)  
3.  Attainment of India’s Developmental Ambitions 
The NAS assumes that all of India’s recently declared developmental ambitions like Housing 
for All by 2022, Power for All by 2022 (All census villages to be electrified by 2019), 100 
91 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Smart Cities, and 175GW of Renewable Energy Capacity till 2022, will be met in their target 
years. The exercise aims to capture India’s growth trajectory post-attainment of the targets. 
Equal level of service demanded  
The aim of this exercise is to show how efficiency and technological measures on the demand 
side  could  reduce  the  aggregate  energy  demand,  thereby  relaxing  the  amount  of  supply 
needed  to  fuel  that  particular  level  of  energy  demand  in  the  economy.  This  generates  two 
numbers  for  energy  demand,  one  at  lower  level  of  efficiency  (BAU),  and  another  at 
heightened level. Therefore, the level of service demand in the analysis is constant, and the 
variations are due to efficiency and technological interventions. The difference between the 
two levels of energy demand highlight the immense potential that interventions on the 
demand side of the economy can have on realizing the developmental goals of India in 
the years to come.  
Energy Demand: 
The analysis captures the six major energy demand sector: Transport, Buildings, Agriculture, 
Cooking, Industry, and Telecom.  
How the scenarios have been generated: The IESS, 2047 aims to capture 4 different levels of 
energy  demand  for  each  sector  based  on  the  adoption  of  energy  efficiency  and  technology 
measures. Two pathways for the demand sectors, based on two different levels of efficiency 
and technology interventions are constructed, and the results are derived from the same. This 
analysis opts for the Business-As-Usual path and an Ambitious path in order to determine the 
energy  demand  for  these  two  scenarios.  In  the  latter  path,  energy  demand  falls  due  to 
adoption of energy efficiency and behavioural changes. 
The major factors, among a variety of others, that have been considered on the demand side 
for this analysis are entailed below: 
1.  Transport  (Passenger  and  Freight  Transport):  Transit  oriented  development,  a 
shift towards Rail based mass transport systems, coupled with the development of the 
systems,  and  increasing  investments  to  fuel  the  same,  a  shift  towards  Electric  and 
Hybrid  Vehicles,  better  logistical  planning,  assisted  by  information  technology 
solutions  to  optimize  route  planning,  concentrated  economic  activity  in  the  form  of 
logistical parks, industrial clusters etc., reducing the demand for Freight Transport, a 
modal  shift  towards  rail  freight,  introduction  of  Dedicated  Freight  Corridors 
throughout  the  four  legs  of  the  Golden  Quadrilateral,  increasing  electric  traction  in 
Railways etc. 
2.  Buildings  (Residential  and  Commercial):  A  move  towards  using  more  energy 
efficient building materials for the construction of buildings (energy efficient building 
envelopes), strengthening of the Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) of the 
Bureau  of  Energy  Efficiency,  and  periodic  revisions  of  the  same,  coupled  with 
increasing  adoption  of  the  same,  better  urban  planning,  adoption  of  high  efficiency 
lighting  technologies  and  appliances,  market  transformation  to  high  efficiency 
appliances, and promotion and adoption of new financial models.  
3.  Industry:  Increasing  energy  efficiency  penetration  in  the  Perform,  Achieve,  and 
Trade  (PAT)  scheme  to  move  towards  the  best  available  technologies,  energy 
92 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
efficiency improvements in the processes of smaller units not under the PAT scheme, 
and a consideration of, and a move towards more disruptive technologies in the major 
energy guzzling Iron and Steel (Switch to electric furnace, Increased gas based direct 
reduced  iron,  Increased  electricity  from  the  grid,  and  Increased  Scrap),  and  Cement 
sectors  (Increased  waste  heat  recovery,  Increased  electricity  from  the  Grid,  and 
Increased  Alternate  Fuels  and  Raw  Materials).  Since,  the  technology  employed  in 
ambitious pathway considers a shift from solid and liquid hydrocarbons to electricity, 
the electricity demand in ambitious pathway is higher than BAU in industry sector.  
4.  Agriculture:  Increased  efficiency  of  agricultural  pump  sets,  a  shift  towards  electric 
and  solar  powered  pump  sets,  from  diesel  pump  sets,  and  a  reduction  in  energy 
demand from farm mechanization by introduction of fuel efficiency in tractors. 
5.  Cooking: A shift towards modern fuels for cooking (LPG, PNG and Electricity), and 
a  continued  improvement  in  the  efficiency  of  LPG,  PNG,  Electricity,  and  improved 
Biomass cook stoves. This would lead to an increased demand for gaseous and liquid 
hydrocarbons and electricity in the ambitious pathway.  
6.  Telecom:  A  reduction  in  the  specific  fuel  requirement  of  telecom  towers  by 
considering  a  shift  away  from  Diesel,  in  favour  of  electricity  and  clean  power 
solutions, and the deployment of green solutions to replace diesel.  
The Potential:  
Energy Demand:  
TWh 
2012 
2022 
2040 
BAU 
568 
4010 
1736 
423 
131 
829 
7697 
Ambitious 
525 
3600 
1628 
388 
124 
684 
6949 
BAU 
1769 
8764 
3828 
728 
207 
524 
15820 
Ambitious 
1460 
7266 
3243 
592 
164 
467 
13192 
 
 
238 
2367 
929 
237 
83 
1072 
4926 
Buildings 
Industry 
Transport 
Pumps & Tractors 
Telecom 
Cooking 
Total 
% reduction in energy 
demand in 2040 
17% 
Table 4 
Segregation of Energy Demand by fuel:  
Mtoe 
2012 
2022 
2040 
BAU 
Ambitious 
BAU 
Ambitious 
 
 
Solid 
Hydrocarbons 
Liquid 
Hydrocarbons 
Gaseous 
Hydrocarbons 
174 
438 
314 
225 
191 
150 
492 
415 
244 
224 
30 
115 
104 
66 
62 
Table 5 
93 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Electricity Demand (Final): 
TWh 
2012 
2022 
2040 
BAU 
1103 
1819 
220 
442 
94 
3678 
Ambitious 
1278 
1494 
244 
324 
99 
3439 
Ambitious 
457 
562 
134 
217 
50 
1420 
BAU 
492 
607 
128 
245 
38 
1511 
 
 
Industry 
Buildings 
Transport 
Agriculture 
Others 
Total 
% reduction in electricity 
demand in 2040 
336 
239 
79 
136 
14 
804 
6.5% 
 
Table 6 
Share of Electricity in Energy Demand: 
2012 
2022 
2040 
BAU 
BAU 
Ambitious 
Ambitious 
 
16% 
19.6% 
23.2% 
26.1% 
20.4% 
 
Table 7 
Demand for Different Hydrocarbons: 
Mtoe 
2012 
2022 
2040 
BAU 
Ambitious 
Ambitious 
BAU 
 
 
Solid Hydrocarbons 
360 
546 
591 
783 
1041 
Liquid Hydrocarbons 
150 
224 
244 
415 
492 
Gaseous Hydrocarbons 
47 
84 
84 
151 
144 
 
Table 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Energy Supply: 
The  IESS  offers  options  to  generate  the  fuel  mix  on  the  basis  of  multiple  factors  —  more 
domestically  produced  (fossil  or  non-fossil),  cheaper,  lesser  carbon  emitting  and  higher 
supplies  from  emerging  technologies.  The  energy  mix  chosen  to  meet  the  chosen  level  of 
energy demand works on the principles of a reduction in import dependence, and a transition 
towards cleaner and sustainable supply options.  
How the scenarios have been generated: Two pathways were mapped out in the IESS based 
on  a  transition  towards  cleaner  sources  of  energy,  and  greater  indigenous  resource 
production.  The  scenarios  on  the  supply  side  assume  the  meeting  of  the  175  GW  of 
renewable  energy  target  of  the  Government  of  India  in  2022  and  enhanced  deployment 
thereafter.  Two  different  paths,  based  on  the  development  of  a  market  ecosystem  for  these 
technologies have been assumed, and alterations in the trajectories of the IESS were done to 
achieve the same. Since, the ambitious pathway assumes a greater penetration of renewable 
and  cleaner  sources  of  energy,  the  energy  supply  from  the  same  would  be  greater  in 
ambitious pathway than BAU. Similarly, the energy supply from coal and oil would be lower 
in  ambitious  pathway  in  comparison  with  BAU.  Suitable  options  in  terms  of  providing  for 
adequate  storage  capacities,  and  gas  power  plants,  to  balance  the  renewable  energy,  and 
dialing back of coal  power plants  when the large amount of  renewable energy  kicks in  has 
been attempted. Newer source of fuel like Hydrogen for the Telecom and Transport sectors 
has also been considered. Although the IESS has been used as a platform for constructing this 
scenario,  alterations  have  been  done  in  order  to  keep  pace  with  the  India’s  developmental 
goals, and its international commitments.  
The supply side of the analysis, among a variety of other factors, brings together:  
1.  Higher  domestic  fossil  fuel  production:  Mechanisms  to  augment  indigenous 
resource production, with an aim to reduce import dependence have been taken into 
consideration. This results in higher domestic coal, oil and gas production. Apart from 
conventional fuel supplies, unconventional  resources such as CBM, UCG, and shale 
oil/gas would also contribute to the domestic production. . 
2.  Thermal Power Generation: Commercialization of newer, and cleaner technologies 
(e.g: Ultra Supercritical and IGCC technologies in Coal based generation etc.), would 
lead to their increased penetration. Enhanced Gas based power generation capacity is 
well  acknowledged  to  encourage  cleaner  sources  of  power  generation  along  with 
balancing requirement for renewable energy capacities. The potential for CCS in coal 
and  gas  based  generation  capacities  in  the  medium  to  long  term  is  also  taken  into 
account.  
3.  Renewable  Energy  (Renewable  Energy):  Apart  from  attainment  of  175  GW  of 
Renewable  energy  capacity  by  2022,  the  creation  of  a  market  and  facilitating 
mechanism for renewable energy post the target year 2022 would lead to its increased 
adoption by autonomous growth. Solar CSP and offshore wind capacities would also 
contribute  to  the  Renewable  Energy  generation  capacities  other  than  solar  PV, 
Distributed SPV and onshore wind. 
95 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
4.  Hydro and Nuclear Power Generation: There has been dismal addition of around 2 
GW of large hydro power generation capacity in the 12th five-year plan. However, this 
exercise  seeks  to  exploit  the  hydro-power  potential  of  the  country.  India’s  nuclear 
power  generation  capacity  would  further  diversify  the  sources  of  electricity 
generation.  The  commercial  operation  for  Kudankulam  unit  2  is  expected  to 
commence in mid-2017, whereas new plants – Kakrapar, Kota and Kudankulam units 
3  &  4  are  also  expected  to  bear  fruit.  The  Government  has  also  approved  10  new 
PWHR reactors of 700 MWe capacity each. 
5.  Storage  Capacities:  Increased  storage  capacities  would  be  established  to  meet 
intermittencies due to a high supply of electricity from renewable sources.  
6.  Biofuels: Enhanced use of liquid biofuels (1st and 2nd generation, advanced biofuels) 
would curb the country’s oil imports. And biogas could be used for cooking in rural 
areas.  
7.  AT&C:  A  reduction  in  AT&C  losses,  introduction  of  Smart  Grids,  and  electricity 
imports and exports is considered while drawing the two scenarios. 
 
The Potential: 
Domestic Production 
2012 
2022 
2040 
 
BAU 
904 
44 
46 
Ambitious 
1006 
46 
53 
BAU 
1190 
54 
95 
Ambitious 
1385 
61 
124 
 
 
582 
38 
48 
Coal (Mtce) 
Oil (Mtoe) 
Gas (BCM) 
 
Table 9 
Electricity Capacity 
GW 
2012 
2022 
2040 
BAU 
34 
266 
1 
12 
61 
59 
4 
62 
2 
36 
18 
555 
Ambitious 
39 
251 
1 
12 
61 
59 
5 
62 
2 
36 
20 
548 
BAU 
46 
441 
26 
23 
71 
237 
28 
168 
19 
102 
43 
1204 
Ambitious 
70 
330 
26 
34 
92 
275 
48 
181 
29 
120 
56 
1261 
 
 
Gas Power Stations 
Coal power stations 
Carbon Capture Storage (CCS) 
Nuclear power 
Hydro Power Generation 
Solar PV 
Solar CSP 
Onshore Wind 
Offshore Wind 
Distributed Solar PV 
Other Renewable Sources 
Total 
24 
125 
0 
5 
41 
1 
0 
17 
0 
0 
8 
221 
Table 10 
96 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Primary Energy Supply:  
TWh 
2012 
2022 
2040 
BAU 
Ambitious 
BAU 
Ambitious 
 
 
Renewable & 
Clean Energy 
Coal 
Oil 
Gas 
Others 
Total 
266 
3281 
1936 
570 
1060 
7113 
823 
5529 
2762 
1016 
1152 
11282 
2010 
11320 
6036 
1762 
1351 
22479 
2602 
8433 
4883 
1788 
1626 
19332 
797 
6021 
3024 
1018 
1108 
11968 
   
Table 11 
Electricity Generation: 
TWh 
2012 
2022 
2040 
BAU 
128 
1526 
5 
1659 
82 
214 
296 
99 
11 
129 
6 
55 
86 
386 
15 
2356 
Ambitious 
154 
1482 
5 
1641 
87 
214 
301 
99 
14 
129 
6 
55 
101 
404 
25 
2371 
BAU 
181 
2606 
137 
2924 
164 
248 
412 
422 
105 
390 
62 
164 
203 
1346 
71 
4753 
Ambitious 
302 
1984 
137 
2423 
237 
324 
561 
489 
185 
423 
92 
193 
281 
1663 
126 
4773 
 
 
Gas Power Stations 
Coal power stations 
Carbon Capture Storage (CCS) 
Fossil Fuel Based Electricity 
Nuclear power 
Hydro Power Generation 
Hydro and Nuclear 
Solar PV 
Solar CSP 
Onshore Wind 
Offshore Wind 
Distributed Solar PV 
Other Renewable Sources 
Renewable Based Electricity 
Electricity imports 
Total 
115 
708 
0 
824 
27 
144 
170 
2 
0 
32 
0 
0 
46 
80 
5 
1078 
 
Table 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Some Key Implications (2040):  
Share of non-fossil fuel based capacity in electricity: 57%-66% 
Per capita energy demand1: 503 kgoe/capita in 2012 to 1055-1184 kgoe/capita in 2040. 
Energy  related  Emissions  per  capita:    1.2  tons  of  Carbon  Dioxide  Equivalent/capita  in 
2012 to 2.7-3.5 tons of Carbon Dioxide Equivalent/capita in 2040 
Per capita electricity consumption2:  887 kWh in 2012 to 2911-2924 kWh in 2040 
CAGR of electricity supply (Ambitious scenario): 5.5% between 2012-2040 
CAGR of primary energy supply (Ambitious scenario): 3.6% between 2012-2040 
Overall Import dependence (including non-commercial energy): 31% in 2012 to 36%-55% 
in 2040. 
Reduction in emissions intensity: 45%-53% by 2030 from 2005 levels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1 Per capita Energy Demand is defined as the primary energy supply in a year divided by the population in that 
year.  
2 Per capita Electricity Consumption is defined as the electricity generation in a year divided by the population 
in that year. 
98 
 
 NEP: Version as on 27.06.2017 
 
 
 
 
Conversion Factors 
1 Mtoe 
2.5 Mtce 
1 Mtoe 
11.63 TWh 
1 Mtoe 
1.11 BCM 
1 Mtoe 
0.8 MT LNG 
1 Mtoe 
7.33 Mboe 
 
Table 13 
99 
 
