Table of Contents:
I. Programme rationale ..: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 8
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
 
I.  Programme rationale 
1.  The 2005 elections enabled Burundi to re-establish a democratic system and enhance the business 
environment for private sector development, which led to an average economic growth rate of 4 per 
cent1  between  2005  and  2014.  However,  the  2015  political  crisis  slowed  the  country’s  economic 
development trajectory, and peacebuilding and social cohesion have remained challenging since then.   
2.  The  country  has  continued  to  implement  its  national  development  agenda  with  a  focus  on 
community  development  and  social  cohesion,  with  commendable  results  in  improving  access  to 
education (96 per cent) and drinking water (73 per cent).2 Burundi has achieved universal primary and 
lower secondary education.3 Burundi ranks 108 of 188 on the Gender Inequality Index with a rate of 
0.4744 and is making progress on political representation with women holding 32 per cent of seats in 
the National Assembly, 42 per cent in the Senate, 33.6 per cent at the provincial level and 16 per cent 
at the local level.5  However, gender inequality is still a challenge because of patriarchal social norms, 
which, for example, hinder women’s rights to inheritance and to complete basic education. Burundi 
experiences low human development with a 2016 Human Development Index of 0.404, ranking it 184 
of 188 countries. The development of the health sector is lagging behind with the incidence of malaria 
remaining very high at 549 per 100,000 population and an average annual estimate of 80,000 cases of 
HIV and 8,500 cases of tuberculosis.6 
3.  The  poverty  level  in  rural  areas  remains  high,  at  72.9  per  cent  in  2018.7  Low  agricultural 
productivity and processing combined with inadequate trading capacity and access to electricity (4 per 
cent)  as  well  as  climate  change  effects  (drought,  floods,  landslides  and  erosion)  prevent  growth.  
Limited financial inclusion of women8 (7.9 per cent compared to 17.5 per cent for men), youth and 
vulnerable  groups  (the  Batwa  community,9  returnees  and  displaced  communities)  paired  with 
restricted  access  to  land10  for  women  and  minorities  (mainly  previously  nomadic  Batwas)  prevent 
these groups from livelihood opportunities which in turn contributes to poverty.  This is exacerbated 
by  other  factors  that  impact  the  overall  growth  of  the  economy,  e.g.,  the  decline  in  foreign  direct 
investment and development aid, low urbanization (11 per cent)11 and depreciation of the Burundian 
franc. 
4.  In  an  attempt  to  address  poverty  and  high  levels  of  inequality,  the  Government  has  sought  to 
improve  citizens’  access  to  services  and  fundamental  rights  (rights  to  property  including  land, 
particularly  for  women,  and  right  to  equality)  through  strengthening  judicial  institutions  and 
administrative reforms. Administrative service delivery has been decentralized to improve citizens’ 
access (35.53 per cent) through five pilot one-stop-centres in five provinces (Ngozi, Gitega, Mwaro, 
Muyinga  and  Bururi).  Penal  and  criminal  codes  were  revised  and  the  judgment  enforcement  rate, 
particularly on land disputes, increased with 95 per cent of judgements on land disputes enforced12 
between 2017 and 2018. 
5.  The  2018  universal  periodic  review  (UPR)  generated  242  recommendations,  of  which  the 
Government has  accepted  134. The UPR and  the Committee on the Elimination of  Discrimination 
against  Women13  highlighted  that  access  to  quality  services  and  fundamental  rights  remains  a 
challenge  notably  for  poor  and  vulnerable  groups  (returnees,  displaced  communities,  people  with 
                                                           
1 Perspectives Economiques Africaines, 2018. 
2 UNDP Human Development Report 2016.  
3 Government of Burundi, Statistical Yearbook of Education 2015–2016. 
4 UNDP Human Development Report 2015. 
5 Burundi Independent Electoral Commission, 2015 Election Report. 
6 Republic of Burundi, Programme National de Lutte contre le SIDA (PNLS), Cadre de Performance, 2018-2020 et Programme National de Lutte 
contre le Paludisme, Cadre de Performance, 2018-2020 
7 World Bank, 2018. 
8 https://www.brb.bi/sites/default/files/Indicate%20octobre-2017.pdf#page=14 
9 Indigenous people accounting for 1 per cent of the population. 
10 Republic of Burundi, “Implementation of national gender policy Action Plan 2017- 2021”, June 2017. 
11 www.bi.undp.org/content/dam/.../Burundi-MDG-2015-Final-Report.pdf 
12 Ministry of Justice 2017. 
13 https://lib.ohchr.org/HRBodies/UPR/Documents/Session29/BI/Burundi_LetterHC_EN.pdf and 
https://www.ecoi.net/en/file/local/1407855/1930_1497440152_n1640274-1.pdf 
 
2 
 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
disability and Batwa), particularly women. Low capacities of key service delivery institutions such as 
judicial, health and administrative services, deficient mechanisms for accountability and transparency 
at national and local levels, and low capacity of right holders to claim their rights are key contributing 
factors to these persistent challenges.  The 2017 Ibrahim Index of African Governance cited Burundi 
among the 12 African countries where global governance deteriorated between 2007 and 2016 (-6.5) 
with a score of 39.9 out of 100 and a rank of 44 of 54 African countries.  
6.  Burundi’s development process has left behind vulnerable groups and their specific needs not only 
in terms of access to justice and administrative services (civil status registry) but also in terms of access 
to basic health services (HIV, tuberculosis and malaria treatment). The HIV prevalence rate among 
those aged 15 to 49 is about 4.2 per cent for women compared to 3.3 per cent for men; about 49 per 
cent of seropositive women between 35 and 44 suffer from severe anaemia and 27 per cent of these 
women  do  not  receive  full  treatment  to  reduce  mother-to-child  transmission  of  HIV.  Despite 
government efforts to combat gender-based violence (GBV), the prevalence is still high with 50 per 
cent of women declaring having been subjected to economic, emotional, physical or sexual violence;14  
assistance remains limited with only four holistic care centres for GBV in 18 provinces.  
7.  Ranked 171 of 181 countries for resilience to natural disasters and climate change,15 Burundi is 
highly vulnerable to extreme climate events such as droughts,  soil erosion, landslides and floods.16 
These events have reversed some of Burundi’s development gains and eroded capacities of vulnerable 
households, resulting in loss of life and of livelihoods17 and internal displacements (178,267 people in 
2018  in  15  of  the  18  provinces).18  El  Niño  and  la  Niña  phenomena  continue  to  affect  agricultural 
production and food security notably in the provinces of Muyinga and Kirundo.19 Burundi has made 
some progress on early warning systems for disaster risk management, which has allowed the country 
to better prevent and respond to shocks and stress, thus building community resilience. Despite this 
progress, there is a lack of coordination among institutions responsible for disaster management and a 
lack of community capacities for prevention and management of disaster risk reduction. These factors 
pose  challenges  to  addressing  immediate  needs,  resilience  and  socioeconomic  reintegration  of 
displaced communities.  
8.  The Government's reforestation programme increased the forest coverage rate from 6.7 per cent in 
2010  to  12  per  cent  in  2015.  However,  environmental  degradation  persists  due  to  demographic 
pressure, soil erosion and excessive use of firewood as the main source of energy (95 per cent of the 
national energy balance).20. With an electrification coverage rate of 5 per cent compared to an average 
of 16 per cent for  Africa  and 41 per cent for other low-income countries,21 access to electricity  in 
Burundi is low, especially in rural areas.  The lack of access to and control of resources and new energy 
technologies limits opportunities for local development and has a disproportionate impact on women 
and girls, as they collect firewood from distant locations, with implications for their safety and ability 
to pursue education and achieve economic independence.22 
9.  The  evaluation  of  the  previous  country  programme23  (2014-2018)  highlighted  the  key  role  of 
UNDP  as  a  catalyst  and  facilitator  of  Sustainable  Development  Goal  prioritization  and 
contextualization and as a contributor to the achievement of development results that benefited the 
most  vulnerable  communities.  With  UNDP  support  and  in  partnership  with  the  Governments  of 
Belgium and Japan, the Peacebuilding Fund, Global Environment Facility (GEF) and Green Climate 
Fund (GCF), the Government has been able to: (a) in line with the Sustainable Development Goals, 
                                                           
14 National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (Institut de Statistiques et d'Etudes Economiques du Burundi (ISTEEBU), Third 
Demographic and Health Survey in Burundi, 2017. 
15 Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index, 2017. 
16 https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/ . 
17 Gouvernement du Burundi, Contribution Prévue Déterminée au niveau National, 2015 
18 http://adaptation-undp.org/explore/eastern-africa/burundi and http://index.gain.org/ranking 
19 Ministry of Agriculture, Intergovernmental Authority on Development report, 2017. 
20 http://adaptation-undp.org/explore/eastern-africa/burundi 
21 Ministry of Energy and Mines, Analytical Study of the Energy Sector within the framework of the Secretary-General initiative on sustainable 
energy for all, 2013. 
22 Ministry of Gender, Plan of Action for implementation of the National Gender Policy. 
23 https://erc.undp.org/evaluation/evaluations/detail/7789 
 
3 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
 
formulate upstream policies and strategies for development (national development plan, employment, 
fight  against  GBV,  decentralization,  industrialization,  energy  and  disaster  risk  management);  (b) 
improve  access  to  justice  (judgement  of  1,597  GBV  cases,  reduction  of  41  per  cent  of  48,894 
backlogged courts cases related to land disputes) and quality administrative services to citizens (five 
pilot  one-stop-centres  established  and  individual  and  institutional  capacity-building);  (c)  increase 
national  capacities  to  prevent  and  manage  disasters  through  the  strengthening  of  10  provincial 
platforms  and  10  local  government  contingency  plans;  and  (d)  increase  community  peace  and 
resilience through the establishment of 18 platforms for youth dialogue, creation of 45,579 livelihoods 
and temporary job opportunities (32 per cent women), financial inclusion for 13,755 people (60 per 
cent women), mobilization of 554 youth volunteers (46 per cent women) and creation of 186 micro-
enterprises for 1,601 youths affected by conflict.  
10. Notwithstanding these valuable development contributions, the evaluation as well as the Common 
Country Assessment (2017) and a conflict and development analysis undertaken by the country office 
in 2016 found that the programme’s focus on high-level policy work resulted in limited impact on the 
lives of women, men, youth, returnees and displaced communities on the ground. The latter found that 
in  the  absence  of  any  clear  position  regarding  national  implementation  programming  in  such  a 
politically fragile context, UNDP should aim to apply direct implementation methods where possible 
and  appropriate.24  As  a  mitigation  measure,  the  country  office  switched  to  direct  implementation, 
which  allowed  for  adjustment  of  programme  implementation  related  to  the  crisis  situation  while 
reinforcing  capacities  of  national  counterparts  to  deliver  results,  as  weak  presence  in  the  field 
compounded  by  limited  national  expertise  hindered  programme  delivery  and  sustainability  of 
interventions.  
11. UNDP  is  recognized  by  partners,  including  the  Government,  for  its  impartiality,  neutrality, 
transparency and accountability.25 UNDP will shift its interventions to the local level and focus on 
building resilience of people and communities by leveraging areas where it has comparative advantage 
(access  to  justice,  access  to  public  services,  local  governance,  livelihoods  and  socioeconomic 
reintegration,  environmental  protection,  durable  solutions,  climate  change  adaptation  and  disaster 
management), while in parallel maintaining essential support at policy level. This will be done through 
localization and implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.   
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships 
12. The National Development Plan 2018-2027 (NDP) is aligned with the African Union Agenda 2063 
and the Sustainable Development Goals and prioritizes 111 targets26 for the Goals. The Government’s 
key priority for the next 10 years is structural transformation of the economy to alleviate poverty.27 
13. The programme’s theory of change  assumes that reducing inequalities and strengthening resilience 
of  women  and  men  in  rural  areas  will  be  achieved  through:  (a)  developing  rural  non-farm  sectors 
through  innovative  gender-responsive  processing  and  manufacturing  units,  inclusive  markets, 
enterprise creation, improving access to financial and non-financial assets; (b) improving access to 
basic gender-sensitive quality administrative, health and judicial services, and increasing technical and 
operational  capacities  for  national  and  local  institutions  for  effective  planning,  governance  and 
accountability mechanisms; (c) and the establishment and improvement of early warning mechanisms 
for early action, which will enable national, local and community capacities to anticipate/prepare for 
and respond to disaster as well as adapt to climate change and promote sustainable energy resources 
to create alternative economic activities. The theory of change also assumes sustained peace, resource 
availability, national ownership and the mainstreaming of gender across the programme, underpinned 
by gender analysis to ensure that all interventions address gender equality gaps.  
14. The programme will adopt an integrated approach between the three priorities under the umbrella 
of the broader resilience and Sustainable Development Goal agenda, targeting disadvantaged people 
                                                           
24 UNDP Burundi, Conflict and Development Analysis and Programme Review, January 2016. 
25 UNDP Burundi, Partners’ Survey, 2017. 
26 Government of Burundi, National Sustainable Development Goal Prioritization Report, 2018 
27 National Development Plan, 2018-2027. 
4 
 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
(returnees and displaced women, youth at risk, Batwas, persons living with disabilities) in the most 
vulnerable  areas  notably  in  northern,  eastern  and  southern  regions.  The  programme  will  support 
reinforcement of a national hub for the Goals through inclusion of other stakeholders including the 
private sector, and the establishment of local hubs to accelerate localization and implementation of 
prioritised targets and showcase innovative practices that can be replicated. 
15. Programme priorities will contribute to achieving Goals 1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 13, 15 and 16. They are 
aligned with the signature solutions of the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021 and will contribute to the 
outcomes  of  the  United  Nations  Development  Assistance  Framework  (UNDAF)  on  inclusive 
economic growth and resilience. 
Priority I. Development of rural non-farm livelihoods for local economic growth 
16. Aligned  with  signature  solutions  1,  5  and  6  of  the  Strategic  Plan,  this  programme  will  support 
initiatives  to  improve  income  generation,  social  capital  and  livelihoods  of  the  most  vulnerable 
population,  focusing  on  returnees,  displaced  persons,  Batwas,  women,  victims  of  GBV,  youth  and 
persons living with disabilities. UNDP will prioritize non-farm livelihoods through improving access 
to financial and non-financial assets especially in rural areas, while strengthening technical capacities 
for manufacturing, processing and trading.  
17. UNDP will provide technical support to the Federal Chamber of Commerce and Industry and to 
organizations working with key target groups (farmers, women and youth) to develop entrepreneurship 
through the establishment of business incubators and services. UNDP will partner with microfinance 
institutions, the Rural Micro-Credit Fund and United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) 
to  scale  up  financial  inclusion  initiatives  adapted  to  the  needs  of  vulnerable  groups.    UNDP  will 
collaborate  with  the  Food  and  Agricultural  Organization  (FAO)  and  International  Fund  for 
Agricultural Development (IFAD) to strengthen technical capacities and support the establishment of 
innovative  processing  units  for  cooperatives  and  women’s  associations,  and  to  promote  inclusive 
market and economic growth, thus contributing to the achievement of the Goals 1, 2 and 8. 
Priority II. Improve access to and quality of administrative, health and judicial services  
18. Aligned  with  signature  solutions  1,  2  and  6,  this  programme  will  contribute  to  strengthening 
institutional capacities of public services to improve accountability and bring quality services closer 
to  the  population,  while  ensuring  that  commitments  to  women’s  rights  are  met.  The  UNDP 
contribution  will  focus  on:  (a)  scaling  up  one-stop-centres  to  the  remaining  provinces  and 
implementing  training  programmes  through  the  Judiciary  Professional  Training  Centre  (Centre  de 
formation  professionnelle  de  la  Justice  (CFPJ)),  National  Management  School  (École  Nationale 
d’Administration (ENA)), Police Academy and the National Training Centre for Local Administration 
(Centre National de Formation des Acteurs  Locaux  (CNFAL)); (b) provision of  legal assistance to 
vulnerable  populations  (widows,  women  and  Batwa  faced  with  land  disputes  and  land  ownership 
rights), through legal advice clinics, legal awareness campaigns and capacity-building for magistrates 
and  lawyers;  and  (c)  prevention  and  holistic  care  for  victims  of  GBV,  including  psychosocial  and 
economic reinsertion support, in collaboration with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and 
the  Empowerment  of  Women  (UN-Women)  and  United  Nations  Population  Fund  (UNFPA).    To 
improve  health  services,  UNDP  will  strengthen  existing  partnerships  with  the  Ministry  of  Health, 
Global  Fund  to  Fight  AIDS.  Tuberculosis  and  Malaria,  World  Health  Organization  (WHO),  Joint 
United  Nations  Programme  on  HIV/AIDS  (UNAIDS)  and  civil  society  organizations  (CSOs)  to 
improve access to basic health services and reduce malaria- and tuberculosis-related morbidity and 
mortality; and (c); improve the care and treatment of HIV-positive patients and fight against the spread 
of HIV/AIDS, thus contributing to the achievement of Goal 3. 
19. In  partnership  with  the  Ministry  of  Decentralization,  the  Burundian  Association  of  Local 
Governments (Association Burundaise des Elus Locaux (ABELO)), bilateral donors (Governments of 
Belgium  and  the  Netherlands,  German  Agency    for  International  Cooperation  (GIZ)  and  Swiss 
Cooperation) and United Nations partners (UNCDF and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
UNDP  is  supporting  the  development  of  a  new  decentralization  policy  (2018-2027)  and  laws  on 
transfer of competences to local governments.  The policy will create an environment  conducive  to 
pro-Goal  community  development  plans  to  address  the  needs  of  men,  women,  girls,  youth  and 
5 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
 
disadvantaged groups in order to leave no one behind. UNDP will support implementation of these 
plans  through  strengthening  institutional  capacities  of  local  governments  on  gender-responsive 
planning, budgeting and resource mobilization.    
20. UNDP will further support local governments to: (a) align their planning process with the NDP; 
(b) experiment with new forms of decision-making, such as participatory budgeting and planning, thus 
strengthen their accountability to all; and (c) integrate capacity development programmes into local 
economic development strategies. The capacities of citizens as right holders will be strengthened to 
hold duty bearers accountable and advocate for public space and dialogue. To ensure representation 
and  equal  participation  of  citizens  in  local  decision-making  processes,  UNDP  will  strengthen  the 
operationalization of existing local mechanisms for good governance and community development.  
21. UNDP will promote access to decision-making for women, youth and other specific groups and 
strengthen women's political leadership at the local level. UNDP will support CSOs to advocate for 
the implementation of UPR recommendations on gender equality and protection of human rights and 
non-discrimination  of  women  and  girls.  In  the  spirit  of  leaving  no  one  behind,  UNDP  will  design 
targeted interventions to tackle GBV and improve women’s access to land. 
Priority III. Strengthen community resilience to climate change and disaster  
22. Burundi has signed and ratified several multilateral environmental agreements including the Paris 
Agreement on Climate Change. Aligned with signature solutions 3 and 4, the programme will support 
the elaboration and implementation of the national adaptation plan. Within the national strategy on 
disaster risk reduction aligned with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, UNDP will, 
in collaboration with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), support the 
development of a country disaster profile and improvement of communities’ technical and operational 
capacities for disaster management, notably in the provinces most affected by floods, landslides and 
drought (Bujumbura, Makamba Kirundo and Mumirwa). In partnership with GEF, the programme will 
strengthen  watershed  management  through  reforestation,  early  warning  and  disaster  management 
mechanisms  adapted  to  the  needs  of  different  groups  (women,  youth,  returnees  and  displaced 
communities) and improve meteorological information. This will enhance community resilience and 
reduce  population  displacement.  The  programme  will  enhance  sustainable  and  gender-responsive 
natural  resource  management.  In  partnership  with  GCF,  UNDP  will  reinforce  the  capacity  of  the 
Ministry  of  Environment,  Agriculture  and  Livestock  to  take  advantage  of  global  partnership 
opportunities for climate change finance. 
23. In  2013,  within  the  framework  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  (SE4ALL),  UNDP  supported  the 
Government to carry out a study on renewable energy,28 which revealed high hydroelectric and solar 
potential. UNDP, in partnership with the Burundi Agency for Rural Electrification,  will support the 
establishment of mini-grids, micro-grids and solar platforms that will enable women and youth groups 
to  engage  in  businesses  development.  In  synergy  with  GIZ,  the  European  Union,  the  African 
Development Bank (AfDB), civil society, the private sector and other United Nations agencies, UNDP 
will support  Burundi  in  implementing its  SE4All commitments and  meet  its  nationally determined 
contributions under the Paris Agreement. 
24. UNDP will retain and strengthen its collaboration with like-minded partners such as the European 
Union and the Governments of Belgium, France, Japan, Netherlands and Switzerland by bridging the 
gap between the Government and donors, undertaking policy dialogue, joint analysis and field visits, 
knowledge-sharing  and  demonstrating  development  results.  It  will  play  a  central  role  in  aid 
coordination and dialogue by revamping the National Committee for Aid Coordination and facilitating 
dialogue  with partners. This programme  will explore alternative strategies for  mobilizing  domestic 
resources  to  finance  the  implementation  of  the  Goals.  In  collaboration  with  the  United  Nations 
development  system  and  humanitarian  actors,  UNDP  will  explore  opportunities  to  bridge  the 
humanitarian-development-peace  nexus  through  joint  analyses  and  planning.  Within  the  United 
Nations  resilience  framework  for  Burundi,  UNDP,  in  collaboration  with  UNFPA,  UNICEF,  UN-
Women and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), will play 
                                                           
28 https://seforall.org/sites/default/files/Burundi_RAGA_FR_Released.pdf 
6 
 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
a  coordinating  role  in  supporting  the  implementation  of  the  resilience  framework’s  outcomes  on 
livelihoods diversification, social cohesion, peacebuilding and disaster risk management.  
25. UNDP will: (a) promote South-South and triangular cooperation, for example with the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo and United Republic of Tanzania for cross-border initiatives, durable solutions 
and reintegration, Côte d’Ivoire for justice reform and  Cameroon for public administration; and (b) 
strengthen  partnerships  with  CSOs  (advocacy,  services  delivery)  and  academia  (research  and 
internships) and explore partnerships  with  the  private sector (business  and clean renewable energy 
development).  
26. Within the framework of the common chapter of the strategic plans of UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA 
and UN-Women, UNDP will strengthen the capacities of  youth to develop energy and information 
and communications technology start-ups. 
27. In  collaboration  with  UNHCR,  UNDP  will  support  socioeconomic  reintegration  of  returnees 
through the development of rural integrated villages. 
III. 
Programme and risk management 
28. The programme will be implemented under the coordination of the Ministry of Finance, Budget 
and  Cooperation  for  Economic  Development.  It  will  be  nationally  executed.  If  necessary,  national 
implementation will be replaced by direct implementation to enable response to force majeure and to 
ensure protection and accountability of UNDP programming results. The harmonized approach to cash 
transfers (HACT) will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage 
financial risks and to develop the capacity of implementing partners and continually use the results of 
quality assurance activities to monitor programme effectiveness and efficiency and support-decision 
making.  
29. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as  the  primary  unit  of  accountability  to  the  Executive  Board  for  results  alignment  and  resources 
assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and 
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme 
and  operations  policies  and  procedures  and  internal  control  framework.  The  country  office  will 
strengthen its programmatic and operational capacities to achieve real impact. As per Executive Board 
decision  2013/9,  cost definitions  and  classifications  for  programme  and  development  effectiveness 
will be charged to the projects concerned. 
30. UNDP will continue to partner with national and local government partners, the private sector and 
civil  society  including  women’s  organizations,  through  steering  and  technical  committees  at  every 
stage  of  the  project  cycle  to  ensure  the  Government’s  leadership  and  mutual  accountability.  The 
involvement of these partners in the implementation of the programme will be guiding principles for 
UNDP.  UNDP will use United Nations Volunteers to strengthen project implementation especially at 
the community level.  
31. The  programme  will  serve  as  a  platform  for  renewed  confidence  and  re-engagement  of  the 
technical and financial partners for their involvement in dialogue and development coordination. To 
this  effect,  country  platforms  on  collective  resilience  and  well-being  will  be  explored  to  address 
complex  structural  problems  and  deliver  innovative  solutions  for  achievement  of  the  Goals.  The 
programme  will  be  built  on  United  Nations  inter-agency  coordination  and  on  the  development-
humanitarian-peace nexus to curb the risks related to the uncertainties of crisis prediction.  
32. Programme implementation may be subject to the following risks: (a) low resource mobilization; 
(b) effects of  climate change  on livelihoods; (c)  high turnover of  implementing partners’ staff; (d) 
worsening socioeconomic situation; (e) fiduciary risks; and (e) weak institutional capacity. 
33. To mitigate these risks, UNDP will: (a) strengthen its resource mobilization strategy to diversify 
its funding base by developing partnerships with the private sector, foundations, international financial 
institutions  and  the  GCF;  (b)  apply  the  UNDP  social  and  environmental  standards  to  monitor 
environmental  and  natural  disaster-related  risks  and  fully  mainstream  gender  when  designing  and 
7 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
 
implementing  all  projects;  (c)  advocate  for  information-sharing  and  designation  of  alternate 
programme  coordination  staff  within  partner  offices;  (d)  review  risks  during  steering  committee 
meetings and undertake scenario planning risk analysis to better adjust the programme; (e) undertake 
HACT  spot  checks  to  ensure  full  programme  and  financial  compliance;  and  (f)  mainstream 
institutional capacity-building in programme implementation. 
 
IV.  Programme monitoring and evaluation 
34. In close cooperation with United Nations development systems, multilateral and bilateral partners, 
sufficiently disaggregated data from qualitative surveys will be systematically collected and used to 
produce the evidence and analysis that form the basis for the programme and to better monitor national 
and local efforts towards the achievement of targeted indicators. The UNDP gender marker will be 
used to track gender-based  investments  and to improve planning and decision-making.  A  thematic 
evaluation of the gender portfolio will be undertaken.  
35. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the programme will be aligned with the M&E frameworks 
of the UNDAF and NDP. In addition, the results and resources framework is fully aligned with the 
integrated results and resources framework (IRRF) of the Strategic Plan. Annual, midterm and final 
reviews will be undertaken with implementing partners and beneficiary representatives. Programme 
outputs and outcomes will be monitored through indicators and information gathered will be used for 
decision-making. 
36. In collaboration with other United Nations agencies, UNDP will work to strengthen the capacity 
of the National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies to produce basic data disaggregated by 
sex,  provinces  and  groups.  This  will  help  to  assess  progress  towards  achievement  of  the  Goals  at 
national  and  local  levels.  At  least  5  per  cent  of  the  programme  budget  will  be  allocated  to  data 
collection and M&E and 15 per cent to gender.  
37. The  Programme  will  leverage  the  national  guide  on  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  local 
development  plans  (plans  communaux  de  développement  communautaire)  to  reinforce  the 
participation  of  civil  society  and  community  groups  in  monitoring  the  implementation  of  the 
Sustainable Development Goals at the local level.  
38. UNDP  will  develop  a  multi-year  study  plan  and  research  programme  to  guide  its  work  with 
strategic  research  institutions  such  as  the  University  Research  Center  for  Economic  and  Social 
Development, Institute of Economic Development and think tanks to conduct thematic studies to test 
certain hypotheses of the programme’s theory of change. 
 
 
8 
 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Burundi (2019-2023) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL 1: Develop growth-enhancing sectors for the structural transformation of the economy 
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 2: By 2023, women and youth and the most vulnerable groups are socio-economic and politically empowered and enjoy social protection. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: OUTCOME 3: Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and 
livelihoods for the poor and excluded 
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities 
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome ($) 
Outcome indicator(s) of 
baselines, target(s) 
Major partners / partnerships 
frameworks 
Indicative country programme output 
Indicator 1: Proportion of 
population covered by 
social protection 
floors/systems, by sex, 
specifically children, 
unemployed persons, older 
persons, persons with 
disabilities, pregnant 
women, newborns, work-
injury victims and the poor 
and the vulnerable 
Burundi Living Standards 
Survey 
Ministry of Interior and Local Development  
Ministry of Finance, Budget and Cooperation 
for Economic Development  
Ministry of Social Affairs and Gender 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
European Union 
World Bank/AfDB 
Governments of Netherlands, Japan and  
Swiss Cooperation 
Peacebuilding Fund 
CSOs 
Private Sector 
Local governments 
UNCDF 
FAO 
IFAD 
Output 1.1: Women, youth, displaced, returnees, Batwas 
and persons with disabilities are empowered to gain access 
to financial and non-financial assets to build productive, 
processing and trading capacities for sustainable 
livelihoods 
Regular:  
$30,757,650 
 
 
ISTEEBU 
Frequency of data 
collection: Annual 
Other:  
$25,500,000 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.1. Number of persons accessing financial assets 
disaggregated by sex and groups 
Baseline: 
(a) Men: 5,402 
(b) Women: 8,253 
(c) Batwas: 0 
d) Persons living with disability: 0 
(e) Displaced persons and returnees: 0 
Target:  
(a) Men: 14,002  
(b) Women:18,728  
(c) Batwas: 1,000  
(d) Persons living with disability: 500  
(e) IDPs and returnees:  5,000 
 
Global Food Index 
 
Health Statistics  
Frequency of data 
collection: Annual 
 
Baseline29:  
(a) Women: 1% 
(b) Men: 1.2% 
Target: (a) 1.5%; (b) 2.1% 
 
Yearbook 
 
IRRF data 
Frequency of data 
collection: Annual 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.2. Number of persons accessing non-financial 
assets disaggregated by sex and groups 
Baseline: 
(a) Men: 244  
(b) Women: 765 
                                                           
29 Burundi, Rapport National de Cartographie Indicateurs de Référence ODD, 2018 
9 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
 
(c) Batwas: 0 
(d) Persons living with disability: 0 
(e) Displaced persons and returnees: 0 
Target:  
(a) Men: 2,070  
(b) Women: 5,560  
(c) Batwas: 500 
(d) Persons living with disability: 200  
(e) IDPs and returnees: 1,000 
 
Indicator 1.1.3: Number of micro-, small and medium-size 
enterprises in communities, especially women entrepreneurs/ 
women’s associations, utilizing service development platforms 
for inclusive and sustainable non-farm livelihoods 
Baseline 
Male-headed: 176  
Female-headed: 20 
Target 
Male-headed:  276  
Female-headed: 200 
 
Output 1.2. Central and local governments have improved 
technical and operational capacities to mainstream gender 
and promote inclusive local development 
 
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of local governments having 
inclusive local economic development conducive strategies 
and plans in place: (a) with gender-responsive and inclusive 
institutional frameworks; (b) with public-private partnerships 
for accelerating catalytic local economic development 
initiatives 
Baseline: (a) 0; (b) 0 
Target: (a): 15; (b): 15 
 
Indicator 1.2.2: Existence of a gender-responsive operational 
development coordination mechanism  
Baseline: No 
Target: Yes 
 
 
10 
 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL 4: Strengthening governance, security and national sovereignty   
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1. By 2023, women and men of all ages and particularly vulnerable groups, equitably access services of institutions that guarantee accountability, 
peace, gender equality, justice and respect for human rights in an effective, independent and transparent manner. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. Accelerate structural transformation for sustainable development  
Ministry of Justice, Bar Association, Ministry of 
Interior, CSOs 
Regular: 
$14,757,650 
Indicator 1: Proportion of 
population satisfied with 
their last experience with 
public services 
Baseline:  
Men: 00 
Women: 0% 
Target: (TBD) 
Men: 10% increase 
Women: 10% increase 
Ministry of Justice 
Frequency of data 
collection: Annual  
Output 2.1: Increased technical/operational capacities of 
public institutions to deliver quality judicial and 
administrative services to the population, whilst ensuring 
women’s rights commitments, are delivered 
 
 
ISTEEBU 
Other:  
$77,171,429 
 
IRRF data 
Frequency of data 
collection: Annual 
 
 
Ministry of Public Administration  
Indicator 2.1.1.  Number of people who have access to justice 
(including land disputes) disaggregated by sex and other 
characteristics 
Baseline:   
(a) Men: 19,019 
(b) Women: 4,598 
(c) Batwas: 0 
(d) Persons living with disability: 0 
(e) Displaced persons and returnees: 0 
Target:  
(a): 24,823 (b): 9,518 (c): 200 (d): 200 (e):1,000 
 
Ministry of Health  
 
GINI Index 
Frequency of data 
collection: Annual 
 
 
Human Development Index  
 
Indicator 2.1.2. Number of GBV cases (a) reported to judicial 
authorities; and (b) number of reported cases receiving 
judgment in the formal justice system 
Baseline:   
(a) 1,232 
(b) 499 
Target:  
(a) 2,500 
(b) 2,000 
 
Indicator 2.1.3. Number of people (men and women) 
accessing the newly established administrative one-stop-
centres. 
Baseline (2018):  
(a) Women: 3,141 
(a) Men: 10,521 
Target: 
a) Women: 10,000 
11 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
 
a) Men: 32,000 
Output 2.2: Increased technical/operational capacities of 
health institutions to deliver quality health services to the 
population and reduce gender inequalities in health 
provision 
Ministry of Health 
Global Fund 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.1. Number of persons who have received 
treatment for malaria, HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis 
disaggregated by sex and other characteristics 
Baseline: 
(a) Malaria cases reached: 3,688,412 men; 4,445,507 women 
(b) HIV/AIDS cases reached: 20,063 men; 40,052 women  
(c)  Tuberculosis cases reached: 5,127 men; 2,735 women 
Target:  
(a) Malaria: Men: 3,768,670 (2018); 3,467,176 (2019); 
3,259,195 (2020) 
 Women: 4,542,238 (2018); 4,178,859 (2019); 3,928,188 
(2020) 
(b)  
Men: 20,199 (2018); 21,566 (2019); 22,799 (2020) 
Women: 40,324 (2018); 43,052 (2019); 45,515 (2020)  
(c) Tuberculosis: Men: 5,509 (2018); 5,790 (2019); 6,074 
(2020);  
Women: 2,939 (2018); 3,088 (2019); 3,240 (2020) 
 
Indicator 2.2.2: Existence of inter-institutional gender 
responsive, operational health coordination mechanisms 
Baseline: No 
Target: Yes 
Output 2.3. National tertiary institutions have 
strengthened capacities to improve gender-responsive 
technical skills of public servants and local actors.  
CFPJ  
 
 
ENA 
 
 
Indicator 2.3.1: Number of public servants and local actors 
benefitting from capacity development programmes 
disaggregated by sex and institutions 
Baseline: 
ENA 
(a) Men: 282; (b) Women: 277 
CNFAL 
 
Police Academy 
12 
 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
CFPJ 
(a) Men: 22; (b) Women: 41 
CNFAL 
(a) Men: 1,393; (b) Women: 515 
Police Academy 
(a) Men: 0; (b) Women: 3 
Targets: 
ENA 
(a):1,000; (b): 1,000 
CFPJ 
(a): 220; (b) 350 
CNFAL 
(a): 2,300; (b): 1,515 
Police Academy 
(a) Men: 200; (b) Women: 103 
Output 2.4. Local actors particularly women have 
adequate gender equality and leadership capacities to 
promote the use of community platforms in reconciliation, 
prevention and peaceful resolution of conflict  
European Union 
 
 
Governments of Belgium and the Netherlands 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.3.1. Number of functional dialogue/mediation 
platforms set up in communities 
Baseline: 18  
Target: 60 
UN-Women 
Peacebuilding Fund 
 
 
Indicator 2.3.2. Proportion of women and youth who lead the 
dialogue initiatives at the provincial and community level 
Baseline:  
(a) Women: 5% 
(b) Youth: 10% 
Target:  
(a) 30%; (b) 30% 
Output 2.4. Local governments have improved technical 
and operational capacities for gender-sensitive planning, 
implementation, monitoring and resource mobilization  
Ministry of Decentralization and Institutional 
Reform 
 
 
Ministry of Interior, Patriotic Formation and 
Local Development 
 
Indicator 2.4.1:  Number of local governments having 
gender-sensitive development plans and budgets aligned with 
Sustainable Development Goal targets and national priorities. 
 
ABELO 
13 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
 
Baseline:  0 
Target: 25 
 
UNCDF 
 
Indicator 2.4.2:  Number of local governments with effective 
innovative mechanisms for civic engagement, including the 
participation of women and marginalized groups  
Baseline: 0 
Target: 25 
 
Indicator 2.4.3: Percentage of targets met in the 
implementation of local gender sensitive and pro-Goal 
development plans. 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 60% for each. 
Output 2.5. National Statistics Institutions have increased 
capacity to monitor and evaluate the NDP (2018-2027) and 
provision of data disaggregated a by sex and marginalized 
groups 
ISTEEBU 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.6.1. Existence of data collection and analysis 
mechanisms providing disaggregated data (sex, territorial, etc) 
to monitor progress towards the Goals: (a) Conventional data 
collection methods (e.g. surveys); (b) Administrative reporting 
systems; (c) New data sources (e.g. big data) 
Baseline: (a) No; (b) No; (c) No 
Target: (a) Yes; (b) Yes; (c) Yes 
 
Indicator 2.6.2. Existence of Sustainable Development Goal 
hub to accelerate implementation of 2030 Agenda and identify 
innovative practices 
Baseline: No 
Target: Yes 
Strategic result 2: The crises, disasters and resources are managed for improved community resilience 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL 3: Environmentally sustainable management, climate change and land use planning 
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 4. By 2023, the national and decentralized authorities adopt and apply disaster risk management and prevention mechanisms, sustainable 
natural resources management (water, land, forests), climate change mitigation and adaptation and ecosystems protection to ensure a better community resilience  
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 3. Building resilience to crises and shocks, in order to safeguard development gains 
14 
 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
Indicator 1: Number of 
displaced persons as a result 
of natural disaster 
disaggregated by sex  
Burundi Living Standards 
Survey  
Frequency of data 
collection: Annual 
Output 3.1: Evidence-based assessment and planning tools 
and mechanisms applied to enable implementation of 
gender-sensitive and risk-informed resilience, prevention 
and preparedness to limit the impact of natural hazards on 
communities   
Regular:  
$22,757,650 
Ministry of Environment, Agriculture and 
Livestock 
Ministry of Finance, Budget and Economic 
Cooperation 
GIZ 
European Union 
GEF 
GCF 
CSOs 
Private sector 
Other:  
$32,202,433 
 
 
IRRF data 
Frequency of data 
collection: Annual 
Baseline:  
(a) Women: 78,790 
(b) Men: 72,730 
Target:  
(a) 54,600; (b) 50,400 
 
Indicator 3.1.1:  Number of local governments with 
operational early warning systems to limit the gender-
differentiated impact of climate change and disaster risks 
Baseline:  10 
Target: 25 
 
ISTEEBU 
Frequency of data 
collection: Annual 
 
Indicator 2: 
Proportion of natural 
ecosystems surface area in 
protected areas 
 
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of internally displaced persons, 
returnees and members of host communities benefiting from 
durable solutions including green jobs and livelihoods, 
disaggregated by sex  
Baseline:  
Men: 2,526 
Women: 2,426 
Target:  
Men: 8,000  
Women: 12,000  
 
Baseline: 44% 
Target: 60% 
 
Output 3.2: Solutions adopted to improve access to clean, 
affordable and sustainable energy particularly for women 
and displaced communities  
 
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of households accessing clean, 
affordable and sustainable energy access (mini-grid, micro-
grid, solar platforms, etc.). 
Baseline: 
(a) Women-headed: 100 
(b) Displaced households: 200 
(c) Batwas: 50 
(d) Men-headed: 650 
Target: 
(a) Women-headed: 300 
(b) Displaced households: 600 
(c) Batwas: 150 
(d) Men-headed: 1,950 
 
15 
DP/DCP/BDI/4 
 
 
Output 3.3. Solutions scaled up for sustainable and gender-
responsive management of natural resource  
 
Indicator 3.3.1: Natural resources that are managed under a 
sustainable use, conservation, access and benefit-sharing 
regime: Area of existing protected area under improved 
management (hectares):  
Baseline: 1,055 hectares 
Target: 5,000 hectares 
 
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of women participating in decision- 
making on the use and management of natural resources  
Baseline: 5  
Target: 20 
 
 
16 
