Table of Contents:
I. Programme rationale ..: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management: Page: 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 8
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
 
I.  Programme rationale 
 
1.  Despite many natural and mineral resources, Guinea is among the world’s least developed 
countries.  This  is  due  to  poor  macroeconomic  performance,  weak  governance  structures, 
political  instability,  and  insecurity  in  the  late  1990s.  Since  its  emergence  from  political 
isolation, via a new constitution and democratic elections in 2010, Guinea made considerable 
progress until the crisis in involving the Ebola Virus Disease in 2014. Government efforts to 
stabilize  the  macroeconomic  framework  were  affected  by  the  epidemic.  The  GDP  growth 
rate1  dropped  from  2.3  per  cent  in  2013  to  0.1  per  cent  in  2015  and  per  capita  income 
declined.2 Fortunately, the economy recovered due to strong performances in the mining and 
agricultural sectors, and an increase in electricity supply.3 Average growth is estimated at 5 
per  cent  for  2016  to  2020.  Nevertheless,  performance  is  hampered  by  limited  economic 
diversification;  inadequacies  in  agricultural,  mining  and  fisheries  value  chains;  insufficient 
support  for  entrepreneurship;  poor  employment  opportunities  for  women  and  youth;  slow 
formalization of the informal sector,4 and weak community resilience to crises and disasters.5 
2.  Overall performance has not translated into better living conditions for people. Efforts to 
achieve  the  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)  had  little impact on reducing poverty 
and social inequalities: 55 per cent of the population lives below the poverty line  and there 
are  strong  urban  (35  per  cent)  and  rural  (65  per  cent)  disparities.  Close  to  a  quarter  of 
households  do  not  have  access  to  improved  sanitation,  and  74  per  cent  have  no  access  to 
electricity  (97  per  cent  in  rural  areas  vs.  26  per  cent  in  urban  centres).6  In  addition,  urban 
unemployment  doubled  from  8  per  cent  in  2012  to  16  per  cent  in  2015.7  Guinea’s  Human 
Development Index (HDI) was 0.4148 in 2016, making it 183 out of 188 countries. Estimates 
from poverty surveys indicate accelerated and inclusive growth can have the biggest impact 
on  poverty  reduction  in  Guinea.9  If  growth  is  equitably  distributed,  1  per  cent  growth  in 
private  consumption  can  lead  to  a  full  percentage  point  reduction  in  the  poverty  rate.10  A 
recent  fragility  analysis11  revealed  Guinea  is  still  in  a  “transition  stage”  and  needs  to 
strengthen  its  institutions  and  state-civil  society  relationship  for  increased  efficiency, 
transparency, accountability and resilience. 
3.  The quality of governance is low in Guinea.12 A recent survey suggests citizen perception 
of  public  administration  is  negative  with  84  per  cent  of  respondents  stating  that  public 
services  are  corrupt,  while  77  per  cent13  have  limited  trust  in  the  justice  system.  Women, 
youth and people with disabilities are largely excluded from political debates and decisions-
making  processes.  Women  are  a  minority  in  leadership  positions  in  publi  c  and  private 
enterprises, and underrepresented in political and electoral processes. Only 21.9 per cent14 of 
national parliamentarians are women, and seven government ministers out of 34 are women, 
which  is  below  the  30  per  cent  constitutional  target.  The  resumption  of  political  dialogue 
following  the  Ebola  epidemic  helped  improve  the  socio-political  situation.  Local  elections 
are scheduled for 2017 but the political and social system is fragile, characterized by deferral 
of local elections beyond deadlines set out in successive political  agreements,15 which have 
led to political tension. A lack of regular updates and harmonization of legal and regulatory 
frameworks,  policies  and  strategies  on  rule  of  law,  inclusive  growth  and  environment 
weakens  overall  coherence,  hinders  enforcement16  and  effectiveness.  Fostering  dialogue 
                                                           
1 World Bank Report, 2015. 
2 GDP per inhabitant dropped in 2014 and 2015, by 2.1 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively (see the National Plan for Economic and Social Development for 2016-
2020, and the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation, December 2016. 
3 IMF eight and final review under the extended credit facility arrangement and financing assurances. 
4 National Report on the development of the private sector, 2016 APIP. 
5 National report on the assessment of fragility, 2016. 
6 National Plan for Economic and Social Development for 2016-2020. 
7 Ibid. 
8 Human Development Report 2016. 
9 World Bank Country Partnership Strategy for Guinea (2014-2017). 
10 Ibid. 
11 National report on the assessment of fragility, 2016.  
12 Mo Ibrahim Index on governance 2015. 
13 Provisional Commission on National Reconciliation, June 2016. 
14 National Gender Policy, Ministry of Social Action and for the Promotion of Women and Children. 
15 Political agreements from July 20l3, August 2015 and October 2016. 
16 National report on the assessment of fragility, 2016. 
2 
 
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
among  political  stakeholders  and  strengthening  relevant  public  institutions  are  critical  for 
safeguarding  and  sustaining  peace,  and  creating  conditions  conducive  to  economic 
transformation. 
4.  Unemployment rates among youth and women17 rates are high (50.4 per cent for women 
and  83  per  cent  for  youth).18  These  groups  have  limited  access  to  productive  resources 
including  land  and  credit,  and  working  women,  youth  and  people  with  disabilities  are 
engaged  in  jobs  in  the  agriculture19  and  informal  sectors  where  they  do  not  have  stable 
incomes or social protection. Poor economic opportunities and natural resource management, 
along with environmental degradation, have led to a rural exodus and massive emigration of 
youth.20 Disenchanted youth radicalize and adopt extremist views easier than their peers. To 
meet  these  challenges  the  government  developed,  with  UNDP  support,  a  program  for  the 
socio-economic integration of youth (2016-2020), which requires partners’ support. 
5.  Environmental  and  natural  resource  management  risk  factors  need  to  be  addressed  to 
reinforce  community  resilience  to  climate  change  shocks,  and  forge  pathways  to  economic 
growth. Guinean forests receded by 12 per cent between 1990 and 2014 due to inappropriate 
farming  practices,  poor  exploitation  of  forest  resources,  open-pit  mining,  and  bush  fires 
exacerbated by climate change.21 Mining operations create significant environmental impacts 
and pose risks  to  social  security and  health. Corporate  social  responsibility policies are  not 
well  applied in areas affected by  mining operations  while the governance process could be 
more  transparent and inclusive. Droughts, floods, storms, extreme temperatures and coastal 
erosion  affect  the  country’s  long-term  development  and  require  special  attention  when 
building resilience of the economy and population. 
6.  Responses are constrained by weak institutional capacities across sectors.  Low levels of 
decentralization  limits  public  access  to  services,  particularly  in  remote  areas.  The  lessons 
learned report on Ebola22 revealed the low resilience of public institutions and need to invest 
at  sub-national  and  community  levels.  The  government  is  strengthening  decentralization 
through the creation of regional development zones that will help build local resilience. The 
operationalization of these zones is a priority for effective coordination, provision of services 
and development of supply chains in sectors such as agriculture and extractive industries, but 
such  reforms  can  only  succeed  if  the  country  has  sufficient  coordination  and  monitoring 
capacities.  Support  to  aid  coordination  frameworks  is  a  priority  in  governmental  resource 
mobilization.  The  Common  Country  Assessment23  highlighted  the  country’s  weak  capacity 
in data  collection, analysis and dissemination, and the dysfunction of the statistical system. 
All  of  this  hampers  the  formulation  and  effective  monitoring  of  national  and  sectoral 
development  policies.  Additionally,  poor  coordination  among  actors,  weak  planning  and 
programming processes, and little public involvement limit the degree of public support for 
government policies, and reduce the impact and sustainability of development programs.  
7.  To unlock Guinea’s potential, ensure prosperity and equitable distribution of revenue, the 
government is committed to tackling the root causes of poverty through its long-term vision24 
for  a  prosperous,  emerging  Guinea  by  2040. This  vision  is  linked  to  Agenda  2030  and  the 
African Union Agenda 2063, and will be operationalized through four strategic priority areas 
in  the  National  Plan  for  Economic  and  Social  Development:  (i) promotion  of  good 
governance  for  sustainable  development;  (ii)  sustainable  and 
inclusive  economic 
transformation;  (iii) 
inclusive  development  of  human  capital,  and  (iv)  sustainable 
management of natural capital. 
8.  UNDP is well positioned as a multilateral organization in supporting the implementation 
of this vision. UNDP has partnered with the government in three areas: governance, building 
institutional  capacity,  and  supporting  legal  and  regulatory  reforms.  Good  practices  include: 
                                                           
17 Light Survey for Poverty Assessment in Guinea, INS 2012. 
18 Specific Survey on Employment and Decent Work, AGUIPE 2012. 
19 General Census of the Population and Housing, Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation 2012. 
20 ‘Advancing development approaches to migration and displacement’, UNDP position paper for the 2016 United Nations summit for refugees and migrants 
21 Report on the state of the environment in Guinea, 2014. 
22 Ebola lessons learned report (MPTF 2016). 
23 UN Common Country Assessment, 2016. 
24 “Vision 2040 for an emerging and prosperous Guinea,” the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation, January 2017. 
3 
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
 
(i) knowledge products;25 (ii) strategic documents like the national plan with an emphasis on 
the  integration  of  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  and  based  on  the  fragility 
assessment  that  facilitated  the  identification  of  accelerators  of  inclusive  and  sustainable 
development;  (iii)  strengthened  electoral  and  justice  institutions,  and  (iv)  revised  legal  and 
regulatory  frameworks  that  incorporate  provisions  from  international  conventions  and  have 
made  significant  institutional  contributions.  The  evaluation  of  the  Second  Priority  Plan, 
financed by the Peacebuilding Fund, for 2013 to 2017 revealed significant progress has been 
made  in  improving  relations  between  citizens  and  national  defense  forces,  thereby 
consolidating peace and security. Findings indicated gaps between police and justice sectors. 
9.  UNDP  focused  on  youth  and  women’s  empowerment  to  provide  skill  development  and 
employment opportunities to more than 400,000 young people (48.5 per cent girls). Efforts to 
generate  inclusive  growth  led  to  the  economic  and  social  empowerment  of  over  100  rural 
women’s  groups  (2,000  women)  through  business,  organizational  and  management  skill 
building  and  multifunctional  platforms.  Such  integrated  approaches  are  gaining  popularity 
among communities and generate high demand from  regions not yet covered in the current 
country programme document (CPD). 
10.  With  regards  adaptation  to  climate  change,  the  UNDP  contribution  includes  the 
development  of  a  policy  framework  for  environmental  sector  management,  identifying  the 
most  vulnerable  geographical  areas  to  support  the  implementation  of  climate  change 
adaptation  initiatives,  and  the  formulation  of  a  national  adaptation  plan  to  support  rural 
communities and increase resilience through ‘green jobs’ creation.  
11. The 2013-2017 CPD evaluation showed UNDP was quick to adapt and respond to socio-
economic and health crises, such as Ebola outbreak through community development support 
projects. It also revealed organizational interventions were fragmented. The consolidation of 
UNDP achievements in Guinea will be the guiding principle for the proposed program with 
weaknesses  addressed  through  focused  scale  up  and  strengthened  partnerships  Leading 
partners  are  the  World  Bank  (WB),  European  Union  (EU),  Islamic  Development  Bank 
(ISDB), French Agency for Cooperation (AFD), the Government of the People’s Republic of 
China,  United  States  Agency  for  International  Development  (USAID),  and  various  non-
governmental organizations (NGOs). Priority areas selected by multilateral partners and  the 
Government  of  China  include  infrastructure,  governance  and  capacity  building  in  public 
administration. The main bilateral contributors (USAID and French government) are focused 
on governance and the social sector (e.g. water, health and education). UNDP will rely on its 
comparative advantage and the lessons learned to consolidate support and build accountable 
national institutions, promote job creation for vulnerable groups (particularly youth, women 
and people  with disabilities), and reinforce local communities’ resilience to shocks.  Efforts 
are inspired by an approach focused on inclusive  participation, gender empowerment,  local 
skills and knowledge, and South-South cooperation. Inter-organizational coordination will be 
consolidated  through  Delivering  as  One  (DaO)  initiatives  and  implementation  of  the  2018-
2022 United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships 
 
12.   The overarching objective of the CPD is to assist Guinea in creating conditions for 
sustainable inclusive growth by building strong and responsible public institutions that 
are  accountable  to  civil  society.  The  development  pathways  that  lead  to  this  objective 
include  promoting  good  governance  for  sustainable  development  at  the  national,  regional, 
and  community  levels,  combined  with  investments  in  economic  transformation  and 
sustainable management of natural capital.  
13.  The  programmatic  strategy  depends  on  creating 
links  between,  and  mutually 
strengthening, the two pillars of the UNDP programme. To ensure gains in economic growth 
are  inclusive  and  not  eroded  by  political  instability,  a  widening  of  democratic  space  is 
required—mainly  through  the  pursuit  of  inclusive  participation  of  communities,  especially 
vulnerable  groups.  Long-term  political  stability  is  protected  by  inclusive  and  sustainable 
                                                           
25 Human Development Reports, MDG Implementation Monitoring Reports, and Economic Impact Assessment Studies of the Ebola Epidemic 
4 
 
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
economic  growth  that  produces  jobs.  Since  agriculture,  fisheries,  livestock  and  forestry 
industries  are  the  main  sources  of  income  for  more  than  70  per  cent  of  the  population, 
sustainable management of natural capital is needed to mitigate the effects of shocks on the 
population and should be mainstreamed within the two pillars.  
14.  The  CPD  was  developed  in  consultation  with  the  government,  national  stakeholders, 
civil society, development partners and United Nations organizations. Focus areas are in line 
with national plan priorities, anchored in the UNDAF 2018-2022, and aligned with outcomes 
of  the  UNDP  Strategic  Plan  2014-2017.  The  programme  will  support  Guinea  in  the 
implementation of  Agenda 2030, the  African  Union  Agenda  2063 and the roadmap  for the 
Istanbul  Plan  of  Action  for  Least  Developed  Countries.  The  CPD  will  focus  support  on 
achieving 10 of the 17 SDGs (e.g. SDGs 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 15 and 16). 
Pillar One: Promoting good governance for sustainable development  
15.  This  pillar  strengthens  government  capacity  to  improve  political  and  economic 
management,  promote  economic  governance  through  strengthened  public  institutions, 
and  increase  civil  society  involvement  in  decision-making  and  citizen  control  in  fighting 
corruption. Disaggregated data will be mined, especially regarding gender, so specific issues 
can  be  taken  more  closely  into  account  when  monitoring  the  SDG  pathway.  UNDP  will 
continue supporting the harmonization and dissemination of legal and regulatory frameworks 
to  ensure  local  ownership  and  improve  institutional  performance,  as  well  as  support 
ministries and institutions in addressing gaps, identifying contradictions in new laws, decrees, 
codes,  regulations,  and  ensuring  national  compliance  with  international  obligations  and 
standards.  UNDP  will  continue  to  support  security  sector  reforms,  rule  of  law  and  the 
implementation  of  critical  laws  through  advocacy,  enforcement  and  monitoring  practices. 
Plans are in place to improve the participation of civil society organizations, women, youth 
and  people  with  disabilities  in  political,  economic  and  social  decision-making  spheres. 
UNDP will help build community capacity, and advocate for increased female participation 
in  public  institutions  and  the  private  sector.  UNDP  will  support  the  creation  and 
operationalization  of  regional  development  zones  to  exercise  legal  and  constitutional 
privileges,  and  assist 
the  formulation  and 
implementation of inclusive, participatory, socio-economic and SDG-localized development 
plans.  This  will  be  done  regionally  and  in  target  development  zones  where  fast  growth  is 
anticipated  and  targets  can  be  met.  Specific  attention  will  be  given  to  youth  and  women’s 
employment,  adaptation  to  climate  change,  security  and  conflict  prevention.  This  will  be 
done  to  strengthen  women’s  participation,  as  voters,  election  candidates,  monitors  and 
observers,  alongside  building  the  capacity  of  early  warning  systems  for  conflict,  citizen 
control and oversight. 
local  governments 
institutions  and 
in 
 
16.  Such  interventions  will  contribute  to  increased  public  trust  in  national  institutions  and 
ensuring  more  inclusive  and  effective  citizen  participation,  thereby  promoting  good 
democratic  governance  and  rule  of  law  in  line  with  SDGs  10  and  16.  The  national 
government will nurture partnerships with: (i) the European Union on elections, institutional 
reforms and local development, through the National Indicative Programme (2014-2020) and 
Civil  Society  Support  Programme;  (ii)  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Human 
Rights (OHCHR), Open Society Initiative for West Africa, and National Democratic Institute 
on conflict prevention and national reconciliation, (iii) the European Union, governments of 
Japan and France,26 and USAID collaborating on Security Sector Reform, and (iv) the private 
sector, especially mining and ancillary sectors to capitalize on ongoing partnerships with the 
Chamber of Mines. Part of the programme includes forging new partnerships with regional 
bodies  on  emerging  and  cross  border  issues  such  as  migration  and  risk  management  (e.g. 
African Union, Economic Community of West African States, and Mano River Union).  
Pillar Two: Economic transformation and sustainable management of natural capital 
17.  This  second  pillar  focuses  on  promoting  inclusive  growth  through  value  chains  in 
high  economic  potential  zones,  job  creation  to  sustain  local,  emerging  growth, 
                                                           
26 Electoral Cycle Support Project in Guinea.  
5 
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
 
improving community resilience to shocks, and reducing youth migration. The following 
priorities  under  this  pillar  are:  (i)  building  the  capacity  of  professional  unions  and  farmers 
associations  to  become  better  organized  and  equipped  to  promote  activities,  comply  with 
international  standards  and  access  new  market  opportunities;  (ii)  supporting  women,  youth 
and  people  with  disabilities  so 
income-generating  activities, 
they  benefit 
entrepreneurship,  decent  employment,  access  to  finance  and  integration  of  the  informal 
sector  within  sustainable  value  chains  in  the  mining,  agricultural  and  fisheries  sectors;  (iii) 
promoting  sustainable  cities  and  villages,  sustainable  waste  management  and  promotion  of 
green jobs, as well as supporting the establishment of area-based waste management systems; 
(iv)  building  resilience  of  vulnerable  groups  so  they  adapt  to  climate  change  and  have 
improved  access  to  renewable  energies  and  alternative  technologies,  and  (v)  building 
national  capacities  in  climate  finance  and  resource  mobilization.  UNDP  will  support  the 
Ministry  of  Environment,  Water  and  Forests  and  the  National  Meteorological  Agency  in 
implementing COP-21 commitments and facilitating resource mobilization for opportunities 
arising  from  COP-22.  Strengthening  national  statistics  system  is  a  crosscutting  domain  for 
UNDP  to  provide  data  that  will  improve  strategic  planning,  budgeting  and  integrated 
development management, monitoring and evaluation. These interventions will contribute to 
the achievement of SDGs 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13 and 15. 
from 
 
18.  The implementation of the second pillar relies on the strong collaborations with a variety 
of  partners.  The  World  Bank  will  work  with  the  government  and  UNDP  on  supporting 
Program for Village Communities (PACV) and Mining Sector Governance Support Program 
(PAGSEM).  The  African  Development  Bank  (AfDB)  will  provide  aid  coordination  and 
institutional  capacity  building.  Other  specialized  United  Nations  organizations,  the  Multi-
Partner  Trust  Fund  Office  (MPTF)  and  European  Union  will  work  on  youth  employment 
while  the  Agence  Française  de  Développement  (AFD)  will  focus  on  environmental  issues 
with the Green Climate Fund (GCF), the governments of Japan, China and Belgium, and the 
Global  Environment  Facility  (GEF).  New  partnerships  will  be  developed  with  ISDB,  the 
Belgian  Technical  Cooperation  and  AfDB  on  value  chain  promotion  in  rural  areas  for  job 
creation to address unemployment among women and young people, which will be an entry 
to  respond  to  migration  issues.  UNDP  will  develop  partnerships  with  the  private  sector  to 
facilitate  greater  participation  in  conflict  prevention,  sustainable  waste  management  and 
alternative energy. UNDP will collaborate with the universities of Conakry and Kankan, the 
Conakry-Rogbanè 
of 
Technology of Mamou.  
Scientific  Research  Centre, 
the  Higher Institute 
and 
 
19.  South-South  and  triangular  cooperation  will  build  on  successful  parliamentary 
exchanges  with  Senegal,  Niger  and  Burkina  Faso,  and  be  expanded  to  other  areas  such  as 
electoral  assistance  and  justice  reform.  UNDP  will  reach  out  to  new  collaborators  like 
Tunisia and Rwanda to provide guidance in promoting the effective representation of youth 
and  women  in  decision-making  bodies.  Collaborations  will  be  made  in  the  areas  of 
microfinance (e.g. crowd funding)  and rural and agricultural entrepreneurship  with partners 
in Burkina Faso and Cameroon. The same will be done with green jobs with Benin.  
 
20.  UNDP will work closely with other United Nations organizations on priority areas using 
the ‘Delivering as One’ approach. It will provide administrative and technical support to the 
Office of the Resident Coordinator in facilitating joint programmes that address development 
challenges related to SDG-localization; income-generating activities; decent employment for 
vulnerable groups; sustainable value chain promotion, and green jobs creation. 
 
III.   Programme and risk management 
 
21.  The country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves  as  the  basis  of  accountability  to  the  Executive  Board  for  results  alignment  and 
resources assigned to the programme. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional 
and  headquarters  levels  are  prescribed  in  the  UNDP  Programme  and  Operations  Policies 
and Procedures and Internal Controls Framework. 
 
22.   The technical, programmatic and operational capacities and organizational structure of 
the  Guinea  Country  Office  are  aligned  with  the  proposed  programme.  UNDP  will 
6 
 
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
strengthen  the  unit  for  strategic  oversight  to  improve  data  collection,  knowledge 
management,  and  the  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  interventions.  The  use  of  a  national 
implementation modality will help reduce the internal UNDP capacity. Up to 70 per cent of 
Service  Contract  and  Temporary  Appointment  positions  will  end  with  the  previous 
programme  cycle.  Internal  allocation  of  other  resources  will  include  25  per  cent  of  direct 
project costs charged to projects to support country office sustainability.  
 
23.   The  programme  will  be  executed  nationally.  UNDP  and  partners  will  capitalize  on 
individual  capacities  to  select  implementation  modalities.  Based  on  a  new  capacity 
assessment,  remaining  gaps  will  be  identified  and  monitored  through  the  Harmonized 
Approach  to  Cash  Transfers.  The  United  Nations  Country  Team  will  conduct  a  macro-
assessment  of  the  public  finance  management  system  and  micro-assessment  for  relevant 
government  bodies  and  civil  society  organizations.  This  will  be  done  to  identify  risks 
related  to  the  management  of  public  resources  and  assess  the  capacity  of  implementing 
partners to manage a harmonized approach to remittances.  UNDP will implement the joint 
programming framework and business operations strategies. 
 
24.  The  risks  to  effective  programme 
implementation  are  institutional  instability, 
deterioration of the security, and lagging humanitarian support. These risks are due to failed 
political  dialogue;  ethnic  polarization  of  the  socio-political  debate;  poor  management  of 
electoral process; insecurity in the sub-region (that could result in extreme violence and the 
radicalization  of  youth),  and  possible  resurgence  of  the  Ebola  virus.  The  CPD  will  be 
implemented in a context characterized by a reduction in regular resources and uncertainty 
of funds. Due to the possible reemergence of risks, some activities can be reprogrammed or 
suspended. UNDP will approach the private sector through an intensive win-win approach 
to  ensure  direct  involvement  when  investing  in  value  chains  and  promoting  job  creation. 
The  recent  operationalization  of  Guinea  Airlines  can  facilitate  mobility  for  continuous 
programme delivery to hard-to-reach populations. 
 
25.  To  mitigate  risks  related  to  insufficient  partnerships  and  resources,  the  country  office 
will focus on its resource mobilization strategy. UNDP will strengthen the communication 
and visibility of interventions; allocate direct costs to projects; update its partner database. 
The organization will explore new funding  mechanisms  with the Green Climate Fund, the 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, ISDB and public-private partnerships. At present, ISDB 
is  promoting  an  outsourcing  approach  under  corporate  agreements  with  UNDP  and  other 
partners.  This  approach  has  distinct  comparative  advantages  in  building  governance  and 
institutional  capacities,  and  boosting  grassroots  level  entrepreneurship  and  value  chain 
development.  A  strategy  will  be  developed  in  collaboration  with  national  stakeholders  to 
secure national funding. Emphasis will be placed on building the capacity of implementing 
partners to improve the quality of interventions. 
 
26.  The  UNDP  country  office  will  project  quality  assurance,  along  with  social  and 
environmental  standards  that  improve  programme  quality.  To  maintain  good  value  for 
money  and  close  existing  gaps,  the  country  office  will  strengthen  financial  management 
controls and project supervision, and improve upon its evaluation and capacity assessment 
of implementing partners. 
 
27.  The  UNDP  country  office  has  put  a  strategic  oversight,  early  warning  and  risk 
management  mechanism  in  place  through  a  business  continuity  plan  that  analyses  and 
assesses  the  national  context,  identifies  risks,  and  assesses  risk  management  capacities 
through the management/mitigation system. This system is updated as the context changes. 
If  needed,  the  country  office  will  have  the  flexibility  to  modify  planning,  reallocate 
resources, and trigger procedures that can address specific crises. 
 
28.  Security-related  risks  will  be  addressed  through  early  warning  systems,  political 
dialogue  with  the  Government  of  Guinea  and  donors.  UNDP  will  locally  strengthen 
mechanisms for the prevention, reduction and management of conflicts and natural disasters 
in  collaboration  with  United  Nations  organizations  and  the  United  Nations  Department  of 
Safety and Security (UNDSS). 
 
7 
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
29.  Attention will be given to monitoring and evaluation to achieve programme outcomes. 
CPD  indicators  are  aligned  with  national  indicators,  UNDAF  indicators,  the  UNDP 
Strategic Plan for 2014-2017 and relevant SDGs. In collaboration with partners, UNDP will 
support  the  development  of  national  capacities  in  data  collection  and  monitoring  and 
evaluation—in  particular,  the  National  Statistics  Institute  for  the  production  and  regular 
dissemination of updated sex and disability-disaggregated data on the SDGs. 
 
30.  UNDP will develop an integrated monitoring and evaluation plan to ensure monitoring 
of  efforts  and  achievement  of  development  outcomes.  Monitoring  of  activities  and 
indicators  will  be  carried  out  by  programme  implementation  units  and  the  use  of:  annual 
reviews; semi-annual monitoring meetings with the government and implementing partners; 
UNDAF outcome group, technical and steering committees meetings, and joint field visits 
with  the  government,  development  partners,  civil  society  organizations,  the  private  sector 
and  local  communities.  To  make  monitoring  more  inclusive  and  participatory,  local  focal 
points and decentralized state structures will collect and share data. 
 
31.   UNDP will ensure the gender marker is incorporated into all projects and programmes. 
The  gender  marker  will  be  used  for  resource  allocation,  and  in  supporting  the 
mainstreaming  of  gender,  women’s  empowerment,  and  disability-sensitive  elements  into 
programmes. The UNDP country office  will allocate 5 per cent of the country programme 
budget  for  monitoring  and  evaluation  activities,  including  resource  mobilization  tracking 
through  the  programme  pipeline  follow-up,  and  data  collection  for  baseline  and  periodic 
surveys.  Experiences  will  be  shared  with  other  countries  within  the  South-South  and 
triangular  cooperation  network  so  a  reliable  data  system  on  the  SDGs  can  be  established. 
Evaluations will be carried out in accordance with the evaluation plan and form part of the 
monitoring  and  evaluation  framework  of  the  national  plan.  The  CPD  will  be  subject  to  a 
mid-term  and  final  evaluation.  UNDP  will  work  with  United  Nations  organizations  to 
conduct joint evaluations (mid-term and final evaluations of the UNDAF 2018-2022), and 
with  the  government  and  development  partners  on  thematic  assessments  and  periodic 
surveys. A discussion group has been set up with academic institutions and universities (the 
University  of  Conakry,  the  Conakry-Rogbanè  Scientific  Research  Centre,  and  Mamou 
Technology Institute) to promote renewable energy initiatives.  
 
8 
 
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
Annex: Results and resources framework for Guinea (2018-2022) 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Promotion of good governance for sustainable development 
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP, Outcome 1: By 2022, national institutions at the central, decentralized and deconcentrated levels are inclusive, assuring and guaranteeing the rule of law, democracy,  security, 
social peace and an effective institutional governance in accordance with the principles of human rights. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: Citizen expectations for voice, development, the rule of law and accountability are met by stronger systems of democratic governance 
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome (in $ 
thousands) 
Data source and frequency of 
data collection27, and 
responsibilities 
UNDAF outcome indicators, 
baselines and targets 
Indicative country programme outputs (including 
indicators, baselines targets)28 
Major partners/ 
Partnership frameworks 
Data sources: General Secretariat of the 
Government, Ministry of Planning 
Ministry of Territorial Administration 
and Decentralization (MATD)/ CENI/ 
Parliament/Ministry of the 
Environment; Transport and Fishing 
Output 1.1: Legal/regulatory framework, policies and strategies on 
rule of law, inclusive growth and environment are updated and 
harmonized  
 
Overall quality index of national 
institutions (CPIA) 
Baseline: 3.1 in 2015 
Target: 4 in 2022 
Regular: 2,070,129 
 
 
 
Other: 6,724,300    
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.1: Number of policies and strategies developed/revised in 
the areas of the rule of law, inclusive growth integrating human rights 
and gender 
Baseline: 17 Target: 27 Data sources: MATD/ CENI/ Parliament/ 
Ministry of the Environment (MEEF); Transport and Fishing;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.2: Number of legislative and regulatory texts available on 
the rule of law, inclusive growth, integrating human rights and gender 
equality 
Baseline: 11 Target: 20 Data sources: MATD/ CENI/ Parliament/ 
MEEF; Transport and Fishing;  
Parliament, Constitutional Court, Supreme 
Court. 
Ministries: Justice, Social Action, Citizenship, 
MATD, Planning and International Cooperation 
(MPCI), Mines and Geology, Finance and 
Economy, Budget, Environment, Labour, 
employment, technical Education and 
Vocational Training, Industry, SMEs and 
Private Sector Promotion, Chamber of Mines, 
Defense, Security, Youth, Communications, 
Court of Auditors, Parliament, INIDH, HCDH, 
CSO, CENI 
IOM, UNICEF, UNFPA, UN-Women, WHO, 
UNCDF 
AfDB, IsDB, EU, GEF/GCF, WB, Japan, GoG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.3: Number of public institutions with legal, policy and 
institutional frameworks in place for conservation, sustainable use, 
access and benefit sharing of natural resources, biodiversity and 
ecosystems 
Baseline: 8 Target: 24 Data sources: MATD/ CENI/ Parliament/ MEEF; 
Transport and Fishing;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data source: Mo Ibrahim Index Report 
/CENI/Assembly 
Output 1.2: Legal/regulatory framework are strengthened to 
improve CSO, women and youth participation in political, 
economic and social decision making  
Regular: 1,552,597    
 
Indicator 1.2 Mo Ibrahim Index of 
African Governance 
Baseline: 43.7% 
Target: 50% 
 
Other: 5,043,225 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.2.1: Percentage of women and youth in national parliament 
and local councils. 
a.)  Women: Baseline: Parliament: 22%, communes: 0% regions: 
 
 
 
 
 
0%, Target: Parliament: 40%, Communes: 30%, Regions: 30% 
Frequency: Biennial. 
 
 
 Data source: MPCI, Ministry of 
Justice/MATD/Sectoral reports;  
b.)  Youth: Baseline: Parliament: 4%, communes: 0% regions: 0%, 
                                                           
 Frequency of all data collection is annual 
 Frequency of all indicator data collection is Annual unless otherwise indicated 
9 
 
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
 
 
Target: Parliament: 30%, communes: 30% regions: 30% 
Frequency: Biennial. 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of new or strengthened laws and policies to 
increase women’s, youth and CSO participation in decision making. 
Baseline: 3 Target: 6 
Frequency: Biennial 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 1.3: Newly created regional development zones are 
functional and exercise legal and constitutional prerogatives 
Regular: 3,622,726 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.3 Percentage of women 
in national parliaments and local 
councils  
Baseline: 21.9% 
Target: 40% 
 
 
Other: 11,767,525 
Indicator 1.3.1: Number of regional zones created 
Baseline: 0 Target: 4 Data source: Ministry of Justice/MATD Sectoral 
reports;  
 
Data source: Ministry of Justice/ 
MATD/ Sectoral reports  
 
 
 
Indicator 1.3.2: Number of regional zones where UNDP built 
capacities in gender sensitive planning, budgeting; 
Baseline:0; Target: 4; Data source: Ministry of Justice/MATD/Sectoral 
reports;  
 
 
 
 
 
Output 1.4:  Institutions and organizations involved in 
strengthening democratic and economic governance have the 
capacities to fulfil their mandate  
Regular: 3,105,194 
Indicator 1.4 Number of national 
elections organized in a calm, 
transparent and credible manner. 
Baseline: 2 
Target: 4 
Data  source:  Official  Journal,  CENI, 
Parliament, Court of Auditors, 
 
Other: 10,086,450 
 
 
Indicator 1.4.1: Number of organizations involved in civic education 
programmes and actively engaged in promoting electoral participation 
Baseline: 6; Target: 10; Data source: Ministry of 
Justice/MATD/Sectoral reports; Frequency: Biennial 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.4.2: Number of institutions/organizations with 
strengthened capacities in accountable management, monitoring and 
evaluation 
Baseline: 3; Target: 10; Data source: Frequency: Biennial 
 
Indicator 1.4.3: Number of women participating as candidates in local 
and national elections supported by UNDP 
Baseline: 35; Target: 100; Data source: CENI Frequency: Biennial 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Economic transformation and sustainable management of the natural capital 
UNDAF  OUTCOME  INVOLVING  UNDP,  Outcome  2:    By  2022,  the  national  institutions,  civil  society  and  the  private  sector  will  have  implemented  the  policies  that  improve  food  security,  sustainable  management  of 
environment, resilience of populations to climate change and disaster risk management 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1: Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded. 
 
 
Output 2.1: The professional unions and farmers’ associations are 
better organized and equipped to promote their activities 
Regular: 3,090,376    
Indicator 2.1 and 2.2: Unemployment 
rate of women.  
Baseline:3,9 
Target:1,90 
Ministers: MPCI, Youth-Technical and 
Professional Training, 
Industry, Small- and Medium-size Enterprises, 
Mines and Geology, Agriculture, Fisheries 
-Civil society 
-Private sector (enterprises, Employers’ 
Federations, Chamber of Mines) 
Decentralized authorities 
 
 
 
 
Other: 15,769,696    
Indicator  2.1.1:  Number  of  professional  unions  and  farmers’ 
associations that have action plans 
Baseline: 4,100; Target: 16,400; Data source: INS/Sectoral Ministries;  
 
 
Data source: INS/Sectoral Ministries;  
 
 
Indicator 2.1 and 2.2Youth 
unemployment rate 
Baseline: 7,3 
Target: 5,30 
 
 
Indicator  2.1.2:  Number  of  skill-building  schemes  which  expand  and 
diversify  the  productive  base,  based  on  the  use  of  sustainable 
production technologies 
Baseline 5; Target: 7; Data source: INS/Sectoral ministries;  
 
 
Indicator 2.1 and 2.2: Unemployment 
10 
 
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
Data source: INS/Sectoral ministries;  
Ministries: MPCI, Youth-Technical and 
Professional Training, Industry, Small and 
Medium-Sized Enterprises, Mines and Geology, 
Agriculture, Fishing; 
- civil society 
- private sector (enterprises, employers’ 
federations; Chamber of Mines; 
Decentralized authorities) 
IOM,  UNICEF,  UNFPA,  UN-Women,  WHO, 
UNCDF 
AfDB, IsDB, EU, GEF/GCF, WB, Japan, GoG 
rate of people living with disabilities 
Baseline:7 
Target : 5 
Output 2.2: Women and youth benefit from income-generating 
activities and decent employment within sustainable value chains 
developed in the mining, agricultural and fisheries sectors 
Regular: 3,533,974   
 
 
 
Other: 18,022,510 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of new full time equivalent jobs created for 
women and men 18+ years old  
Baseline: 46736 (W: 11,682, M: 35,054); Target: 50,236 (W: 13,182; 
M: 37,054); Data source: MJ/METFP/ME/OSC;  
 
Indicator 2.2 b: Rate of wage-earning 
women and youth in non-agricultural 
employment 
Baseline: 27,7% 
Target (2022) :40% 
Data source: MJ/METFP/ME/OSC 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of additional females that benefit from 
UNDP's livelihoods interventions 
Baseline: 131,736 (F: 46,736; M: 85,000); Target: 137,736 (F: 49,736; 
M: 88,000); Data source: MJ/METFP/ME/OSC;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.3: Number of new full time equivalent jobs created for 
people with disabilities 
Baseline: 904 Target: 2,512; Data source: MJ/METFP/ME/OSC;  
 
 
Indicator 2.3: Percentage of women and 
youth with access to credit 
Baseline:(2016):56% 
Target:(2022):65% 
 
Indicator 2.2.4: Number of additional people with disabilities that 
benefit from UNDP's livelihoods interventions 
Baseline: 2,479 Target: 6,887; Data source: MJ/METFP/ME/OSC;  
 
 
AfDB, WB, 
MPCI, INS; 
- civil society- private sector 
 
Output 2.3: The capacities of National Statistical Institute are 
enhanced to provide quality data and analysis for development 
planning monitoring and evaluation and decision-making. 
Regular: 2,217,996    
 
 
 
 
Other: 11,264,069    
 
 
Indicator 2.3.1: Number of national frameworks with data collection 
and analysis capabilities Baseline: 1; Target: 25 Data source: 
MPCI/INS  
 
Data source: INS 
 
 
Indicator 2.3.2: Number of national surveys supported that include 
disaggregated data on vulnerable groups 
Baseline:0; Target: 8 Data source: INS  
Data source: MEEF sectoral 
reports/sectoral reports 
Ministries of Industry, MEEF GEF, civil 
society, private sector, local communities 
Indicator 2.4 a Food insecurity rate 
Baseline: 18.2% 
Target: 9.02% 
Output 2.4: Households of targeted cities and villages have better 
access to alternative technologies, renewable energies and healthy 
living environment. 
Regular: 4,110,622    
 
Other: 14,528,890    
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.4.1: Number of households benefitting from alternative 
technologies and renewable energies 
Baseline: 10,126; Target: 15,126; Data source: MEEF sectoral 
reports/ sectoral reports;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data source: MEEF sectoral 
reports/sectoral reports 
 
 
Indicator 2.4 b Rate of access of 
populations to a waste disposal system 
Baseline: 33.7% 
Target: 60% 
Indicator 2.4.2: Number of new partnership mechanisms with funding 
for sustainable management solutions of natural resources, ecosystem 
services, chemicals and waste at national and/or sub-national level; 
Baseline: 1 Target: 2; Data source: MEEF sectoral reports/Sectoral 
reports  
 
 
 
 
       
Indicator 2.4.3: Percentage of female headed households benefitting 
from improved energy access  
Baseline:  27%;  Target:  30%;  Data 
reports/sectoral reports;  
 
 
source:  MEEF 
sectoral 
 
 
11 
 
DP/DCP/GIN/3 
 
 
Data source: Environmental sectoral 
reports,  
MEEF, Health, GEF, civil society, private 
sector, local communities   
 
Output 2.5: The most vulnerable groups, have increased capacities 
for resilience and adaptation to climate change 
Regular: 3,622,726 
 
Indicator-2.5 Number of persons 
affected by natural disasters per 100,000 
inhabitants (by sex) 
Baseline: 295 
Target: 100 
 
Other: 12,712,779  
 
Indicator 2.5.1: Number of communes that integrated practices of 
resilience and adaptation in their local development plan 
Baseline: 74; Target: 100; Data source: MEEF Sectoral 
Reports/Sectoral report;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.5.2: Number of women and youth able to adapt their 
economic and living environment to climate change 
2.5.2a Women Baseline: 1,735; Target: 5,000 
2.5.2b Youth Baseline:0; Target: Data source: MEEF sectoral reports 
Sectoral reports;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.5.3: Area of reforested/protected forest ecosystems by 
UNDP 
Baseline: 916; Target: 2,916 ha; Data source: MEEF sectoral reports 
/Sectoral reports;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.5.4: Number of climate information systems put in place 
and operational  
Baseline :0; Target: 1; Data source: MEEF sectoral reports Sectoral 
reports;  
 
 
 
 
Indicator-2.6. Reforested areas (ha) 
Baseline: 199,200 ha 
Target: 300,000 ha 
Data sources: Sectoral reports 
 
Output 2.6: National environment and natural resources 
management institutions have strengthened capacities in resource 
mobilization and improved access to climate funding 
Regular: 2,587,660 
Ministry of Environment, 
Ministry of Economy, Planning and 
International Cooperation, GEF, civil society, 
private sector, local communities 
 
 
Other: 9,080,557 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.6.1: Number of funded projects submitted by environment 
and natural resources management institutions  
Baseline: 12; Target: 17; Data source: MEEF sectoral reports/Sectoral 
reports; Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.6.2 Amount mobilized by environment and natural 
resources management institutions for the implementation of new 
projects 
Baseline: $16,389,000 US dollars; Target: $60,000,000 US dollars; 
Data source: MEEF sectoral reports /Ministry of  Economy and 
Finance; Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
