File Name: ALB-NEP-2013-EN
Year: 2013
Country Name: Albania
Country Code: ALB
Category: NEP
Document Title: Solar Water Heating System Project: Albania Country Program
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2013
Start Year: 2013
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

United Nations Development Program – Solar Water Heating System Project: 
Albania Country Program 
(Project ID 00062827) 
Solar Thermal Obligations for Public Buildings in the 
Municipality of Tirana 
September 2013 
 CONTENTS
Abbreviations and Acronyms ............................................................................................................................ 4
Solar Thermal Obligation for the Municipality of Tirana................................................................................... 5
Definitions..................................................................................................................................................... 5
Objectives of the Tirana Municipality Solar Thermal Obligation (STO)......................................................... 8
Scope of the Tirana Municipality STO ........................................................................................................... 8
Quantification of the Tirana Municipality STO.............................................................................................. 9
Quality Requirements of the Tirana Municipality STO................................................................................ 10
Design and specification of the SWH systems......................................................................................... 10
Installation and commissioning of SWH systems.................................................................................... 11
Maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems....................................................................................... 12
Municipal Targets for Solar Water Heating in Public Buildings................................................................... 14
Annexes........................................................................................................................................................... 16
Annex I – Method for calculating the SHW thermal load............................................................................ 16
Annex II – Steps for designing a SWH system in the scope of the Tirana Municipality STO ....................... 17
Annex III – Curriculum for the training and coaching program for certification of SWH systems designers
..................................................................................................................................................................... 17
Annex IV – Structure of the document to be produced by the SWH systems designer when designing
systems in the scope of the Tirana Municipality STO.................................................................................. 19
Annex V – Curriculum for the training and coaching program for certification of SWH systems installers 20
Annex VI – Guidelines for developing the SWH systems preventive maintenance plan............................. 21
Annex VII – Guidelines for developing the SWH systems monitoring plan................................................. 23
Annex VIII – Evaluation grid for the course of SWH systems designers...................................................... 23
Annex Ix – Evaluation grid for the course of SWH systems installers ......................................................... 23
Annex X – Check‐list for information collection in the scope of the SWH systems design ......................... 23
Annex XI – Grounds for developing a Solar Thermal Obligation in the Municipality of Tirana................... 26
Municipal Vision of a Solar Water Heating framework ........................................................................... 27
Key Challenges......................................................................................................................................... 28
General recommendations...................................................................................................................... 29A vision of EU Standards on STO ............................................................................................................. 30
The scope of a STO .................................................................................................................................. 31
Quantifying the Obligation ...................................................................................................................... 31
Quality Requirements.............................................................................................................................. 36
Architectonic Issues and Protected Buildings.......................................................................................... 38
Supervision of the STO ............................................................................................................................ 39
References....................................................................................................................................................... 42ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
EE ‐ Energy Efficiency
GHG – Green House Gases
MoT – Municipality of Tirana
MV&E – Monitoring, Verification and Enforcement
NPV ‐ Net Present Value  
NZEB – Nearly Zero Energy Building
RES – Renewable Energy Sources
SF – Solar Fraction
SHW – Sanitary Hot Waters
STO – Solar Thermal Obligation
SWH – Solar Water Heating 
TL – Thermal Load
UNDP – United Nations Development Program
 SOLAR THERMAL OBLIGATION FOR THE MUNICIPALITY OF TIRANA
The importance of the SWH and all to it relevant concerns have been recognised on the national
level. SWH is one of the most promising technologies to reduce electricity and fuel wood
consumption in Albania with a significant contribution towards GHG gas emissions reduction.
The Global Solar Water Heating Market Transformation and Strengthening Initiative: Albania
Country Programme, funded by the Global Environment Facility and implemented by UNDP,
under the National Execution Modality, addresses the most common barriers to solar water
heating development: policy and regulations, finance, business skills, information, and
technology.
The UNDP Project will give a contribution regarding the creation and drafting of all SWH bylaws of
governmental decrees. The Energy Efficiency (EE) Center has taken the initiative to develop an
initiative aiming at raising the awareness of Municipal staff in what regards the benefits of EE in
buildings. It would be important to have these activities integrated and co‐ordinated since they all
have the same purpose – save energy, raise competitiveness and avoid polluting emissions.
According to the National Energy Strategy and Albania’s First National Communication and
Technology Needs Assessment, over 70% of domestic hot water needs of the household and
service sector in Albania is supplied by electric boilers, while the energy demand for hot water in
Albania was projected to grow from 600 GWh in 2000 to 875 GWh in 2015, in the residential
sector alone.
The objectives of Albania energy policy are competitiveness, security of supply and sustainability.
The Law, No. 138/2013 on Renewable Energy Sources (RES), endorsed by the Albanian
Government, recognises the important role of Albanian municipalities in taking the lead in making
solar water heating as a standard solution for all new public buildings and those going through
major renovations.  
DEFINITIONS
Amplification – the intervention in one existing building that aims at adding a new body, section
or floor and that has the consequence of augmenting the useful pavement surface.
Annual solar energy (design) – it is the energy expressed in units of final energy, supplied by the
SWH system, according with the design methodology and estimation method used.
Annual solar energy (measured) – it is the energy expressed in units of final energy, supplied by
the SWH system, according with the information made available by the use of an energy
management system. Measured in the boundaries of the primary circuit of the SWH system, i.e.,
before and after the heat exchanger.
Appropriate solar exposition – is the existing roof, in terrace or sloped surface, the latter with a
perpendicular oriented in a range of azimuths of 90º between south‐east and south‐west, that arenot shaded by significant obstacles in the period initiating everyday two hours after sunshine and
finishing two hours before sunset.
Autonomous fraction – it is a section, floor or apartment within a building which is designed or
altered to be used separately.  
Building – in the scope of this STO, it is either the whole part of a property or one of its
autonomous fractions.
Energy management system – it is an electronic system, composed of hardware and software,
used for managing the SWH system, including, the supervision, monitoring, command of the
system and its components and the quantification of the energy collected and made useful by the
SWH system.
Energy mix – is the distribution in percentage terms of the primary energy sources for producing
electricity at the national level. This value varies every year, namely in function of the annual
hydropower generation capacity.
Envelope – it is a building component that defines the boundary between the internal and
external space. It is closely related with the architecture and construction of the “skin” of the
building but depends also of the physical relations between the “skin” of the building, its structure
and the other constructive elements.
Final energy – is the energy made available to users under different forms (electricity, natural gas,
propane, butane, diesel, gasoline, and biomass) and expressed in units with commercial meaning
(kWh, Nm3
, kg). 
Large rehabilitation – the intervention in the envelope or in the technical installations (energetic
or not) of one existing building, that should not result in the erection of a new body or section and
which has an estimated cost superior to 25% of the value of the building, excluding the value of
the terrain, in the conditions defined in the relevant legislation.
Monitoring – in the scope of this STO, it is the accompanying of the SWH system by following a
program of regular and periodic readings and registries of pertinent characteristic parameters.
This activity can be executed continuously in real time or periodically.  
Municipal energetic matrix – it is a quantitative representation of all the available energy, in a
region under administration of a Municipality, which can be used for all the productive processes.
It is essential for the orientation of energy‐sector planners in their mission of ensuring production,
security of supply and rational use of energy. The municipal energy matrix details the energetic
profile of the Municipality, separated by activity sectors and energy use typologies. It also details
the group of energy forms or vectors of each sub ‐sector and or energy use typology. The
pollution potential of each subsector or energy use typology can be done by correlating the
energy matrix with the carbon emissions matrix. The carbon emissions matrix, reflects the
corresponding emissions of each sub‐sector or energy use typology. The pollution potential of
each subsector or energy use typology can be indicated in terms of the result of dividing tonnes of
carbon by the tonnes of oil equivalent. It is important to refer the difference between the
calculation of carbon emissions, taking into account the final energy matrix or the primary energy
matrix. From the global perspective, it is more correct to calculate the carbon emissions through
the primary energy matrix, because, in that situation, the inefficiencies of the power generationand distribution systems can be included, as well as the inefficiencies of the various fuels for
processing the distribution.
Nearly Zero‐Energy Building – is a building that has a very high energy performance, as
determined in accordance with Annex I of the EU Energy Performance Buildings Directive (recast).
The nearly zero or very low amount of energy required should be covered to a very significant
extent by energy from renewable sources, including energy from renewable sources produced on‐
site or nearby.
Nominal primary energy global needs – it is the parameter that expresses the quantity of primary
energy that corresponds to the pondered sum of the nominal useful energy‐needs for heating,
cooling and production of sanitary hot waters, taking into account the adopted systems or, in the
absence of their respective definition, conventional reference systems, and the current utilization
patterns of those systems.
Nominal useful energy‐needs for cooling – it is the parameter that expresses the quantity of
useful energy needed annually to maintain a building or an autonomous fraction with a reference
internal temperature during the cooling season.
Nominal useful energy‐needs for heating – it is the parameter that expresses the quantity of
useful energy needed annually to maintain a building or an autonomous fraction with a reference
internal temperature during the heating season.
Nominal useful energy‐needs for producing sanitary hot waters – it is the parameter that
expresses the quantity of useful energy needed to heat the annual average reference sanitary
water volume to a temperature of 60 ºC.
Preventive maintenance plan ‐  a set of maintenance tasks and activities that are recommended
for each component and part of the SWH system, taking into consideration the good practice of
the professional category, the manufacturers instructions and the specific applicable regulations.
Primary circuit – is the hydraulic closed circuit of a SWH system that makes the transportation of
the solar thermal energy, collected in the solar collectors, to the sanitary hot water storage
tank(s).
Primary energy – is the energetic resource that is found available in nature (petroleum, natural
gas, hydro energy, wind energy, biomass and solar) and is expressed generally in units of
equivalent mass of petroleum (tonnes of oil equivalent). There are forms of primary energy
(natural gas, wood, Sun) that can also be made available directly to the final users, being
coincident in those cases to final energy.
Renewable energy – is the energy with origin in, the Sun (used under the form of light, thermal
energy or photovoltaic electricity, of biomass, wind and waves), in the Earth (geothermic) and in
the gravitational effect of the Moon and Sun (tides).
Roofing surface – is the surface, measured from the inside, of the opaque elements of the
envelope, horizontal or with an inclination inferior to 60º that separates superiorly the useful
space from the exterior or from non‐useful adjacent spaces.Sanitary hot water – is potable water at a temperature higher than 45 ºC used for showers,
cleaning, cooking, washing and other specific uses, prepared in an appropriate device and using
conventional and, or, renewable energy sources.
Secondary circuit – is the hydraulic open circuit that ensures the supply and heating of fresh
water to the final consumption. The heating process happens with the heat exchange between
the primary and secondary circuits, generally with support of an internal or external (to the
storage tank) heat exchanger.
Solar fraction – is the proportion, in percentage terms, of the thermal load that is satisfied by the
SWH system.
Thermal load – is the energy, in units of final energy, needed to satisfy the nominal useful energy‐
needs for producing sanitary hot waters.
Useful pavement surface – is the sum of the surfaces, measured in plan from the inside perimeter
of the walls, of all the compartments of an autonomous fraction of a building, including dressing
rooms, internal circulations, sanitary installations, internal sheds and other compartments of
similar function and built‐in wardrobes.
OBJECTIVES OF THE TIRANA MUNICIPALITY SOLAR THERMAL OBLIGATION (STO)
By building on the provisions of the RES law (Law No. 138/2013 ON RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES),
the Municipal STO aims at making solar thermal applications as a common and obligatory
component for all new public buildings and those going through large rehabilitation in the area of
Tirana Municipality.
The Tirana Municipality STO and respective accessory standards aims also at defining:
A. The specific type of buildings subject to this obligation (or which should be exempted
from this obligation on technical or cost‐efficiency grounds);
B. The minimum technical and quality requirements applicable for SWH systems, in three
phases of their overall life‐cycle:
i. design/specification
ii. installation/commissioning
iii. operation
C. The minimum technical qualifications applicable to SWH designers and installers and the
contents to include in specific vocational training and certification schemes for these two
professional categories;
D. The timeframes for the objectives and targets
SCOPE OF THE TIRANA MUNICIPALITY STO
1. All the public buildings under the jurisdiction of the Municipality of Tirana, in which
sanitary hot water needs were identified, are in the scope of this STO, with the exceptionof those public buildings under the jurisdiction of the Municipality of Tirana referred in
point number 4.  
2. This STO applies to all buildings referred in point 1 regardless of their age, i.e., it applies to
new buildings and existing buildings.
3. For a complete understanding of the point number 2, in the scope of this STO, the
following applies:
a. New buildings are buildings being erected for the first time or amplifications of
existing buildings.  
b. Existing buildings are buildings that:
i. Will be subjected to a large rehabilitation and, or, an amplification
ii. Have energy systems for producing sanitary hot water that will be
replaced and, or, rehabilitated
4. Public buildings exempted from this STO are:
a. Buildings used as places of worship and for religious activities
b. Temporary buildings
c. Buildings which have permanently no appropriate solar exposition and that are,
therefore, impeded of receiving a profitable SWH system
d. Historically protected buildings (e.g., monuments)
5. The Municipality of Tirana shall extend the scope of this STO to non‐public buildings
through a governmental order to be published by the Municipality of Tirana/the Ministry
responsible for Energy.  
QUANTIFICATION OF THE TIRANA MUNICIPALITY STO
The quantification of the STO follows an approach based on the principle that a minimum
percentage of the thermal load shall be covered by the SWH system.
6. In all buildings included in the scope of the STO, considering that there is an appropriate
solar exposition, the annual solar fraction of the SWH systems shall be at least 55%, as an
average over the annual expected consumption.  
7. The thermal load shall be calculated through the method described in Annex I.
8. The Tirana Municipality STO shall have a simulation software tool, to support the design
of the SWH systems. In particular, the referred simulation software tool shall be able to
provide information regarding:
a. The collecting area (number of collectors) of a given SWH system, based on the
specification of:
i. the daily thermal load
ii. the annual utilization of the system
iii. the storage tank(s)
iv. the heat exchanger
v. the solar collectors  
vi. the solar collectors orientation and inclination
b. The solar fraction of a given SWH system configurationc. The annual energy supplied by the SWH system
9. The only argument for the designer to not comply with the point number 6 is an
argument related with the absence of, available roofing surface (due to the occupation
with other energy systems) and, or, appropriate solar exposition. In this case the solar
fraction may be reduced to a limit of 35%.
QUALITY REQUIREMENTS OF THE TIRANA MUNICIPALITY STO
The implementation of a STO in a community or country introduces significant alterations in the
local solar thermal market. Without appropriate measures of quality assurance, low quality
installations may occur frequently. To ensure persistence of the solar energy gains and to amplify
the acceptance of the Municipal STO and of the solar thermal technology, strict requirements
must be verified in the following stages of a SWH system, under this STO.
DESIGN AND SPECIFICATION OF THE SWH SYSTEMS
A project with insufficiencies may force the installer to assume the responsibility of defining
details of the installation, for which he is generally not qualified. This may lead to the making of
decisions that may compromise the functioning of the SWH system. On the other hand, the lack
of clear and objective specifications may encourage the use of more economic equipment and
components, generally with doubtful quality, raising the risks of reliability and contributing to low
availability levels of the system and loss of credibility of the technology.  
10. The design of all SWH systems under the scope of this STO must be developed by certified
SWH systems designers.
11. The design and specification of all SWH systems under the scope of this STO, including the
respective components, must follow the steps defined in the Annex II of this STO.
12. The certification process of the SWH system designers, referred in the point number 10,
will be defined in a governmental order to be published by the Municipality of Tirana/the
Ministry responsible for Energy, and will consist in the evaluation of the professional
competence of individual candidates, taking into account the performance of the
individual candidate in designing and specifying a SWH system, defined and attributed to
him, in the scope of a training and coaching program.  
13. The training and coaching program referred in point number 12 shall be based in the
curriculum indicated in Annex III, which includes professional development in security
aspects, commissioning, maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems.
14. The training and coaching program referred in point number 12 shall be developed,
adapted and delivered for the following two different stages:
a. Initially, to train and certify the first frontrunners, i.e., a training of trainers.  
In this case the evaluation will be based on the performance of individual
candidates during:
i. the referred training and coaching program; and  ii. the first experience of delivering a course to certify SWH systems
designers (i.e., a mentoring session to evaluate and improve training
skills);
b. In the following editions, to train and certify the SWH designers
15. The specification of the SWH systems components shall take into consideration the need
to choose components with a recognized and accepted certification. In this sense, solar
collectors chosen for SWH systems, under the scope of this STO, must have certification
Solar Keymark, and the other main components (e.g., storage tanks, circulation units,
piping accessories and safety equipment) must have the mark CE.
16. For all the SWH systems developed in the scope of this STO, there should exist a
document containing all the relevant information that can serve as:
a. The basis for understanding between the owner and the technician responsible
by its definition
b. Provide grounded estimates and transparent information regarding the
economical and environmental evaluation of the project
c. Give orientation to the installer in the execution phase; and
d. Support the clarification and allocation of responsibility in the case that the
installation presents deficiencies and, or, malfunctioning.
17. The document referred in the number 16 is of the responsibility of the certified SWH
designer. It should be in a complete version before the procurement process of the SWH
system and should have a structure that addresses, at least, the points indicated in Annex
IV of this STO.
INSTALLATION AND COMMISSIONING OF SWH SYSTEMS
The installation stage of SWH systems has been, in several European countries, a stage when
many mistakes that endanger the reliability and durability of the installations occur. On the other
hand the essay of all components and fine‐tuning of their respective working parameters, before
entering in operation, helps to adapt the system to the concrete operational context and to the
technical conditions that optimizes the systems’ performance. This STO aims at avoiding the
concretization of performance risks in the several stages of a SWH system life‐time.
18. The installation and commissioning of all SWH systems under the scope of this STO must
be executed by certified SWH systems Installers.
19. The certification process of SWH system Installers and commissioning technicians will be
defined in a governmental order to be published by the Municipality of Tirana/the
Ministry responsible for Energy, and will consist in the evaluation of the professional
competence of individual candidates, taking into account the performance of the
individual candidate in performing the activities foreseen in a specific training and
coaching program.  
20. The training and coaching program referred in point number 19 shall be based in the
curriculum indicated in Annex V, which includes also professional development in security
aspects, maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems.
21. The training and coaching program referred in point number 19 shall be developed,
adapted and delivered for the following two different stages:a. Initially, to train and certify the first frontrunners, i.e., a training of trainers.  
In this case the evaluation will be based on the performance of individual
candidates during:
i. the referred training and coaching program; and  
ii. the first experience of delivering a course to certify SWH systems
installers (i.e., a mentoring session to evaluate and improve training
skills);
b. In the following editions, to train and certify the SWH installers
MAINTENANCE AND MONITORING OF SWH SYSTEMS
Nowadays SWH systems are planned to have a useful life of about 20 years. Maintenance of SWH
systems is a key success factor for assuring high levels of reliability, availability, maintainability
and security of those systems. On the other hand, in some cultures the energy performance of an
energy system is not always related to its reliability. To overcome this issue it is important to
establish, in parallel with a preventative maintenance plan, a monitoring plan to have a notion of
how is our system performing.  
Monitoring plans of SWH installations under the scope of a STO are also important to ensure the
supply of information to the STO administration entity. Resulting information of a monitoring plan
can help characterize the success of the STO or, in case the SWH installations under the STO are
being financed or co‐financed by public funds, of how those public funds are being used.
22. All the SWH systems developed in the scope of this STO must have, at the beginning of
their operation, a preventive maintenance plan proposed by the certified SWH designer
that was responsible for the design. The existence of this preventive maintenance plan is
a necessary condition to the emission of the building permit by the competent authority.
23. The preventive maintenance plan referred in the point number 22 should be developed
according with the guidelines indicated in point number 24 and in the Annex VI of this
STO. The preventive maintenance plan should be adapted to the specific operational
context, of the SWH system, by the entity or individual responsible for assuming the
responsibility of the services contract referred in the point number 30.
24. The preventive maintenance plan shall include, at least, the identification of:
a. The installation and its location, i.e., building address
b. The contacts of the technician responsible for the design or maintenance, and, or
the maintenance contract manager
c. The function of the SWH system
d. The expected number of users
e. The solar collecting area, in reference to the aperture area of solar collectors
f. The characteristics and specifications of the main components (circulation kit,
storage tank(s), collectors, thermal fluid)
g. The detailed description of the maintenance and cleaning tasks and their
respective periodicitiesh. The detailed description of procedures for troubleshooting, in relation the most
common failure modes of SWH systems
i. The registry of the maintenance operations and alterations to the installation
performed, including the name of the technician who performed said operations,
the results of executing the procedures and other eventual pertinent comments
j. The definition of the parameters to be read and registered for construction of the
maintenance historic registry
25. The preventive maintenance plan of the SWH systems under the scope of this STO, shall
foresee the need to, access to and intervene in, all the constituting equipment and
components for maintenance purposes.
26. In a sheltered technical area of the SWH system there should be, easily accessible:
a. an updated unifilar diagram of the SWH system
b. a copy of the design document
c. operating instructions  
d. emergency instructions
27. The entities and, or individuals responsible for assuming the responsibility of the services
contract referred in the point number 30, must be able to demonstrate, at any time, that
they possess the professional aptitude in the scope of this STO, i.e., a professional SWH
systems designer and, or installer certificate, to perform the corresponding activities.
28. All the SWH systems developed in the scope of this STO must have a monitoring plan. Said
monitoring plan must define responsibilities for:
a. Data acquisition
b. Data registry in the maintenance folder of the SWH system
c. Submission of data to the administrating entity of this STO
29. The definition of the monitoring plan should follow the guidelines indicated in Annex VII
30. All the SWH systems developed in the scope of this STO must be, since the beginning of
their operation, subjected to a services contract for:
a. Executing the preventive maintenance plan referred in point number 22
b. Executing any other activity related with the reliability assurance of the system
(e.g., corrective maintenance, fine‐tuning to improve performance, satisfy legal
warranties over deficiencies in the installation)
c. Monitoring the installation in accordance with the monitoring plan mentioned in
point number 28, and  
d. Keeping guard and managing the resulting information of both, the preventive
maintenance plan and the monitoring plan (e.g., maintenance and performance
historic of the installation).  
31. The services contract referred in the number 30 should be established with the following
entities, listed in order of preference:
k. The entity or individual responsible for the installation of the SWH system  
l. The entity or individual responsible for the design of the SWH system
m. Any other entity or individual possessing a certification of installer and, or,
designer of SWH systems as mentioned in this STO.
32. The activities in the scope of the services contract referred in the point number 30 are of
the responsibility of the services supplier. However, the contracting authority(Municipality of Tirana) as administrator of this STO and owner of the buildings in which
the SWH systems will be installed and working, should include in its management
activities procedures for monitoring the quality of the services provided by these service
providers.  
MUNICIPAL TARGETS FOR SOLAR WATER HEATING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
33. The Municipality of Tirana shall start implementing this STO in 2013.
34. The Municipality of Tirana shall define, document and implement, until the end of 2013,
action plans to achieve the objectives and targets of this STO
35. The Municipality of Tirana shall define and document, until the end of February 2014, the
time frames for extension of this STO to private buildings, i.e., private residential and non‐
residential buildings
36. The Municipality of Tirana shall define and document, until the end of February 2014:
a. The appropriate allocation of resources (human, technical and financial) and
responsibilities (who does what) to put in place the operational and instrumental
structures of the Municipal STO, including those needed for the supervision of
this STO
b. The precise way by which the SWH systems designers and installers will be
qualified and certified. This shall include:
i. the approval of the training and coaching programs and curriculums
ii. the approval of the processes for recognition of competencies, rights and
obligations of those new professional categories
iii. the indication of the entities responsible for creating, developing and
managing this qualification and professional aptitude certification process
iv. the annual scheduling of training and coaching courses to qualify and
certify SWH designers and installers
c. The precise way by which the SWH systems will be simulated, as referred in the
point number 7 of this STO
d. The precise way by which the procurement, acquisition and final reception of
SWH systems, to be installed in Public Buildings, will occur. This shall include the
rules, procedures and the needed documentation.
e. The precise way by which the SWH systems will be licensed
f. A Monitoring, Verification & Enforcement (MV&E) plan to supervise and ensure
the integrity of this STO. This MV&E plan shall not collide with the actual related
procedures (e.g., licensing) and shall be defined in a cost‐effective manner, i.e.,
ensuring the rational use of Municipal technical, human and financial resources
g. The appropriate flanking measures to maximize the promotion and dissemination
of information regarding this STO and the benefits of SWH technologies, e.g.:
i. Campaigns
ii. Municipal knowledge centre
iii. Training of Municipal Staff in MV&E activities inherent to this STO
h. The appropriate sanctionary regime to be applied in case of nonfulfilmenti. The motivations and causes that conduce to the need of revising and altering this
STO. This statement for the revision of the STO shall have a periodicity referred in
it
37. The Municipality of Tirana shall ensure, by the end of April 2014:
a. The training of the implicated Municipal staff in performing the MV&E activities
needed to ensure the integrity of this STO
38. The Municipality of Tirana shall ensure, by 15 July 2014:
a. The existence of a team of certified Trainers, able to qualify and certify individual
candidates for the programmes of SWH design and installation, using the
curriculums foreseen in the Annexes III and V of this STO and the mentoring
process referred in point number 14.a.ii.
b. The existence of results of the first training courses, for designers and installers,
after the Training of Trainers referred in the point number 34.a.ANNEXES
ANNEX I – METHOD FOR CALCULATING THE SHW THERMAL LOAD
The daily thermal load is calculated by using the following expression:
DailyThermalLoad  (Vshw*  w ) *Cw *T /1000
   
[kWh] 
Where:
Vshw – is the reference daily average sanitary hot water (SHW) consumption in [liters]
ρw – is the density of water, 0.988 [kg/liter]
cw – is the specific heat capacity of water, 1.163 [Wh/kg*K]
∆T – is the increase of tap water temp. for the preparation of SHW (e.g. from 15ºC to 45 ºC)
For dimensioning the SWH system, the daily thermal load is expected to be the same in every day
where there is consumption of SHW.
For the purpose of calculating the reference daily average SHW consumption (ܯ௦௛௪), for a given
type of building, the following values should be used:
Table 3 – Reference values of SHW consumption for several types of buildings, [1]
Type of building Sanitary Hot Water daily consumption (60 ºC) Units
Residential 40 l/capita
Hospitals 50‐65 l/bed
School 5 l/capita
Hotel ***** 90 l/bed
Hotel **** 70 l/bed
Hotel *** 55 l/bed
Hotel ** 40 l/bed
Hotel * 35 l/bed
Elderly or students house 55 l/bed
Military facilities 20 l/capita
Gymnasium (showers) 25‐35 l/capita
Laundry 4‐7 l/kg cloths
Restaurant 6‐12 l/meal
Canteen 4 l/meal
The increase in tap water temperature to prepare the SHW (∆ܶ) shall have the reference value of
45 ºC. This value results from two considerations:
i) The annual average temperature of the water coming from the public grid is 15 ºC
ii) The temperature at which the SHW must be warmed up is 60 ºCANNEX II – STEPS FOR DESIGNING A SWH SYSTEM IN THE SCOPE OF THE TIRANA
MUNICIPALITY STO
It is suggested that the design of SWH systems is made by realizing the following sequence of
activities:
 Collecting information about the building, the hot water needs and the expectations of
the building owner, regarding the SWH system to produce. This activity can be carried out
by using the check‐list provided in Annex X of this STO.
 Simulating the SWH system in a software simulation tool as referred in point number 7 of
this STO, i.e., quantify the collecting surface, the solar fraction and the annual solar
energy obtainable.
 Define the line‐up of the collectors and the physical characteristics of the primary circuit.
 Define the filling pressure of the primary circuit, specify the safety components and
define their location in the circuit.
 Define the SWH system configuration (technical drawing, identification of components
and map of quantities)
 Define the backup system
 Calculate the economical and environmental viability of the installation (ROI, NPV)
 Describe the sequence of activities for the installation execution
 Describe the procedures for final cleaning and commissioning of the SWH system
  
ANNEX III – CURRICULUM FOR THE TRAINING AND COACHING PROGRAM FOR
CERTIFICATION OF SWH SYSTEMS DESIGNERS
The proposed programmatic content is expected to respond to the training needs of professionals
that are willing to become specialized in the design of SWH systems of medium‐ and large‐size.
The proposed curriculum will deliver a level of knowledge to participants such that, since the
beginning of the definition of the system, there will be the potential to condition the operation,
the cost, the durability, the performance and the maintenance cost of the installation.
The certification process of SWH designers initiates with the candidacy of the individual
candidates. There will be no pre‐requisites. The training and coaching program consists of seven
(7) days in class. Four (4) days will be used to deliver knowledge from the trainer to the
participants. The three (3) last days will be used to initiate and elaborate on the practice exercise,
i.e., designing with support of the trainer a medium‐size SWH system according with the
information contained in Annex II and Annex IV of this STO.
After the seven (7) days in class, totalling 56 hours, the participants will have 10 useful days to
complete the SWH system design and the document referred in the number 15. The final work
will be subjected to the evaluation of the trainer. The participant will have two opportunities to
see his work evaluated. The evaluation will be made objectively and taking into account the
evaluation grid included in Annex VIII. If the first evaluation delivers a classification inferior to
85%, the participant will receive his work with written comments in relation to the parts thatwere not well done. If it is superior to 85%, the participant is approved as certified SWH systems
designer under the scope of this STO. If, after the second evaluation, the classification is again
below 85%, the participant will not be approved as certified SWH designer in the scope of this
STO. Participant can always try more times but will have to initiate the process from the
beginning.
If approved, the participant will become habilitated to:
 Design installations for SWH in global terms and in relation to all of its constituting
elements
 Make critical analysis of projects
 Elaborate the budget to execute the project
 Define and plan the program of works and activities in relation to all stages of the project
development
 Elaborate the plans for, production, installation, commissioning, maintenance and
monitoring of a SWH system
The programmatic content of the training and coaching program for certification of SWH systems
designers is as follows:  
 Basics of solar energy collection and storage (elementary physics / fundamentals of
hydraulic circuits / solar radiation)
 Fundamentals of solar thermal energy (relative movement Earth‐Sun / study of shades /
detailed study of components / thermodynamic analysis of a solar collector)
 Legislation and technical standards
 Types of systems
 Check‐list for information collection – Aspects to include for several types of buildings
 Choice of storage capacity(ies)
 Choice of collectors
 SOLTERM software tool (Determination of collecting area / determination of Solar
Fraction)
 Displacement and interconnection of collectors
 Primary circuit dimensioning (validation of commercial diameters / pressure loss
calculations / circulating pump / heat exchangers dimensioning)
 Charging pressure of the primary circuit and security equipment selection
 Overall configuration of the system (single line diagram / location of safety components /
map of quantities / working principle description and function of components / control of
the system)
 Back‐up system
 Economical and environmental evaluation of SWH systems
 Installation execution (schedule of activities / schedule of inspections / acceptance
criteria)
 Failure modes of a SWH system
 Maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems
 Security related with SWH systems operation and installation
 Generalities on procurement of SWH systems installations
 Project practical exerciseThe pedagogic methodology of the training and coaching program for certification of SWH
systems designers is as follows:
 The contents are presented in power point format with oral exposition and will be
distributed to participants in hard copy.
 The project practical exercise, initiated in class and finished in the participant’s premises,
is developed according with the format indicated in Annex IV and submitted by e‐mail to
an address defined by the entity managing the certification process, before the deadline
indicated in this Annex.
In the end of the training and coaching program, the approved participants will receive a
certificate, attributed by the National Agency for Natural Resources, which will confer them the
professional aptitude to design SWH systems.  
As a result of this process a list of certified SWH systems designers will be created and maintained
accessible to the interested parties on the internet site of the Municipality of Tirana/National
Agency for Natural Resources.
The training and coaching course is a presential course and implies the presence of participants in
at least 90% of the total number of hours (56).
 
ANNEX IV – STRUCTURE OF THE DOCUMENT TO BE PRODUCED BY THE SWH SYSTEMS
DESIGNER WHEN DESIGNING SYSTEMS IN THE SCOPE OF THE TIRANA MUNICIPALITY
STO
The document to be produced for the purpose of satisfying the point number 15 of this STO shall
have the following structure:
1 Introduction
2 Building description
2.1 Initial information supplied by client
2.2 Hot water consumptions / demand
2.3 Additional information resuting from the visit and inquiry (use of check‐list)
3 Simulation program (e.g., SOLTERM)
3.1 Choosing the hot water storage tanks
3.2 Choosing the collectors
3.3 Simulating the system – Calculation of collecting area and annual solar energy
4 Collectors’ arrangement and primary circuit characteristics
4.1 Primary circuit mass and volumetric flow
4.2 Diameters of the piping network (validation of commercial diameter)  
4.3 Pressure loss in the primary circuit – piping and accessories (identification of the critical
path)  
4.4 Heat exchanger thermal power
4.5 Primary circuit circulation pump
5 Primary circuit pressure and definition of security equipment/components
5.1 Security equipment and components
5.2 Loading pressure of the primary circuit
6 Configuration of the SWH system
6.1 Single‐line diagram (with precise location and identification of accessoories)6.2 Detailed description of components (map of quantities and commercial reference of
accessories)
6.3 Control system and system’s working principle (monitoring parameters and control
conditions)
6.4 Collector’s security temperature
7 Backup system
7.1 Source of energy for backup system
7.2 Technical characteristics and interconnection with SWH system
7.3 Control of backup system and working principle (monitoring parameters and control
conditions)
8 Installation’s viability
8.1 Acquisition budget
8.2 Installation budget
8.3 Avoided energy costs
8.4 Simple payback; Net present value; Internal rate of return
8.5 Environmental benefit of the installation
9 Execution of the installation
9.1 Schedule for execution of works
9.2 List of equipment suppliers (collectors, storage tanks, hydraulic groups, …)  
9.3 List of installers (companies) that can be invited to bid
9.4 List of tools to be used in the installation execution (referring the utility and function)  
9.5 Maintenance program and plan (actions, verification parameters and respective
periodicity)
9.6 Market consultation procedure (including parameters evaluation and selection criteria)
9.7 Installations’ provisional acceptance criteria
10 Annex
Annexo I – Building plants (technical drawings)
Anexo II – Check‐list used for information collection
Annex III – Simulation reports  
Annex IV – Calculations spreadsheet
Annex V – Equipment catalogues
ANNEX V – CURRICULUM FOR THE TRAINING AND COACHING PROGRAM FOR
CERTIFICATION OF SWH SYSTEMS INSTALLERS
The proposed programmatic content is expected to respond to the training needs of professionals
that are willing to become specialized in the installation of SWH systems. The proposed
curriculum will deliver a level of knowledge to participants such that, there will be the potential to
condition the operation, the cost, the durability, the performance and the maintenance cost of
the installation. Furthermore, a large focus on the safety of the installation activities will be given
so that accidents can be minimized.
The certification process of SWH installers initiates with the candidacy of the individual
candidates. There will be no pre‐requisites. The training and coaching program consists of seven
(7) days. Four (4) days will be used to deliver knowledge, in class, from the trainer to the
participants. The three (3) last days will be used to visit existing and selected installations so that a
real perception of good and bad practices can be made.After the seven (7) days, totalling 56 hours, the participants will have 10 useful days to complete
the SWH system installation exam. The final work will be subjected to the evaluation of the
trainer. The participant will have two opportunities to see his work evaluated. The evaluation will
be made objectively and taking into account the evaluation grid included in Annex IX. If the first
evaluation delivers a classification inferior to 85%, the participant will receive his work with
written comments in relation to the parts that were not well done. If it is superior to 85%, the
participant is approved as certified SWH systems installer  under the scope of this STO. If, after
the second evaluation, the classification is again below 85%, the participant will not be approved
as certified SWH designer in the scope of this STO. Participant can always try more times but will
have to initiate the process from the beginning.
If approved, the participant will become habilitated to:
 Execute installations of SWH systems of all sizes
 Elaborate the plans for, production, installation, commissioning, maintenance and
monitoring of a SWH system
 Take the responsibility for the maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems
The curriculum for installers should be based on the following topics:
 Basics of solar energy collection
 Fundamentals of solar thermal energy (detailed study of components / thermodynamic
analysis of a solar collector / study of shades)
 Fundamentals of hydraulic circuits
 Materials of SWH systems
 Sequence of activities needed for having a SWH system constructed
 Means and tools needed and respective function
 Washing and filling up the primary circuit
 Preparing the commissioning – development of a check‐list
 Failure modes of a SWH system
 Maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems
 Security related with SWH systems operation and installation
ANNEX VI – GUIDELINES FOR DEVELOPING THE SWH SYSTEMS PREVENTIVE
MAINTENANCE PLAN
In the scope of this STO all SWH systems shall have a preventive maintenance plan including the
following maintenance actions and respecting the respective periodicities.
Table 4 – Preventive maintenance actions recommended for SWH systems
COMPONENT INTERVENTION FREQUENCY
(months) OBSERVATIONS
Solar Collectors Cleaning 12
With water and detergent. Execute the operation
in periods of low sun radiation (sunrise or
sunset).Structure 12 Recover structure parts that present corrosion;
sand and paint. Verify screw tightness.
Collectors
Covering 6
Visual inspection. Replace in case of crack. If
significant condensation is observed inside,
identify the origin and correct the situation.
Joints 6 Visual inspection (adherence, deformation and
degradation).
Absorbing board 6
Visual inspection to detect scaling of paint,
corrosion points, strange bodies deposition,
leakage and deformations. Replace in case of
leakage.
Piping 6 Visual inspection for leakage detection.
Box 6 Visual inspection for deformation detection.
Primary Circuit
Thermal fluid in circulation
12 Check density and PH  (pH< 5 may indicate the
need for replacement)
60 Replacement of thermal fluid.
Waterproofness 24 (max.) Make pressure proofs from the second year of
operation.
Purge
‐ Automatic 12 Clean and confirm correct operation.
‐ manual 0,5 Activate to release air retained.
Coil 60 Cleaning and take out. Simultaneously with
replacement of thermal fluid.
Pump 12 Waterproofness and lubrication.
Thermostat 12 Cleaning. Check functionality control and
regulation. Use temperature sensors.
Expansion vessel 12 Comprove pressure.
Heat exchanger 60 Cleaning and inspection (12 months in locations
with hard waters).
Secondary
circuit
Cut off valve 12 Lubricate and fasten.
Security valve
12 Move them along their entire course to avoid
incrustation or mineral deposits.
60 Check release pressure.
Thermal storage reservoir 24 (max.) Verify cathodic protection elements.
Electric
components
Switch 12 Cleaning and fasten the terminal connections.
Meters 12 Cleaning and fasten the terminal connections.
Differentials 12 Control of operation. Verification of mass
connection.
Electric panel 12 Cleaning.ANNEX VII – GUIDELINES FOR DEVELOPING THE SWH SYSTEMS MONITORING PLAN
In the scope of this STO, the objectives of monitoring are:  
i) to determine the quantity of solar thermal energy that is converted and delivered to
the consumption as well as the contribution, for the same consumption, of the source
of energy that supplies the backup equipment;  
ii) to validate the calculation tools used in the dimensioning of the SWH system; and  
iii) provide valorous information to the administrating entity of this STO about, among
other thing, the number of installations, their performance and energy savings
achieved.  
In the scope of this STO all SWH systems shall have a monitoring plan including the following
actions and respecting the respective periodicities.
Object of Monitoring KPI Periodicity
Thermal fluid temperature at the
exit of each autonomous group
of collectors
Differences larger than 5 ºC 6 months
Fuel or electricity that is used by
the backup system
Kg or kWh   12 months
Annual solar energy collected –
Productivity (kWh/m2
)
Integration of the enthalpy
measured by the energy
management system
6 months
Sanitary hot water consumption Install a meter at the
entrance of the storage
tank(s)
12 months
ANNEX VIII – EVALUATION GRID FOR THE COURSE OF SWH SYSTEMS DESIGNERS
ANNEX IX – EVALUATION GRID FOR THE COURSE OF SWH SYSTEMS INSTALLERS
ANNEX X – CHECK‐LIST FOR INFORMATION COLLECTION IN THE SCOPE OF THE SWH
SYSTEMS DESIGN
The following is an example of the use of a check‐list appropriate to multi‐family apartments
building.Local Somewhere in Tirana 
Typologies Quantity Nº of bathrooms Nº of showers Observations
T0 3 1 1 Building under 
rehabilitation. It will 
incorporate taps and 
showers of Class A+
hydraulic efficiency. 
T1 3 1 1 
T2 5 2 1 
T3 2 2 2 
T4 3 3 2 
T5
Observations
Consuming
profiles
Regulation derived According with Tirana SWH Standards. See the decree 
Other for details. 
Seasonality To be used all year. 
Observations
Other hot water requirements Washing machines Machines receive pre-heated water. 
It must be defined an extra hot 
water demand for this. No pools. 
Other SWH system applications Pool
Other
Back‐up system Observations
Is there a grid of conventional fuel (natural gas) ?
What is the most cost‐effective local source of energy ?
Are the houses equiped with heating system ? Specify.
Roofing Observations
Plane accessible The roofing is plane and accessible, by stairs. There is an 
elevator between living floors. Rrofing is above the 5th floor. 
Collectors may have to be transported to the roof by elevating 
means (depends on the model chosen). The roof is in good 
condition to resist to the load. 
Plane not accessible
Sloping
Other type
Roof covering Observations
Ceramic tile
The roof coveing is asphaltic. The covering is supposed to be 
replaced in the scope of the rehabilitation. There should exist a 
careful planning to integrate the installation of the SWH system 
without damaging the new asphaltic covering. 
Metal sheet
Mosaic
Asphaltic
Pebble
Inclination No inclination. There is sufficient space to install the collectores 
Orientation South oriented and according with good rules of the art. 
Sources of shading ObservationsExisting The only shading source is the surrounding wall of 1,1 m height 
and the howuse of the elevator room located in the centre of the 
roof. Potential
Observations
Positioning of lead The lead columns can pass through the existing technical 
courette that exist in the lateral of the elevators vertical 
passage. Space available columns
Building technical room
Local Observations
Roof
The bulding technical room is in the basement. It accomodates 
currently an old boiler, used for heating purposes, that will be 
removed in the scope of the rehabilitation. 
Ground‐floor
Basement
Other
Dimensions ‐ plan Technical drawings exist. There is sufficient space to 
accomodate (and move in) the needed equipment for the SWH 
system (circulating system and expansion reservoirs). 
Height
Access dimensions
Fraction technical room
Local Observations
Laundry The most appropriate space to accomodate the individual hot 
water storage tank would be in the sheds, where old electrical 
thermal accumulators are installed. Attention to the choice of 
model and the respective space needs for maintenance. 
Shed
Other
Dimensions ‐ plan Technical drawings exist. There is sufficient space to 
accomodate (and move in) the indivuidual hot water tanks 
and security components. Primary and secondary circuits must 
pass there. 
Height
Access dimensions
Positioning of accessories Observations
Energy meters The system should have at least one enrgy meter, located in the 
technical area with 2 sensors (one in the collectors area and 
one just before the pump). 
The cut-off valves of the collectors area should be instaleld on 
the top of the lead columns (at the level of roofing). 
There should exist, in the primary circuit, flow regulation valves 
in each autonomous group of collectors, at the exit of each 
individual storage tank and in the technical room. 
Water meters
Cut‐off valves
Flow regulation valves
Date:
Surveyor:ANNEX XI – GROUNDS FOR DEVELOPING A SOLAR THERMAL OBLIGATION IN THE
MUNICIPALITY OF TIRANA
Solar Water Heating (SWH) is a proven technology to supply Sanitary Hot Water (SHW) to the
service sector (e.g. hospitals, hotels, and schools), industry and households. However, low
electricity prices and non‐payments are obstacles to the penetration of this carbon‐free source of
useful energy. Nevertheless, solar panels are already available on the market and significant
volumes have been installed. According with the national Agency of Natural Resources of Albania,
in 2010, a total of 10,700 m2 were installed (60% by services, 40% by households), bringing total
installations to 52,000 m2 (equivalent to around 70 GWh/y or 1% of electricity consumed by
households in 2009). UNDP is supporting a programme (2011‐2015) to install 50 thousand m2 of
solar panels based on grants and fiscal incentives.
In Tirana, the daily average solar radiation in each month is given in the table below.
Table 1 – Monthly daily average solar radiation [kJ/m2]
County Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec
Tirana 12066 13292 14243 16007 18555 20538 21598 21896 19854 16564 13604 13250
The following pictures illustrate the availability of the energy resource – Sun – in annual energy
per square meter and the annual sunshine hours. It can be seen that Tirana is located in a region
where there is an annual average of 1500 [kWh/m2
] and where it is possible to have a SWH
system operating during more than 2500 hours per year.MUNICIPAL VISION OF A SOLAR WATER HEATING FRAMEWORK
Generally composed of solar thermal collectors, an hydraulic circuit to carry the thermal energy
collected and a storage of the thermal energy, SWH systems provide a simple, cost‐effective, and
sustainable means of heating water for domestic and other uses. In addition to reducing Green
House Gas (GHG) emissions, SWH systems offers a host of potential benefits to governments
seeking to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels and, or, reducing energy importations and
improving the overall efficiency of their energy sector, in both perspectives – supply and demand
sides. In countries where power demand is exceeding capacity, SWH can reduce pressure on the
national power system and diminish pollution produced by conventional energy sources.
The contribution of SWH for the Nearly Zero‐Energy Buildings (NZEB) concept can be very
significant, especially in residential buildings and in those buildings where there is a significant
need of heat for preparing sanitary hot waters. The NZEB concept is related to the development
of buildings that have a very high energy performance and therefore require a very low amount ofenergy to comply with its function. Moreover, the low amount of energy required should be
covered to a very significant extent by energy from renewable sources, including energy from
renewable sources produced on‐site or nearby. The NZEB concept is being widely studied through
all Europe and is expected to be mainstream from 2018 onwards (on new public buildings) and
from 2020 onwards (on all buildings).
Given the crisis in the EU construction sector, it is expected that new incentives and obligations
will redirect the construction companies’ efforts for the urban rehabilitation and, therefore, the
NZEB concept eventually start being applied also to the existing buildings, which hide the greatest
potential to avoid energy use.
Environmental benefits of a SWH framework are the direct and indirect reduction of GHG
emissions. Direct reduction of GHG emissions are obtained by the avoidance of using fossil‐fuel
based primary energy sources to prepare sanitary hot waters. Indirect reduction of GHG emissions
are obtained, for example, by the avoidance of overheating of buildings, the reduction of the
heat‐island effect and by the avoidance of transporting fossil‐fuel based primary energy from
outside the boundaries of the city to the city (e.g., LPG, natural gas, diesel). The environmental
performance of cities can be well characterized and monitored using and implementing the
concept of Energetic Matrix.  
Economic and social benefits of a SWH framework include the creation of new (and eventually
certified) professional categories, enhanced employment opportunities and the creation of small
and medium‐sized SWH businesses. The development of such businesses and maturation of the
respective market could lead to improved product quality and professional culture.  
KEY CHALLENGES
Through all Europe, and especially in the South European countries, solar thermal is a key
technology to address multiple current challenges such as sustainable development, green
economy, population growth, housing, quality of life, resource efficiency, energy efficiency,
climate change and poverty eradication.
Albanian challenges are a combination of the global challenges with particular challenges of
Albania as a state with a transitional economy. From the analysis made to the available
information, it was possible to identify several aspects and market barriers that must be
addressed by the implementers of the Tirana Municipality STO in order to achieve the objectives
of the STO and to promote the creation, development and sustained growth of a solid solar
thermal market.  
 Lack of installations working in a correct and effective manner
 Lack of installations working and subjected to a monitoring program
 Lack of knowledge from the public in general regarding the benefits of SWH and Energy
Efficiency (EE)
 Lack of service providers (companies) duly qualified and certified by an accredited
certification body   Lack of individual technicians qualified and certified, by an accredited certification body,
to perform the activities of design, installation, commissioning, maintenance and
monitoring of SWH systems
 Lack of financial incentives to promote not only the final users of SWH systems but also:
o The construction stakeholders (supporting the over‐cost of new constructions);
and especially
o The entrepreneurs that know and believe in the benefits and potential of SWH
and that may want to create their business in the area.
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
It is not uncommon to see countries that have loads of laws and regulations that, although
technically perfect, do not work as initially expected. There are at least two major reasons for this:
a) The high level of complexity of the Regulations;
b) The inadequate instrumental and operational structure of the Regulations to ensure its
integrity.  
Regarding point a), the complexity of the law makes it difficult to be applied and constitutes a
general barrier to its fructuous implementation. This is even clearer if the object of the new law is
a “new subject”, as it is for the case of SWH in Albania.
Therefore, it is recommended that the regulation should be simple and clear to be, easily applied,
less expensive to manage and to more easily convince all stakeholders that the application of the
law will benefit the community.  
The regulation shall establish in a clear and direct way the linkage of activities to be done, the
entities responsible implicated and the respective timeframes that must be satisfied by the
implicated parties, e.g., operational structure of the STO and its target groups (time of entering
into force, actors, deadlines, documentation to present, periodicity of inspections, training and
certification of professionals, …).
Regarding point b), the initial operational structure must be carefully balanced in order not to
compromise the integrity of the standard, in one hand, and to ensure that the implementation
and maintenance costs are kept as low as possible, on the other hand. The integrity of a standard
can be measured by the respective levels of Monitoring, Verification and Enforcement (MV&E).
Monitoring comprises the collection and analysis of data to give an accurate picture of the STO
progress and compliance, and is usually an on‐going process. It provides the opportunity to
identify and act on any implementation issues, as well as providing data for the STO evaluation.
Verification is the process of determining whether the SWH systems are being developed
according with the requirements of the STO (e.g., quality requirements).
Enforcement is about responding to non‐compliance offences with a suite of timely and
appropriate actions. When developing a STO it is essential to consider not only how non‐
compliance will be detected, but also how it will be responded to and by whom. When instancesof non‐compliance are not responded to as often or as appropriately as they should be, there are
negative repercussions on the STO integrity. If participants see that the penalties for non‐
compliance are low, then there is less motivation for them to comply, particularly if the costs of
compliance are seen to be high. The STO administrators should consider the design and
implementation of procedures for responding to non‐compliance offences.  
A VISION OF EU STANDARDS ON STO  
The experience has been showing that there has been in the several EU regulations concerning
energy use in buildings, a merging of measures that promote renewable integration and EE
improvement. In fact, the need to save conventional (fossil‐fuel based) energy, through, namely,
the limitation of energy demand, the increase of the thermal energy systems efficiency and the
introduction of renewable energy collected locally or nearby, made clear that it is necessary to
establish an integrated “bundle of policies” in the direction of the Nearly Zero‐Energy Buildings.  
One key aspect hat must be reflected in this “bundle of policies” is that of quality. It is essential,
for the benefit of the users, the market and the credibility of the STO, to integrate certification
schemes in key aspects of the STO as well as technical and, or, performance requirements.
Examples of these aspects are:  
 Certification of components of the SWH system (e.g., the collectors);  
 Certification of the designers for medium and large size installations;  
 Certification of installers for installations of all sizes;  
 Introduction of technical requirements, such as reference to EU Standards and
comprehensive maintenance plans;  
 Integration of requirements for reliability assurance, such as the existence of a valid
maintenance contract during the useful life‐time of the SWH system;
 Integration of performance requirements, such as persistence of a given Solar Fraction
(SF) and, or, annual productivity.
Another aspect to reflect in the Tirana Municipality STO, as a general good practice and for the
benefit of overcoming existing barriers, is that of the public awareness. Parallel to the
implementation of the STO, the public in general must have easy and free access (e.g., on‐line
access, solar thermal municipal knowledge centre) to information about the work being
developed by the operational structure of the STO. Examples of relevant information are:
 Lists of certified equipment that exist in the market (national/international);
 Lists of local certified professionals (designers and installers);
 List of institutions that promote the training of all stakeholders and the qualification and
certification of SWH systems professionals;
 Annual scheduling of training and coaching programs for certification of preofessionals;
 Technical description of SWH systems and respective individual integrating equipment;
 Manuals containing guidelines;
 Data and graphics illustrating the chronological rate of penetration of SWH systems in the
market (desirable before and after STO implementation to have better perception of the
effect); Initiatives of financial incentive for voluntary integration of SWH systems.
THE SCOPE OF A STO
STO’s are generally applied to new and existing buildings subjected to large refurbishments and,
sometimes, when there is the need to replace water heating systems. Although it would be
desirable to integrate all buildings in a STO, pondering on the existing limitations is
recommended. The first STO ever, a 1980 Israeli law, had encompassed only the residential
buildings with a height up to 27 meters. Very tall buildings and non‐residential buildings were not
considered in the scope of the law.
The following group of criteria can be used to determine the type of buildings to include in the
scope of an STO:
 Type of use (residential; non‐residential; seasonality);
 Localization (i.e., climatic zone);
 Age (new/existing buildings);
 Hot water needs (litre/day or litres/year, SHW temperature);
 Dimension (total net area; height; number of autonomous fractions)  
 Energy consumption
The following group of criteria can be used to determine the type of buildings to exempt of the
scope of an STO:
 Buildings used as places for worship or religious activity;
 Temporary buildings;
 Protected monuments;
 Buildings under permanent shading;
 Buildings not included in the scope of the STO.
It is a success key factor to define as clear as possible the scope of the STO (i.e., buildings in the
scope and buildings exempted), in order not to affect its intention and not to allow circumvention
of the rules.  
The Tirana Municipality is already limiting the scope of intervention of the STO to develop, to the
universe of Public buildings. This seems wise and advisable at the first glance, but it is
recommended just for the purpose of highlighting the intention of being the Public Authority to
set the example; progressive extension of the scope of the STO to other buildings (e.g., private
buildings) is recommended because of the cost‐benefit analysis of applying the STO.
QUANTIFYING THE OBLIGATIONThe critical aspect of an STO is the minimum proportion of solar energy contribution to the overall
thermal load for water heating purposes (i.e., the solar fraction). A STO must define clearly:
 A quantitative and qualitative definition of the obligation; and
 A unequivocal description of the calculation procedure.
The following approaches are possible:
1. The STO stipulates the SF of the SWH system (e.g., 40 % ‐ 80 %). This SF can vary
depending on several parameters (e.g., the use of the building; hot water needs;
availability of solar energy; availability of area to install solar collectors).
SWOT Analysis, [3]  
Strengths
correctness and precision: giving different
values for the obliged share, taking into account
different parameters (building size, climate,
etc.) and requiring a specific calculation allow to
meet precisely the requirements; for instance,
the efficiency of the solar collector could be
included in the calculation;  
from the point of view of communication, it is
easy to understand how much solar really
contributes to the hot water demand and
therefore to the energy savings in buildings.  
Weaknesses  
calculations should be first performed and then
checked; this means that both designers and
Municipality staff (or other actors in charge of
the checks) should be adequately trained.  
the approach is practically applicable only to
solar domestic hot water systems. It is not
applicable for systems for combined domestic
hot water preparation and space heating.
Opportunities  
N/A
Threats  
simplified tools and standard calculation
methods should be provided and their correct
use should be carefully checked; otherwise, any
applicant could do his/her own 'tricks' for not
fulfilling the obligation;  
the above tools should be for free, cleary visible
on web sites and easily downloadable;  
do not allow exemptions or lowering of the
minimum share based on too generic 'technical
impossibility' to install the solar thermal plants.
2. Making a relation between the minimum solar collecting area to be installed and some
well known and standardized figures of the construction sector, such as, square meters of
useful area or number of occupants. For this method to be precise, it will be needed to
define parameters for the specific climatic zone and parameters related with the solar
collector’s technology.SWOT Analysis, [3]  
Strengths  
this approach is easy both for calculating the
amount of solar thermal to be installed and
also for checking the fulfilment;  
it is applicable for both applications of solar
plants, domestic hot water preparation and
space heating;  
it uses figures which designers and
Municipality staff are quite familiar with (floor
area, number of occupants and which should
be anyway communicated when asking for
building permission.
Weaknesses  
not precise and not correct on a
technical/scientific basis, since we only talk
about m2 of 'solar thermal', without taking into
account the efficiency of the collector; defining
a set of values depending on the efficiency
could avoid this problem;  
from the point of view of communication, solar
thermal is something which is expressed
through m2 and not through the produced
heat. Presently the solar thermal markets are
changing to the use of kWth instead of m2 for
defining the size and capacity of solar heating
systems. Following this development it is
should be considered to specify the obligation
in kWth collector capacity per m2 and per
occupant.
Opportunities  
N/A
Threats  
define precisely which area of solar thermal we
are referring to ('gross', 'aperture', 'absorber');  
do not allow exemptions or lowering of the
minimum values based on too generic
'technical impossibility' to install the solar
thermal plants.
The first approach is a more simple and easy to understand option, besides being more precise,
since it is more directly related with the purpose of the system. The second option can become
complex and become a source of questions from the interested parties involved.  
For the Tirana Municipality STO the use of the approach described in point 1 above is
recommended.
Given that Tirana has very good solar radiance a high threshold could in principle be placed.
However, as the economical aspect of SWH systems must not constitute a discouraging factor, the
Tirana Municipality STO should be implemented with a moderate level of SF. Ideally there should
be a range of acceptable SF to be taken into account when designing a SWH system (55‐65) and a
solution to exceptions that can eventually surge when the application of the STO begins.Experience has shown that a high solar fraction (e.g., > 70%), does not mean cost optimality of
minimum SWH requirements. The next figure is a tendency curve of the SF of a SWH system in
function of the collecting area. It was placed here to illustrate the idea that it may be better
having a system with a moderate SF and operating with high levels of global efficiency instead of a
very high SF and a system with lower global efficiency.
Figure 3 – Solar Fraction (%) of a SWH system vs Collecting Area (m2)
For this graphic, 13 simulations were done in the SOLTERM dimensioning tool. It can be noted
that the last 6 simulations correspond to values of SF between 80% and 90% and that the
corresponding increments in SF associated with the increase of collecting area is progressively
smaller. It should also be noted that from simulation nº 6 (Collecting area = 14,22 m2 | SF =
75,4%) the simulation resulted in the generation of wasted energy, i.e., solar energy that was
collected but that will not have use/be useful, taking into account the application foreseen for the
SWH system (in this case, preparation of SHW). These facts constitute valorous information for
defining the cost optimality of the minimum SWH requirements, to be established in a STO.
On the other hand, the optimization of the NPV of a SWH system implies the collection of a
significant amount of solar energy, to ensure the profitability of the investment. Calculating the
NPV of the system, i.e., the accumulated cash flows provided by the operation of this SWH
system, one can have a perception of the exact collecting area that provides economical
optimization of a SWH system.  
The SOLTERM tool has this optimization process integrated in its functionalities. Using this specific
example, a designer could dimension the SWH system for a collecting area immediately below the
threshold of waste generation (14,2 m2 – 6 collectors). However, after integrating all the relevant
information to have a clearer picture of the economics of this SWH system, the designer can
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100conclude that the collecting area that optimizes the NPV of this specific SWH system is lower than
what was defined just by analysing the annual performance of the system (9,5 m2 – 4 collectors).  
The Municipality of Tirana, as a leader in Albania for the implementation of STO, given the
potential national interest, should strive to have the support of the Ministry responsible for
Energy and, or the UNDP, to initiate the procurement of a simulation software tool, perfectly
adapted to the conditions and needs of the STO. Said software tool, eventually useful also for the
Albanian Buildings Energy Performance Certification System, should be able to be further adapted
to encompass the climatic conditions of all the Albanian territory.
Figure 4 – SOLTERM output related with the economical optimization of a SWH system, using the NPV method
Finally, using the value of collecting area that optimizes the NPV (9,5 m2) and the graphic of Figure
3, the SF of the economically optimized SWH system is approximately 62 %.
There are other software tools, such as POLYSUN and, or, T‐SOL, that can be indicated for the
purpose of being considered as the tool to be used in the scope of the Tirana Municipality STO.
The SF is naturally related with a given Thermal Load (TL). The TL’s to consider for the STO should
be the hot water needs of several types of buildings. The following table taken from [1], gives an
indication of reasonable values of hot water needs for several types of buildings. These figures
presuppose that the hot water piping of the secondary circuit is thermally insulated.  
The units in which the hot water needs are expressed must facilitate the design of the SWH
system, in particular the dimensioning of the storage tank(s). It is good practice that the storage
tanks are dimensioned with the following criteria: the volume of the storage tank(s) must be
equal to the daily hot water needs.
Table 2 – Hot water needs by type of building according with Portuguese STO (RCCTE)
Type of building Hot water daily consumption (60 ºC) Units
Residential 40 l/capita
Hospitals 50‐65 l/bed
School 5 l/capita
Hotel 90 l/bed
Hotel 70 l/bed
Hotel 55 l/bedHotel 40 l/bed
Hotel 35 l/bed
Elderly or students house 55 l/bed
Military facilities 20 l/capita
Gymnasium (showers) 25‐35 l/capita
Laundry 4‐7 l/kg cloths
Restaurant 6‐12 l/meal
Canteen 4 l/meal
These values can be used for the Tirana Municipality STO providing that the design of the
secondary circuit comprehends thermal insulation in the hot water piping.
EXAMPLES
Several approaches used in Europe to define the solar collectors’ mandatory surface.
1 ‐ The Portuguese legislation requires 1 m² of standard solar collector per occupant of the
residential building.
2 ‐ The regulation in Murcia, Spain, demand that the system covers 60‐70% of the heat needs to
produce sanitary hot water.  
3 ‐ The German law of renewable heat and the regional law of Baden‐Württemberg of renewable
heat demands that, for the existing buildings and for the new buildings, 10 to 20 % respectively of
the global energy needs for heating are covered by renewable energy sources. This is
accomplished when 0,04 (m2 of solar collector / m2 of useful pavement surface), is installed.
QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
Without appropriate measures to ensure, quality of SWH systems installations and persistence of
SWH systems performance, there can be frequently installations of low quality that will generate
lower solar energy gains than expected and will affect the credibility of the STO and eventually
the credibility of the technology. This latter is more probable in markets with low penetration of
solar thermal (as it is the case in Albania). Therefore the regulations must be conceived in a way
to ensure that the products used in the SWH systems, the planning/design of the SWH systems,
the installation, commissioning and maintenance/monitoring of the SWH systems are according
with the state‐of‐the‐art.
The STO should not include to much technical requirements if it will not be possible to confirm
them all and if, by doing so, the technological innovation and development will be impeded.
The quality requirements should be:
 Clear;
 Applicable (e.g., certified products and, or, services only if in the market there is a
significant quantity available; otherwise the STO must establish deadlines to accomplishthe certification requirements included in the STO). Even if there are not many internal
suppliers, Albania is a member of the World Trade Organization and can, therefore, access
easily the EU market.
 Inclusive, i.e., include quality requirements for the services needed in the main stages of
the SWH systems (from planning/design to maintenance/monitoring) and for the
products/components;
 For the services, several requirements should be established, e.g.:
o Design (certified designers; accredited training centres/entities)
o Installation (certified installers; delivery of a specific maintenance plan; accredited
training centres/entities);
o Operation and Maintenance (maintenance contract valid for a given number of
years; energy performance contract; monitoring of the system; random
inspections);
 For the products and components, it is preferred that Albanian or European standards are
used (e.g., solarkeymark for solar collectors). If different schemes are created and, or,
adopted the market may become fragmented, the competition will be reduced, the
certification costs will be higher all with disadvantage to the final users;
EXAMPLES
1 ‐ The Solar Keymark is the first internationally recognized quality mark for solar thermal
products and it is based in three main imperatives:
 Testing of the initial type of collector through the methodologies described in the
European Normatives EN 12975 or 12976
 Having implemented a Quality Management System for the manufacturing process
 Ensuring annual revision of the Quality Management System and submitting the product
to a bi‐annual inspection
Sometimes the market feels as if it is awash with a large variety of standards and directives to
achieve the necessary market compliance. To simplify understanding of achieving EU market
needs:  
 The obligatory CE marking shows conformity with European directives.  
 The voluntary Keymark certifies conformity with European standards and so offers market
opportunities.  
 National marks certify conformity with requirements of national Member State
certification schemes.  
If the EU has produced a directive relevant to a particular product, then manufacturers selling
that product have to show conformity by attaching the relevant CE mark. For the time being, only
very large collectors can be CE marked. In the next 5 to 10 years, it is anticipated that collectors
will need a CE mark.  The Solar Keymark is a voluntary third‐party certification mark, introduced by CEN and CENLEC
(the European Committee for Standardisation introduced the Keymark) and developed by ESTIF
(the European Solar Thermal Industry Federation) and CEN, with the support of the European
Commission. By obtaining the Solar Keymark, the solar product qualifies for nearly all the
different Member State regulatory and financial incentive schemes. The voluntary Solar Keymark
scheme encourages the further expansion of the European solar thermal market by improving
market confidence in solar products.  
2 ‐ In Portugal besides the existence of a certification scheme for installers, ADENE(*) is
developing, in partnership with CERTIF(*), a certification scheme for SWH systems Designers. As
the thermal regulation for buildings is to be reformulated, one aspect that is expected to be
included is that medium‐ and large‐size SWH installations (mandatory according with the
buildings thermal regulation) will require a design developed by a certified designer.  To be a
certified designer, one must conclude successfully a training/coaching course (with classification
above 90%) and have significant experience (still to be defined).  
(*) :
 ADENE ‐ the Portuguese Agency for Energy.
 CERTIF – an association for Certification composed of 27 associate members like business
associations and laboratories that represent several activity sectors.
3 – In France, Qualisol is a qualification of installers that includes 10 compromises (from advisory
to the after sales). It is a voluntary compromise valid for three years, but with annual renovation.
To become a Qualisol company, the organization must demonstrate that possesses technical
competency in solar thermal, through previous experience and, or, professional development
certificates. Within the three years of the compromise, the certification organization (Qualit’EnR)
will execute a quality audit to one installation done by the installer.
The audit is presented as a pedagogic tool for the installer and a confidence mark for the
customer. Depending on the number of non‐conformities, the results of the audit may vary from,
“perfect service” to “failed installation”. Based on the result the installer will maintain, or not, the
commercial quality certificate. In 2008 more than 5000 audits were done (> 1 M€ spent), and
more than 85% passed the threshold.
ARCHITECTONIC ISSUES AND PROTECTED BUILDINGS
A well developed STO should include requirements about architectural integration and clear rules
about what buildings are exempt of complying with the law, e.g., for historic reasons. Naturally
that the requirements for architectural integration of SWH systems in new buildings, should be
more tight than those for existing buildings (under large rehabilitation).
At this respect, the STO should include simple rules, i.e., rules that are easy to verify and to
execute. For example: Installation in plane roofs or terrace: consider the height of the existing platband and
define it as the maximum height of the solar collectors’ field to minimize the visual
impact. The orientation should be free. However preferential orientations can be
specified so that the visual impact is reduced and the efficiency of the system is
augmented.
 Installation in tilted roofs: the solar collectors should have the same orientation and
inclination of the roof. The use of supporting structures should not be allowed.
 In new buildings with tilted roofs the architecture should foresee the need to have at
least one slope of the roof with sufficient surface and favourable inclination and
orientation.
 In new buildings with tilted roofs the architecture should foresee the need to have a good
access to the roof (to allow passing materials and persons).
 In historical areas, instead of just impeding the installation of SWH systems, special
requirements may be established for their architectonic integration.
The STO should not exempt too many types of buildings and the exemption criteria should not be
vague.
EXAMPLES
Integration of SWH systems in the historical and protected area of Lisbon’s down‐town.
The buildings located in the Portuguese protected areas or belonging to the historic patrimony
are exempt of the thermal regulation (which imposes the use of SWH systems to produce SHW).
Although it can be accepted that the historic patrimony should be preserved, this exemption
conduces several times to a situation where the investors and promoters of the construction
industry (especially of residential buildings in protected areas) will try to escape of complying
from the thermal regulation. To overcome this tendency it is important to adapt residential
protected buildings to modern patterns which include the possibility to integrate technologies to
collect and convert solar energy.
In the context of the urban requalification of the Lisbon down‐town, the Municipal Energy Agency
(Lisboa‐Enova) in cooperation with the Municipality and IGESPAR (the entity responsible for the
management of the national archaeological and architectural patrimony) promotes the
development of the “Potential for integration of solar technologies in the Lisbon’s down‐town”.
The application (an IT web based platform), allows the identification of the solar potential for all
the buildings in the perimeter of the project. http://lisboaenova.org/en/cartasolarlisboa
This information will be integrated in the urban requalification plan, in order to promote the
integration of solar systems in the renovation process of buildings, in accordance with the cultural
patrimony requisites. The assessment of potential will be accompanied by an Integration Manual,
do be developed in accordance with the solutions currently existing in the market and the
relevant criteria for the integration of such systems in classified buildings.
SUPERVISION OF THE STOThe supervision is a key question when a STO is introduced: the laws can be well made but will
not have impact until a well defined and balanced MV&E regime is in place. Supervision means
also the appropriate monitoring of the STO impact. Without an impact monitoring it is not
possible to compare the real results with the targets established in the preparation phase.
There are many indicators that should be considered when defining the MV&E of the STO. At
least, the following two categories of indicators are essential:
 The values relative to buildings
o Number of buildings in the scope of the STO (also interesting to be defined in
terms of m2 of useful pavement surface and, or, number of persons); to be
compared with
o Number of buildings in the scope but exempted of the STO  
o Values of the real over‐cost in new buildings or buildings rehabilitated; infer
about the reasonableness of this value  
o Number of cases where the minimum solar water heating requirements (e.g.,
solar fraction) was evidently surpassed
 The values relative to verifications
o Number of people in the administrating authority of the STO that received
training to perform verifications in the scope of the STO
o Percentage of negative verifications in the SWH system design phase
o Number of random verifications (or inspections) in the installation phase and the
percentage of negative situations
o Number of random verifications (or inspections) in the operation phase and the
percentage of negative situations
o Number of sanctioned situations (and type, i.e., severity of non‐compliance) and
rate of execution (payment of the fine)
An enforcement strategy is a set of responses to incidents of non‐compliance, coupled with a
progressive action plan for their application that should include a range of elevating enforcement
responses that can be implemented depending on:  
 The severity of the non‐compliance;  
 The range of sanctions that are available;  
 The type of programme (i.e. whether it is mandatory or voluntary);  
 The quality of the evidence supporting the claim of non‐compliance;  
 The responsiveness of the party responsible for the non‐compliance;  
 The potential to rectify non‐compliance.  
If compliance is enforced, participants will be encouraged to comply when the potential costs,
whether financial or to the participant’s reputation, are greater than the benefits. Similarly, if
programme participants consider that there is only a small chance of a transgression being
discovered and that the associated penalty is also low, there will be little motivation to comply.  
Enforcement, including remediation, is most effective when action is timely, i.e. responding to the
detection of transgressions without undue delay. Enforcement processes with a limited range ofpossible responses tend to be unwieldy and often require high levels of “proof”, which make
them impractical in dealing with minor transgressions. A wider range of sanctions allows the
enforcement authority to respond more quickly, is less costly, and more effective.  
Where sanctions are necessary, they should be sufficient to outweigh the benefits of non‐
compliance in order to be an effective deterrent.  
Taking enforcement action improves the level of compliance by elevating the perception of risk to
the parties involved in the STO.  
Before creating the enforcement strategy, answering some basic questions will help to develop an
effective enforcement strategy and highlight areas that need further information or investigation.
A preliminary set of questions includes:  
 What types of non‐compliance can be envisaged?  
 What criteria will be used to rank types of non‐compliance?  
 What levels of compliance will be acceptable?  
 What will be deemed as non‐compliance?  
 At what level of non‐compliance will penalties commence and what will trigger their
escalation?  
 What action will be taken and by whom?
Understanding the costs and benefits associated with MV&E activities of an STO is important:  
 For governments to justify decisions on the design of a STO to industry partners
 For programme administrators to articulate requests for adequate public funding of
MV&E processes  
Generally MV&E regimes that deliver high rates of compliance will have a higher overall cost than
those that achieve lesser outcomes. This is true irrespective of the regime design, although the
design is likely to affect how these costs are distributed amongst governments, industry and
consumers.REFERENCES
[1] RCCTE – Portuguese Decree‐Law about the thermal regulation of buildings
[2] EPBD – EU Energy Performance of Buildings Directive
[3] www.solarordinances.eu – European Community funded project to promote and
disseminate information about STO
[4] www.clasponline.org  