File Name: ARM-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Armenia
Country Code: ARM
Category: CPD
Document Title: UN Country programme document for Armenia (2021–2025)
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 7–11 June 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
9 April 2021
Original: English
2104748X (E) 140421
Annual session 2021
7–11 June 2021, New York
Item 8 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Armenia (2021–2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework…………………. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………………………… 4
III. Programme and risk management………………………………………………………………………... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….………………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Armenia (2021–2025)……………………………………………. 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. The Republic of Armenia is a landlocked country in the Southern Caucasus with a 
population of 2.97 million. It is an upper middle-income country1 with a Human 
Development Index (HDI) score of 0.760, putting Armenia in the high human development 
category.
2
2. Despite an increase in HDI of more than 20 per cent since 1991, 26.4 per cent of the 
population still lived below the poverty line in 2019,
3 with 2.7 per cent classified as 
vulnerable to multidimensional poverty.
4 Disparities between urban and rural areas, gender 
inequality, outward migration and high climate change exposure further impact the country’s 
resilience, competitiveness and well-being. These pre-existing inequalities and 
vulnerabilities were amplified by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, driven by 
extensive disruption of businesses, income insecurity/loss and the deterioration of people’s 
health and well-being, disproportionately affecting women, children, youth, older persons, 
persons with disabilities, people living in poverty, labour migrants, informal workers, 
entrepreneurs and remittance-dependent households.
3. The recent large-scale military hostilities in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict area caused a 
massive displacement from Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia. Among an estimated 90,000 
displaced people, 88 per cent were women and children who were housed in host 
communities and collective shelters. A significant number of the arrivals from NagornoKarabakh may not be able to return safely even now with the ceasefire in place, particularly 
residents of territories currently under control of Azerbaijan. Tens of thousands of them lost 
their homes and productive assets. The escalation has also left a significant impact on border 
communities, particularly in Syunik and Tavush regions of Armenia. The needs of people 
displaced and affected by the recent escalation, war veterans, wounded, newly disabled and 
their families, and families who lost productive assets or a breadwinner, need to be prioritized 
on the basis of the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and 
independence.
4. The negotiated, comprehensive and sustainable settlement of all remaining core
substantive issues of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, in line with the basic principles and 
elements within the framework of the internationally agreed format of the Co-Chairs of the 
Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, continues to shape 
the humanitarian-development-peace nexus for the region, including Armenia.
5. Armenia has undergone a profound transformation since independence, including after 
the peaceful transition of power in 2018 which triggered renewed commitments to a humancentred governance system, investments in human capital and the realization of the human 
rights agenda. These commitments will be operationalized through the 2019-2023 
Programme of the Government, sectoral strategies and the Armenia Transformation Strategy 
2050, with support from the re-established Intergovernmental Sustainable Development 
Goals Council, headed by the Deputy Prime Minister with the mandate to lead and monitor 
the country’s processes for nationalization and implementation of the Goals. 
6. UNDP plays a key role in ensuring a coherent United Nations strategy for collective 
impact, under the overall leadership and coordination of the Resident Coordinator. As part 
of its integrator function, UNDP works with a wide range of public, private and civil
stakeholders to facilitate recovery along the humanitarian-development-peace nexus and 
__________________
1 https://data.worldbank.org/?locations=XT-AM.
2 http://www.hdr.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/ARM.
3 https://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=82&id=2323.
4 http://hdr
undporg/sites/all/themes/hdrtheme/country-notes/ARMpdfmore inclusive development solutions, at upstream policy level, advising on legal and policy 
frameworks, and at downstream level, turning projects into policies and policies into actions. 
7. The development challenges facing Armenia are complex and require ‘out of the box’
solutions. The UNDP national innovation platforms and the UNDP global networks
(including the Global Policy Network and the accelerator labs) serve as important venues to 
leverage innovations, know-how and international expertise to achieve development 
breakthroughs.
8. During the preceding programme cycle, the UNDP activities and results in Armenia were 
highly relevant to the Government’s agenda as evidenced by the 2019 independent country 
programme evaluation5and stakeholder consultations. In particular, UNDP was recognized 
as a valued partner in local economic development and community mobilization; natural 
resource management; enhancement of legal, policy and institutional frameworks in the 
environmental sector; disaster risk reduction; organization of transparent parliamentary 
elections; management of infrastructure investments and technical capacities of customs and 
other agencies; coordination of issue-based coalitions; women and youth empowerment; and 
citizen engagement. 
9. UNDP underwent a sense-making review in 2020 to identify coherent cross-portfolio 
areas for action. Examples include the nexus of education, technology, inclusion and jobs, 
particularly for women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics; innovative 
approaches to public service delivery; and participatory democracy, active citizenship, youth 
empowerment and citizen engagement.
10. The country programme will support all three pillars of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF): (a) people’s well-being and capabilities; 
(b) green, sustainable and inclusive economic development; and (c) responsive and effective 
governance. Particularly, UNDP will address multidimensional poverty by building a deeper 
and more holistic understanding of what poverty and vulnerability mean in the postCOVID-19, conflict reality and work across sectors to address the deprivations that leave 
people behind. Regular human development snapshots will unpack emerging priorities, 
drawing attention of policymakers through white papers and provoking public discourse 
through awareness-raising. UNDP will support the Government’s future-proof strategic 
planning by embedding foresight and scenario design at national and subnational levels, 
including in crisis preparedness. 
11. A key direction of the UNSDCF is to address the socioeconomic impacts of the
compound crisis. Building on the socioeconomic/early recovery efforts of the United 
Nations, technically led by UNDP and coordinated by the Resident Coordinator, UNDP will 
work hand in hand with the Government, United Nations agencies, international financial 
institutions (IFIs) and other development partners to bring various mandates and experiences 
into coherent actions that will help the country’s recovery to be more resilient, more peoplecentred and greener. The comparative advantages of UNDP include the ability to collect,
manage and analyse data and leverage digital solutions and innovative approaches to help 
the country transition towards risk-informed and evidence-based development. 
12. UNDP plays an important role in joint programming and implementation in Armenia. In 
the period 2021-2025, UNDP will work to create an integrated innovation platform as part 
of shifting to the next-generation UNDP, using its innovation platforms as internal service 
providers to United Nations agencies and for exploratory and catalytic joint programming 
with the Government and other partners. The platforms have influenced the UNDP approach 
__________________
5 https://www.am.undp.org/content/armenia/en/home/library/independent-country-programme-evaluationarmenia
htmlto innovation globally and efforts to scale this approach will be further explored during this 
programme cycle through South-South and/or triangular cooperation. 
13. UNDP is well positioned to facilitate a stronger engagement between the United Nations 
and the private sector and to leverage the wealth of human capital in the country. A priority 
is to deploy new and innovative development financing options enabled through publicprivate partnerships and better alignment between financial market incentives and long-term 
development.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
14. The vision for the country programme is for Armenia to become a more cohesive, 
inclusive, just and resilient society supported by governance systems that use evidence, 
citizen-centred innovation and partnerships to ensure social, economic and environmental 
sustainability and prosperity for all. Important sub-elements of the vision are: (a) people are 
healthy, skilled and resilient to poverty, external shocks and disasters; (b) people enjoy equal 
rights and opportunities regardless of their personal characteristics; (c) natural resources are 
managed sustainably with respect for the needs of future generations; (d) governance systems 
are people-centred and effective, ensuring political stability, transparency and social 
cohesion; and (e) the economy is knowledge-based, green and competitive, thus capable of 
attracting investments, creating jobs and facilitating the return of migrants.
15. The compound crisis has exacerbated issues in Armenian society that limit potential, 
competitiveness and capabilities at both individual and institutional levels. UNDP will focus 
on a more future-oriented and integrated way of helping to shape and realize a new narrative 
for Armenia. This means an increased focus on understanding and tackling pre-existing and 
emerging vulnerabilities and risks in the crisis setting and an upper-middle-income context, 
many of which were revealed by the socioeconomic impact assessment of COVID-19.
6
It
will also entail support for a renewed social contract between citizens and the State; 
rebuilding social cohesion and trust; investing in science and developing national research
and development capacities; supporting the private sector to adopt sustainable models for a 
green recovery; and helping the Government build its strategic view of territorial 
development, linked to addressing depopulation in remote rural areas and secondary towns. 
UNDP will support Armenia to reimagine and evolve its governance systems, making them 
more agile, effective, service-oriented and shock-resilient, underpinned by a strong civic
culture and linked to real investments in human capital development. Moreover, as a result 
of the escalation, the number of border communities within Armenia has doubled. These
communities are vulnerable also due to the proximity of foreign military forces and the 
absence of adequate infrastructure. The implementation of programmes aimed at the 
development of border communities, including the creation and rehabilitation of 
infrastructure, particularly in the southern regions of Armenia, is a priority.
16. The country programme is firmly grounded in a human-rights-based and risk-informed 
approach to development, guided by national priorities, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, the UNSDCF and the UNDP Strategic Plan 2018-2021. To ensure that the 
programme effectively tackles the interconnected nature and root causes of development 
challenges, systems thinking and participatory approaches are being applied. 
17. The country programme aims to achieve results across four key areas: (a) sustainable 
and inclusive socioeconomic development; (b) environmental sustainability and resilience; 
(c) democratic governance and gender equality; and (d) evidence-based policy, financing and 
innovation aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals.
__________________
6 https://www.am.undp.org/content/armenia/en/home/library/socio-economic-impact-assessment-of-the-covid-19-
outbreak-in-armhtml18. The pathway to sustainable and inclusive socioeconomic development will entail 
initiatives that promote early recovery and community resilience, including in border 
communities, targeting the most vulnerable groups such as war veterans, persons affected by 
conflict, women and children. Efforts will be directed towards risk-informed and sustainable 
urban and rural planning; income and employment generation for vulnerable groups, 
including in agriculture; infrastructure rehabilitation and development, including housing 
solutions; and the realization of the country’s human capital potential. UNDP will contribute 
to increasing competitiveness and connectivity in Armenia, thus helping to mitigate negative
migration trends. Solutions that use participatory approaches at local level will be pursued, 
with a focus on fostering a culture of active citizenry where women and men enjoy equal 
rights and opportunities to influence and benefit from proportional territorial development. 
UNDP will further expand its work to strengthen livelihoods, promote a predictable, fair and 
competitive business environment and build social cohesion and resilience in areas affected 
by the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
19. Support will include: (a) improving preparedness for socioeconomic and environmental 
shocks in rural communities and secondary cities; (b) the transition from subsistence 
agriculture to value addition, processing and precise agriculture using climate-smart, green 
and digital technologies, including irrigation systems; (c) investments in small and mediumsized enterprises, local start-up initiatives and tourism development; (d) boosting 
entrepreneurship, especially for women, and facilitation of trade, investment and exports; 
(e) income-generation and employment initiatives, including rehabilitation and integration 
into social and economic life for war veterans, wounded and disabled during the recent 
military escalation in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict area; and (f) the development of a 
future-proof labour market. 
20. This will be enabled through the promotion of technology-based education, including
improved literacy in information and communication technology; professional exchanges
without discrimination by age or disability status; inclusive and active labour-market policies 
with focus on new skills, new jobs and talent management; lifelong learning and 
re/up-skilling, including through vocational education and training; and protection of labour 
rights. To strengthen social protection, UNDP will work with the Government to upgrade
public service models and strengthen local capacities to deliver people-centred and shockresponsive services, including through digital and innovative modalities. These approaches 
are necessary to foster sustainable connectivity, including transport, which in turn will 
improve the services and assistance available to the regions. The pathway to environmental 
sustainability and resilience will comprise efforts to mainstream environmental issues into 
national and regional development processes, thus helping the country to transition into a 
low-carbon, resource-efficient, resilient and socially-inclusive green economy that is able to 
adapt to and mitigate the effects of climate change. UNDP interventions will be geared 
towards identifying, piloting and scaling up data-driven and tech-based smart policies and 
solutions that are environmentally and climate-friendly, risk-informed and long lasting. 
UNDP will work on: (a) improving the institutional and regulatory frameworks governing 
the environmental sector; (b) providing technical and financial support, including through 
small grants, for promotion of community engagement in co-management and monitoring to 
increase local ownership, improve livelihoods and reduce poverty; and (c) mainstreaming 
ecosystem-based approaches into sectoral policymaking, community development and 
landscape restoration. UNDP will advocate for a new social contract, turning people, 
particularly women and youth, and businesses into actively contributing development 
partners. This will require all-of-society engagement, environmental education, behavioural 
changes, new types of economic and fiscal instruments and public-private partnerships, 
including tapping the potential of the country’s tech sector. UNDP will address energy
poverty and insecurity by investing in energy infrastructure, unlocking retrofit markets for 
energy-efficient and renewable sources and facilitate access to international climate financing mechanisms for mitigation and adaptation, including through climate budgeting 
frameworks.
21. In light of the compound crisis, a green and resilient recovery will be boosted by 
promoting sustainable city concepts through low-emission and circular-economy models; 
helping to design and translate nationally determined contributions; and including climate 
adaptation into sectoral strategies and action plans in line with the Paris Agreement. Stimulus 
packages will be developed to protect and promote nature-based/green jobs and livelihood
opportunities in communities, specifically for the rural poor and other vulnerable groups such 
as war veterans, the newly disabled and the widowed and their families. National capacities 
for resilience-building will be strengthened and gender-responsive public and private 
investments in disaster risk management will be stimulated. UNDP will pay particular 
attention to the environment-health nexus by mainstreaming a ‘one-health approach’ into 
cross-sectoral policies, financing and actions. This encompasses reducing risks to human 
health through sound management of waste, chemicals, air and water pollution and green 
transformation of urban mobility and industry.
22. The pathway to democratic governance and gender equality includes efforts that will 
help strengthen trust in governance systems and service delivery capacity in Armenia. The 
focus will be on building democratic, effective and accountable institutions capable of 
upholding human rights and the rule of law; preventing discriminatory practices and 
violence; and strengthening the public administration system to ensure effective and humancentred service delivery for all. UNDP will work to improve the transparency and 
accountability of decision-making and service delivery; strengthen access to justice and 
combat corruption; address inequalities and protect human rights; reinforce the legislative 
and electoral systems; improve service orientation and promote excellence in the public 
sector, including the customs service and the police; and support the development of a new
generation of smart public services for improved fairness and accountability at national and 
local levels. 
23. UNDP will promote participatory decision-making; strengthen the notion of the citizen 
as the ‘client’ of public institutions; support access to education, learning and self-realization; 
support ambitious future-proof strategies which build on people’s collective aspirations; and 
build social cohesion and help to foster a new social contract. The work will be based on the 
principles of inclusiveness and address emerging vulnerabilities with a human-centred 
approach. This includes the creation of psychosocial and economic support mechanisms and 
the provision of medical care, particularly for war veterans. UNDP will also promote 
transformation (including digital) of the Parliament and other institutions to enhance checks 
and balances and ensure a ‘whole-of-government’ approach, strengthened separation of 
powers and cross-party work. 
24. UNDP continues to be a key partner to the Government and Parliament in the design, 
implementation and promotion of open governance policies. The Parliament will play a key 
role, serving as an important platform for evidence-based policymaking and citizen 
engagement. UNDP will seek to eliminate gender inequalities through targeted genderfocused initiatives that consider the unique experiences, potential, needs and contributions of 
women, girls, men and boys. This will include efforts to dismantle structural barriers and 
promote the leadership and wide participation of women and youth in decision-making and
help the Government to ensure that its strategies, plans and programmes are genderresponsive. The programme will continue to focus on implementation and oversight of the 
Human Rights Strategy and Action Plan; enhancing accountability of law-enforcement 
bodies, efficiency and public trust in the judiciary; promoting non-discrimination; and 
strengthening capacities of the office of the Human Rights Defender of the Republic of 
Armenia.25. The pathway to evidence-based policy, financing and innovation aligned to the 
Sustainable Development Goals builds on the UNDP integrator and convening roles and 
on established platforms for innovation, collaboration and financing/impact investments. In 
line with the reform of the United Nations development system, UNDP will provide 
integrated policy and programme solutions; support the development of an integrated 
ecosystem for collection and analysis of data on the Goals; support the development of 
evidence-based policies and frameworks aligned to the Goals using state-of-the-art tools for 
data collection, modelling and forecasting; and transfer knowledge, behavioural insights and 
innovation to help pioneer new ways of ‘doing development’”. Specifically, UNDP will 
pioneer an innovative portfolio approach to the development of the country’s secondary 
cities, using innovative practices for reimagined urban development. UNDP will also work 
closely with the Government to create links between policies, planning and budgeting 
processes and the Goals, and deploy innovative mechanisms to leverage partnerships and 
multiple sources of development finance. 
26. The programme will prioritize co-designing a road map for an integrated national 
financing framework to help the Government mobilize the resources needed to realize 
development priorities. UNDP will initiate dialogues between the Government, the private 
sector and investors to provide a common understanding of financing and investments for 
the Goals; stimulate innovative solutions through the implementation of impact acceleration 
programmes; and provide platforms for developing and piloting innovative financing tools 
such as ‘pay for success’ mechanisms or impact bonds. 
27. National and local ownership, diverse partnerships and deployment of local capacities 
will be priorities. UNDP will expand its collaboration with all branches of the Government,
including through exploring government co-funding modalities, and seeking to enlarge its 
network of civil society and development organizations, media, innovation centres, think
tanks, universities, the private sector, diaspora organizations and others.
28. UNDP will strive to strengthen partnerships with multiple bilateral donors, international
organizations and other emerging partners. UNDP will partner with IFIs, with a focus on 
scaling up key development accelerators related to regional and urban development, social 
protection and data. Other key priorities are scaled-up partnerships with the private sector
and diaspora organizations to catalyse development financing and the design of new 
solutions that will help Armenia leapfrog, development wise. The Adaptation Fund, the 
Global Environment Facility, the Green Climate Fund and other vertical multilateral funds 
will remain critical partners, with a vision to scale up existing and introduce new 
programming areas in line with government priorities. In line with the reform agenda of the 
United Nations, UNDP will expand its portfolio of inter-agency partnerships, especially 
around the issue-based coalitions on social protection, food security and environmental 
sustainability, with a focus on supporting cohesive and integrated United Nations action, 
under the leadership of the Resident Coordinator. UNDP will champion South-South and 
triangular exchange, facilitating sharing of knowledge and experience on such topics as 
disaster risk reduction, innovation and private sector development. 
III. Programme and risk management
29. The UNSDCF and this country programme were developed through an inclusive virtual 
consultation process with public, private and civil society stakeholders. National priorities 
were jointly determined within the United Nations country team, building on the Common 
Country Analysis, national strategies, the COVID-19 socioeconomic impact assessment and 
feedback received through online surveys. The findings of the independent country 
programme evaluation served as a basis for both programme orientation and anticipating and 
mitigating programmatic risks.30. UNDP will focus on portfolio/cross-sectoral programming and overcoming siloes,
through a new generation of policy and programmatic initiatives being designed at the 
intersection of the four outcomes. Systems thinking will underpin this work, ensuring holistic 
approaches to complex problems. Projects will be clustered and interlinked across portfolios 
for dense knowledge flows and spillovers and for risk diversification. To ensure 
sustainability and maximum impact, programmes will be designed with scaling-up and 
national ownership in mind.
31. To ensure agility and an effective response to underlying programmatic risks in Armenia, 
including the complex regional context, socioeconomic disparities, climate change and 
vulnerability to natural disasters such as earthquakes, UNDP will strengthen its procedures 
for risk recognition, mitigation and diversification. This will include applying a crosspractice/portfolio approach to programming and resource mobilization through partnerships, 
joint projects and dialogues with international and national stakeholders and United Nations 
agencies. Early warning and risk management will be enhanced through a risk dashboard and 
a grievance-reporting mechanism.
32. In line with global priorities, UNDP will enhance its focus on thought leadership, 
strengthening capabilities related to data and research, digital solutions, policy analysis and
innovative financial tools. UNDP will tap the potential of volunteering, local and diasporabased expert networks, the private sector and inter-office exchanges as sources of skills and 
expertise. 
33. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is 
prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and 
internal control framework.
34. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
35. Monitoring and evaluation of the country programme are aligned with monitoring, 
reporting and evaluation of the UNSDCF. UNDP will contribute to annual reviews of the 
UNSDCF and the joint evaluation of outcomes to validate progress in relation to envisaged 
short-term and long-term results. 
36. Drawing lessons from the independent country programme evaluation and country office 
evaluations, UNDP has strengthened its learning and adaptive management policies, thus 
becoming a more agile and effective partner of choice. In addition to the results and resources 
framework and project result frameworks to monitor outputs and outcomes, the UNDP social 
and environmental standards and accountability mechanism will be used to identify, monitor 
and mitigate risks. Annual reviews will assess and validate progress towards results with 
special attention to multidimensional challenges.
37. UNDP, in collaboration with other United Nations agencies, will continue to support the 
Statistical Committee of Armenia (ArmStat) and other counterparts to upgrade government 
statistical capacities, support the development of evidence-based policies and strategies and 
strengthen analysis for tracking progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals and transformative changes on the ground, with particular emphasis on gender-disaggregated 
statistics.
38. In line with the recommendations of the independent country programme evaluation, 
UNDP has enhanced its monitoring and evaluation frameworks and staff capabilities and will 
aim for higher-quality evaluations to inform programming and decision-making and promote 
learning. UNDP uses specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and time-bound indicators to 
monitor outputs and results. Stronger results-based management, together with 
communication and outreach, will ensure more effective reporting on impact and partnership 
achievements.Annex. Results and resources framework for Armenia (2021-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 2019-2023 Government Programme and Action Plan, Section 5. Armenia Transformation Strategy 2050.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1:
UNSDCF Outcome 4: People, communities and regions benefit from equitable economic opportunities, decent work and sustainable livelihoods, enabled through competitiveness and inclusive green 
growth
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 - Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY 
OF DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME 
OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines 
targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY 
OUTCOME ($)
Indicator: Poverty rate decreased
Baseline (2018): 23.5%
Target (2024): 20%
Indicator (SDG 8.5.2): Unemployment 
rate decreased 
Baseline (2018): 19%
Women: 20.4%
Men: 17.9%
Youth: 24.9%
Rural: 11.3%
Urban: 24.9%
Target (2024): 17
Women:18%
Men: 17%
Youth: 22%
Rural: 10%
Urban: 23%
Indicator: Rural population per capita 
average monthly gross income level 
increased
Baseline (2018): 63,338
Target (2024): 75,000
Indicator (SDG 8.6.1): Proportion of 
youth (aged 15–24 years) not in 
education, employment or training
Baseline (2018): 11.3%
Target (2024): 10%
• ArmStat, annually
• SDG National Reporting Tool 
(ArmSDG), annually
• Social Snapshot Report in Armenia, 
annually
• MESCS, MTAI, MLSA and Labour 
Inspectorate, annually
• Reports, assessments, surveys, media 
analytics, United Nations/UNDP data, 
annually
Output 1.1 Marginalized groups are 
empowered to gain universal access to basic 
services and financial and non-financial assets 
to build productive capacities and benefit from 
sustainable livelihoods and jobs (IRRF7 1.1.2)
• Indicator 1.1.1: Number of jobs created in 
communities 
Baseline (2020): 1,500 (805 men; 695 women)
Target (2025): 2,000 (1,050 men; 950 women)
10% increase women entrepreneurs,
UNDP, annually
• Indicator 1.1.2: Number of persons with 
improved livelihoods
Baseline (2020): 28,000 (12,000 men; 16,000
women)
Target (2025): 40,000 (18,000 men; 22,000
women),
UNDP, annually
• Indicator 1.1.3: Number of economic actors 
benefiting from improved productive capacities 
and strengthened value chains
Baseline (2020): 240
Target (2025): 390 (25% women-led),
UNDP, annually
Output 1.2 Capacities at national and 
subnational levels strengthened to promote 
inclusive local economic development and 
deliver inclusive public services (IRRF 1.2.1)
Ministries: of Territorial
Administration and
Infrastructure (MTAI); of 
Finance (MF); of
Economy (MEc); 
of Labour and Social 
Affairs (MLSA); of 
Education, Science, 
Culture and Sport 
(MESCS); of Health
(MoH),
Local self-government 
bodies, 
Educational institutions 
Community-based 
organizations, 
Private sector 
organizations, 
UNICEF, FAO, WFP, ILO
Regular: $ 832,000
Other: $19,615,981
__________________
7
IRRF = UNDP integrated results and resources framework• Indicator 1.2.1: Number of inclusive local 
economic development plans/strategies and 
policies/frameworks in place
Baseline (2020): 45 plans/strategies; 2 policies/
mechanisms
Target (2025): 60 plans/strategies; 6 policies/
mechanisms,
UNDP, annually
• Indicator 1.2.2: Number of improved public 
service models
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 6, 
UNDP, annually
(UNSDCF-3) Output 1.3 Competitive labour 
force developed through promotion of 
innovative practices of skills-building and 
human capital development with focus on 
youth
• Indicator 1.3.1: Number of new labour marketresponsive Vocational Education and Training 
models supported
Baseline (2020): 1 
Target (2025): 3, 
MESCS, annually
• Indicator 1.3.2: Number of 
partnerships/mechanisms in place to bridge the 
education and labour-market gap
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 4, 
MESCS, annually 
(UNSDCF-2) Output 1.4 Capacities developed 
for progressive expansion of inclusive social 
protection systems 
• Indicator 1.4.1: Number of improved social 
protection services provided 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 8,
MLSA, MoH, annuallyNATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 2019-2023 Government Programme and Action Plan, Section 6. Armenia Transformation Strategy 2050.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2:
UNSDCF Outcome 5: Ecosystems are managed sustainably and people benefit from participatory and resilient development and climate-smart solutions
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 - Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development 
Indicator: CO2 emissions per GDP (in 
purchasing power parities)
Baseline (2017): 0.22 tons/US$
thousand
Target (2025): 0.21 tons/US$ thousand 
Indicator: Share of renewables in the 
gross final energy consumption 
Baseline (2017): 14.9%
Target (2025): 16.4% 
Indicator (SP8 2.7 revised): Number of 
sectors that increased ability to 
adapt/mitigate to the adverse impacts of 
climate change, and foster carbonneutral, climate-resilient development 
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 3
Indicator (SP 2.9, SDG 15.1.2 
revised): Hectares of important sites for 
terrestrial and freshwater biodiversity 
under improved management 
Baseline (2020): 250,000 hectares
Target (2025): 380,000 hectares
Indicator (SP 1.7, SDG 7.1.2 revised):
Number of people benefited from 
affordable/clean energy technologies 
(disaggregated by sex). 
Baseline (2020): 4,000
Target (2025): 8,000 (55% women)
Indicator (SDG 13.1 revised): Number 
of funded strategies in place to 
strengthen resilience/adaptive capacity 
to climate-related hazards, natural 
disasters. 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 5 (3 sectoral, 2 regional) 
• National greenhouse gas inventory, 
Biennial-annual update, MoE, 
biennially
• National greenhouse gas inventory 
reports, MTAI, Yerevan Municipality, 
Reports to the Green Climate Fund, 
UNFCCC, Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC)
• ArmSDG, ArmStat, Energy balance, 
annually
• MES, National Platform for Disaster 
Risk Reduction (NPDRR), annually
• Reports, assessments, surveys, media 
analytics (United Nations/UNDP)
Output 2.1 Low-emission and climate-resilient 
objectives addressed in development 
plans/policies on economic diversification and 
green growth (SP 2.1.1)
• Indicator 2.1.1: Number of development 
plans/strategies with targets for low-emission 
and climate-resilient development adopted, 
including NDC, National Adaptation Plan and 
Low-Emission Development Strategy 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 4,
MEc, annually
• Indicator 2.1.2: Number of institutional 
coordination mechanisms in place and 
operational in line with multilateral agreements 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 2,
MEc, MES, annually
• Indicator 2.1.3. Number of cities with 
resilient/green development plans and financial 
commitments in place
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2024): 5,
MTAI, annually
Output 2.2 Low-emission measures, 
renewables and energy efficiency advanced 
and scaled
• Indicator 2.2.1: Number of public and 
residential buildings benefiting from energy 
efficiency improvements 
Baseline (2019): 2 public, 3 residential
Target (2024): 200 public, 300 residential,
MTAI, annually
• Indicator 2.2.2: Number of households 
benefiting from energy efficiency measures 
Baseline (2019): 88 (10% women-headed)
Ministries: of 
Environment (MoE); of 
Emergency Situations 
(MES); of Foreign Affairs
(MFA); MTAI, MEc, MF
Urban Development 
Committee, 
Local self-government 
bodies, 
UNICEF, IOM, UNFPA, 
UNIDO, WFP, OCHA, 
WHO
Regular: $440,000
Other: $36,695,971
__________________
8 SP=UNDP Strategic PlanTarget (2024): 45,000 (15% women-headed),
• Evaluations, Local self-governing bodies, 
annually
• Indicator 2.2.3: Number of communities 
benefiting from renewable energy sources 
Baseline (2020): 80 
Target (2024): 100,
Local self-governing bodies, annually
Output 2.3: Improved national and local 
governments capacities to introduce 
environmentally sound management practices 
for ecosystems, waste and chemicals 
• Indicator 2.3.1: Amount of chemicals and 
waste reduced and/or safely disposed
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2024): 1,100 tons of persistent organic 
pollutant waste is prevented from release 
through elimination/secure storage, 
MoE, biennially
• Indicator 2.3.2: Hectares of ecosystems/lands 
rehabilitated or sustainably managed, 
including through innovative spatial/urban 
plans and rural community-based solutions 
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 130,000,
Line ministries, local self-government bodies, 
annually
• Indicator 2.3.3: Number of innovative 
mechanisms and tools used by the 
Government for participatory decision-making 
for conservation and sustainable use of natural 
resources
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 2,
MoE, annually
• Indicator 2.3.4: Number of improved policies
and frameworks adopted on the conservation 
and sustainable use of natural resources in 
place
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 10,MoE, annually
Output 2.4 Improved national and local 
capacities to integrate resilience to climate 
change and disasters into development plans 
and practices 
• Indicator 2.4.1: Number of communities with
funded disaster risk management frameworks,
gender-responsive disaster risk 
management/adaptation plans, and 
coordination and monitoring mechanisms in 
place
Baseline (2016): 109
Target (2025): 200,
Armenian Rescue Service (ARS), NPDRR,
MES, annually
• Indicator 2.4.2: Number of health institutions 
with Hospital Safety Index modules in place, 
including gender-responsive contingency 
plans
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 25,
MoH, ARS, annually
• Indicator 2.4.3: Innovative digital platforms 
and reports in practice for risk-informed, 
evidence-based, gender-disaggregated 
policymaking
Baseline (2020): 1
Target (2025): 4,
MoE, annually
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 2019-2023 Government Programme and Action Plan Section 3. Armenia Transformation Strategy 2050.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3:
UNSDCF Outcome 6: People benefit from effective and accountable governance systems and institutions that safeguard human rights, uphold the rule of law, and public administration that ensures 
effective and human-centred service delivery for all
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 - Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development 
Indicator: Government effectiveness, 
transparency and accountability 
Baseline (2018): Worldwide 
Governance Indicators (WGIs):
Voice and Accountability: 40.39
Government effectiveness: 51.44
Control of corruption: 42.79
• ArmStat, ArmSDG, annually
• WGI, annually; Transparency 
International Corruption Perceptions 
Index, OGP, annually
• Caucasus Barometer, biennially
Output 3.1: Constitution-making, electoral, 
parliamentary processes/institutions 
strengthened to promote inclusion, 
transparency and accountability (IRRF 2.2.2)
• Indicator 3.1.1: Electoral management bodies
capacities strengthened to conduct inclusive
and credible elections
Baseline (2019): 53% trust in Central 
Electoral Commission (CEC); fairness 63%
Parliament, 
Electoral management 
bodies 
Prime Minister Office
Deputy Prime Minister 
Offices; 
Ministry of Justice (MoJ); 
MTAI,
Ombudsman, 
Regular: $430,000
Other: $13,349,919Open Government Partnership (OGP):
2021-2023 Action Plan implementation:
60%
Target (2025): WGI:
Voice and Accountability: 42
Government Effectiveness: 52.2
Control of Corruption: 43.2
OGP 2021-2023 Action Plan
implementation: 80%
Indicator: Independence, 
accountability, professionalism of 
judicial system 
Baseline (2020): WGI Rule of Law:
48.56 
Target (2025): WGI Rule of Law: 50
Indicator (SDG 16.6.2 revised):
Availability of platforms/tools to 
measure the proportion of the 
population satisfied with their last 
experience with public services; and 
(SDG 16.7.2) who believe decisionmaking is inclusive
Baseline (2020): ArmStat collects data 
in the health and education sectors
Target 2025): 3 public service data 
platforms/tools established 
Indicator (SDG 5.5.1,5.5.2): Women’s 
representation in Parliament, 
Government, Local self-government 
bodies, increased
Baseline (2020):
Parliament: 24% 
Ministries: 24%; 
Local self-government bodies:10%
Target (2025):
Parliament: 30%
Local self-government bodies: 30%
Ministries: 27%
• Reports, assessments, surveys, media 
analytics
• Universal Periodic Review (UPR)
2024, International Republican 
Institute (IRI) (biennially; Judicial
Reform Strategy Action Plan 
reporting, annually
• Gender Inequality Index, Gender 
Development Index, Gender Global 
Gap Report and other gender 
indicators, annually
Target (2025): 10 % increase (trust 63%; 
fairness 73%), 
CEC, IRI, Caucasus Barometer, biennially
• Indicator 3.1.2: Parliament capacity 
improved to undertake inclusive, effective and 
accountable law-making, oversight and 
representation 
Baseline (2019): 33% public trust. 
Target (2024): 43% public trust
UNDP, Caucasus Barometer, Public Opinion 
Poll, biennially
• Indicator 3.1.3. Number of citizen-centric 
scalable innovative solutions introduced 
aimed at democratic processes 
Baseline (2020): 5 
Target (2025): 23, 
Government, annually
• Indicator 3.1.4. Number of initiatives to 
promote connectivity 
Baseline (2020): 3 
Target (2025): 5,
Government, biennially
Output 3.2. Capacities, functions and financing 
of rule of law, national human rights 
institutions/systems strengthened to protect 
human rights, expand access to justice and 
combat discrimination, with a focus on women 
and marginalized groups (IRRF 2.2.3)
• Indicator 3.2.1: Number of nondiscriminatory policies and laws in place
Baseline (2019): no stand-alone law on 
equality
Target (2024): 1 law and 1 policy adopted,
Parliament, annually
• Indicator 3.2.2: Strengthened 
institutions/systems to implement human 
rights obligations: 
Baseline (2020): Human Rights Action Plan 
2020-2022 adopted
Target (2025): 80% implemented, UPR, MoJ,
Human Right Defender’s Office, annually
Civil society,
UNICEF, UNFPA, IOM, 
OHCHR, UN-Women, 
UNHCR, UNODC• Indicator 3.2.3: Number of digital 
transparency/accountability mechanisms coestablished with the Government and/or 
citizens
Baseline (2020): 2 
Target (2024): 20,
UNDP, Government, annually
(UNSDCF-8) Output 3.3. Systems/ mechanisms 
to ensure equal opportunities/rights to 
participate in decision-making 
• Indicator 3.3.1: Number of gender-responsive 
laws, policies, programmes and practices at 
national and local levels 
Baseline (2020): 5 
Target (2025): 30, 
MTAI, MLSA, local self-government bodies,
annually
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 2019-2023 Government Programme and Action Plan Sections 7-8. Armenia Transformation Strategy 2050.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4:
UNSDCF Outcome 7: People benefit from evidence-based, human-centric and Sustainable Development Goals-aligned policies supported by diversified sources of financing, innovation and
partnerships for sustainable development for all
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 - Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development 
Indicator (SDG 17.14.1 revised): 
Number of policies, frameworks and 
mechanisms aligned to the Sustainable 
Development Goals in place to enhance 
policy coherence for sustainable 
development
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 3 
• ArmStat, ArmSDG, annually
• Voluntary national review, United 
Nations/UNDP, Government, 
Development Assistance Database, 
Development Foundation of Armenia
Output 4.1. New mechanism and partnerships 
established to support impact-driven 
innovation ecosystems for the Goals
• Indicator 4.1.1 Number of innovative Goalsaligned mechanisms and partnerships 
developed Baseline (2020): 10 mechanisms; 5 
partnerships
Target (2025): 20 mechanisms, 10
partnerships, 
Government, annually
Output 4.2 Enabling environment/institutional 
capacities developed to leverage public and 
private financing for the t Goals
• Indicator 4.2.1: Number of mechanisms 
developed to realign/catalyse public and/or 
private financing 
Baseline (2020): 2 
Target (2025): 5, 
UNDP, annually
Prime Minister Office
Deputy Prime Minister
Offices,
Line ministries, 
Civil society,
Private sector, 
UNICEF, WFP, UNWomen, UNIDO
Regular: $430,000
Other: $4,035,428Output 4.3 National and local governments use 
innovative, impact-oriented and data-driven 
solutions for policymaking 
• Indicator 4.3.1 Number of innovative, impactoriented and data-driven tools developed
Baseline (2020): 5 
Target (2025): 10,
UNDP, annually