File Name: ARM-NEDS-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Armenia
Country Code: ARM
Category: NEDS
Document Title: Republic of Armenia Energy Sector Development
Strategic Program to 2040
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2021
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2040
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

 Appendix 1
RA Government Decision N 2021
Republic of Armenia Energy Sector Development 
Strategic Program to 2040
YEREVAN 2020Content
I. VISION OF THE RA GOVERNMENT FOR ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT .............................. 3
II. MAIN PRIORITIES FOR THE ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT ................................................ 3
III. DEVELOPMENT OF GENERATING CAPACITY .......................................................................... 5
IV. HIGH-VOLTAGE ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION NETWORK DEVELOPMENT............................ 8
V. DEVELOPMENT OF THE DISTRIBUTION NETWORK...............................................................10
VI. ELECTRICITY MARKET...........................................................................................................11
VII. REGIONAL ENERGY COOPERATION ....................................................................................12
VIII. HEAT SUPPLY .....................................................................................................................15
IX. GAS SUPPLY..........................................................................................................................16
x. ENERGY EFFICIENCY ..............................................................................................................16
X1. DIGITAL ENERGY .................................................................................................................18
XII. SCIENCE-BASED ENERGY.....................................................................................................18
XIII. MANAGEMENT OF STATE-OWNED COMPANIES ...............................................................20
SUMMARY.................................................................................................................................20Free, competitive and non-discriminatory,
Inclusive and diversified, energy independence at the 
highest level,
Clean and energy efficient: sustainable developing,
Of regional significance,
Reliable and safe,
Digitized and Innovated, science-based, high 
technological,
Foreseeable and transparent,
Accessible and fair to everyone, sufficiently available 
to the vulnerable group, as well as attractive to 
investors
This is the RoA Government’s vision of the Energy 
Sector development.
This vision will be a basis for making all energyrelated decisions, building relationships with 
neighboring countries regarding the energy sector,
integrating into more global electricity markets and 
for further developing relationships with key 
partners. 
The RoA Government shall implement the balanced 
social, environmental and economic policy in the 
energy sector, involving all the stakeholders to the 
most extent for achieving the objectives of this 
Strategic Program. 
This Program has served as a basis for the 
development of the Action Plan that ensures the 
implementation of the energy sector development 
strategic program, wherein a set of separated target 
indicators and list of actions have been determined 
for the period until 2040 to ensure the 
implementation of this Strategic Program (Appendix). 
1. Maximum use of renewable energy
potential
The maximum use of renewable energy potential, 
considering it as a part of the Least Cost Energy 
Development Plan, is one of the key priorities of the 
Energy Sector development. 
II. MAIN 
PRIORITIES FOR 
THE ENERGY 
SECTOR 
DEVELOPMENT 
I. VISION OF 
THE RA 
GOVERNMENT 
FOR ENERGY 
SECTOR 
DEVELOPMENTdevelopment tendencies of this technology 
throughout the world, the construction of solar 
power plants, will prevail over the rest of types,
given the limitations of the system reliability and 
safety indicators. 
2. Possible realization of energy- efficiency
potential 
All the sectors of the economy of Armenia have 
great potential in the energy efficiency including 
transport, industry, multi-apartment buildings, public 
sector budgeting, fuel system, etc. The Government 
of the Republic of Armenia will be consistent in 
terms of creating a new culture of energy efficiency,
therefore will implement institutional reforms by 
promoting investments in the alternative energy 
sources, that may result in energy efficiency, 
security, environmental regulation and promotion of 
energy efficiency in all the spheres of economy. 
3. Life extension of the ANPP Unit 2
The extension of operational lifetime of ANPP Unit 2
after 2026 is on the main priorities of the RoA 
Government and the construction of a new nuclear 
power plant upon the expiration of the term is the 
main objective. The availability of the nuclear power 
plant in the power system will allow to diversify 
more the energy resources, not to increase reliance
on the imported natural gas as well as the volume of 
emissions. 
4. North- South Road Corridor construction 
program 
The full implementation of the North- South Road 
Corridor construction program, its Armenia-Iran 
and Armenia-Georgia power transmission lines and 
infrastructures play a decisive role in terms of having 
power system of regional significance. 
This program provides an opportunity to Armenia to 
be a bridge for being engaged into the more global 
electricity markets as well as for using opportunities 
of mutually beneficial electricity trade with Iran and 
Georgia. Meanwhile the full implementation of the 
Program will increase the reliability and security of 
the Armenia’s power system. market 
The current model of Armenia’s electricity market 
has been applied since 2004. Electricity markets of a 
number of developed and developing countries are 
already liberalized. Armenia has also commenced this 
process and will transit to a new liberalized model in 
the coming years which will still be a subject to 
limited competition but will have precise milestones
towards the full liberalization given the creation 
process of EAEU Common energy market and the 
EU Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership 
Agreement.
III. DEVELOPMENT OF GENERATING CAPACITY
In the Republic of Armenia in 2016, 2017, 2018 , 2019, 7.3, 7.8, 7.8 and 7.6 billion 
kWh of electricity has been generated respectively, of which 1.2, 1.4 , 1.6 and 1.25 
billion kWh of electricity respectively has been exported and the own needs and the 
total consumption in terms of losses of generating units have made 1.03, 1.02, 0.96 
and 0.88 billion kWh respectively. In Armenia, electricity is mainly generated by 
nuclear, hydro and thermal plants whereof 39% is generated by the nuclear power 
plant while the remaining 60% is almost generated equally by hydro and thermal 
plants. The share of all the other plants in the power system is quite low - up to 1%.
The Government aims to have 12 billion kWh output by 2030, whereof about 5.0 
billion kWh will be export based. In accordance with the statistics of the last 5 years 
the winter peak in the Armenia’s power system is 1300 MW, and in summer it is 
1040 MW. The variation between winter and summer peaks recently has significantly 
declined. 
The following plants with a total installed capacity of 2878.7 MW as of July 1, 2020 
are currently operating in the power system. 
• ANPP - 407.5 MW
• Hrazdan TPP- 410 MW
• Hrazdan Unit 5 - 467 MW
• Yerevan CCGT -1 - 228.6 MW
• Vorotan Cascade of Hydroelectric Power Plants - 404.2 MW
• Sevan-Hrazdan Cascade of Hydroelectric Power Plants - 561.4 MW
• Renewable small power plants (under 30 MW )about 400 MW, whereof 
about 380 MW are small HPP. 
Due to low efficiency of the above mentioned Hrazdan TPP it is envisaged to take the 
plant out of service after putting Iran-Armenia 400 kV transmission line and the 
Yerevan CCGT-2 which is being constructed into service. The following generating
capacities are currently under construction: 
• Yerevan CCGT-2- 250 MW, by July, 2022 (USD 250 million investment),
• Masrik-1 Solar Photovoltaic Power Plant- 55 MW, by July, 2022 (USD 60 
million investment),
• Small HPPs. 23 power plants, 50 MW, commissioning by 2023 (USD 60
million investment),that the total installed capacity of such plants will comprise 210 MW in 2022. 
• Wind Power Plant- 4 MW, by 2021. 
In the near future new tenders for construction of seven more solar photovoltaic 
power plants with total installed capacity of about 520 MW will be conducted, 
whereof capacity of two plants will comprise 200 MW each. 
As of July 1, 2020, 2669 autonomous solar power plants with capacity up to 500 kW, 
with the total installed capacity of 49.5 MW are connected to the network. The 
current development rates allow to anticipate that the total installed capacity of the 
above-mentioned plants will reach to 100 MW for the next three years.
The Republic of Armenia government aims to increase the share of solar power 
generation at least to 15% or 1.8 billion kWh by 2030. For that purpose, solar power 
plants with total installed capacity of 1000 MW including autonomous plants will be 
constructed. 
It is worthwhile to mention that in the coming years the prospective changes in the 
world market can enable not only solar but also renewable energy power plants with 
storages to compete with the traditional base plants. As for Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP) agreements, the RoA Government will conclude such agreements 
for the utility scale generation units construction by means of attracting investors 
exclusively on a competitive basis, where their access to the electricity market 
cannot be granted without additional guarantees from the state. 
The fact that the solar and wind technologies are considered as part of the least cost 
solution for new generation under all scenarios stresses the importance to Armenia 
of ensuring a policy and institutional environment that supports development of these 
technologies to the maximum extent possible, not only to ensure the lowest cost 
generation but also to minimize reliance on other imported energy sources and to 
strengthen Armenia’s energy security and competitiveness.
The Least Cost Energy Development Plan is developed with application of the TIMESArmenia model, which provides a platform for the integrated power system 
modelling and envisages to guide policy formulation over a wide range of energy, 
economic and environmental planning as well as climate change issues. The TIMES 
Armenia platform allows to:
• encompass the entire power system from resources through to end-use 
demands;
• employ least-cost optimization to identify the most effective pattern of 
resource use and technology deployment over time;
• evaluate medium and long-term policies and programs that can impact the 
evolution of the power system;
• quantify the expected costs and technology choices that result from imposing 
those policies and program. 
Within the baseline scenarios modelling, through the TIMES-Armenia platform, the 
following was considered: the construction costs of different power generating 
capacitiesimported fuel pricesanticipated economic growth rate and the associated required inputs that may affect power generating capacities in terms of choosing the 
least cost development option. The outcomes show that the possible development of 
the solar and wind technologies ensure the least cost in the power system. 
Moreover, the sensitivity analyses revealed that the results of model calculations on 
new generating capacities required to meet the electricity demands don’t essentially 
differ in all the considered GDP growth scenarios. 
The Government will stay committed to the policy to maintain nuclear power plant 
in the country’s generation mix. In this context, it is worthwhile to mention that the 
possibility of the nuclear plant’s life extension will guarantee development of the 
system on the basis of least cost. The investment program focused on the ANPP Unit 
2 design lifetime extension will be completed by 2023, resulting in USD 330 million 
investment, and the nuclear power plant will be extended to 2026. In the event that a 
safe operation of the ANPP Unit 2 is justified after 2026 in accordance with the
respective studies, the Government intends to operate it at least until 2036 which 
according to forecasts will require an additional USD 150 million investment. 
Moreover, the lowest level of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions can only be reached 
in the case of availability of the nuclear power plant compared to other scenarios, 
which is consonant with the implementation of the Government’s long-term 
development purposes with the low level of greenhouse gas emission. After the
expiration of the existing nuclear power plant’s operational lifetime (including its life 
extensions), the construction of new nuclear unit with replacing capacity on the 
existing ANPP site is considered, which will prevent an increase in the country’s 
reliance on the imported natural gas. Meantime, regardless of the construction of 
Meghri, Shnogh and Lori-Berd HPPs has not been considered by the least cost 
development scenarios, they will remain relevant projects and will be constructed as 
utility scale plants when the construction of such power plants will be needed in the 
power system. With regard to the wind plants, the RoA Government will be 
consistent in development of such technology as well and is planning to construct 
utility scale wind power plants with total installed capacity of 500 MW, in 2025 –
2040, but the implementation of Public-Private Partnership programs focused on the 
construction of such plants will be driven exclusively by the fact that the prices of 
electricity delivered from the wind plants are competitive. 
It is worthwhile to mention that if the price of imported natural gas changes by 2040
the maximum utilization of solar and wind power plants will reduce the power 
system total costs. In any case, the natural gas will remain one of the main consumed 
fuel sources, as it is used not only for enterprises but also for the residential heating, 
household and transportation needs. Meanwhile the gradual market penetration of 
electric cars can also be implemented solely on the basis of the solar and wind power 
by reducing the volume of imported natural gas.
To summarize the above mentioned, it can be stated that in the coming seven years 
about USD 1.5 billion will be invested in electricity generation. 
Forecasts and assessments presented within the framework of the Least Cost Energy 
Development Plan, based on global warming, change in water resources as well as 
other significant circumstances that might impact on the power system, shall be 
biennially revised. DEVELOPMENT 
High voltage electricity transmission networks are state-owned, and their natural 
development is one of the strategic issues of the energy sector. The development of 
the high-voltage transmission network includes two sets of actions aimed at 
modernization of the existing infrastructures and the expansion of the transmission 
network. The first set of actions are aimed at modernization of substations of the 
high-voltage transmission network and
overhead transmission lines, while the second set of actions are focused on 
installation of monitoring system for transmission capacity, automation (SCADA 
system expansion) as well as electricity system reliability and safety indicators and 
development of new infrastructures for the regional integration.
In the high-voltage transmission network 13 substations of 220 kV, two substations of 
110 kV and one switching point on the border with Iran as well as 1960 km electrical 
transmission lines with 5600 towers are currently being operated. Five above 
mentioned substations (220/110/10 kV “Haghtanak”, 220/35/10 kV “Kamo”, 
220/110/10 kV “Gyumri-2’, 220/110/35 kV “Vanadzor-2” and 220/110/35 kV 
“Alaverdi 2”) have been completely reconstructed. 
Five more substations are currently under reconstruction, in particular:
• With the support of the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development , which provided USD 36 million within the scope of the loan 
agreement “Electricity Supply Reliability Project - Additional Financing”,
220kV substation “Haghtanak” was reconstructed in 2019; the 
reconstruction of 110kV substations “Charentsavan-3”, “Vanadzor-1” and 
220kV substation “Zovuni” is envisaged.
• With the support of the Asian Development Bank, which provided about 
24.02 million SDR within the scope of the loan agreement «Power 
Transmission Rehabilitation Project», the reconstruction of 220 kV “Agarak2” switching point to the substation, and reconstruction of “Shinahayr” 
substation are planned to be implemented, along with the second stage of 
SCADA communication and automation system investment program.
• With the support of the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, which provided USD 39.86 million within the scope of the Loan 
Agreement“Power Transmission Network Improvement”, a new 220 kV 
substation of Yerevan TPP was constructed and commissioned replacing the 
previous substation of 110 kV. The reconstruction of 220 kV “Ashnak”
substation is underway as well as reconstruction of the “Ararat-2” substation
is envisaged to be implemented. 
• With the support of the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, which provided about USD 35.5 million within the scope of the
loan agreement “Electricity Supply Reliability”, the modernization of the 230 
kilometer 220 kV overhead transmission line along Noraduz- Lichq-VardenisVayq-Vorotan-1 between Hrazdan TPP and 220 kV “Shinuhayr” substation is 
carried out, which has increased the export capacity to Iran by about 50 MW.
Within the scope of the savings made as a result of the concluded agreements 
aimed at reconstruction of the above mentioned overhead transmission line, and “Noyemberyan” of 110 kV is being conducted. The lines, having been in 
operation since 1962 under the influence of severe chemical substances, have 
been corroded and have a negative impact on ensuring ofthe reliable and 
uninterrupted power supply to consumers. 
The following programs are being implemented for regional integration process. 
• With support of Export Development Bank of Iran and “Sanir FZE”, which 
provided EUR 107.9 million, 400 kV Iran-Armenia double-circuit overhead 
transmission line and 400 kV “Noravan” substation are under construction. 
The construction of the power transmission line and the substation will enable 
to increase the electricity exchange capacity between both countries’ power 
systems from 350 MW to 1200 MW also by improving reliability of the power 
systems’ parallel operation and energy security of the Republic of Armenia.
• The construction of the “Caucasus Electricity Transmission Network” 
(transmission line / substations) is aimed at connection of Armenian and 
Georgian power systems by 500 kV overhead transmission line ensuring the
reliability of asynchronous-parallel operation of the two countries’ systems by 
constructing 500/400 kV HVDC back-to-back station of 350 MW capacity, 
500/400 kV overhead line with the length of 8 km from the station to Georgian 
border in Ayrum at the first stage , new substation of 400/220 kV in Ddmashen 
equipped with two 440/220 kV autotransformers and 400 kV single-circuit 
overhead transmission line from Ddmashen to Ayrum substation with doublecircuit supports. Implementation of the project will ensure power exchange of 
electricity with 350 MW capacity. Within the scope of this stage of the project, 
investments will amount to about EUR 188.2 million and the transmission 
capacity with Georgia will be 350 MW, which is intended to be increased to 
1000 MW during the next two stages depending on power flows volume. 
In addition to the above mentioned, another substation (220/110/35 kV “Litchq”) will 
be reconstructed at the company’s expense, and the financing options and dates of 
investment projects for the reconstruction of the remaining three substations 
(220/110/10 kV “Shahumyan-2”, 220/110/10 kV “Marash” and 220/110/35 kV 
“Yeghegnadzor”), for will be considered. 
In addition to the above-mentioned, along with the construction of solar plants, it will 
be necessary to invest additionally about USD 70 million in the transmission network. 
Investments aimed at system automation in the high-voltage electric network are 
being conducted, in addition to the infrastructure investments. SCADA Automated 
control system will be installed by 2023 which will ensure a new level of dispatch and 
technological dispatch. With a view to considering the changing requirements of the 
power system of Armenia, the system will have scalable modular structure and 
possibility to select operating characteristics. As a result, accident elimination time in 
the power system will be significantly reduced and the level of reliability of power 
supply to consumers will increase. 
It is worthwhile to mention that Electricity System Transmission Network 
Development plan (2020-2024) was developed in 2019, which, based on the 
international experience and up-to date models considered the possible 
developments of the energy sector within that period and the volume of necessary 
fhldlf hkpower transmission lines and expansion of the Transmission network. This will be
continuous work and the development plan will be reviewed in 2022 including the 
period for the next ten years, and afterwards will be biennially updated
Investments in the Transmission Network will reach about USD 550 million by 2030. 
V. DEVELOPMENT OF THE DISTRIBUTION NETWORK 
The distribution networks were privatized in 2002 as a united company with the 
purpose of distribution and, for a while, supply of electricity throughout the Republic 
of Armenia. As a wholly private company, its activity is regulated by the Public 
Services Regulatory Commission. Currently, the Electricity Networks of Armenia 
CJSC operates the distribution networks for a seven-year period until 2026 and also 
fulfils a function of Universal Supplier. The company is currently distributing and 
supplying electricity to about one million consumers including residents, commercial 
organizations and industrial enterprises operating the lines of 110 kV and under.
After privatization, the Electricity Networks of Armenia is implementing its first 
investment program at the cost of USD 750 billion, which will be completed by 2028.
The investment program is designed to reduce the number and duration of the 
power outages as a result of reconstruction of the distribution networks, reduce
technical losses and exclude the risks of commercial losses, reduce the operation and 
maintenance cost, expand the distribution network for connection of new capacities
and meeting additional needs, modernize completely the metering system, creating 
electronic map for the existing infrastructures, implement environmental 
international standards, management information system (MIS) and ISO management 
system standards. 
As a result of the implementation of the investment program the following are 
expected:
• The system average interruption duration index (SAIDI) and frequency index 
(SAIFI) will significantly decrease by 2028 to 55% of the 2021 baseline 
indicator. At the same time, the customer average interruption duration index 
(CAIDI) in both urban and rural areas will be reduced by 50%. 
• Long-term voltage deviations beyond the permissible limits for consumers will 
be excluded. 
• Technical losses in the Distribution Networks will decrease to 7.5% in 2021 
and 6.4% in 2028. 
• Material and maintenance costs will decrease by 30% in 2021, by 20 % in 2025, 
and by 15% in 2028. Other costs will decrease by 10% in 2025 and by another 
10% in 2028. 
• The list of employees will be reduced by about 1100 positions in 2021 and by 
560 positions in 2028. 
• All consumers shall be connected to the Automated System of the Electrical 
Energy Metering which will enable the consumers to receive data of
commercial metering devices on the basis of remote operation, ensuring Retail Electricity Market as well as for the Market Operator, creating a 
favorable environment for liberalization of the Retail Market. 
It should be noted that the electricity market distribution network code was
approved by the Public Services Regulatory Commission decision N 523 on 
December 25, 2019, which stipulates additional requirements in terms of the TenYear Network Development Plan and its further regular update. The Development 
Plan will be designed with the use of up-to-date models considering the possible 
developments in the energy sector within that period and the volume of investments 
required for the distribution network development on the basis of least cost. The 
program will complete the development programs of power generation and the 
transmission network accomplishing the Least Cost Energy Development Plan. 
VI. ELECTRICITY MARKET
The current model of the Armenian electricity market was introduced in 2004. The 
market is fully regulated both in the wholesale and retail sectors. The electricity 
market is solely based on the forecasted annual amount of electricity generation and 
consumption and it doesn’t impose responsibility on the Market Participants in the 
event of deviations from that amount. Hence, the risks resulted from differences 
between the forecasted and actual amounts of electricity generation are balanced by 
tariffs of electricity delivered to consumers including the cost of such risks balancing 
of the electricity distribution licensee. In many developed and developing countries, 
the electricity markets are already liberalized and operate under perfect competition. 
The liberalization of the electricity market requires the transition to a new model 
which will improve efficiency of the wholesale and retail electricity markets, while the 
promotion of the interstate commerce will enable to have new elements of 
competition in the domestic market. This process has already commenced, and 
activities aimed at development of bylaws are currently underway. 
The transition to the new market model will be carried out in the coming years with 
a long-term target of a full market liberalization. The market’s new model already at 
this stage will be based on the current electricity trading rules, will operate on the 
basis of balancing demand and supply as well as will define the responsibility
mechanisms of the Market Participants during trade. The first stage of reforms will be 
followed by the development of a new RoA Law on Electricity, which will consider 
the EU directives requirements, that will be a start of the second stage of reforms. At
that stage of reforms, opportunities for perfectly competitive market design will be 
taken into account.
At the first stage of the market reforms, issues related to improving the efficiency of 
the tariff policy, in particular the feasibility of future use of night-time and day-time
tariffs and its alternatives, implementation of new tariff adjustment mechanisms for 
reactive energy, necessity to fix monthly service fee, etc. will be considered. In this 
context, the improvement of protection mechanisms of vulnerable consumers will
constantly remain in the focus of the Government’s attentionSaving and Renewable Energy”, as a result of which the renewable energy power 
plants will be entitled to sell electricity in new electricity market exclusively under 
competitive terms without providing a power purchase guarantee and signing Public 
Private Partnership аagreement, as well as to generate and consume at different 
metering points of the power system. Moreover, the current mechanisms for 
implementation of autonomous generators technical power flows will be improved, 
enabling the latter to generate and consume electricity at different metering points of 
the power system and to form groups involving residents and organizations. 
VII. REGIONAL ENERGY COOPERATION
The Armenian Power System is currently connected to the power systems of Iran 
and Georgia. Through these countries the natural gas is being imported to Armenia. 
In this respect, the current energy relationships with Iran and Georgia are of strategic 
importance. 
As a member of EAEU, Armenia is involved in a process of establishing EAEU 
common energy market. Meanwhile, Armenia has signed Comprehensive and 
Enhanced Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with EU which envisages gradual 
implementation of the EU energy related directives. In this context, scientific and 
technical cooperation is envisaged, including exchange of experience regarding 
development and improvement of technologies in electricity generation, transmission, 
supply and utilization, with a particular focus on energy efficiency and environmentally
friendly technologies.
It is highly important to assess regional development trends in the energy sector so 
that Armenia’s competitive advantages are effectively realized for mutually beneficial 
cooperation with other countries of the region. 
1) EAEU common electricity market
Armenia is actively involved in the process of 
establishing the Eurasian common electricity market, 
which is planned to be launched in 2025 in accordance 
with the Action plan approved by the decree N 31 of 
Supreme Eurasian Economic Council dated December 
20, 2019. The plan also stipulates the adoption of the 
following five key regulatory documents: 
• Access rules for cross border transmission
service of electricity (capacity) within the 
framework of the EAEU common electricity 
market.
• Mutual electricity trade rules.
• Rules for determination and distribution of cross 
border power lines transmission capacity.
• Rules for exchange of information.
• Regulation of cross-border networks 
development.
Currently the drafts of the above-mentioned documents 
are developed and under discussion.2) EAEU common natural gas market
The common gas market of the Eurasian Economic 
Union is to be launched in 2025. In this regard, the 
concept of the common gas market formation and its 
implementation plan have been adopted pursuant to the 
decree N 7 of Supreme Eurasian Economic Council 
dated May 31, 2016. The member-states have to sign an 
international agreement on forming the common gas 
market. The following regulatory documents related to 
the common gas market’s full launch will be adopted:
• The procedure for the conduct of exchange 
trading sessions.
• Common rules for access to gas 
transportation system in the member-states.
• Protocol on the completion of complex 
measures which are preconditions for ensuring 
access to gas transportation system in the 
member-states.
• Trading rules for the common gas market.
• Definition of communication documents in the 
information exchange system.
3) EAEU technical regulation 
The Section X of the Treaty of Eurasian Economic 
Union stipulates the procedures of the technical 
regulations and standards of the Union, general 
principles of technical regulations, circulation of 
products and accreditation. In accordance with 
the Decision N 526 of the Customs Union 
Commission of January 28, 2011, the unified list of 
products was approved for which mandatory 
requirements are to be established. In accordance 
with the Decision N 79 of Eurasian Economic 
Council of October 1, 2014, the Action plan of 
adoption and modification of the technical 
regulations according to which the procedures of 
development, adoption and modification of the 
EAEU technical regulations are continuing. The 
Drafts of Technical Regulation of the Eurasian 
Economic Union "On the Safety of High Voltage 
Equipment" and "On Requirements 
to Pipelines for Transportation of Liquid and 
Gaseous Hydrocarbons" are under discussion. 
 
Within the scope of the Comprehensive and Enhanced 
Partnership Agreement signed on November 24, 2017 
between the Republic of Armenia and the European 
Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and 
their member-states, the Republic of Armenia has framework into compliance with the European one. 
With the purpose of fulfilment of the agreement’s 
provisions, according to the RoA Prime Minister 
decision N 666-L dated June 1, 2019, a road map was 
adopted, which clearly stipulates the completion period 
and the responsible authorities.
Within the scope of the CEPA, the cooperation shall 
cover the following areas: energy policy, energy security, 
diversity of energy sources, diversification of 
transmission path, competitive electricity markets, use 
of renewable energy sources, promotion of energy 
efficiency and energy saving, regional energy 
cooperation, technological and scientific-technical 
cooperation etc. 
Bringing EU directives and regulations into compliance 
will result in harmonization of the RoA energy sector 
regulations with the European standards which will 
make the investment environment of the energy sector 
more attractive, promote trade in the energy sector
with the neighboring countries and increase the level of 
energy security and diversification. New incentives will 
be introduced for the use of renewable energy sources, 
which will bring new players to the market. The level of 
nuclear safety will also increase in terms of radwaste 
and spent fuel management and control. New criteria 
for energy efficiency including energy labelling and eco 
design shall be determined. 
The power system of Armenia operates in conjunction 
with the power system of Islamic Republic of Iran which 
significantly increases the reliability of the Armenian 
power system. Besides, the gas pipeline connecting the 
two countries is an alternative way for natural gas 
supply. In this regard, in the energy sector Armenia-Iran 
relationship is strategic and that will be ongoing in the 
long-term outlook.
Possible extension of terms of Armenia-Iran gaselectricity exchange program and increase in exchange 
volume under the mutually beneficial conditions is the 
key for further development of this relationship. For this 
reason, a new Armenia-Iran 400 kV voltage transmission 
line and the Caucasus transmission line projects are 
being implemented. Within the framework of the gaselectricity exchange program, the exploitation of new 
infrastructures will raise the electricity export at least the maximum level by the end of 2025. 
The Armenian power system is also connected to the 
Georgian power system, which is strategically important 
for Armenia. Nevertheless, that is subject to various 
technical constraints considering synchronous-parallel
operation between Armenia and Iran and between 
Georgia with Russia. The Caucasus 
Transmission Network Project (Armenia-Georgia 
power transmission line/substations) is being 
implemented for removing the current constraints as 
well as increasing transmission capacity, which will 
enable to stimulate the energy cooperation between the 
two countries.
In parallel to the above-mentioned investment program,
the Agreement on the principles of Armenia-Georgia
electricity trade is envisaged to be developed, which will 
lead to creation of prerequisites for regular electricity
trade between the two countries that will rely, to the 
greatest extent possible, on the requirements of the EU 
directives.
The relations with Georgia are also of great importance 
as a natural gas transit country, currently transiting gas 
from Russia in terms of supply of natural gas from Russia 
to Armenia. 
VIII. HEAT SUPPLY
The centralized heat supply system in Armenia ceased to exist back in the early 
2000’s for a variety of reasons. Recently the construction of smaller systems has
begun to meet the heating and hot water demands of individuals or group of new 
multiapartment buildings, which, however, are not significant in the overall demand 
pattern.
Currently the production of heating and hot water is mainly carried out by means of 
individual natural gas heating boilers which is the result of the large-scale gasification 
in Armenia. The effectiveness of this approach as an orienting point for the future 
development needs to be reassessed. First, it should be taken into account that the 
population should regularly make investments in the replacement of the individual 
heating boilers and pay more for the consumed natural gas due to the maintenance of 
additional infrastructure to supply gas to the household, than it would have paid in 
the presence of centralized gas supply system. Moreover, the availability of natural gas 
in apartments will always be a challenge in terms of ensuring safety of people’s lives 
and property. 
In terms of heat supply and hot water production, other individual systems using
renewable energy sources for the production of solar water heaters and their own projects are already being implemented to install such systems, in particular, with the 
involvement of the Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund, 
“Energy efficient” loan project is being carried out in the non-gasified communities of 
Armenia. Within the framework of the project, as of July 1, 2020, 3042 water heaters 
have already been installed in different communities. 
The RoA Government shall gradually expand the implementation of such projects 
that will enable use of individual heating and hot water generation systems based on 
the renewable resources. To formulate a new vision of this sector, the Government 
will initiate development of new law on Heat Supply by the end of 2022. 
IX. GAS SUPPLY
Natural gas is the main fuel consumed in the country, about 60% of primary energy, 
about 85% of fossil fuel consumption and more than 83% of CO2 emissions from 
fossil fuels combustion are natural gas. The level of gasification of the RoA 
communities is 96%, natural gas is also widely used in the road transport. 
The natural gas transportation and distribution systems are available in Armenia, 
which are managed by “Gazprom Armenia” CJSC. The latter is the only natural gas 
supplier. The natural gas transportation system is connected to the gas 
transportation systems of Georgia and Iran. Moreover, there is a gas storage facility
in Armenia, which is available, significantly increases the reliability of the gas supply to 
consumers while being connected to the two neighboring countries. 
The price of the natural gas currently imported to Armenia is determined based on
the agreement between the RoA Government and Russian Federation Government 
signed on December 2, 2013 in Yerevan regarding purchase and sale of shares of 
“ArmRosGazprom” CJSC and the further operational conditions as well as the 
agreement between RoA Government and RF Government on pricing procedure for 
the natural gas supply. Meanwhile the common gas market of the Eurasian Economic 
Union is to be launched in 2025. In view of this, the concept of the common gas 
market formation and its implementation program have already been adopted. An 
international agreement will be singed between the member-states for a full launch of 
the common market. 
The gas sector regulations in Armenia were developed back in the early 2000’s and 
need to be updated. In view of this the Government of Armenia will commence the 
process of developing a new law based on a separate and current principles on “Gas 
supply” by 2022 and by the end of 2024 bylaws including the regulatory framework 
will be thoroughly reviewed. Meanwhile, for the purpose of gas transportation and 
gas distribution systems development prospects and clarification of investment 
priorities, in case of both energy sector and gas supply system, a ten-year least cost 
development plans for gas transportation and gas distribution networks will be
implemented which shall be periodically updated. 
X. ENERGY EFFICIENCYeconomic targeted activity aimed at reducing the specific cost of energy sources. In 
the last decades of the last century, the world leading energy efficiency experience 
showed that the energy efficiency potential for current technologies amounts to 30% 
- 40% of electricity materials and fuel saving is 2-3 times cheaper than extraction and 
supply of equivalent amount of fuel to consumers. Thus, energy efficiency as a new 
energy source is more cost-effective than other sources to meet the increasing 
demand. In accordance with the data of the International Energy Agency each AMD 
spent on energy efficiency measures provides more “clean” energy than the needed
amount spent on other energy sources for generating the same energy. It should be 
emphasized that the significant amount of the conserved energy is generated in the 
consumption sector and that energy is ecologically clean as its generation is free of 
emissions. 
The RoA Government prioritizes the energy efficiency as a measure for the country’s 
energy security, increasing economic competitiveness and reducing a negative impact
on the environment as well as global climate warming. The RoA Government’s policy 
is to promote the energy efficiency in all the sectors of economy which is stipulated 
in the Law on “Energy Saving and Renewable Energy” and in National Program on 
Energy Saving and Renewable Energy. 
According to the official energy balance in 2018, the largest domestic energy 
consumer is the household which accounts for 33.21% of total final energy 
consumption. It is followed by the transport sector with a share of about 33.81%. 
15.2% of energy has been consumed in the industry which is significantly less than the 
share of the Soviet-era industry. Commercial and public services consumed about 
17.2% and agriculture - about 1.5%. The share of the housing sector varies depending 
on the weather. 
The studies show that the additional capital investments aimed at energy efficiency in 
public and residential buildings can reach 15% and energy saving up to 40%. The 
overwhelming majority of about 19,000 multi-apartment buildings in Armenia were 
built during the Soviet period 35-60 years ago without energy efficiency measures. 
Energy consumption in that buildings per square meter is about 2 or 3 times higher 
than in the developed countries and varies from 200 to 320 kWh/m2annually. In 
accordance with the preliminary studies, energy consumption for heating can be 
reduced at least by 40% by means of effective thermal insulation of residential and 
public buildings. The average cost per unit of energy conserved in buildings is 1 to 4 
US cents per kWh meanwhile the average cost of energy generated by the Armenian 
power system is about 5 US cents. Heating and cooling systems in buildings as well as 
the use of different appliances are the biggest consumers in buildings. Along with the 
improving the energy efficiency of the appliances, the consumer effective behavior in 
this sector will have greater saving potential -about 60% . 
Within the framework of the international integration procedures, Armenia, by 
joining the Treaty on “Eurasia economic union” and as part of EAEU, accepted 
technical regulation on “energy efficiency requirements for energy consuming 
equipment”. Based on Comprehensive and Extended Partnership Agreement signed 
between the European Union and the Republic of Armenia, Armenia is obliged to 
adapt 65 regulations, instructions and guidelines (buildings and facilities, energy 
consuming equipment and means of transport) to the RoA legislation in the nearest state policy in terms of energy conservation and energy efficiency development. 
The process of development of National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable 
Energy 2021-2030 has already commenced taking into consideration increasing 
economic and energy security, power system reliability, strengthening economic and 
energy independence, promoting energy efficiency and renewable energy 
development based on new production and services organization, as well as reducing 
man-made impact on environment and human health.
X1. DIGITAL ENERGY
Information technology and new related opportunities are continuously transforming 
markets by offering completely new business models and lifestyles based on data 
management and the energy is a part of that transformation throughout the world. 
Sustainable and smart energy is one of the most important conditions for dynamic 
development of the economy aimed at improving human lives and their living 
standards. 
The Information Technology sector of Armenia, which is competitive in the global 
market, shall be widely used in order to solve different energy sector-related issues. 
In this regard, the organization of trade in the wholesale electricity market will be 
primary and this will be completely carried out through the electronic platform in the 
next few years. 
Along with the wholesale market electronic trading platform, it is planned to develop 
the unified information system for remotely transmitting and managing the 
information on the consumption and other necessary indicators from the electricity 
metering system of the consumers connected to the Distribution Network, which 
will promote the liberalization process of the Retail Electricity Market. Meanwhile the 
SCADA management system will be installed in the power system which will enable 
the System Operator not only to collect the necessary data but also to carry out 
automatic remote control of the network equipment. 
In this context, new cyber-security challenges will emerge and to ensure the digital 
transformation of the energy sector, it’s important to consider the implementation of 
the information security management international standards, whereof the 
implementation of ISO/IEC 27000" Security Management Systems (ISMS) standards" 
and NIST SP 800-53 “Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and 
Organizations” standards is high-priority, which include the description of 
organizational and technical requirements for ensuring information security and 
developing a comprehensive management system. 
The Government of Armenia will pursue continuous implementation of such tools, so 
that the procedures in the energy sector related to generation and consumption can 
be fully digitally manageable in the shortest possible time through the concept of the 
smart consumption systems. 
XII. SCIENCE-BASED ENERGY
Research and innovations are of fundamental significance in terms of the energy 
sector development. The RoA Government will implement continuous programs researches and innovations. 
In this regard, the Institute of Energy, Electrical Engineering, which is part of the
National Polytechnic University of Armenia Foundation is the main higher education 
institution for training young specialists in the energy sector. This university ensures 
the demand for labor in the energy sector and the development of its relationship 
with the energy sector companies will be essential for supply of more skilled
workers. 
The Scientific Research Institute of Energy (SRIE) should be a major asset to the 
further retraining of personnel in the energy sector. Over 70-years of its activity, the 
SRIE has supported for the implementation of numerous reform programs in the 
power system of Armenia aimed at enhancing the country’s energy independence and 
security, implementing the development plans and strategy, conducting research on 
renewable energy sources as well as providing scientific and technical guidance on 
different issues. The SRIE has the necessary experience to design development 
programs on power generation and the transmission network on the basis of least 
cost and equipped with the software tools of international importance to perform 
such activities. In this context, the further development of the SRIE as a scientific 
center of the world’s best practice in the Armenian energy sector is essential, and it 
will render services not only in Armenia but also outside the country.
Armenian Scientific Research Institute for Nuclear Plant Operation CJSC 
(“Armatom” CJSC) is science-based in the nuclear energy sector. “Armatom” CJSC, 
which was founded in 1973 in the process of ANPP construction. The latter is the 
only organization in Armenia that provides scientific and technical support to nuclear 
power plant, which conducts activities towards development and implementation of 
measures aimed at enhancing security and reliability of ANPP, personnel training, 
technical documentation development as well as design, development and 
implementation of necessary devices, equipment and systems. “Armatom” CJSC also 
has the wide range of the international world-known partners and a recognition.
The research organization in the field of nuclear safety regulation is "Nuclear and 
Radiation Safety Technical Scientific Center" CJSC (NRSC). The NRSC is a licensed 
organization providing scientific and technical assistance to the RA Nuclear Safety 
Regulation Committee (ANRA). It specializes in nuclear and radiation safety analysis, 
nuclear facility safety assessment, independent expertise, risk assessment of the 
nuclear and radiation safety, legislation development for the nuclear and radiation 
safety including laws, regulations and guidelines, emergency response procedures, 
emergency simulation scenarios development, development of the programs/tools
related to radiation safety assessment, radiology and dose measurements, software 
tools used in the field of nuclear safety, as well as capacity building to prepare 
nuclear energy specialists. 
The RoA Government will continue supporting the further development of these 
scientific institutions, also considering the possibility of consolidating some of them 
into a single structure, for the purpose of strengthening direct connection with 
companies operating in the sector and, expanding the international cooperation and 
availability of energy sector enriched with modern scientific solutions. In this context, 
it is envisaged to establish unified institution for implementation of climate change, 
energy and energy efficiency projects with a purpose to increase efficiency and 
reduce management cost for implementation of such projects. The Government of the Republic of Armenia will significantly improve the 
management of the state-owned energy companies by implementing new tools in 
compliance with the international standards. Currently, five entirely state-owned 
companies are operating in the energy sector, as follows:
• “Armenian Nuclear Power Plant” CJSC, electricity generation.
• “Yerevan TPP” CJSC, electricity generation.
• “High Voltage Electric Networks” CJSC, provision of electricity transmission 
service.
• “Electricity System Operator” CJSC, provision of dispatch services to the 
power system.
• “Settlement Center” CJSC, provision of the Market Operator services to the 
power system.
With a view to improve the management efficiency of the above-mentioned five 
state-owned companies, the activity of the companies for the next four years will 
comply with the international standards requirements. Meanwhile, in order to 
increase the efficiency of companies, it is required to change the tools of their tariff 
regulation, switching from annual tariff regulation to multiyear cycle by introducing 
also incentive regulatory measures. 
Such an approach is already used in case of the private companies operating in the 
energy sector and enables the companies to improve both the quality of services 
provided and the level of profitability as a result of increasing their efficiency. 
Moreover, profit rate defined by the Public Services Regulatory Commission for the 
state-owned companies need to be reviewed for the purpose of tariff regulation, 
since, at their current level, among other restrictions, the attraction of private 
investments is impossible and the RoA Government shall raise funds necessary for 
the realization of these investments by providing a state guarantee. In the context of 
the above-mentioned during 2020-2024, the following activities shall be carried out: 
• Revision of the rules currently applied to profit rate for calculation of 
electricity tariff of companies with state participation, to involve commercial 
capital without state guarantee;
• Fixing operation and maintenance costs of companies with state participation 
and establishment of approaches for its annual revision for the next ten years;
• Implementation of the international standards such as ISO 9001: 2015 Quality 
Management, ISO 37001: Anti-Bribery Management Systems, ISO 50001: 2018 
Energy Management Systems, and ISO14001: 2015 Environmental 
Management Systems and ISO 31000: Risk Management.
 SUMMARY
Information technologies and new related opportunities are constantly transforming 
markets by offering completely new business models and lifestyles based on the data 
management and the energy is a part of that transportation throughout the world. development of the economy aimed at improving human lives and their living 
standards. 
Hence, until 2040 the RoA power system will have the following description:
• Self-sufficient and export-oriented high reliability and equipped with stateof-the-art technology, modern infrastructures generating annually around
12 billion kWh. 
• The large regional power center linking the neighboring power systems and 
the Common Electricity Market of the Eurasian Economic Union.
• Liberalized electricity market based on the best international models. 
• Cost-effective and rational use of renewable energy sources in compliance 
with all environmental standards. Ensuring the highest possible increase of 
the renewable energy share in the country’s energy balance at least by 15% 
of solar energy in 2030.
• Extensive conducting of energy efficiency measures, implementation of 
energy efficient technologies in the transition to a green and science-based 
economy. 
• Peaceful development of nuclear energy, in particular the construction of 
new nuclear power generating unit in Armenia.
• Balanced and predictable tariffs for reliable, uninterrupted, high-quality 
supply of electricity to consumers and reliable operation of the power 
system. 
• Diversification of the primary energy resources, in particular natural gas 
supply routes to Armenia and types, by guarantying availability of at least 
two pipelines entry to the country.
Taking into account the activities envisaged by the Action Plan, the given strategy will
be developed and the revised version for 2025-2050 will be presented by July 1, 
2024. This will also include the regulatory, social and environmental impact 
assessments of the strategy as well as will introduce new target indicators in terms of 
energy efficiency and renewable energy. Meanwhile, the effectiveness and impact of 
the strategy will be evaluated once every three years.ACTION PLAN 
TO ENSURE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIC PROGRAM
(TILL 2040) 
NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
1. Development of Electricity Generation Capacity
1.1 Implementation of the ANPP 
Unit 2 Upgrade and Design 
Lifetime Extension until 2026
Efficient and safe 
operation of the 
ANPP Unit 2 until 
2026
Clean electricity
generation of about 
2.9 billion kWh per 
year (as a result of 
upgrade, annual 
generation will 
increase 300 million 
kWh)
ANPP ANRA December 
2022
USD 
189million 
USD million, 
of which 
USD 170 
million loan, 
and 
USD 19
million grant, 
under the 
agreement 
with the 
Russian 
Federation 
63.2 billion 
AMD 
investment 
under the NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
budget loan 
of the RA 
state budget
1.2 Preparation of the studies 
justifying safe operation of the 
ANPP after 2026
Justification of the 
efficient and safe 
operation of the 
ANPP Unit 2 until 
2036
Development of 
safety and reliability 
measures with 
implementation 
timetable for ANPP 
operation until 2036
ANPP ANRA December 
2022
1.3 Implementation of the ANPP 
Unit 2 Design Lifetime 
Extension for 2026 - 2036
Efficient and safe 
operation of the 
ANPP Unit 2 until 
2036
Clean electricity 
generation of about 
2.9 billion kWh per 
year.
ANPP ANRA December 
2026
USD 150
million, 
Financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
1.4 Construction of New Nuclear 
Unit with Replacing Capacity on 
the ANPP Site after the 
Expiration of the ANPP Unit 2 
Design Lifetime (including its 
extensions)
Timetable for the 
Unit 
decommissioning 
measures, including 
identification of 
realistic potential 
financing sources for 
construction of new 
unit.
Ensure energy 
independence, 
diversification of 
electricity generation.
RA MTAI ANRA December 
2035
Financing not 
prohibited by 
LawNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
1.5 Construction of Yerevan CCGT
– 2 with installed capacity of 
about 254 MW
Highly efficient and 
clean electricity 
generation of about 
2 billion kWh per 
year.
Increased reliability of 
electricity supply. 
Potential decrease of 
electricity price in the 
wholesale market.
RA MTAI ANRA July 2022 USD 250 
million 
investment 
from private 
and 
international 
institutions 
1.6 Construction of Masrik -1 Solar 
PV Plant with installed capacity 
of 55 MW 
Increased energy 
independence 
through increased 
share of solar 
generation to 15% 
or 1000 MW by 
2030. 
Clean electricity 
generation of about 
0.11 billion kWh per 
year.
RA MTAI RA PSRC July 2022 USD 60 
million 
Private 
investment
1.7 Implementation of the projects 
for construction of five Solar PV 
Plants with total installed 
capacity of about 120 MW
Increased energy 
independence 
through increased 
share of solar 
generation to 15% 
or 1000 MW by 
2030.
Clean electricity 
generation of about 
0.192 billion kWh per 
year.
RA MTAI RA PSRC December 
2024
Private 
investment 
through 
tenders based 
on the lowest 
price offer.
1.8 Construction of Ayg – 1 Solar 
PV Plant with installed capacity 
of 200 MW 
Increased energy 
independence 
through increased 
share of solar 
generation to 15% 
or 1000 MW by 
2030.
Clean electricity 
generation of about 
0.32 billion kWh per 
year.
RA MTAI RA PSRC December 
2023
USD 170 
million
private 
investmentNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
1.9 Construction of Ayg – 2 Solar 
PV Plant with installed capacity 
of 200 MW
Increased energy 
independence 
through increased 
share of solar 
generation to 15% 
or 1000 MW by 
2030.
Clean electricity 
generation of about 
0.32 billion kWh per 
year.
RA MTAI RA PSRC December 
2024
USD 150
million
private 
investment
1.10 Construction of Small Solar 
Plants (up to 5 MW) with total 
installed capacity of 315 MW, 
out of which 
Increased energy 
independence 
through increased 
share of solar 
generation to 15% 
or 1000 MW by 
2030.
Clean electricity 
generation of about 
0.326 billion kWh per 
year.
RA MTAI RA PSRC December 
2029
USD 340
million 
Private 
investment 
within the 
tariffs set by 
the PSRC
1.11 Construction of Autonomous 
Solar Power Plants increasing 
total installed capacity from 40
MW to 100 MW
Increased energy 
independence 
through increased 
share of solar 
generation to 15% 
or 1000 MW by 
2030.
Clean electricity 
generation of about 
0.16 billion kWh per 
year.
Private 
companies, 
individuals
RA PSRC December 
2023
USD 80 
million 
Private 
investment
1.12 Construction of Small 
Hydropower Plants increasing 
total installed capacity from 380
MW to 430 MW
Increased energy 
independence
Increase in clean 
electricity generation 
of about 0.2 billion 
kWh per year.
Private 
company
RA PSRC December 
2023
USD 100 
million 
Private 
investmentNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
1.13 Construction of small and utility 
scale Wind Power Plants with 
capacity of up to 500 MW, if 
competitive tariff offers exist
Increased energy
independence
Clean electricity 
generation
RA MTAI RA PSRC 2025 - 2040 Private 
investment
1.14 Development of the Least Cost 
Energy Generation Plan, and its 
periodic review once in two 
years.
Planning of 
development of the 
electricity system’s 
generating capacities 
To provide the 
Government of 
Armenia with the
visions of potential 
developments in the 
electricity system
aiming at 
implementation of the 
measures in 
appropriate direction.
RA MTAI ESO December 
2022
Financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
2. Development of the High-Voltage Electriicty Transmission Network
2.1 Reconstruction of 110 kV 
Substation “Charentsavan-3” 
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system 
HVEN ESO December 
2023
USD 36
million, IBRD 
under the 
loan 
agreement 
2.2 Reconstruction of 110 kV 
Substation “Vanadzor-1” 
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO December 
2021NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
2.3 Reconstruction of 220 kV 
Substation “Zovuni”
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO December 
2024
2.4 Reconstruction of 220 kV 
Switching point “Agarak – 2” 
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO December 
2021
SDR 24.02 
million, ADB 
under the 
loan 
agreement
2.5 Reconstruction of 220 kV 
Substation “Shinahayr”
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO December 
2022
2.6 Reconstruction of 220 kV 
Substation “Ashnak” 
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO December 
2020
USD 39.86 
million, IBRD
under the 
loan 
agreement
2.7 Reconstruction of 220 kV 
Substations “Ararat – 2” 
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO December 
2024
2.8 Reconstruction of 110 kV 
overhead transmission line 
“Larvar” 
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency 
in the electricity 
system
HVEN ESO December 
2020
USD 35.5 
million, IBRD
under the 
loan 
agreement
2.9 Reconstruction of 110 kV 
overhead transmission line 
“Noyemberyan” 
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO
2.10 Reconstruction of 220/110/35 
kV Substation “Litchk”
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO December 
2022NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
2.11 Assessment of the financing 
options and dates for 
investment project to 
reconstruct 220/110/10 kV 
Substation “Shahumyan-2” 
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO December 
2030
State 
Guarantee 
Loans
2.12 Assessment of the financing 
options and dates of investment 
project for reconstruction of 
220/110/10 kV Substation 
“Marash”
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO December 
2030
State 
Guarantee 
Loans
2.13 Assessment of the financing 
options and dates for 
investment project to 
reconstruct 220/110/35 kV 
Substation “Yeghegnadzor”
Increased reliability 
of the electricity 
supply
Reduced emergency in 
the electricity system
HVEN ESO December 
2030
State 
Guarantee 
Loans
2.14 Implementation of the second 
stage of SCADA communication 
and automation system 
investment program
ESO June 2022 Included in 
SDR 24.02 
million loan of 
ADB
2.15 Implementation of the project 
for construction of Iran-Armenia 
400 kV double-circuit overhead 
transmission line, and 400 kV 
Substation “Noravan” 
Construction of the 
transmission line 
and substation will 
enable increase of 
the electricity 
exchange capacity 
Increased reliability 
and operation safety 
of the electricity 
system
RA MTAI ESO, HVEN December 
2021
EUR 107․9
million, EDBI 
Sunir FZE,
under the 
loan 
2.15.1 Construction of agreementNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
Iran-Armenia 400 kV doublecircuit overhead transmission 
line
between two 
countries’ energy 
systems from 350 
MW to 1200 MW, 
meantime will 
improve reliability of 
parallel operation of 
the energy systems
and enhance 
Armenia energy 
security.
2.15.2 Construction of 400 kV 
Substation “Noravan”
2.16 Caucasus Electricity 
Transmission Network (Armenia 
– Georgia power transmission 
line/substations)
Implementation of 
the project will 
result in significant 
promotion of the 
mutually beneficial 
regional 
cooperation in the 
energy sector, and 
in increase of 
transmission 
capacity of parallel 
operation with 
Georgia from the 
existing 200 MW to 
350 MW.
Increased reliability 
and operation safety 
of the electricity 
system; transient 
flows, as well as 
favorable conditions 
for operational 
regimes are ensured.
RA MTAI ESO, HVEN December 
2025
EUR 188.2
million ,
KfW, EIB, NIF
under the 
loan and grant 
agreements
2.16.1 Construction of 
Substation “Ddmashen” 
2.16.2 Construction of 
transmission linesNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
2.16.3 Construction of the Backto Back HVDC station 
2.17 Development of the Ten-Year 
Transmission Network 
Development Plan, and its 
periodic review once in two 
years.
Optimization of the 
Electricity Sysytem 
Transmission 
Network 
Development
ESO EMO 
HVEN
ENA (by 
agreement)
ANPP
Yerevan TPP
Hrazdan TPP (by 
agreement)
December 
2022
ESO financing
3. Development of the Electricity Distribution Network 
3.1 Implementation of the 
Investment Program of the 
Electric Networks of Armenia
As a result it is 
expected to reduce 
the average 
duration and 
frequency of the 
interruptions by 
2028 to 55% of the 
2021 baseline 
indicator, reduce 
maximum duration 
for an interruption 
by 50%, exclude 
Increased reliability 
and quality of 
customers electricity 
supply 
ENA (by 
agreement)
December 
2027
AMD 750 
million
ENA 
investmentNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
long-term voltage 
deviations beyond 
the permissible 
limits for 
customers, reduce 
technical losses to 
7.5% in 2021 and 
6.4% in 2028, 
exclude the risks of 
commercial losses,
reduce the 
operational and 
maintenance cost, 
expand the 
distribution 
network, modernize 
completely the 
metering system, 
complete the works 
related to geoinformational 
elements of 
infrastructures 
(linear 
infrastructures), 
implement ISO 
standards for 
environmental, NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
management system 
and management 
information system 
(MIS). 
3.2 Development of the Ten-Year 
Distribution Network 
Development Plan, and its 
periodic review once in two 
years.
ENA (by 
agreement)
December 
2022
ENA
4. Electricity Market
4.1 Pilot -Transition to the new 
Wholesale Electricity Market 
Model with application of the 
pilot version of the Market 
Management System Software 
without financial liabilities to 
market participants.
Verification of the 
proposed model for 
wholesale electricity 
and capacity market 
Experience gained in 
competitive market, 
reveal potential 
deficiencies and make 
adjustments
EMO
ESO
HVEN
ENA (by 
agreement)
ANPP
Yerevan TPP
Hrazdan 5 (by 
agreement)
ContourGlobal
(by agreement)
IEC
(by agreement)
REPP
February 
2021 
In the 
framework of 
USAID 
assistance
4.2 Full Transition to the new 
Wholesale Electricity Market 
Model
Actual introduction 
of the wholesale 
electricity and 
capacity market 
Increased efficiency of 
the system, 
introduction of 
responsibility tools
EMO
ESO
HVEN
ENA
ANPP
Yerevan TPP
February 
2022
In the 
framework of 
USAID 
assistanceNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
Hrazdan 5 (by 
agreement)
ContourGlobal
(by agreement)
IEC (by 
agreement)
REPP
4.3 Development of regulations to 
increase efficiency of the current 
tariff policy
Ensure efficient 
tariff policy
Increased level of 
transparent tariff 
setting. 
Improved economic 
indicators of the 
system.
Application of flexible 
tariff systems.
RA PSRC RA MTAI
EMO
ESO
ENA (by 
agreement)
December
2022
Financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
4.3.1 Feasibility for future use of 
night-time and day-time tariff 
currently established for 
electricity customers, 
establishment of monthly fixed 
service fee for electricity 
customers
4.3.2 Introducing tariff for 
reactive energy for the 
electricity customers
4.3.3 Adoption of the 
Methodology and Procedure for 
Setting (Revision) of Tariffs in 
the Electricity System of 
Armenia
4.4 Improvement of protection 
mechanisms for vulnerable 
customers
Ensure efficient tariff 
policy
Poverty reduction RA MTAI RA MLSA
RA PSRC
December 
2022
Financing not 
prohibited by 
LawNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
4.5 Development of the draft law on 
making changes in the RoA Laws 
“on Energy” and “on Energy 
Saving and Renewable Energy”, 
according to which: 
1. the renewable energy 
power plants will be 
entitled to sell 
electricity in new 
electricity market 
exclusively under
competitive terms 
without providing a 
power purchase 
guarantee and signing 
Public Private 
Partnership аgreement, 
as well as to generate 
and consume at 
different metering 
points of the power 
system. 
2. the current mechanisms 
for implementation of 
autonomous generators 
technical power flows 
will be improved, 
enabling the latter to 
Improvement of the 
legislative 
framework of the 
electricity market 
Increased level of the 
commercial 
competition in the 
electricity market
RA MTAI RA PSRC July 2021 No financing 
is requiredNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
generate and consume 
electricity at different 
metering points of the 
power system and to 
form groups involving 
residents and 
organizations
4.6 Development of the new RoA 
Law on Electricity taking into 
consideration international best 
practices, as well as issues 
revealed during implementation 
of Electricity Market Model and 
Electricity Trade Mechanisms.
Ensure regulatory 
and normative 
framework of the 
electricity and 
capacity liberalized 
market 
Harmonization of the 
legal framework with 
application of the 
international practice
RA MTAI RA PSRC December 
2022
In the 
framework of 
USAID 
assistance
5. Regional Energy Cooperation
5.1 Participation in the EAEU 
common electricity market in 
accordance with the Action plan 
approved by the decree N 31 of 
Supreme Eurasian Economic 
Council dated December 20, 
2019. 
Development and 
adoption of the 
regulatory 
documents 
Interstate flow access 
rules.
Electricity interstate 
trading rules.
Identification of 
interstate sections 
and distribution rules.
Information exchange 
rules.
RA MTAI RA PSRC 2021-2024 Financing not
prohibited by 
LawNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
Interstate networks 
development 
procedure. 
5.2 Participation in the EAEU 
common natural gas market in 
accordance with the Action Plan 
approved by the decree N 7 of 
Supreme Eurasian Economic 
Council dated May 31, 2016.
Development and 
adoption of the 
regulatory 
documents
Rules for trading in 
the gas exchange. 
Unified rules for 
access to the gas 
transportation system 
of the Member States.
Protocol on 
completion of the 
complex measures as 
pre-conditions 
required for ensuring 
access to the gas 
transportation system 
of the Member States. 
Trading rules in the 
common gas market. 
Identification of 
documents for 
informational 
cooperation
in the information 
exchange system.
RA MTAI RA PSRC 2021-2024 Financing not
prohibited by 
Law
5.3 EU-Armenia Comprehensive 
and Enhanced Partnership 
Agreement (CEPA): 
Implementation of 
the EU-Armenia 
Comprehensive and 
Promotion of the 
investment 
RA MTAI RA PSRC 2021-2026 Financing not 
prohibited by 
LawNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
Implementation of the reforms 
in the Energy Sector in 
accordance with the Road Map 
adopted by the RoA Prime 
Minister decision N 666-L dated 
June 1, 2019 that clearly 
stipulates the completion period 
and the responsible authorities.
Enhanced 
Partnership 
Agreement (CEPA)
environment of the 
energy sector.
Development of 
energy trading with 
neighboring countries.
Increased level of 
energy security and 
diversification. 
5.4 Implementation of measures
focused on the expansion of 
Armenia - Iran Energy 
Cooperation and conclusion of 
agreements
Implementation of 
Armenia – Iran gas -
for - electricity 
exchange program 
Electricity export of 
5.0 billion kWh
RA MTAI ESO
EMO
Yerevan TPP
2021-2025 Included in 
the cost for 
construction 
of Iran -
Armenia 
electricity 
transmission 
line 
5.5 Implementation of measures
focused on the expansion of 
Armenia - Georgia Energy 
Cooperation and conclusion of 
agreements
As a result, 
prerequisites will be 
established for 
regular electricity 
trade between the 
two countries based 
on the EU 
directives to the 
extent possible.
Regular electricity 
trade between the 
two countries 
RA MTAI RA PSRC
ESO
EMO
HVEN
2021-2023 Included in 
the cost for 
construction 
of Armenia –
Georgia 
electricity 
transmission 
line
5.5.1 Conduct Armenia –
Georgia Joint Working Group 
meetings to ensure electricity 
trade between Armenia and 
Regular electricity 
trade between the 
two countries
RA MTAI RA PSRC
ESO
EMO
HVEN
2021-2023 In the 
framework of 
USAID 
assistanceNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
Georgia and development of the 
Agreement on the Principles for 
Electricity Trade
5.5.2 Conclusion of Armenia -
Georgia Agreement on the 
Principles for Electricity Trade
Regular electricity 
trade between the 
two countries
RA MTAI RA PSRC
ESO
EMO
HVEN
2023 In the 
framework of 
USAID 
assistance
6. Heat Supply
6.1 Gradual expansion of 
implementation of such projects
that will enable the use of 
individual heating and hot water
generation systems based on the 
renewable resources. 
Installation of solar 
water heating 
systems,
1500 – 7500 
AMD/litre, (600C –
700C) 
Large-scale use of 
renewable energy 
sources,
Increased level of 
energy security and 
independence
RA MTAI Private sector Continuously 
until 2040 
Financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
6.2 Development of a new law on 
heat supply
Regulation of heat 
supply sector and 
ensuring legal 
framework
Harmonization of the 
legislation with 
implementation of 
international practice 
RA MTAI December 
2022
International 
donor 
organizations
7. Gas Supply
7.1 Development of a new law on 
gas supply based on the modern 
principles.
Clarification of the 
sector management 
principles based on 
Reforms in the sector, 
efficient protection of 
consumers rights
RA MTAI RA PSRC December 
2023
International 
donor 
organizationsNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
the international 
best practice.
7.2 Comprehensive review of the 
regulatory framework for the 
gas supply sector. 
Clarification of the 
sector activities and 
application of the 
modern principles.
Ensure requirements 
for having full 
transparency of 
applicable tariffs, and 
requirements for 
reliability and security. 
RA MTAI RA PSRC December 
2024
International 
donor 
organizations
7.3 Development of the Least Cost 
Gas Transportation and Gas 
Distribution Networks 
Development Ten-year Plans, 
and its review once in two years
Optimal 
development of the 
gas supply sector 
according to the 
long-term plan
Ensure reliable and 
safe gas supply of the 
customers 
Gasprom 
Armenia CJSC 
(by agreement)
December 
2022
No financing 
is required
8. Energy EfficiencyNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
8.1 In the framework of 
Comprehensive and Extended 
Partnership Agreement signed 
between the European Union 
and the Republic of Armenia, 
adapt 65 regulations, 
instructions and guidelines 
(buildings and facilities, energy 
consuming equipment and 
means of transport) to the RoA 
legislation which are aimed at 
promotion of energy efficiency.
As a result, new 
standards for energy 
efficiency and energy 
saving will be 
established including 
for energy labeling 
and eco design.
Reduced specific cost 
of energy resources 
RA MTAI RA ME
RA UDC 
December 
2027
International 
donor 
organizations
8.2 Development of the National 
Program on Energy Efficiency 
and Renewable Energy for 2021-
2030. 
National Program 
will define new 
measures and 
targets for 2021-
2030 that will 
facilitate future 
formation of the 
policy for Armenia 
Energy Efficiency 
and identification of 
specific actions for 
its implementation. 
Reduced specific cost 
of energy resources
RA MTAI June 2021 International 
donor 
organizationsNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
8.3 Implement regular annual energy 
statistics in the RA 
Annual energy 
balance 
development in 
compliance with the 
standards of the 
International Energy 
Commission 
Support to 
implementation of the 
energy policy 
RA MTAI RA SC Annually International 
donor 
organizations
8.4 Establish new parameters for 
energy efficiency and energy 
saving, and develop and adopt 
national standards ensuring their 
implementation
Energy efficiency 
and energy saving 
new national 
standards for 
product and 
services
Reduction of specific 
cost for energy 
resources 
RA ME RA MTAI
RA UDC
Continuously International 
donor 
organizations 
9. Information Technology in the Energy Sector
9.1 Installation of the electronic 
platform for trading in the 
wholesale electricity market 
Application of the 
digital systems for 
transactions
Ensuring impartial and 
transparent decision 
making for the market 
participants
RA MTAI
EMO
ESO
RA MHTI December 
2022 
International 
donor 
organizations
9.2 Installation of the unified 
information system for remotely 
transmitting and managing the 
information on the consumption 
and other necessary indicators 
from the electricity metering 
system of the customers 
Ensuring full 
awareness of 
customers
Ensuring absolute 
level of transparency
ENA (by 
agreement)
RA MHTI December 
2027
ENA financingNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
connected to the distribution 
network. 
9.3 Installation of the SCADA 
system in the wholesale 
electricity market which will 
enable the ESO not only to 
collect the necessary data but 
also to carry out automatic 
remote control of the network 
equipment.
Ensuring reliable 
and uninterrupted 
operation of the 
system 
Increased quality of 
the electricity supply 
HVEN, ESO RA MHTI December 
2022
ADB loan
9.4 Implementation of the 
information security 
management international 
standards at ANPP, as provided 
in 9.4.1 – 9.4.2
Ensuring Cybersecurity, digital 
transformation of 
the energy sector at 
ANPP
Ensuring required 
level of reliability and 
safety of ANPP 
operation 
ANPP RA MHTI December 
2023
ANPP 
financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
9.4.1 ISO/IEC 27000" Security Law 
Management Systems (ISMS) 
standards"
9.4.2 NIST SP 800-53 “Security 
and Privacy Controls for 
Information Systems and 
Organizations”
9.5 Implementation of the 
information security 
international standards at 
Yerevan TPP, as provided in 
9.5.1 – 9.5.2
Ensuring Cybersecurity, digital 
transformation of 
the energy sector at 
Yerevan TPP
Ensuring required 
level of reliability and 
safety of Yerevan TPP 
operation
Yerevan TPP RA MHTI December 
2023
Yerevan TPP 
financing and 
other 
financing not NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
9.5.1 ISO/IEC 27000" Security 
Management Systems (ISMS) 
standards"
prohibited by 
Law
9.5.2 NIST SP 800-53 “Security 
and Privacy Controls for 
Information Systems and 
Organizations”
9.6 Implementation of the 
information security 
international standards at 
HVEN, as provided in 9.6.1 –
9.6.2
Ensuring Cybersecurity, digital 
transformation of 
the energy sector at 
HVEN 
Ensuring required 
level of reliability and 
safety of HVEN 
operation
HVEN RA MHTI December 
2023
HVEN 
financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
9.6.1 ISO/IEC 27000" Security Law
Management Systems (ISMS) 
standards"
9.6.2 NIST SP 800-53 “Security 
and Privacy Controls for 
Information Systems and 
Organizations”
9.7 Implementation of the 
information security 
international standards at ESO, 
as provided in 9.7.1 – 9.7.2
Ensuring Cybersecurity, digital 
transformation of 
the energy sector at 
ESO
Ensuring required 
level of reliability and 
safety of ESO 
operation
ESO RA MHTI December 
2023
ESO financing 
and other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
9.7.1 ISO/IEC 27000" Security Law
Management Systems (ISMS) 
standards"
9.7.2 NIST SP 800-53 “Security 
and Privacy Controls for NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
Information Systems and 
Organizations”
9.8 Implementation of the 
information security 
international standards at EMO, 
as provided in 9.8.1 – 9.8.2
Ensuring Cybersecurity, digital 
transformation of 
the energy sector at 
EMO
Ensuring required 
level of reliability and 
safety of EMO 
operation
EMO RA MHTI December 
2023
EMO 
financing 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
9.8.1 ISO/IEC 27000" Security 
Management Systems (ISMS) 
standards"
9.8.2 NIST SP 800-53 “Security 
and Privacy Controls for 
Information Systems and 
Organizations”
10. Scientific Advancement in the Energy Sector
10.1 National Polytechnic UniversityFund of Armenia Providing highly 
qualified sciencebased professionals 
for the safe and 
reliable operation 
and development of 
the energy system
Increased quality of 
the system operation
NPUA Continuously State budget, 
Contracts 
with 
companies of 
the system
10.2 Scientific Research Institute of 
Energy CJSC 
Application of 
scientific- research 
studies in different 
Increased quality of 
the system operation
SRIE Continuously State budget, 
Contracts 
with NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
subareas of the 
energy system 
companies of 
the system
10.3 “Armatom” CJSC Application of 
scientific- research 
studies in nuclear 
energy sector 
Increased quality of 
the system operation
Armatom Continuously State budget, 
Contracts 
with 
companies of 
the system
10.4 Establishment of climate change, 
energy and energy efficiency 
projects implementation unified 
institution.
Increased efficiency 
for projects 
implementation 
Management cost 
reduction
RA MTAI RA MEnv October 
2021
No financing 
is required
11. Management of State - Owned Companies 
11.1 ANPP management 
improvement and 
implementation of international 
standards, in accordance with 
11.1.1 – 11.1.7
Ensuring efficient 
management at 
ANPP, in 
compliance with the 
international 
standards
Improvement of 
management efficiency 
of state-owned energy 
companies
2021 - 2024
11.1.1 Revision of the rules 
applied to profit rate for 
calculation of ANPP electricity 
RA MTAI
ANPP
RA PSRC January 2021 No financing 
is requiredNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
tariff, to involve commercial 
capital without state guarantee. 
11.1.2 Fixing ANPP operation 
and maintenance costs and 
establishment of approaches for 
its annual revision for the next 
10 years
RA MTAI
ANPP
RA PSRC December 
2021
No financing 
is required
11.1.3 ISO 9001: 2015 Quality 
Management
RA MTAI
ANPP
December 
2024
ANPP 
Financing and
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.1.4 ISO 37001: 2016 
Anti-Bribery Management 
Systems
RA MTAI
ANPP
December 
2024
ANPP 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.1.5 ISO 50001: 2018 Energy 
Management Systems 
RA MTAI
ANPP
December 
2024
ANPP 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.1.6 ISO14001: 2015 
Environmental Management 
Systems
RA MTAI
ANPP
December 
2024
ANPP 
Financing and 
other NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.1.7 ISO 31000: Risk 
Management 
RA MTAI
ANPP
December 
2024
ANPP 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.2 Yerevan TPP management 
improvement and 
implementation of international 
standards, in accordance with 
11.2.1 – 11.2.7
Ensuring efficient 
management at 
Yerevan TPP, in 
compliance with the 
international 
standards
Improvement of 
management efficiency 
of state-owned energy 
companies
2021 - 2024
11.2.1 Revision of the rules 
applied to profit rate for 
calculation of Yerevan TPP 
electricity tariff, to involve 
commercial capital without state 
guarantee. 
RA MTAI
Yerevan TPP
RA PSRC January 2021 No financing 
is required
11.2.2 Fixing Yerevan TPP 
operation and maintenance 
costs and establishment of 
approaches for its annual 
revision for the next 10 years
RA MTAI
Yerevan TPP
RA PSRC December 
2021
No financing 
is required
11.2.3 ISO 9001: 2015 Quality 
Management
RA MTAI
Yerevan TPP
December 
2024
Yerevan TPP 
Financing and 
other NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.2.4 ISO 37001: 2016 
Anti-Bribery Management 
Systems
RA MTAI
Yerevan TPP
December 
2024
Yerevan TPP 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.2.5 ISO 50001: 2018 Energy 
Management Systems 
RA MTAI
Yerevan TPP
December 
2024
Yerevan TPP 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.2.6 ISO14001: 2015 
Environmental Management 
Systems
RA MTAI
Yerevan TPP
December 
2024
Yerevan TPP 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.2.7 ISO 31000: Risk 
Management 
RA MTAI
Yerevan TPP
December 
2024
Yerevan TPP 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
LawNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
11.3 HVEN management 
improvement and 
implementation of international 
standards, in accordance with 
11.3.1 – 11.3.7
Ensuring efficient 
management at 
HVEN, in 
compliance with the 
international 
standards
Improvement of 
management 
efficiency of stateowned energy 
companies
2021 - 2024
11.3.1 Revision of the rules 
applied to profit rate for 
calculation of HVEN electricity 
tariff, to involve commercial 
capital without state guarantee
RA MTAI
HVEN
RA PSRC January 2021 No financing 
is required
11.3.2. Fixing HVEN operation 
and maintenance costs and 
establishment of approaches for 
its annual revision for the next 
10 years
RA MTAI
HVEN
RA PSRC December 
2021
No financing 
is required
11.3.3 ISO 9001: 2015 Quality 
Management
RA MTAI
HVEN
December 
2024
HVEN 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.3.4 ISO 37001: 2016 
Anti-Bribery Management 
Systems
RA MTAI
HVEN
December 
2024
HVEN 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
LawNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
11.3.5 ISO 50001: 2018 Energy 
Management Systems 
RA MTAI
HVEN
December 
2024
HVEN 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.3.6 ISO14001: 2015 
Environmental Management 
Systems
RA MTAI
HVEN
December 
2024
HVEN 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.3.7 ISO 31000: Risk 
Management 
RA MTAI
HVEN
December 
2024
HVEN 
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.4 ESO management improvement 
and implementation of 
international standards, in 
accordance with 11.4.1 – 11.4.7
Ensuring efficient 
management at 
ESO, in compliance 
with the 
international 
standards
Improvement of 
management 
efficiency of stateowned energy 
companies
2021 - 2024
11.4.1 Revision of the rules 
applied to profit rate for 
calculation of ESO electricity 
tariff, to involve commercial 
capital without state guarantee. 
RA MTAI
ESO
RA PSRC January 2021 No financing 
is requiredNN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
11.4.2 Fixing ESO operation and 
maintenance costs and 
establishment of approaches for 
its annual revision for the next 
10 years
RA MTAI
ESO
RA PSRC December 
2021
No financing 
is required
11.4.3 ISO 9001: 2015 Quality 
Management
RA MTAI
ESO
December 
2024
ESO Financing
and other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.4.4 ISO 37001: 2016 
Anti-Bribery Management 
Systems
RA MTAI
ESO
December 
2024
ESO Financing
and other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law 
11.4.5 ISO 50001: 2018 Energy 
Management Systems 
RA MTAI
ESO
December 
2024
ESO Financing
and other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.4.6 ISO14001: 2015 
Environmental Management 
Systems
RA MTAI
ESO
December 
2024
ESO Financing
and other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.4.7 ISO 31000: Risk 
Management 
RA MTAI
ESO
December 
2024
ESO Financing
and other NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.5 EMO management 
improvement and 
implementation of international 
standards, in accordance with 
11.5.1 – 11.5.7
Ensuring efficient 
management at 
EMO, in compliance 
with the 
international 
standards
Improvement of 
management 
efficiency of stateowned energy 
companies
2021 - 2024
11.5.1 Revision of the rules 
applied to profit rate for 
calculation of EMO electricity 
tariff, to involve commercial 
capital without state guarantee. 
RA MTAI
EMO
RA PSRC January 2021 No financing 
is required
11.5.2 Fixing EMO operation 
and maintenance costs and 
establishment of approaches for 
its annual revision for the next 
10 years
RA MTAI
EMO
RA PSRC December 
2021
No financing 
is required
11.5.3 ISO 9001: 2015 Quality 
Management
RA MTAI
EMO
December 
2024
EMO
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.5.4 ISO 37001: 2016
Anti-Bribery Management 
Systems
RA MTAI
EMO
December 
2024
EMO
Financing and 
other NN Action Expected 
Immediate Result 
Expected Impact Responsible 
Body(ies) 
Coimplementer(s)Deadline Action Cost 
and 
Financing
Source
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.5.5 ISO 50001: 2018 Energy 
Management Systems 
RA MTAI
EMO
December 
2024
EMO
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.5.6 ISO14001: 2015 
Environmental Management 
Systems
RA MTAI
EMO
December 
2024
EMO
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
Law
11.5.7 ISO 31000: Risk 
Management 
RA MTAI
EMO
December 
2024
EMO
Financing and 
other 
financing not 
prohibited by 
LawAcronyms
RA Republic of Armenia
RF Russian Federation
RA MTAI RA Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure
RA MLSA RA Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs 
RA ME RA Ministry of Economy
RA MEnv RA Ministry of Environment
RA MHTI RA Ministry of High-Tech Industry
RA UDC RA Urban Development Committee
RA PSRC RA Public Services Regulatory Commission
ANRA RA Nuclear Safety Regulation Committee
RA SC RA Statistics Committee 
ESO “Electric Power System Operator” CJSC
EMO “Settlement Center” CJSC/Electricity Market Operator 
HVEN “High Voltage Electric Networks” CJSC
ENA “Electric Networks of Armenia” CJSC
ANPP “Armenian Nuclear Power Plant” CJSC
Yerevan TPP “Yerevan TPP” CJSC
Hrazdan 5 Unit of “Gasprom Armenia” CJSC
IEC "International Energy Corporation" CJSC
ContourGlobal "ContourGlobal Hydro Cascade" CJSC
REPP Renewable Energy Power Plant
SRIE“Scientific Research Institute of Energy” CJSC
Armatom “Armatom” CJSC
NPUA "National Polytechnic University of Armenia" Foundation
ADB Asian Development Bank
USAID United States Agency for International Development 
EIB European Investment Bank
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
KfW German development bank
NIF Neighborhood Investment FundSDR Special Drawing Right
EDBI Export Development Bank of Iran
PPP Public Private Partnership
USD US dollar 