File Name: ARM-NEEP-2010-EN
Year: 2010
Country Name: Armenia
Country Code: ARM
Category: NEEP
Document Title: National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 2010 Republic of Armenia
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2010
Start Year: nan
End Year: nan
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

National Energy Efficiency Action 
Plan 2010 
REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA 
Version submitted by 
13 September 2010 Executive Summary 
Energy Efficiency – a Government Priority 
The Government of Armenia prioritizes energy efficiency as a means of increasing the 
country’s energy security, increasing economic competitiveness and reducing the 
negative impact on the environment. The Government’s commitment and principles to 
promotion of energy efficiency are given in the Law on Renewable Energy and Energy 
Efficiency (2005) and the National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy 
(2007). 
Armenia has significant potential for energy efficiency and can recoup sizable 
economic benefits through utilization of this potential. Although its economic activity is 
less energy intensive than compared to other economies in the region, large potential 
remains for further efficiency improvements (up to 5% of the country’s GDP, as was 
estimated in a World Bank study in 2008). 
The highest economic effectiveness is envisaged through energy efficiency 
investments in the public sector. Other dominant sectors to be considered are the 
residential sector (buildings), industry, energy production, transport and agricultural 
sector. 
Creating an Enabling Environment for Energy Efficiency 
The main issue to realise the significant energy saving potential in the country’s 
economy is the creation of an enabling environment for energy efficiency and financing 
of energy efficiency investments. This is mainly linked to a strong policy and to 
regulatory measures that need to be implemented and enforced. Beside that, there is 
great unawareness and lack of information in all sectors (from private households to 
industrial enterprises) what to do in regard to reducing energy intensity and specific 
demand. The country is looking for the introduction of appropriate market-based 
incentives for energy efficiency that are a necessary condition to diversify Armenia’s 
energy supply and thus improve economic competitiveness. 
This National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) is another attempt following 
different programmatic activities in the past years to making energy efficiency happen. 
Although the country does have a Law on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
since 2005 and a National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy since 
2007, basic measures formulated in these two documents have not been implemented 
so far. The NEEAP is therefore consolidating a set of measures for all relevant 
economic sectors in the country and specifying the need for action, especially on the 
political level. It shall provide the Government of Armenia with a bundle of activities to 
be realised with different priorities in the considered period 2010 to 2020. 
The NEEAP focuses on five main economic sectors 
The NEEAP is proposing a set of relevant measures to the Government of Armenia for 
improving the current legal status and enforcement of legislation put in place, for capacity-building (mainly in the public sector) and institutional setting, for creating 
awareness across all sectors and a general environment that is more in favour of 
energy efficiency improvement in the following sectors: 
o residential buildings 
o public and private service sector 
o industry & energy production 
o transport 
o agriculture 
All in all, 31 relevant measures have been proposed within the NEEAP, all of them 
described in chapters 4 (horizontal and cross-sectoral measures and 5 (sectoral 
measures) 
The overall time frame for implementation of the action plan is considered to be a 
period of ten years, from 2010 until 2020. This is also in line with action plans of other 
countries. 
Indication of Potential EE Targets 
For the purpose of the first NEEAP presented here, intermediate national energy 
savings targets have been proposed. These intermediate targets shall provide an 
indication of realistic savings as a percentage of the baseline demand to be achieved in 
the relevant target year, consistent with the overall national indicative energy savings 
target. However, a more detailed analysis of potentials and corresponding energy 
savings requires in all sectors is necessary, to provide a better data base and solidify 
the assumptions made regarding the EE potentials. 
Lack of Basic Statistical Data 
One important deficiency is the missing of a detailed annual energy supply and 
demand survey for all main sectors of economy that provides data on the annual final 
inland energy consumption of all energy users for the most recent years, including data 
on: 
o energy supply (import, production, inventory changes) 
o energy transformation (primary and secondary transformation processes) 
o final energy demand of all relevant sectors 
o useful energy demand according user categories (residential heating, industrial 
heat demand, stationary engines, lighting, air-conditioning, etc.) 
Due to the missing basic data and with the information made available from different 
sources, it is at the moment not possible to draw a realistic baseline scenario that will 
provide a sound base to estimate absolute savings to be achieved in the target year. 
Therefore, this first NEEAP provides only an indication of annual savings in relative 
terms (% p.a.) compared to the energy demand of the relevant sector (to be defined) where the proposed measures is part of. 
They are shown in the following table and further explained in the chapters 4 and 5. 
Table 1: Estimated energy savings cumulated for each sector until 2020 
in % 23,0%
in % 23,3%
in % 20,3%
in % 14,6%
in % 14,0%
Residential/Households
Industry & Energy sector
Transport
Public and commercial services
Water sector
Energy saving target adopted in 2020:
Source: own calculation 
As soon as detailed energy balances will become available, i.e. final energy demand 
per sector (in absolute terms), the second NEEAP (2014) will have to update this 
information and provide relevant data on the calculation of the national energy saving 
target for the year 2020 as well as intermediate targets for the years 2013 and 2017, as 
proposed in the template provided in Annex 1. 
Evaluation and Monitoring of Progress Made
One important issue is to address regular monitoring and evaluation of measures in 
line with the proposed time frame, to assess if the intermediate energy savings targets 
are being achieved or if increased efforts are to be made to get back on the 
implementation path. 
It is therefore foreseen that the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources shall submit 
to the Government updated NEEAPs: 
o a second NEEAP not later than 30 June 2014 (considering implementation status 
until end 2013), 
o a third NEEAP not later than 30 June 2018 (considering implementation status until 
end 2017), 
o and a fourth NEEAP not later than 30 June 2021 (considering implementation 
status until end 2020). 
The 1st NEEAP – High Priority Measures until 2013 
The measures proposed in the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan have been 
categorised into “high”, “medium” and “low” priority. Main criterion for the high 
prioritisation is the available energy saving potential with possible low funding 
implications (“low-hanging fruits”) or eventually already secured donor funding. These 
measures are to be implemented within the first implementation period until 2013. A 
summary of all high-priority measures proposed in the first NEEAP is given in the 
following table. No Title of the EEI measure Responsibility Duration
I.1 Implementation of a regular national “Energy Statistic” (with 
annual updates)
Ministry of Energy 
National Statistics Office
2010 - 2013
I.2 Implementation of a “National Energy Agency for Energy 
Efficiency and Renewable Energy”
Ministry of Energy 2010 - 2013
I.3 Financial Support for Energy Efficiency measures in all 
sectors
Ministry of Energy 2010-2013
I.6 Assessment of the economic rationale of measures proposed 
in the NEEAP
Ministry of Economy 2010-2012
II.1 National Building Code considering energy performance of 
buildings
Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Economy, 
Ministry of Urban Development
2010 - 2012
II.2 Standards and calculation methodology to assess energy 
performance in buildings
Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Economy, 
Ministry of Urban Development
2010 - 2012
II.3 Institutional capacity-building for implementing and enforcing 
new standards
Ministry of Urban Development 2010 - 2012
II.4 Establishing quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) 
standards that will support the certification of key building 
materials for energy performance.
Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of 
Economy
2010 - 2012
III.1 Information campaigns on several issues of energy efficiency 
to be applied in public and private service buildings
Ministry of Energy,
National Energy Agency
2010 – 2020
(continuous 
activity)
Ministry of Energy
Public and private service facilities' 
operators
IV.1 Considering energy efficiency aspects for the construction of 
new industrial facilities
Ministry of Economy, 
Ministry of Environment
PSRC
2010 - 2012
V.1 Vehicle Inspection and Maintenance (I&M) program Ministry of Transport,
Ministry of Economy
2010-2018
V.2 Traffic Demand Managmeent (TDM) scheme Ministry of Transport,
Ministry of Economy
2010 - 2012
V.3 Dissemination of information on technologies and
approaches for reducing energy consumption effectively
Ministry of Transport 2012 - 2020
V.4 Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger passenger 
buses operated by natural gas
City of Yerevan 2010 - 2020
VI.1 Utilization of gravity flow in irrigation systems and 
modernisation of existing pumping stations and upgrading 
secondary and tertiary canals
Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Energy, 
Water Committee (under Min. of Territorial 
Administration)
2010 – 2012
2010 - 2015
IV.3 Electricity savings through improvements of existing 
electricity network, compensation of reactive power and 
improvement of transformers
Ministry of Energy, Electric Networks of 
Armenia
2010-2020
I.5 General regulatory demand side measures Ministry of Energy, Public Service 
Regulatory Commission
2010-2012
III.2 Efficient energy services in public facilities - investive 
measures
2011 - 2013
I. Horizontal Measures
II. Building Sector
III. Public & Private Service Sector
I.4 Information campaigns, training and education in the area of 
energy efficiency improvements
Ministry of Energy (later: National Energy 
Agency)
2010-2020 
ongoing 
process
IV.2 Implementation of Energy Efficiency Financing Facility for 
Industrial Enterprises
Ministry of Energy, (with support from 
European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development)
IV. Industry & Energy Sector
V. Transport Sector
VI. Water SectorTable of contents 
Executive Summary I
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Trends in Promoting Energy Efficiency 1
1.2 Energy Efficiency – the issue for Armenia 5
1.3 Scope and Objectives of the NEEAP 6
1.4 Relevant Activities and Programmes related to Energy Efficiency in Armenia 7
2 Defining Targets for the Implementation of the NEEAP 9
2.1 Setting the path for Energy Efficiency in Armenia until 2020 9
2.2 Baseline energy consumption and calculation of the national EE target 11
3 Addressing Barriers for Energy Efficiency in Armenia 18
4 Horizontal and cross-sectoral measures 19
4.1 Overview of horizontal and cross-sectoral EEI measures 19
5 Sectoral presentation and assessment of energy efficiency improvement 
programmes, energy services, and other measures to improve energy efficiency 25
5.1 Energy efficiency improvement measures in the residential building sector 25
5.1.1 General introduction on the building sector........................................................................25
5.1.2 Overview of sector-specific measures ................................................................................27
5.2 Energy efficiency improvement measures in the public and private service sector 35
5.2.1 General introduction on the public and private service sector............................................35
5.2.2 Overview of sector-specific measures ................................................................................36
5.3 Energy efficiency improvement measures in industry sectors (including energy production) 41
5.3.1 General introduction on the industry & energy sectors ......................................................41
5.3.2 Overview of sector-specific measures ................................................................................42
5.4 Energy efficiency improvement measures in the transport sector 48
5.4.1 General introduction on the transport sector.......................................................................48
5.4.2 Overview of sector-specific measures ................................................................................48
5.5 Energy efficiency improvement measures in the water sector 53
5.5.1 General introduction on the water sector............................................................................53
5.5.2 Overview of sector-specific measures ................................................................................54
6 References 57
Annex 1: Template for the calculation of the national energy saving target 58
Annex 2: Projections of greenhouse gas emissions for Armenia from 2005 to 2020 59Annex 3: List of relevant donor projects and programs ongoing and of past 60
List of charts and tables 
Chart 1: Electricity demand of main sectors 2005-2009 (prelim.) ................................12
Chart 2: Natural gas demand of main sectors 2005-2009 (prelim.) .............................12
Chart 3: Total electricity and gas demand 2005-2009 (prelim.) ...................................13
Chart 4: MCA-Armenia Irrigated Agriculture Project....................................................54
Chart 5: Projections of greenhouse gas emissions (Gg CO2 equivalent, excl. LULUCF)
...................................................................................................................................59
Table 1: Estimated energy savings cumulated for each sector until 2020 ....................III
Table 2: Estimated annual savings per measures in % (2011-2020) compared to final 
energy consumption baseline .....................................................................................15
Table 3: Estimated energy savings cumulated for each sector until 2020 ...................17
Table 4: List of horizontal and cross-sectoral measures under the Armenian NEEAP.20
Table 5: Estimated savings per measure in the residential building sector from 2011-
2020 ...........................................................................................................................29
Table 6: List of measures in the residential building sector specified under the 
Armenian NEEAP .......................................................................................................30
Table 7: Estimated savings per measure in the public and private service sector from 
2011-2020 ..................................................................................................................38
Table 8: List of measures in the public and private service sector specified under the 
Armenian NEEAP .......................................................................................................39
Table 9: Estimated savings per measure in the industrial sector from 2011-2020.......44
Table 10: List of measures in the industrial sector specified under the Armenian 
NEEAP .......................................................................................................................45
Table 11: Estimated savings per measure in the transport sector from 2011-2020 .....50
Table 12: List of measures in the industrial sector specified under the Armenian 
NEEAP .......................................................................................................................51
Table 13: Estimated savings per measure in the agricultural sector from 2011-2020..55
Table 14: List of measures in the agricultural sector specified under the Armenian 
NEEAP .......................................................................................................................56List of Abbreviations 
AEAI Advanced Engineering Associates International 
AMD Armenian Dram 
ArmSEFF Armenian Sustainable Energy Financing Facility 
BAU business as usual 
CEE Central & Eastern Europe 
CEEP Commercialization of Energy Efficiency Project
CO2 Carbon dioxide 
EBRD European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
EE Energy Efficiency 
ENP European Neighbourhood Policy 
ESCOs Energy Service Companies 
ESMAP Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme (of the 
World Bank) 
EU European Union 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GEF Global Environment Fund 
Gg Greenhouse gas 
GHG Greenhouse gas 
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
IDA International Development Agency 
IEA International Energy Agency 
IFI International Financing Institution 
IMF International Monetary Fund 
KfW „Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau“ Bankengruppe (group of 
banks) 
Kg kilograms 
kWh kilo Watt hours 
LULUCF Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry 
MCA Millennium Challenge Account 
mto million tonnes mtoe million tonnes equivalent 
NEEAP National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NOx Nitrogen oxide 
PSRC Public Services Regulatory Commission 
QA/QC quality assurance / quality control 
R2E2 Armenian Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund 
SEFF Sustainable Energy Financing Facility 
SEI Sustainable Energy Initiative 
SMEs small and medium enterprises 
TJ Terra Joule 
TRACECA TRAnsport Corridor Europe-Caucasus-Asia 
TWh Terra Watt hours 
UN United Nations 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme 
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
USAID United States Agency for International Development 
USD United States Dollar 
WB World Bank 1 Introduction 
1.1 Trends in Promoting Energy Efficiency 
In 2008 the World Energy Council published a paper about “Energy Efficiency Policies 
around the World: Review and Evaluation”. In this study it is shown that in most world 
regions the amount of energy used per unit GDP is decreasing steadily: 1.6% p.a. on 
average at the world level between 1990 and 2006. Since 2000, this trend has however 
slowed down significantly, to slightly less than 1% p.a. 
Industry is the main sector driving energy intensity reduction in industrialized countries. 
In developing countries and economies of transition, on the other hand, households are 
very often the main drivers. In China and the CIS, energy productivity improvements 
were almost equally driven by industry, energy conversion and households. 
There are a few significant questions to consider when planning about EE 
improvement: What is the importance of energy efficiency measures? What are the 
priorities? What are the trends? How to introduce an adequate policy level to foster 
implementation of EE measures? And how to stimulate energy efficiency innovation 
cost effectively? 
The main factors for stimulating energy efficiency measures observed are: 
o Institutional background: Almost all countries have set up specific institutions 
dealing with energy efficiency, such as energy efficiency agencies, either at the 
national level, or at regional levels or both, and more recently at local level. 
Although the legal status of these agencies is different from one country to 
another, their establishment almost everywhere clearly indicates that there is a 
need for having a driving institution taking the lead on EE activity. 
o A proper regulatory framework, with a specific bundle of energy efficiency 
legislation and/or national programmes taking into consideration quantitative, 
measurable, targets for energy efficiency improvements, can provide a long 
lasting context for energy efficiency policies and avoid the negative effect of 
“stop and start” actions: many countries have already set up quantitative 
targets, with annual monitoring requirements. 
o Electrical appliances and buildings continue to be the main target for 
regulations and are spreading to a larger number of countries. In Europe, 
regulations represent about 40% of the measures implemented in the 
residential sector. 
All European countries and most other OECD countries have energy efficiency 
standards for all new buildings. Some non-OECD countries outside Europe 
have recently established standards for service buildings. Altogether, about 
60% of the countries surveyed had mandatory or voluntary standards for new 
non-residential buildings. The few evaluations studies of the savings achieved with building codes show 
that the actual savings for new buildings are lower than the potential theoretical 
savings. This can be attributed to non-compliance with standards and changes 
in behaviour. 
A more recent trend is to extend regulations to existing buildings (mainly stricter 
codes referring to thermal quality standards and introduction of energy 
efficiency certification of existing buildings). 
o Labelling and standards apply to a growing number of electrical appliances. 
Labelling programmes and efficiency standards are an effective method of 
transforming the market and slowing the electricity demand growth. Labelling 
programmes introduced in developing countries are based on the experience of 
OECD countries and use models that have already been proven: the European 
label has been used as a model in Brazil, Tunisia, China and Iran, while labels 
introduced in Thailand and the Korean Republic are based on some Australian 
model. 
Energy labels and standards are complementary tools. Labelling acts as an 
incentive for manufacturers to differentiate themselves from their competitors 
and stimulates the introduction of new, more efficient models. Standards 
remove from the market the less efficient appliances. To be effective, labelling 
programmes and performance standards must be regularly updated. 
o Energy pricing is an important component of EE policies. Adequate pricing is a 
necessary condition for promoting energy efficiency. One of the first steps of 
any energy efficiency policy should be to adjust energy prices to more “real” 
market levels in order to give correct signals to consumers, whilst maintaining 
incentives for behaviour changes or to acquire energy efficient equipment and 
technologies. 
Energy producing countries often maintain low domestic prices, which lead to 
intensive energy uses, as was seen previously by the high and increasing 
energy intensities in these countries. A reduction in the subsidies could lead to 
energy savings that could be sold at a much higher price on the international 
market and bring benefits to these economies. 
Adequate pricing means establishing consumer energy prices that reflect the 
cost of energy supply, i.e. the long-term marginal cost for electricity, the longterm price of oil products on international markets for fossil fuels. Although most 
energy planners agree with such objectives, they often face reluctance and 
opposition from decision-makers outside the energy sector, who fear public 
resistance and the impact of energy price corrections on the consumer price 
index. Also, energy is a basic good for which a low price is a condition for lowincome households access. This makes actual price adjustments slow or 
impossible in many developing countries, especially in the household sector. 
o Financial incentives rely more and more on tax incentives than on direct subsidies. Nevertheless direct subsidies on energy efficiency investments 
remain popular. As they have often been considered as costly and 
questionable, they are now better targeted. Subsidies are viewed as a 
temporary measure to mobilise consumers, to prepare for new regulations, or to 
promote energy efficient technologies by creating a larger market than would 
exist otherwise, with the objective of a cost reduction for the subsidised energy 
efficient technologies. 
o Fiscal incentives, such as tax credits, tax reductions and accelerated 
depreciation, are usually considered cheaper than direct subsidies, especially to 
households, as they have lower transaction costs. They can work well if the tax 
collection rate is sufficiently high: such measures usually perform poorly in an 
economy in recession or in transition. They are more adapted to well-developed 
countries: so far, mainly OECD countries have implemented such fiscal 
measures. Tax reductions on energy efficient equipment or investments have 
been introduced in many countries and almost equally in all regions: they are 
used in about 30% of the countries surveyed. 
o One of the main barriers to energy efficiency is the lack of information to 
consumers about what they can do. To address this issue, a large range of 
tools has to be designed: e.g. general information campaigns, labelling of 
appliances and even dwellings rating their energy performance, audits, local 
information centres, education campaigns in schools and universities, case 
studies, and comparative information. 
o Audit schemes are a practical way of informing consumers about the possible 
actions to improve energy efficiency. They have been mainly developed in 
industry and in non-residential buildings and are increasingly made mandatory. 
Energy audits usually are partially funded by public agencies or by utilities in 
European countries and are more often free for consumers in the other regions 
to encourage participation. 
Mandatory audits – like voluntary audits - assume a certain quality of the 
auditors as well as of the staff responsible for energy management in the 
companies (energy managers). This can be assured by the certification of the 
auditors and by the training of energy managers. 
o ESCOs (Energy Service Companies) and EPC (Energy Performance 
Contracting) are a very attractive mechanism to capture cost-effective energyefficiency potentials worldwide, mainly because they do not involve either public 
expenditure or market intervention. EPC can probably be considered among the 
most effective mechanisms for promoting energy efficiency in the public sector 
and, especially in developing countries, in the industrial sector. 
o Several countries are introducing green taxes either on purchase tax or annual 
tax dependent on the CO2 emissions or energy efficiency of the cars. Fuel 
taxation plays a key role in promoting more efficient vehicles and more sensible driving habits. Tax increases are not always motivated by energy efficiency 
only. In some countries, specific CO2/environmental taxes have been set up for 
motor fuels (e.g. Scandinavia and Germany). Green taxes are better accepted 
by the population, especially if part of the revenue is used to support 
energy/CO2 efficiency measures. Road pricing indicates an efficient way to 
enhance the energy efficiency in transport, such as; the congestion charge in 
London. 
o Energy efficiency obligations have been a success in the EU Member States. 
They have been shown to work in both monopoly and fully liberalised 
environment, both for supply and distribution companies. 
Energy efficiency obligations are attractive also to governments, as they do not 
have to support the cost of these obligations. Energy efficiency obligations 
could be an important policy option for developing countries to save electricity, 
as they offer a way for governments to tackle energy efficiency at a modest 
increase on electricity customers’ bills. Energy efficiency obligations for utilities 
are a promising market-based instrument. 
o Quality labels and technical standards are effective tools for maintaining or 
improving quality, provided they are successfully enforced (e.g. the Keymark 
certification scheme in Europe). The existence of independent certification 
centres is a key element to ensure that imported products comply with national 
standards. The existence of skilled installers and of appropriate network of after 
sales services is also essential for stimulating further dissemination of solar 
water heating. 
As a summary, the introduction and/or strengthening of energy efficiency policies 
are becoming increasingly important and a sustained effort will be required over 
the long term. To be successful, energy efficiency programmes need to be based 
on appropriate strategies, including for example: 
o The public sector needs to commit itself to EE and lead by example. 
o Need for a favorable and stable institutional framework. 
o Energy efficiency policies should address all areas with energy savings potentials. 
o To be efficient and cost-effective, regulations need to be well planned, regularly 
strengthened and properly enforced. 
o Adequate pricing: a condition for successful energy efficiency policies’ 
implementation to reflect more near-market conditions. 
o Public/private partnerships to reinforce the effect of public policies. 
o Quality of energy efficiency services and equipment should be strengthened 
through certification and testing facilities. o Innovative measures should be promoted based on suitable experiences 
elsewhere. 
o Regular monitoring and evaluation of implemented measures using indicators 
should be ensured. 
1.2 Energy Efficiency – the issue for Armenia 
The Government of Armenia prioritizes energy efficiency as a means of increasing the 
country’s energy security, increasing economic competitiveness and reducing the 
negative impact on the environment. The Government’s commitment to promotion of 
energy efficiency is mainly reflected in the Law on Renewable Energy and Energy 
Efficiency (2005) and the National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy
(2007). The Law lays out the principles of the government’s policy and governance 
structure supporting energy efficiency, and provides for energy efficiency standards, 
audits and awareness raising. The National Program on Renewable Energy and 
Energy Efficiency identifies the sectors with the largest energy efficiency potential and 
provides an outline of technical measures/solutions to be taken to realize the identified 
technically viable potential. 
Armenia has significant potential for energy efficiency and can recoup sizable 
economic benefits through utilization of this potential. While Armenia is one of the less 
energy intensive economies in the region, largely due to the structural changes of the 
economy, large potential remains for further efficiency improvements. 
Based on the National Program on Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency, the 
World Bank performed a study in 20081
 which identified significant economically and 
financially viable energy efficiency potential. 
The study found that Armenia could save about 132 billion Armenian Drams (more than 
US$360 million) annually, equivalent to almost 5 percent of its GDP, through energy 
efficiency investments. The above study also identified a number of informational, 
legal, regulatory and financial barriers impeding energy efficiency investments. There is 
an estimation that the economic and financial returns of energy efficiency 
investments in public buildings have the highest return with paybacks of two to 
eight years. Investments in energy efficiency of public buildings cannot only free up the 
fiscal space, but also prime the market, by creating demand for energy efficient 
equipment and services and send a strong signal to the private sector and general 
public about the Government’s commitment to energy efficiency. 
 
1
 “The Other Renewable Resource: The Potential for Improving Energy Efficiency in Armenia”. July, 2008. To aid the implementation of the National Program, the Government of Armenia 
requested the World Bank to support with creation of an enabling environment for 
energy efficiency and financing of energy efficiency investments of public buildings. 
The proposed lending and TA project will contribute to achieving the Government’s 
national priorities as it will help generate awareness of the benefits of energy efficiency 
investments, address other information and data gaps related to energy efficiency, 
remove institutional and regulatory barriers, address capacity weaknesses hindering 
the implementation of energy efficiency measures, and provide financing for energy 
efficiency investments in the public sector, drawing on the recommendations of the 
National Program. 
Moreover, energy efficiency is a key reform area for the development policy lending 
operations of the World Bank in Armenia. Under the development policy operation, the 
Government committed to adopt a time-bound Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
(NEEAP). 
For the development of the action plan, an international consultant was hired by the 
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources in summer 2010, and the elaboration of 
measures proposed in the following report conducted in a process of involving 
stakeholders from different ministries (Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, 
Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Natural Protection), 
the Public Services Regulatory Commission, Armenian Renewable Resources and 
Energy Efficiency Fund, the Energy Institute, utilities, the World Bank, UNDP/GEF 
Armenia office, and gas and electricity companies. 
1.3 Scope and Objectives of the NEEAP 
The main objective of the action plan is to contribute to the formulation of the future 
energy policy of Armenia and to define concrete steps for its implementation. One of 
the main aims of the national policy in the energy sector is defined to improve energy 
efficiency and to further develop the use of renewable energy sources. 
The mentioned Law on Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency and the National 
Program on Renewable Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy provide general 
policy measures and an assessment of energy saving potentials, however they have 
not been implemented so far. 
The National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is based on generalised past trends in 
energy consumption and presumes a further rise in energy demand up to 2020. It takes 
into consideration earlier potential assessments made for energy savings in different 
sectors of the economy and refers to past and current projects/programmes dealing 
with energy efficiency issues and the main barriers to energy conservation. However, it 
was not the task during the NEEAP preparation to investigate into the sectoral 
potentials or even verify existing data, neither regarding energy efficiency nor economic 
potentials. The action plan is rather to be understood a policy implementation programme to help overcoming institutional, regulatory and information barriers, to help 
the government to focusing on the most relevant actions to be taken in a short, medium 
and longer term perspective. 
The diverse projects referred to in the previous paragraph are an important inflow of 
funds and financial sources into the country, especially in regard to technical 
assistance, rehabilitation and new infrastructure investments and as well awareness 
and capacity-building measures. The NEEAP is building upon these 
programmes/projects and proposes concrete measures per sector as well as horizontal 
and cross-sectoral measures together with quantitative targets (in %) that can be 
achieved by 2020. These targets need to be compared to a baseline energy demand 
that considers the average demand for the 3-years period 2008-2010. 
However, the first stage of the Action Plan presented here is not able to take into 
consideration actual figures regarding final energy demand across all relevant sectors 
of Armenian economy. The problem lies mainly in the unavailability of reliable up to 
date statistical information on final energy demand in considered sectors. It is therefore 
been proposed to the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources to define the baseline 
energy demand during the first NEEAP implementation period (until 2014, see 2.1) and 
provide the necessary data background together with a second NEEAP to be submitted 
by 2014, while ensuring this crucial measure, the elaboration of national energy 
statistic will be implemented as soon as possible. 
1.4 Relevant Activities and Programmes related to Energy Efficiency in Armenia 
To encourage energy efficiency, Armenia has so far taken several steps on the political 
and programmatic level: 
 Started to create a legal framework for energy efficiency. In 2005, the Government 
passed a Law on Energy Savings and Renewable Energy, and has since signed the 
Intergovernmental standard draft building codes (for new buildings) which mandate 
energy efficiency but has not adopted it yet. 
 Developed a National Program on Energy Savings and Renewable Energy with 
solid data on energy use and energy efficiency in Armenia. 
 Has taken steps to improve the economic efficiency of energy use through improved 
regulation of energy utilities. Several barriers to economic efficiency which also 
affect the efficiency of energy resource use—for example, highly subsidized energy 
tariffs, or the absence of electricity and gas metering—have been largely removed in 
Armenia. 
 Continued to work actively with development partners like the World Bank, the UN 
Development Programme, the EBRD, USAID and other donors on energy efficiency 
programs to improve the energy supply infrastructure (electricity and heat production 
facilities, transmission and distribution networks) and heat energy use in public and residential buildings. 
Relevant projects and programs ongoing and of past were mostly financed with support 
of the above mentioned IFIs that contribute to the implementation of an institutional and 
policy environment in favor of energy efficiency in Armenia: 
GEF Program: 
 Armenia – Improving the Energy Efficiency of the Urban Heating and Hot Water 
Supply (UNDP) 
 Armenia Energy Efficiency Project (IBRD) 
 LGGE Improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings (UNDP) 
World Bank: 
 Urban Heating Project – Armenia
 Electricity Supply Reliability and Energy Efficiency Project 
INOGATE Programme: 
 Harmonization of gas and oil technical standards and practices (E. Europe and 
Caucasus)
 Capacity-building for Energy Regulators in Eastern Europe and Central Asia
 Capacity building for Sustainable Energy Regulation in Eastern Europe and Central 
Asia
 Harmonization of electricity standards 
EBRD:
 Armenian Sustainable Energy Financing Facility (ArmSEFF)
USAID:
 Commercialization of Energy Efficiency Project (CEEP)
International Finance Corporation: 
 Armenia Energy Efficiency Survey Project
Millennium Challenge Account–Armenia (MCA–Armenia):
 Irrigated Agriculture Project
A more detailed list with a short description of the mentioned projects is provided in the 
Annex 3: List of relevant donor projects and programs ongoing and of past of this 
document. 2 Defining Targets for the Implementation of the NEEAP 
Armenia can save greatly by investing in energy efficiency. As mentioned above, 
previous studies made by the World Bank estimate the realizable saving potential to 
some 5 percent of its GDP. This is equal to energy savings of approximately 1.21 mtoe 
annually, or 1 TWh of electricity and 600 million m3
 of natural gas (based on 2008 
demand). 
Apart from the generated energy and cost savings, energy efficiency is one necessary 
condition to diversify Armenia’s energy supply and thus improve economic 
competitiveness. And this can be achieved at less cost than investing into new 
production capacities or energy imports. Energy efficiency investments are in general 
economically and financially viable, especially the public sector investments provide the 
highest return on investment overall. 
2.1 Setting the path for Energy Efficiency in Armenia until 2020 
The action plan is proposing a set of relevant measures to the Government of Armenia 
for improving the current legal status and enforcement of legislation put in place, for 
capacity-building (mainly in the public sector) and institutional setting, for creating 
awareness across all sectors and a general environment that is more in favour of 
energy efficiency improvement in the following sectors: 
o residential buildings 
o public and private service sector 
o industry and energy sector 
o transport 
o water sector 
The overall time frame for implementation of the action plan is considered to be a 
period of ten years, from 2010 until 2020. This is also in line with action plans of other 
countries. Due to the fact that several measures have a longer duration, e.g. 
considering enforcement periods or reaction time until market actors are ‘ready’ to 
implement energy saving measures in the mentioned sectors, the action plan needs to 
distinguish short term, medium and long term planning: 
o Short term measures: referring to an implementation path during a first 
implementation period of the action plan from 2011-2013. They refer to 
immediate action required in regard to policy making, institutional setting and 
awareness and communication. These are typical measures with significant 
energy saving potential with low funding implications (“low-hanging fruits”) and 
eventually already secured donor funding, which are classified with a high priority in the action plan. 
o Medium term measures: the medium priority measures are expected to be 
implemented within a 4 to 7 years period equalling the second implementation 
period of the action plan from 2014-2017. 
o Long term measures: the timeframe is considered to cover a period of more 
than 7 years. The implementation is more complex and thus less easily to be 
adopted, or depending on the existence of an institutional and policy setting. 
For the consideration in the action plan, they are assigned a low priority and 
thus are considered to be implemented not before the third implementation 
period of the action plan between 2018 and 2020. 
For the purpose of the first NEEAP presented here, apart from the list of measures,
intermediate national energy savings targets for the following periods of 
implementation have been proposed. These intermediate targets shall define realistic 
savings as a percentage of the baseline demand to be achieved in the relevant target 
year, consistent with the overall national indicative energy savings target referred to in 
chapter 2.2. 
The targets set for this first action plan implementation period provide an indication only 
and have been determined based on experiences made (and published) in other 
countries. A more detailed analysis of potentials and corresponding energy savings 
requires an in-depth national review of economic sectors, to provide a better data base 
and solidify the assumptions made regarding the EE potentials. 
Regular monitoring and evaluation of measures shall provide the Government and 
involved stakeholders with a clear view if the implementation is in line with the 
proposed time frame, if the intermediate energy savings targets are being achieved or 
if increased efforts are to be made to get back on the implementation path. 
It is therefore foreseen that the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources shall submit 
to the Government the following updated NEEAPs: 
o a second NEEAP not later than 30 June 2014 (considering implementation status 
until end 2013), 
o a third NEEAP not later than 30 June 2018 (considering implementation status until 
end 2017), 
o and a fourth NEEAP not later than 30 June 2021 (considering implementation 
status until end 2020). 
All NEEAPs shall describe the energy efficiency improvement measures planned and 
realised to reach the targets set out in chapter 2.2. 
The following NEEAPs shall as well: 
o include a thorough analysis and evaluation of the preceding NEEAP; o include the final results with regard to the fulfilment of the energy savings targets 
set out in chapter 2.2; 
o include plans for – and information on the anticipated effects of – additional 
measures which address any existing or expected shortfall vis-à-vis the target; 
o use and gradually increase the use of efficiency indicators and benchmarks, both 
for the evaluation of past measures and estimated effects of planned future 
measures; 
o be based on latest available data, supplemented with estimates. 
2.2 Baseline energy consumption and calculation of the national EE target 
Armenia can meet only roughly one-third of its total demand of fuels, mainly natural gas 
and oil, through own resources, thus the country is highly dependant on imported 
energy sources. On the other hand it currently benefits from an electricity surplus 
produced from own hydro power plants, one nuclear power plant and several thermal 
power plants. From 2001 until 2008, the amount of electricity consumed grew steadily 
at about 6% p.a, which is less than the annual GDP growth average of 9-10% p.a. 
Other fuels used for residential heating, process heat, transportation and as fuel source 
for power plants have also steadily increased, in total about 7% p.a. between 2001 and 
20082. The main fuel type is natural gas. In 2009, the preliminary figures show a 
decline due to general economic crisis of electricity demand by about 8% and of gas 
demand by almost 22%, compared to 2008. 
The following charts provide an overview of the electricity consumption and gas 
consumption in the last 5 years (2005-2008, 2009 preliminary figures) that account for 
estimated 75% of the total energy demand3
. For the other sources, no suitable data is 
available. 
 
2
 source: National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy, Armenian Energy Institute 
3
 source: 2005 data provided in National Program on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Chart 1: Electricity demand of main sectors 2005-2009 (prelim.) 
-
1.000
2.000
3.000
4.000
5.000
6.000
2005 2006 2007 2008 (2009)
GWh
Others
Agriculture
Transport
Industry
Public services
Residential
Source: Armenian Scientific Energy Institute 
Chart 2: Natural gas demand of main sectors 2005-2009 (prelim.) 
-
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
2,000
2005 2006 2007 2008 (2009)
mln m³
Others (incl. transportation)
Industry
Power Sector
Population
Source: Armenian Scientific Energy Institute Chart 3: Total electricity and gas demand 2005-2009 (prelim.) 
-
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
2005 2006 2007 2008 (2009)
GWh
Natural Gas
Electricity
Source: Armenian Scientific Energy Institute 
In the National Program on Energy Efficiency from 2007, the Armenian Scientific 
Energy Institute and the Energy Design Insitute (Damare CJSC) provided an 
assessment of sectoral consumption data for the main user sectors (for 2001-2005). 
However, what is missing since 1989, the last year when the energy balance was 
prepared, is a detailed annual energy supply and demand survey for all main sectors of 
economy that provides data on the annual final inland energy consumption of all 
energy users for the most recent years, including data on: 
o energy supply (import, production, inventory changes) 
o energy transformation (primary and secondary transformation processes) 
o final energy demand of all relevant sectors 
o useful energy demand according user categories (residential heating, industrial 
heat demand, stationary engines, lighting, air-conditioning, etc.) 
Due to the missing basic data and with the information made available from different 
sources, it is at the moment not possible to draw a realistic baseline scenario that will 
provide a sound base to estimate absolute savings to be achieved in the target year. 
Therefore, this first NEEAP provides only an indication of annual savings in relative 
terms (% p.a.) compared to the energy demand of the relevant sector (to be defined) 
where the proposed measures is part of. 
As soon as detailed energy balances will become available, i.e. final energy demand 
per sector (in absolute terms), the second NEEAP (2014) will have to update this information and provide relevant data on the calculation of the national energy saving 
target for the year 2020 as well as intermediate targets for the years 2013 and 2017, as 
proposed in the template provided in Annex 1. 
The table below provides a summary of estimated energy efficiency savings that shall 
be reached by the implementation of measures proposed in the chapters 4 and 5. 
As mentioned above, the savings reached by each year are indicative targets that are 
based on saving estimations in the National Program for Renewable Energy and 
Energy Savings for Armenia (mainly for industry and energy sector, transportation, 
water sector) and supported by reference to international studies and experience 
(mainly for building and service sectors4). 
 
4
 As for building refurbishment and corresponding energy saving potentials compare e.g. with the World 
Bank Study “Status of Energy Efficiency in Western Balkans” (2010). The study estimates the saving 
potential in residential buildings to be between 10 and 35% and in service sector 10 to 30%, and this 
for economies in transition similar to Armenia (e.g. Albania, Kosovo, Montenegro). Average 
quantitative savings have been regarded as a technical potential to be possibly realised in Armenia as 
well. N
15
Table 2: Estimated annual savings per measures in % (2011-2020) compared to final energy consu
2008 2009 2010
average
2008-2010 2011 
[in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in %] 
I. Horizontal measures 
I.1 Implementation of a regular national “Energy Statistic” (with annual updates) 
I.2 Implementation of a “National Energy Agency for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy” 
I.3 Financial Support for Energy Efficiency measures in all sectors 
I.4 Information campaigns, training and education in the area of energy efficiency improvements 
I.5 General regulatory demand side measures 
I.6 Assess the economic rationale of measures proposed in the NEEAP 
I.7 Public Procurement for Energy Efficiency 
 annual 0,0% 
 cumulated 0,0% 
II.1 National Building Code considering energy performance of buildings
II.2 Standards and calculation methodology to assess energy performance in buildings
II.3 Institutional capacity-building for implementing and enforcing new standards 0,0% 
II.4
Establishing quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) standards that will support the certification of key building 
materials for energy performance. 0,0% 
II.5
Set up road-test procedures for building certification and methodology for assessment of energy performance for pilot buildings 0,0% 
II.6
Training and education in correspondance with the promotion of integrated building design approach and new 
energy performance requirements in buildings 0,0% 
II.7
Pilot Project: Design competition and construction of several “best-practice” buildings (e.g. school or other public 
building, and a multi-family house) in Yerevan and another larger city, using an integrated building design approach 
within available budget and time schedule for the construction of a typical building.
0,0% 
II.8
Development of an incentive scheme to promote energy efficient construction or reconstruction in residential and 
service buildings 0,0% 
no meas
0,0% 
n/a n/a n/a n/a
Baseline
Sector/Measure
II. Building sector
annual/
cumulated 
savings
n/a n/a n/a n/aN
16
2008 2009 2010
average
2008-2010 2011 
[in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in %] 
 annual 0,0% 
 cumulated 0,0% 
III.1 Information campaigns on several issues of energy efficiency to be applied in public and private service buildings 0,0% 
III.2 Efficient energy services in public facilities - investive measures 0,0% 
III.3 Monitoring of energy consumption and achieved savings in service buildings 0,0% 
 annual 0,3% 
 cumulated 0,3% 
IV.1 Considering energy efficiency aspects for the construction of new industrial facilities 0,0% 
IV.2 Implementation of Energy Efficiency Financing Facility for Industrial Enterprises 0,0% 
IV.3
Electricity savings through improvements of existing electricity network, compensation of reactive power and 
improvement of transformers 0,3% 
 annual 0,2% 
 cumulated 0,2% 
V.1 Vehicle Inspection and Maintenance (I&M) program 0,0% 
V.2 Traffic Demand Managmeent (TDM) scheme 0,0% 
V.3 Dissemination of information on technologies and approaches for reducing energy consumption effectively 0,1% 
V.4 Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger passenger buses operated by natural gas 0,1% 
 annual 0,2% 
 cumulated 0,2% 
VI.1
Utilization of gravity flow in irrigation systems and modernisation of existing pumping stations and upgrading secondary and tertiare canals n/a n/a n/a n/a 0,2% 
VI.2 Optimization of drinking water pumping stations n/a n/a n/a n/a 0,0% 
VII. Total n/a n/a n/a n/a 
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a n/a
Baseline
Sector/Measure
n/a n/a
Industry sector
III.
VI. Agricultural sector
n/a n/a n/a n/a
Public & Private Service Sector
V. Transport sector
IV.
annual/
cumulated 
savingsThe proposed sectoral energy savings are based on potential assessments referred to 
by the author and have been adjusted to the target year. The summary effects to be 
possibly realised by the target year 2020 are shown in Table 3 and further explained in 
the following chapters 4 and 5. 
Table 3: Estimated energy savings cumulated for each sector until 2020 
in % 23,0%
in % 23,3%
in % 20,3%
in % 14,6%
in % 14,0%
Residential/Households
Industry & Energy sector
Transport
Public and commercial services
Water sector
Energy saving target adopted in 2020:
Source: own calculation 
The report on the “National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy of 
Republic of Armenia” just comes up with potential energy savings of the main fuel 
sources, around 1,036 GWh for electricity (ca. 23 % of 2008 demand) and 573,000,000 
m³ for natural gas (ca. 25% of 2008 demand). These savings are mainly dedicated to 
the industry and energy sectors, as well as transportation and water sector. References 
to the building sector (residential and public/private services) are not found to be too 
specific there. 3 Addressing Barriers for Energy Efficiency in Armenia 
Armenia has taken important steps to encourage more efficient use of energy, but 
many more steps must still be taken. However, the potential is mainly untackled due to 
a number of reasons that can be summarized in a list of barriers to addressing energy 
efficiency: 
o The legal framework needs to be implemented and enforced. Especially in the 
building sector the existing building code needs binding provisions regarding 
thermal quality of new and existing buildings and enforced standards and 
methodologies to assess energy performance in buildings. 
o Creating awareness about energy efficiency needs a lot of information and 
know-how provided to all energy consumers (private, business, service sector, 
etc.). Yet, there is a weak institutional setting in Armenia of communicating 
energy efficiency with profound capacity, e.g. through a National Agency or 
NGOs. 
o Private consumers (i.e. households) miss general and simple information on 
what can be done to reduce energy demand in the daily life, such as in housing, 
use of electric appliances, transportation etc. 
o Many political decision-makers and private businesses still fail to see the value 
in energy efficiency investments, despite the successes of donor-sponsored 
pilot projects and programs, because of missing awareness, sufficient current 
energy supply and to a certain extent because they simply lack information on 
energy consumption for and energy potentials in the main sectors. 
o The natural gas tariff encourages wasteful use by some smaller customers. 
There tariff structure does not provide an incentive for consumers to use less 
energy. Furthermore, there are no other financial incentives available that would 
encourage saving energy. 
The action plan presented in the next chapters of this document will address these 
main barriers and provide a set of selected instruments and action to overcome the 
main legal, institutional, decision-making and information barriers. 4 Horizontal and cross-sectoral measures 
4.1 Overview of horizontal and cross-sectoral EEI measures 
Target: Provide the necessary institutional setting and capacity to 
implement the Armenian Energy Efficiency Action Plan and
ensure continuous evaluation and monitoring of activities 
Target group: Ministries / Agencies 
Energy efficiency is not merely a matter of a single sector. Many measures are 
intertwined and mutually supportive. Energy efficiency measures affecting several or all 
energy consumption sectors are reflected within the horizontal activities. The main 
objective is to build up the necessary institutional capacities that will ensure an 
established structure for the implementation of the action plan. 
The measures proposed are to focus on cross-sectoral issues for a wide range of user 
target groups: 
o Legal aspects: integration of the NEEAP into existing energy policies (e.g. 
amending the Law on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy by taking the 
action plan as one main instrument for implementation into consideration); and the 
necessary reinforcement of the national energy statistic. The issue of public 
procurement of energy efficient equipment is mainly to provide public purchasers 
with technical specifications and the necessary “good will” to consider the 
acquisition of energy efficient products and services by spending public money. 
o Institutional setting: installation of a National Energy Agency. The main
responsibility for taking political action will stay with the Ministry of Energy and 
Natural Resources (legislation and policy making), while the new Agency will 
implement, co-ordinate implementation, evaluate and regularly report NEEAP and 
give also technical expertise to government in developing policies. The institutional 
building will also require additional personnel capacities within the responsible unit 
of the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources (Division of energy efficiency) and 
special training should be provided for new employees in international energy 
efficiency practices and strategies (training financed by R2E2 and UNDP/GEF, 
employees salaries from state budget). 
o Awareness, information campaigns and technical assistance/training on energy 
topics shall be enforced. It is a measures which is very long-lasting and needs to be 
reinforced all the time (through specific campaigns and built-up of proper material 
and media) 
The described horizontal and cross-sectoral measures will factually not create any 
energy saving per se, but will be the main driver for achieving savings under the 
following sectoral measures described in chapter 5. However, relevant indicators for 
monitoring the outcome are being defined with the measures presented in Table 4. N
20
Table 4: List of horizontal and cross-sectoral measures under the Armenian NEEAP 
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and 
specific actions
Responsibility 
Since 1989, there is no regular energybalance produced for Armenia. A government
decree was approved in 2007 to prepare anational energy balance sheet, yet however,the decree has not been implemented.
Ministry of Energy National Statistics
Office
Necessary actions:o Build-up of personal capacities at the
National Statistics Officeo Technical assistance and training ofdedicated staff to implement energy statisticsaccording to international standards andmethods (e.g. compliance with IEA)o Performance of sectoral surveys and
analysis (households, industry, service sector,etc.), including survey of changes over theyearso requirement of large consumers (e.g.industry) to submit regular data on energyconsumptiono Regular update (i.e. annually) and
publicationo Elaboration of a energy balance “baseline”
year (e.g. 2010) that will reflect the newmethodology and provide detailed energysupply and consumption ectoral data and willserve as a basis for evaluating progress of
EEAP in the future
I.1 Implementation of a regular 
national “Energy Statistic” (with
annual updates)N
21
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and 
specific actions
Responsibility 
It is necessary to embed the EEAP into a institutional setting for co-ordination and 
monitoring of progress made. The government is therefore to give a clear mandate, qualified staff and budgetary means to a national institution or agency to conduct the following main tasks:
o Co-ordinate and manage the activities to
be implemented under the Armenian EEAPo Regularly evaluate progress of measuresimplemented under the EEAP against definedbaseline consumptiono Prepare regular reports and monitoring ofEEAP activities (e.g. every 2-3 years)Furthermore, it shall be ensured that thefollowing activities shall be co-ordinated by thenew entity or other responsible governmentalagency(ies):o developing short-term and long-term energy
efficiency programs; o coordinating the energy efficiency activities
in different branches of economy;o conducting information campaigns
o developing energy efficiency standardso conducting certification and labelling; o certifying and/or licensingenergy auditors;
I.2 Implementation of a “National 
Energy Agency for EnergyEfficiency and RenewableEnergy”
Ministry of Energy N
22
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and 
specific actions
Responsibility 
I.3 Financial Support for Energy
Efficiency measures in all
sectors
Due to a primary lack of funding meansprovided by the national budget, it is a keytask to provide properly adaptedcomplementary funding of energy efficiencymeasures through providing primarily (in theshort term) donor funding to financially supportthe planning and realisation of energyefficiency measures. This could be donethrough the following mechanisms:o investing into energy efficiency measures inpublic facilities (schools, kindergartens,hospitals, street lighting, etc.)o grants for capacity-building/trainingactivities for public administration toimplement energy policies and strategieso On-lending programmes industry and SME,such as EBRD's Sustainable EnergyFinancing Facility. In the medium to long-term, alternativesources (others than donor programmes),such as private sponsoring or public-privatepartnerships are to be sought to:o realise in particular flagship energy efficiency projects in industry, public & privateservices or residential buildings.o support the development of energyservices companies (e.g. ESCOs) - pilot activities and training programmes
Ministry of Energy N
23
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and 
specific actions
Responsibility Funding sou
Organising and running information
campaigns and educational projects onenergy efficiency and financial support foractions relating to the promotion of energyefficiency. The campaigns need to be timespecific and targeted to different kind ofenergy consumers (residential, service sector,industry, etc.). Proper indicators for measuringthe effectiveness of awareness raisingmeasures shall be developed when designingawareness campaigns.o Use of energy efficient products.
Campaigns will be targeted towardsencouraging specific actions, e.g. residentialbuildings: optimising new construction(thermal requirements, integrated buildingdesign, use of optimised equipment forlighting, household appliances, heatingsystems incl. pumps etc.) or ways to improveexisting buildings cost-effectivelyo Information and education actions aimed at
changing consumer behaviour and increasingsocial acceptance of solutions that improveenergy efficiency in households, tertiary sectorand industry.o Encourage providers and consumers to
pay more attention to energy efficiencylabelling and to the energy consumption of
products bought and sold.o Training for sales staff as regards energy
efficiency labelling and product life cyclecosts.o Creation of a training system for energy
efficiency specialists within tertiary education,as part of various disciplines.o Introduction of energy efficiency subjectsinto education programmes at all levels.
I.4 Information campaigns, training 
and education in the area of
energy efficiency improvements
Ministry of Energy(later: NationalEnergy Agency)
State budgetInternational donors (e.g. UNDP/GEF, WBank)Private sponsorshipN
24
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and 
specific actions
Responsibility Fundin
o Providing incentives to energy consumersto use energy more efficiently and at realmarket costs.
State bWorld ESMAP
o Introduce load management tools andrevise gas and electricity tariff structure basedon detailed cost-benefit analysis.
I.6 Assessment of the economic 
rationale of measures proposed in the NEEAP
Adopt a methodology for assessment of economic viability of proposed energy efficiency programmes and measures
Ministry of Economy State b
Public procurement contracts must include
energy efficiency aspects when buyingproducts, services or works. Specific criteriafor public authorities and contracting partiesneed to be prepared, such as technicalspecifications and evaluation criteria for thepurchase of public goods, works and servicesin all sectors, e.g. in the fields of:
Relies 
of goand sefrom state/mbudget
o (re)construction of buildingso lightingo ICT and office equipmento air-conditioning and coolingo household appliances (e.g. refrigerators,
washing-machines, coffee-machines)o vehiclesAt the same time it should be ensured that theannual planning of public budgets - especiallywhen taking into consideration necessaryinvestments into infrastructure - construction,purchase of equipment, etc. - should considerenergy efficiency aspects already in thebudgeting phase.
Public Procurement 
Agency (underGovernment) Ministry of Energy,Ministry of Finance,Ministry of UrbanDevelopment
Public Procurement for Energy Efficiency
I.7
I.5 General regulatory demand side
measures
Ministry of Energy,
Public ServiceRegulatory Commission5 Sectoral presentation and assessment of energy efficiency 
improvement programmes, energy services, and other measures to 
improve energy efficiency 
5.1 Energy efficiency improvement measures in the residential building sector5
Overall Target: Improved use of energy for heating and cooling while ensuring 
thermal comfort, and reduction of specific energy consumption 
in the preparation of hot water; implementation of the necessary 
legal and institutional framework; provision of large-scale 
information and awareness raising campaigns amongst all 
stakeholders 
Target group: Owners, tenants and operators of private homes (family houses, 
multi-family buildings), architects, planners, construction 
companies, legislative bodies 
5.1.1 General introduction on the building sector 
Almost all the Armenian housing stock has been constructed during Soviet period 
some 35-60 years ago without any regard to energy efficiency. Many of these buildings 
are now in obsolete condition and do not provide for minimum hygienic and comfort 
living conditions. Specific energy use per square meter is almost 3-5 times higher than 
in EU and varies between 320 and 690 kWh/m² per year. Nevertheless, in many 
households, the amount of space heated is limited to one or two rooms, as tenants 
have limited available household budget to cover the high energy costs. 
Also, construction works in Armenia are presently performed more or less according to 
former Soviet practices and norms that almost do not involve buildings’ energy 
performance and improvement issues. Such designs and construction works result in 
excessive energy consumption and growing amount of GHG emissions. 
Currently, residential (and also public) buildings in the country are of low thermaltechnical performance resulting in growing demand for and consumption of thermal 
energy. Buildings’ low thermal technical performance reflects insufficient heat 
conduction resistance of building envelope and unnecessary expansion of glass cover. 
Besides, state supervision of mandatory implementation of current norms is absent. 
Armenia has voted for Intergovernmental construction norm MSN 2.04-02-2004 
“Thermal Insulation of the Buildings,” developed by Intergovernmental NormativeTechnical Commission on Standards and Certification in Building Sector of CIS, 
however it has not been adopted and applied in Armenia. 
 
5
 80% of the total building stock in Armenia is for residential purposes. So there is a specific focus to be 
given to the housing sector, nevertheless several measures presented here also reflect the need to be 
covered in other building types, mainly from the public and private service sector According to preliminary research, via efficient thermal insulation of residential and 
public buildings, it is possible to reduce energy consumption for heating at least by 20-
40%6
, taking into consideration the low heating level in residential buildings. Of course, 
the technical potential for improving the building sector is much higher, and able to 
reach a minimum of 70% (and up to 90%). 
New housing stock is largely privately owned and often built with limited financial 
means, leading to the use of inadequate building materials. It is therefore 
recommended to put an emphasis on low- and no-costs energy efficiency measures to 
overcome the lack of finance, while strengthening enforcement of the new building 
regulations. 
Used building materials are rarely certified or labelled for thermal quality, while 
imported materials and components lack labels or are labelled in an inconsistent 
manner. There is some potential for developing domestic materials, and a domestic 
production of quality construction materials could be developed through the use of 
licenses for foreign components. However, this would require substantial investments 
in plants capacity, technology adaptation, training and marketing that seem to be 
premature at this stage, given limited market size. Such investments would only be 
viable when the standards enforcement capacities are in place, and when a real 
demand is effective on the market. 
Since 2004, Armenia is involved in the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP). The 
implementation of ENP action plan was approved in 2006 and is to contribute to 
harmonization of Armenian legislation, norms and standards with EU criteria. In this 
regard, improvement of energy efficiency of buildings and constructions also needs 
paying attention to EU directives. 
According to EU Directive on “Energy Performance of Buildings”, cap values of energy 
consumption in buildings, buildings’ efficiency rankings, specific consumption of 
thermal energy for heating etc. Should be identified upon discretion of each country 
based on climatic conditions, technical and demographic data. 
At the same time, improvement of buildings’ energy efficiency level is reflected in 
certain provisions of the Armenian “Law on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy” 
and of the “National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy”. In this 
context, the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources and Ministry of Urban 
Development in cooperation with the “Armenia – Improving the Energy Efficiency of 
Municipal Heating and Hot Water Supply” UNDP/GEF project, initiated a harmonization 
process of standards relevant to the sector. The Project’s work plan for 2009-2010 
includes harmonization issues to international and European standards. 
 
6
 Sources: Towards Energy Efficiency Buildings in Europe (2004) 5.1.2 Overview of sector-specific measures 
Summarizing one can say that apart from climate, the energy consumption in the 
building sector is significantly affected by the thermal-technical properties of buildings, 
the efficiency of heating and cooling systems, their regular inspection, maintenance 
and the behaviour of residents. This fact not only refers to residential buildings, but the 
same is true for public and private service buildings. 
The main barriers in the building sector can be therefore defined as follows: 
o lack of available energy statistics and qualitative data on energy demand in the 
sector, 
o appropriate legislation (codes, standards, norms) and its enforcement to induce 
energy efficient (re)construction, 
o coherent strategy for building sector development and plans for new 
constructions and renovation of existing buildings,
o availability of funds to support EE investments (e.g. availability of a financing 
scheme to support reconstruction and/or refurbishment of residential buildings), 
o as well as knowledge and willingness of house owners, planners, architects and 
operators of buildings to improve the quality of buildings and support residents 
in adopting energy efficiency user practices; 
Therefore, the main target for the developing measures in the residential building 
sector can be specified as follows: 
o upgrading existing legislation and all by-laws (standards, norms) to reflect the 
necessary efforts to be made in increasing the energy of buildings, 
o setting up educational programmes (tertiary education, on-the-job-training) to 
train students and employees of companies in the planning/design and 
construction sector to comply with new integrated design and building 
standards, 
o establish necessary capacities on the enforcement level, 
o develop pilot projects to demonstrate building best-practice (for rehabilitation 
and new buildings) and 
o provide further incentives to promote energy efficient construction at all levels, 
such as introduction of energy passports or building operational costs to be 
used for advertising those flats and houses for sale/rent adhering to high energy 
efficiency standards (provide incentives for construction companies to enforce 
EE construction practices). 
A broad range of measures proposed for existing and new buildings will account for 
approx. 23% of total energy savings of the building sector projected under the 
Armenian NEEAP by 2020. 
The % savings attributed to each kind of measures is being demonstrated in Table 5. 
Marked red are the relevant intermediate energy saving target years, according to which the following energy savings are foreseen: 
o 2013: 1.3% 
o 2017: 9.9% 
o 2020: 23.0% 
Table 6 provides a more detailed description of the measures of the building sector. N
29
Table 5: Estimated savings per measure in the residential building sector from 2011-2020 
2008 2009 2010
average
2008-2010 2011 
[in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in %] 
 annual 0,0% 
 cumulated 0,0% 
II.1 National Building Code considering energy performance of buildingsII.2 Standards and calculation methodology to assess energy performance in buildingsII.3 Institutional capacity-building for implementing and enforcing new standards 0,0% 
II.4
Establishing quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) standards that will support the certification of key building 
materials for energy performance. 0,0% 
II.5
Set up road-test procedures for building certification and methodology for assessment of energy performance for 
pilot buildings 0,0% 
II.6
Training and education in correspondance with the promotion of integrated building design approach and new 
energy performance requirements in buildings 0,0% 
II.7
Pilot Project: Design competition and construction of several “best-practice” buildings (e.g. school or other public building, and a multi-family house) in Yerevan and another larger city, using an integrated building design approach 
within available budget and time schedule for the construction of a typical building.
0,0% 
II.8
Development of an incentive scheme to promote energy efficient construction or reconstruction in residential and 
service buildings 0,0% 
0,0% 
n/a n/a n/a n/a
Baseline
Sector/Measure
II. Building sector
annual/
cumulated 
savingsN
30
Table 6: List of measures in the residential building sector specified under the Armenian NEEAP 
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and
specific actions
Responsibility 
II.1 National Building Code
considering energy performanceof buildings
Adoption of a National Building codeconsidering energy performance of buildings(compatible with international best practices,such as the European Energy PerformanceBuilding Directive) with regular revisions ofthe building code (e.g. all 3 years). The newcode will consider the total building energyperformance (including heating, hot water,air conditioning and ventilation) and setspecific targets concerning the maximumenergy demand of buildings. Constructionpermits are to be issued taking into
consideration that all requirements 
Ministry of EnergyMinistry of EconomyMinistry of UrbaDevelopment
II.2 Standards and calculation
methodology to assess energyperformance in buildings
Elaborate and adopt national calculationmethodology to determine building energyconsumption based on standardized useand establish minimal requirements forthermal properties of a building, heating andair-conditioning systems, application ofrenewable energy sources and relevantdesign aspects of buildings (e.g. inclusionof passive solar elements).
Ministry of EnergyMinistry of EconomyMinistry of UrbaDevelopmentN
31
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and
specific actions
Responsibility Fund
II.3 Institutional capacity-building for
implementing and enforcing newstandards
Develop responsibilities and clear
procedures within the responsible Ministry of Urban Development to address theenforcement of the new building energyefficiency codes and standards. Train staffto ensure compliance with the new codethroughout design, construction andmaintenance phases, through capacitybuilding in energy audits: Define proceduresand methodology for issuance of buildingenergy passports and the types of buildingsfor which the passports will becomecompulsory.
Ministry of UrbanDevelopment
UNDP
II.4 Establishing quality
assurance/quality control(QA/QC) standards that willsupport the certification of keybuilding materials for energyperformance.
Establish a mandatory testing system for theconformity of construction materials withbuilding energy performance according tonational standards. Establish performancerequirements for materials produced locallyor imported, which will allow builders anddesigners to make better informed decisionsabout the performance of the constructionmaterials used in new buildings. Introduce avoluntary certification and labelling schemefor construction materials (e.g. windows,insulation, boilers, etc.) to provide incentivesfor high-quality materials to enter theArmenian market. Furthermore, nationalnorms for QA/QC shall be established inmanufacturing facilities and assistance forsuppliers to comply with energy-efficiencyrelated national standards
Ministry of UrbanDevelopment, Ministryof Economy
UNDPN
32
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and
specific actions
Responsibility 
II.5 Set up road-test procedures for
building certification andmethodology for assessment of
energy performance for pilotbuildings
Set up road-test procedures for buildingcertification and methodology forassessment of energy performance forseveral pilot buildings (e.g. schools,residential buildings) to be constructedfollowing integrated building designapproach. Use experiences and outcomesfrom relevant projects, such as UNDP/GEFProject on "Improving the Energy Efficiencyof Municipal Heating and Hot Water Supply”(UNDP/GEF/00035799)
Ministry of UrbaDevelopmentN
33
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and
specific actions
Responsibility 
II.6 Training and education in
correspondance with thepromotion of integrated buildingdesign approach and newenergy performancerequirements in buildings
Promotion of best energy design andconstruction practices in the constructionsector: (1) Develop and introduce moduleon energy efficient building design in thecurricula of University for Architecture andConstruction and provide training assistanceand other support materials (Teachers’Guide) for teaching staff; (2) Design anddeliver training courses for staff in the fieldof building energy performance, solararchitecture and applications for renewableenergy sources in buildings; (3) Providetraining courses for practicing architects andengineers concerning the application of thenew codes and calculation methodologies;(4) Raise awareness of buildingconstructors on economic, environment andsocial benefits of integrated building designand on locally available and testedtechnologies, materials and other EEapplications in buildings (e.g. though publicevents at major construction events); (5)Organize information campaign for thegeneral public promoting benefits of the newbuilding code and the Energy Passport; (6)promote results of pilot buildings and integrated building design regularly through the national media;
Ministry of Educatioand ScienceN
34
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and
specific actions
Responsibility 
II.7 Pilot Project: Design competition 
and construction of several “bestpractice” buildings (e.g. school or other public building, and a multi-family house) in Yerevan and another larger city, using an integrated building design approach within available budget and time schedule for the construction of a typical building.
Pilot project should cover the following: (1) low- or no-cost measures; (2) monitor energy performance of pilot buildings; (3) Adopt a new standard design for newly constructed buildings (e.g. schools) based 
on the ones applied in the pilot buildings; (5) introduce integrated energy efficient design methodology in all planned public construction (technical specifications for public procurement);
Ministry of UrbaDevelopment, Ministrof Education, Ministrof Finance, TechnicaAssistance from Donor
II.8 Development of an incentive
scheme to promote energyefficient construction orreconstruction in residential andservice buildings
Development of an incentive scheme forenergy efficient construction orreconstruction. Provide appropriate andfinancially sound support mechanisms thatwould allow the building owners to complywith enhanced standards andsimultaneously accept the opportunity toinvest into cost-effective energy efficiencymeasures by realising visible benefits (e.g.small scale subsidy and financing schemes,support for energy passport)
Ministry of EnergyMinistry of Financewith internationadonors and nationabanks5.2 Energy efficiency improvement measures in the public and private service sector
Target: Reduction, or minimisation of energy consumption in public and 
private service sector focusing on a various range of 
applications in buildings and public space (e.g. street-lighting, 
use of office equipment, air-conditioning) 
Target group: Public administration (ministries, towns/municipalities), public 
lighting operators, private office owners and tenants, employees 
in these companies 
5.2.1 General introduction on the public and private service sector 
The Armenian economy is agricultural-industrial oriented, with a developing service 
sector. The structure of 2004 GDP in Armenia is: 40% in industrial sector, 35% in 
service sector (including construction and transportation), and 25% in agriculture. The 
share of service sector is 1.5-2 times lower than in developed countries (50-70%). 
The energy intensity index in the service sector of Armenia, 90.4 kg oe/$1,000 USD is 
close to that of many developed and developing countries: Estonia, 91 kg oe/$1,000 
USD, Latvia, 99.7 kg oe/$1,000 USD, Czech Republic, 114.8 kg oe/$1,000 USD (see 
Figure 1). According to the “National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable 
Energy of Republic of Armenia” paper (2007), the service sector in Armenia is 
experiencing the same issues of energy efficiency as in developed countries and in 
general does not represent a high absolute energy saving potential. 
Figure 1: Energy intensity of economy in a number of countries in 2003, kg oe/thous.USD 
Source: Scientific Research Institute of Energy for the Alliance to Save Energy/USAID: “National Program 
on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy of Republic of Armenia”; Yerevan 2007 as by Key World Energy 
Statistics from IEA: htpp:/www.iea.org/dbtw-wpd/Textbase/stats/nmcbalancetable.asp Nevertheless, the role of the public administration in providing good practice and thus 
being a shining example for the other sectors is evident. Public spending is a significant 
contributor to the countries’ GDP. The state administration, all regional and local 
authorities and other public institutions (e.g. health sector, schools) regularly purchase 
energy consuming devices, such as office equipment, lighting, diverse household 
appliances (fridges, dishwashers, washing-machines, etc.) and other equipment used 
for air-conditioning, ventilation, etc. 
It is therefore of importance to provide the public sector with a clear strategy, i.e. to 
demand energy efficient applications and equipment and directing public spending 
towards higher-quality products. Energy efficient public procurement will provide costeffective means to improve the energy intensity of the sector as slightly higher 
purchasing costs will pay back within a couple of years. On the other hand the 
availability of energy efficient products on the market will steadily increase, if the 
demand is rising. 
Pretty the same issues are to be addressed to the private service sector, although it is 
generally a very inhomogeneous market segment which usually is not subject to direct 
influence by the government. The issue for this sector is therefore to increase the 
awareness of the protagonists in this area – business owners, service companies, 
operators of office space and commercial trading, etc. – and provide them with a scope 
of measures that would foster concrete action towards energy efficiency. Although 
most of the energy used in service buildings is spent for heating and hot water 
(measures already covered in chapter 5.1), the growing demand for ventilation and 
cooling in these buildings is a serious issue to be addressed in the countries energy 
policy. 
5.2.2 Overview of sector-specific measures 
The operation of public buildings is a relevant cost factor in the public sector due to the 
share of energy costs in the total budget. Apart from lighting, heating and cooling of 
buildings and use of various equipment (ICT, office equipment, household appliances 
used in offices etc.) are the most significant consumers in service buildings. Together 
with the improvement of the energy efficiency of mentioned equipment, efficient user 
behaviour constitutes for a large saving potential (from 20% to 60%, depending on the 
baseline consumption) in this area. The general energy efficiency measures covering 
the building envelope are already specified in chapter 5.1 (also valid for service 
buildings). 
In addition to the energy consumption in public buildings, operation of lighting in public 
buildings and public street-lighting in towns and municipalities make a relevant 
contribution to the final energy consumption in the public sector. Street-lighting projects 
are usually financed out of municipal budgets. The current practice is that in case of 
efficiency measures implemented (leading to savings in operational costs covered by 
the municipal budget) the local authority is not able to dispose of the energy cost savings, as operational budgets in this case will be usually cut by the central 
government. So there is no real incentive to realise efficiency measures. Finding ways 
to change this situation (e.g. financing schemes, such as energy performance 
contracting) will definitely increase the interest in becoming more energy conscious. 
As for street-lighting, the largest consumer in this area is the City of Yerevan, in other 
towns and municipalities the issue of street-lighting is of less importance, mainly due to 
absence of fully operated lighting-systems. Lighting is, to a large extend, being 
consumed inefficiently, which results from the use of obsolete light sources, unreliable 
regulation (switching, declining power supply voltage) and wrong positioning and 
location of light sources. Upgrading of public lighting will focus on the installation of 
modern highly efficient light sources for public lighting as well and reliable and efficient 
regulation and management of operation. 
The three measures proposed for the service sector can save up to approx. 15% of 
total energy savings of sector by 2020. However, as shown below, the effects are 
low in the short-term and will grow steadily with increasing the penetration of efficiency 
measures in the service sector. 
The % savings attributed to each kind of measures is being demonstrated in Table 7. 
The relevant intermediate energy saving target years, according to which the following 
energy savings are foreseen, are: 
o 2013: 0.6% 
o 2017: 6.1% 
o 2020: 14.6% 
Table 8 provides a more detailed description of the measures of the building sector. N
38
Table 7: Estimated savings per measure in the public and private service sector from 2011-2020 
2008 2009 2010
average
2008-2010 
[in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] 
 annual 
 cumulate
III.1 Information campaigns on several issues of energy efficiency to be applied in public and private service buildings 
III.2 Efficient energy services in public facilities - investive measures 
III.3 Monitoring of energy consumption and achieved savings in service buildings 
n/a n/a
Baseline
Sector/Measure
n/a n/a
III. Public & Private Service Sector
annual/
cumulate
savingsN
39
Table 8: List of measures in the public and private service sector specified under the Armenian NE
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and 
specific actions
Responsibility F
III.1 Information campaigns on several
issues of energy efficiency to beapplied in public and privateservice buildings
Office equipment and room ventilation
and conditioning systems used in service buildings provide usually a greatpotential for energy efficiency throughchanging of user behaviour andoptimising existing systems throughenergy efficient operation. The resultare significant savings on the operationcosts and higher user comfort. Theadvantages and types of measures to beadopted to optimise existing facilities and systems shall be transmitted throughpublic information campaigns specificallyadressing the following issues:- operating lighting in offices efficiently- use of office equipment (computers,printers, copiers, servers, etc.)- air-conditioning and ventilation- other household appliances used inoffices (e.g. refrigerators, cookers, etc.)- availability of energy efficiency labelsand how they can be used forpurchasing decisions- evaluation of the potential of behaviourchange impact and provision ofcorresponding recommendations to thepublic building administration
Ministry of Energy,National Energy Agency
W N
40
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and 
specific actions
Responsibility FMinistry of Energy W Public and privateservice facilities'operators
III.3 Monitoring of energy consumption
and achieved savings in servicebuildings
"Energy accounting" or regular
monitoring of energy consumption inpublic buildings is an important aspect toimprove the consciousness regardingenergy use. Many building operatorshowever do not know about their buildingenergy consumption and energy costsaccrued. The idea is to support theintroduction of building energyaccounting to monitor energyconsumption and savings in case ofrehabilitations.
National EnergyAgency
B
III.2 Efficient energy services in public 
facilities - investive measures
Defining minimum requirements for provision of energy efficient services in public facilities, and implementation of correlating investive measures reducing the energy demand of public (and private) service buildings (heating, airconditioning, use of office equipment) and optimisation of public lighting systems (e.g. learning from experiences made in City of Yerevan); Provide examples of financing such projects through ESCOs.5.3 Energy efficiency improvement measures in industry sectors (including energy 
production)
Target: Reduction of energy intensity with respect to value-added 
production in the industry and the energy sector (energy 
production, transmission and distribution companies); 
optimisation of energy supply in the country’s power plants and 
distribution network 
Target group: Stakeholders in industrial production and energy utilities 
5.3.1 General introduction on the industry & energy sectors 
Industrial activities: 
The 40% share of industry in the GDP (2004) of Armenia is close to the one in 
developed countries (30-40%). 
The industry sector of Armenia has, as compared to other sectors, also a low energy 
intensity characteristic, 329.4 kg oe/$1,000 USD, compared to the one for Uzbekistan, 
2616 kg oe/$1,000 USD, Estonia, 569 kg oe/$1,000 USD, Moldova, 1264 kg oe/$1,000 
USD, and Georgia, 304 kg oe/$1,000 USD (see Figure 1). 
This means that the spectrum of the energy intensive production in the country is very 
low (e.g. “Nairit” factory, “Polyvinylacetate” factory use mainly electricity, and cement, 
ore and mining industry is mainly depending on oil and natural gas), and that the share 
of production using modern energy efficient technologies is fairly high (food production, 
non-energy intensive production). 
Nevertheless, it is necessary to make use of energy efficient technologies and 
production methods which make it possible to reduce energy intensity of the production 
in the main energy consuming industrial sectors (such as chemical industry, 
metallurgy), but also within the larger sector smaller and medium-sized companies. 
Energy production: 
Armenia has no oil and natural gas reserves, and imports all its fossil fuel demand. 
Electricity is provided by: 
o A nuclear power plant which provides 30-40%; 
o Hydroelectric plants satisfy 20-35% of the country’s needs. Besides, the 
hydropower generation is declining due to limitations associated with irrigation 
purposes of the hydro plants; 
o The remaining electricity demand is satisfied by thermal power plants which can 
burn either oil or natural gas. The share of the thermal plants in the generation 
mix of the country is on average 30-35%. 
In the heating sector, due to the consequences of the economic and energy crisis that followed the separation of Armenia and its neighboring countries from 
the former Soviet Union in 1990, the municipal heat and hot water supply systems in all 
Armenian cities essentially collapsed. While in some cities the operations of the former, 
centralized district heating (DH) system have been partially restored, the vast majority 
of the urban population still lacks organized heat and hot water supply services. 
Nowadays, in larger public and private service buildings there is often a centralised 
boiler house existing, while in residential buildings local heating systems prevail. Many 
of these centralised boiler houses are operated inefficiently or are generally old. They 
would need a focus within the Action Plan to undergo major refurbishment or 
reconstruction. 
5.3.2 Overview of sector-specific measures 
The measures to improve energy efficiency in the industry sector must be particularly 
targeted at energy demand, monitoring and management in the individual technological 
processes, introduction of innovative approaches primarily aimed at reducing the 
energy intensity of industrial production, and investments in energy efficiency in the 
selected industrial branches. Generally, there is a lack of awareness and knowledge on 
potential EE measures as well as incentives to implement them. In order for these 
measures to be effective, a change must occur in people’s mentalities and behaviour. 
The National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy has assessed a 
series of measures throughout the specific sectors, which need to be tackled. 
Reference is therefore made to the existing potential analyses and studies, one of 
which was also prepared by the International Finance Co-operation (IFC), that is 
helping Armenian financial institutions develop sustainable energy finance products, 
thereby increasing renewable energy generation and lowering electricity waste and 
greenhouse-gas emissions. Another of these sustainable energy financing institutions 
(“ArmSEFF” programme, see Annex 3: List of relevant donor projects and programs 
ongoing and of past) is being developed by the EBRD (envisaged start: autumn 2010). 
A focus is also to be given to the power and gas sector. Obsolete and old 
infrastructure, a high share of production and transmission losses are putting a 
pressure on the utilities to maintain their systems reliable and make them fit for the 
future – which is showing sharp increases of energy demand (up to 10% p.a. until 
2020, once the “economic crisis” is over). Although there are several programs running 
with support from e.g. the World Bank, continuous improvement and maintenance of 
existing energy production and distribution facilities remains a high priority for ensuring 
a sustainable and reliable energy system. Together with the improvement of the 
infrastructure, measures to ensure the affordability of gas and electricity tariffs (as 
described as an improvement measure in chapter 4) have to be enforced. 
A summary of the critical measures proposed can be found in Table 10. The table is split into demand side measures on the one hand (i.e. efficiency 
measures at industrial users) and on the other hand on measures focussing on the 
supply side (looking for improvements in the supply and distribution of heat and 
electricity through utilities). 
The targeted savings to be reached by 2020 are significant and could reach approx. 
42% of total energy savings of the industry (and energy production) sector. 
The % savings are also given in Table 9. The relevant intermediate energy saving 
targets are as follows: 
o 2013: 2.1% 
o 2017: 11.3% 
o 2020: 23.3% N
44
Table 9: Estimated savings per measure in the industrial sector from 2011-2020 
2008 2009 2010
average
2008-2010 2011 
[in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in %
 annual 0,3
 cumulated 0,3
IV.1 Considering energy efficiency aspects for the construction of new industrial facilities 0,0
IV.2 Implementation of Energy Efficiency Financing Facility for Industrial Enterprises 0,0
IV.3
Electricity savings through improvements of existing electricity network, compensation of 
reactive power and improvement of transformers 0,3
n/a n/a n/a n/a
Baseline
Sector/Measure
IV. Industry sector
annual/
cumulated 
savingsN
45
Table 10: List of measures in the industrial sector specified under the Armenian NEEAP 
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and 
specific actions
Responsibility Fu
IV.1 Considering energy efficiency
aspects for the construction of newindustrial facilities
Emphasizing awareness raisingmeasures in industrial enterprises and attechnical and management levelregarding the introduction of energyefficient technologies for newinstallations; or for rehabilitationsensuring the improvement of the energyefficiency of the existing system.
Ministry of Economy, Ministry of EnvironmentPSRC
St
Demand side measuresN
46N
47
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and 
specific actions
Responsibility Fu
o Electricity transmission losses are
considerably higher than the internationalstandard of 6-7 percent, at roughly 15percent. Investments into the network arenecessary to reduce high amount oflosses and thus contribute to safer supplyof energy
W
o Technical losses in the transformers
and transformer substations as well asdistribution lines are to be tackled,especially on the medium and low voltagesystems
IV.3 Electricity savings through 
improvements of existing electricitynetwork, compensation of reactivepower and improvement oftransformers
Ministry of Energy,
Electric Networks ofArmenia
Supply side measures 5.4 Energy efficiency improvement measures in the transport sector
Target: Reduction and minimisation of energy consumption in freight 
and passenger transport; increasing opportunities for public 
transport 
Target group: Traffic participants, transport route owners and operators, 
owners and operators of means of transport, state 
administration, local and regional governments 
5.4.1 General introduction on the transport sector 
The provision of transport linkages and transit carriages has a key role for the 
development of trade-economic relations between countries. For all developing 
countries, especially those which are landlocked as Armenia, it is crucial to implement 
transit carriages in the light of the tariffs in use and to spur infrastructure development, 
modernization of available transport stock, etc. The transport policy of Armenia is 
conducted onwards the creation of integrated Euro-Asian transport network, 
elaboration of mechanisms for unification of legislative acts and other regulations. 
Currently, Armenia is implementing the necessary internal state procedures for joining 
to the existing agreements and conventions in the field of transport, which have been 
signed in the framework of UN Economic Commission for Europe. 
The Republic of Armenia, which has a quite developed network of roads and railways, 
taking into consideration the specific geographical situation of the country, extends 
major attention to the modernization of transport infrastructures and for attracting 
investments in the said sector, especially for the reconstruction of artificial facilities – 
bridges and tunnels. In regard with its effectiveness, high priority is given to the 
implementation of combined container carriages and modernization of container 
terminals. 
The major issue, however, remain the quite underdeveloped means of public 
transportation means across the country (e.g. under-utilised railway system) and 
especially within its largest city, Yerevan. Individual means of transportation are a huge 
traffic problem within the city (e.g. there a ten times more minibuses operated than 
regular larger buses), causing congestion and high emissions from this sector. 
Moreover, the electrified transport means, such as railway, trolley buses or metro (one 
line in Yerevan) are playing a very limited role in transport means of the country. The 
share of different public transportation means in Yerevan (2008) are: trolley buses ca. 
3%, metro 4%, large and medium buses 8% and micro buses ca. 85%. The big 
challenge is increase the share of public transportation systems (large and trolley 
buses, metro) compared to the high number of micro buses and individual private cars.
5.4.2 Overview of sector-specific measures 
The energy saving measures for the transport sector include the development of specific emission norms for vehicles in combination with some incentives to reduce the 
emission level, further the optimization of vehicles and routes, especially when it comes 
to the introduction of new energy efficient public transportation to force the replacement 
of old vehicles with newer, efficient ones, but still maintain the quite unique large share 
of gas driven cars in the world. The worst polluters are however the large trucks, they 
are usually least efficient and increasingly congesting roads. Regular inspection 
programs shall be focussing on the vehicles causing the most pollution, and expanded 
to other cars like mini buses, taxis and the majority of second-hand car ownership in 
the country. 
One important aspect is related to the creation of awareness among drivers to drive 
cars efficiently and consider opportunities to reduce the amount of annual mileage. 
These measures shall be supported by the implementation of traffic demand 
management schemes which can include a wide range of options (such as parking 
restrictions or fees, tolls, restrictions by plate numbers) to help ease congestion in 
bottleneck corridors while promoting public transport. 
The proposed measures in the transport sector will account for approx. 20% of total 
energy savings projected under the Armenian NEEAP. The annual % savings 
including the intermediate energy saving targets up to 2020 are given in Table 11 as 
follows: 
o 2013: 2.3% 
o 2017: 10.8% 
o 2020: 20.3% N
50
Table 11: Estimated savings per measure in the transport sector from 2011-2020 
2008 2009 2010
average
2008-2010 2011 2012 
[in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in %] [in %] 
 annual 0,2% 0,9% 
 cumulated 0,2% 1,1% 
V.1 Vehicle Inspection and Maintenance (I&M) program 0,0% 0,5% V.2 Traffic Demand Managmeent (TDM) scheme 0,0% 0,0% V.3
Dissemination of information on technologies and approaches for reducing energy consumption effectively 0,1% 0,2% 
V.4 Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger passenger buses operated by natural gas 0,1% 0,2% 
Baseline
Sector/Measure
Estima
n/a n/a n/a n/a
V. Transport sector
annual/
cumulated 
savingsN
51
Table 12: List of measures in the industrial sector specified under the Armenian NEEAP 
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and
specific actions
Responsibility 
V.1 Vehicle Inspection and
Maintenance (I&M) program
Trucks are often the worst polluters, leastefficient and on the road most frequently.Therefore the I&M program should focus ontrucks in the beginning (2010-2012). - In asecond step, the I&M program could beexpanded to minibusses and taxis (2012-2015). - In a third step the program can than be
expanded to all vehicles (2015-2018).
Ministry of Transport,Ministry of Econom
V.2 Traffic Demand Managmeent
(TDM) scheme
(1) To overcome bottleneck corridors, the city ofYerevan shall prepare a TDM scheme. Thiscould including parking fees, parkingrestrictions, tolls, restrictions by plate number,... (2) At the same time it is important to promotepublic transportation (use of metro, busesinstead of individual transport). Restrictions forindividual transport mentioned under (1) couldhelp to create a shift in the transport modal splittowards public transportation means.(3) Optimisation of public transport routes andtraffic light management to reduce fuel intensityof vehicles.
Ministry of Transport,Ministry of Econom
V.3 Dissemination of information on
technologies and approaches forreducing energy consumptioneffectively
Dissemination of information to users regardingupdated legislation and on ways of economisingpetrol (e.g. change in air pressure in passengercar tyres, driving skills and others). Especiallyin the area of heavy traffic (trucks, buses)training of drivers for fuel efficiency shall beencouraged.
Ministry of TransportN
52
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and
specific actions
Responsibility 
V.4 Continuous exchange of mini
buses by larger passenger busesoperated by natural gas
In total, there are about 2,800 mini-buses (10-12seats) running on Yerevan's public bus routes,only about 300 larger buses (with 25-30 seats).They are operated by private companies thatmostly use gas (90%) for driving them due tocheaper running costs. However, mini-buses areone reason for increasing traffic congestion intown which is becoming an environmentalproblem. The City's plan is to replace in the longterm 2 mini-buses by a large bus (also being
operated by natural gas, currently at about50%). This will bring fuel savings at highercapacity and contribute to reducing congestion.Estimated fuel savings is 20-25% per passengerkilometer.The necessary measure is to adapt publictenders for operating bus routes, which arerenewed every 4 years, and include large busesas compulsory vehicles. Fuel types have notbeen specfied so far, but as gas is muchcheaper than regular diesel or gasoline, theoperators will prefer to run gas-operated busesanyway.
City of Yerevan 5.5 Energy efficiency improvement measures in the water sector
Target: Structural reforms in water sector, especially reduction of energy 
intensity in irrigation systems and for drinking water pumping 
stations 
Target group: Owners and operators of agricultural businesses / water supply 
5.5.1 General introduction on the water sector 
Armenia has 2.1 million hectares of agricultural land, 72% of the country’s land area. 
Most of this, however, are mountain pastures, and cultivable land is 480,000 hectares 
(452,900 hectares arable land, 27,300 hectares in orchards and vineyards), or 16% of 
the country’s area. In 2006, 46% of the work force was employed in agriculture (up 
from 26% in 1991), and agriculture contributed about 21% of the country’s GDP. Back 
in 1991, Armenia imported still about 65 percent of its food. 
Agriculture is carried out mainly in the valleys and mountainsides of Armenia’s uneven 
terrain, with the highest mountain pastures used for livestock grazing. Fertile volcanic 
soil allows cultivation of wheat and barley as well as pasturage for cows, sheep, goats, 
and horses. The principal agricultural products are grains (mostly wheat and barley), 
potatoes, vegetables, grapes and fruits (e.g. apricots). 
Agriculture provides a significant share in the country’s energy demand, mainly through 
intensive irrigation. Almost 80% of agricultural products are coming from irrigated 
lands, which generally use electric pumping rather than free-flowing gravity schemes. 
In former Soviet era, there were about 400 pumping stations in the country, and as 
electricity always used to be very cheap, nobody cared about the additional irrigation 
costs. This has changed over the last years, especially due to an initiative started in 
2006 by the Millennium Challenge Account-Armenia (MCA-Armenia), a State Non 
Commercial Organization established by the Government of Armenia and supported by 
the Government of U.S. through the creation of a foundation. One main focus of MCAArmenia is to improve current irrigation schemes by converting from pump to gravityfed irrigation, reducing water losses and improving drainage and thus contribute to a 
significant energy saving in the agricultural sector. 
Another issue is the major energy consumption in the drinking water sector. Support 
has been given for projects mainly financed by World Bank and USAID to emphasize 
water sector reform to develop an efficient and sustainable integrated water resources 
management system. Despite recent improvements in performance of water 
companies and regulatory institutions, much remains to be done, particularly 
improvement of water networks in the rural areas. One issue is the rehabilitation and 
optimization of drinking water pumping stations across the country. 5.5.2 Overview of sector-specific measures 
The main measures regarding the water sector addressed in the action plan is 
following the activities conducted by the MCA Armenia program to rehabilitate existing 
drainage and pumping systems, rebuild existing secondary and tertiary canals and 
introduce several new gravity irrigation schemes that will reduce the demand for 
electrical pumping. This measure does not refer to the agricultural sector only, but 
optimisation of pumping stations is also a big issue in the drinking water sector and 
shall focus on water utilities. 
Chart 4: MCA-Armenia Irrigated Agriculture Project 
4
Yerevan
PS14 PS15
GS1
GS3
GS4
GS5
GS3
PS16 PS17
PS13
PS12
PS5
MC4
MC5
MC3
MC1
MC5
Main Canals
1. Artashat
2. Lower -Hrazdan
3. Armavir
4. Talin
5. Arzni-Shamiram
6. Shirak
Ararat Valley 
Drainage System
GS1
PS01
MC1
Pump Stations
1-2. Mkhchian I, II
3-4. Ranchpar I, II
5. Achajur 1
6. Armash
7. Khor-Virap
8. Avshar-Aygevan
9. Noyakert
10. Baghramyan
11. Burastan
12. Noyemberyan
13. Vorotan 2
14. Saralanj
15. Dashtadem
16. Martuni
17. Zolakar
Gravity Schemes
1. Spitak
2. Aigezard
3. Mantash
4. Shenik
5. Vardenis
PS03 PS05
PS01
PS04
PS02
PS06
PS09
PS08
PS07
PS11
PS10
MC2
GS2
4
Yerevan
PS14 PS15
GS1
GS3
GS4
GS5
GS3
PS16 PS17
PS13
PS12
PS5
MC4
MC5
MC3
MC1
MC5
Main Canals
1. Artashat
2. Lower -Hrazdan
3. Armavir
4. Talin
5. Arzni-Shamiram
6. Shirak
Ararat Valley 
Drainage System
GS1
PS01
MC1
Pump Stations
1-2. Mkhchian I, II
3-4. Ranchpar I, II
5. Achajur 1
6. Armash
7. Khor-Virap
8. Avshar-Aygevan
9. Noyakert
10. Baghramyan
11. Burastan
12. Noyemberyan
13. Vorotan 2
14. Saralanj
15. Dashtadem
16. Martuni
17. Zolakar
Gravity Schemes
1. Spitak
2. Aigezard
3. Mantash
4. Shenik
5. Vardenis
PS03
4
Yerevan
PS14 PS15
GS1
GS3
GS4
GS5
GS3
PS16 PS17
PS13
PS12
PS5
MC4
MC5
MC3
MC1
MC5
Main Canals
1. Artashat
2. Lower -Hrazdan
3. Armavir
4. Talin
5. Arzni-Shamiram
6. Shirak
Ararat Valley 
Drainage System
GS1
PS01
MC1
Pump Stations
1-2. Mkhchian I, II
3-4. Ranchpar I, II
5. Achajur 1
6. Armash
7. Khor-Virap
8. Avshar-Aygevan
9. Noyakert
10. Baghramyan
11. Burastan
12. Noyemberyan
13. Vorotan 2
14. Saralanj
15. Dashtadem
16. Martuni
17. Zolakar
Gravity Schemes
1. Spitak
2. Aigezard
3. Mantash
4. Shenik
5. Vardenis
PS03 PS05
PS01
PS04
PS02
PS06
PS09
PS08
PS07
PS11
PS10
MC2
GS2
Source: MCA-Armenia 
The effect of this measure is de facto a decrease of the energy intensity (by about 15% 
in average), nevertheless the total energy consumption in the irrigation sector is going 
to increase due to the fact that in most of the projects mentioned in the chart below are 
also dedicated to increase the amount of irrigated land. As for drinking water pumping 
stations, it is estimated that a country-wide programme to be implemented could reach 
a significant saving of up to 10% by 2020. The total effect on the energy 
consumption is thus estimated to be roughly minus 14% until 2020.
The annual % savings including the intermediate energy saving targets up to 2020 are 
given in Table 13 as follows: 
o 2013: 0.7% 
o 2017: 3.8% 
o 2020: 14.0% N
55
Table 13: Estimated savings per measure in the agricultural sector from 2011-2020 
2008 2009 2010
average
2008-2010 2011 2012 
[in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in %] [in %] 
 annual 0,2% 0,2% 
 cumulated 0,2% 0,4% 
VI.1
Utilization of gravity flow in irrigation systems and modernisation of existing pumping stations and upgrading secondary and tertiare canals n/a n/a n/a n/a 0,2% 0,2% 
VI.2 Optimization of drinking water pumping stations n/a n/a n/a n/a 0,0% 0,0% 
Baseline
Sector/Measure
Estima
VI. Agricultural sector
annual/
cumulated 
savingsN
56
Table 14: List of measures in the agricultural sector specified under the Armenian NEEAP 
No Title of the EEI measure Description of measures and 
specific actions
Responsibility 
VI.1 Utilization of gravity flow in 
irrigation systems and 
modernisation of existing pumping stations and upgrading secondary and tertiare canals
The MCA programme activities forsee thefollowing measures:(1) Installation of 5 gravity schemes (Spitak,Aygezard, Mantash, Shenik, Vardenis)which will rehabilitate in total more than 30km of existing canals and provide highlyimproved irrigation.At the same time the possible arable landarea will be enlarged; (2) Installation ofenergy efficient pumping stations: somepumping stations will be rehabilitated andsome renewed with efficient pumps, in total17 pumping stations will be rehabilitated.(3) Rehabilitation of 6 main canals, 250 kmof tertiary canals and of Ararat valleydrainage systemSimilar activities are also been supportedby the World Bank.
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Ministry of EnergW ater Committe(under Min. of Territorial Administration)
VI.2 Optimization of drinking water 
pumping stations
(1) Elaborate potential assessment for rehabilitation of pumping stations(2) Develop plan for optimisation of most relevant pumping stations across the country
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Ministry of EnergW ater Committe(under Min. of Territorial Administration)6 References 
1 Law on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy, The Republic of Armenia (2005) 
2 National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy of Republic of 
Armenia, USAID (2007) 
3 TORs of the UNDP/GEF project “Armenia - Improving the Energy Efficiency of 
Municipal Heating and Hot Water Supply”; UNDP/GEF/00035799 
4 Scientific Research Institute of Energy for the Allicance to Save Energy/USAID: 
“National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy of Republic of 
Armenia”; Yerevan 2007 
5 Global Environment Facility - GEF: 
http://www.thegef.org/gef/gef_country_prg/AM; (21.7.2010) 
6 The Other Renewable Source: The Potential for Improving Energy Efficiency in 
Armenia, Report to the World Bank (2008) 
7 Second Communication of the Republic of Armenia to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, UNDP/GEF (2009) 
8 UNDP/GEF Project Document “Improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings”, 
UNDP/GEF (2009) 
9 World Energy Council : “Energy Efficiency Policies around the World: Review 
and Evaluation”: 
http://www.worldenergy.org/documents/energy_efficiency_es_final_online_1.pdf; 
(25.8.2010) 
10 Towards Energy Efficient Buildings in Europe (2004), The European Alliance of 
Companies for Energy Efficiency in Buildings 
11 Status of Energy Efficiency in the Western Balkans (2010), The World Bank Annex 1: Template for the calculation of the national energy saving target 
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Final inland energy consumption 
within the scope of the EEAP
Residential/Households
Industry
Energy production
Transport
Public and commercial services
Agriculture
Non-energy use
in % 23,0%
in % 23,3%
in % 20,3%
in % 14,6%
in % 14,0%
in % n/a
in TJ
2013
2017
2020
Residential/Households
Industry & Energy sector
Transport
Public and commercial services
Water sector
Total savings (for all sectors)
Total final energy consumption Armenia
Unit [TJ]
[in TJ]
Average final consumption over 5-year period:
Energy saving target adopted in 2020:
Non-energy use
Intermediate energy saving targets in the years (total):Annex 2: Projections of greenhouse gas emissions for Armenia from 2005 to 
2020 
The GHG projections are taken from the “Second Communication of the Republic of 
Armenia to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change”. They 
provide and indication of the development of greenhouse gases that are indirectly also 
a result of energy use in the country. 
The data are based on a 6.0% average annual economic growth and expected 
volumes of activities in various sectors of economy. Two scenarios of greenhouse gas 
emissions are being considered – business-as-usual, which assumes the continuation 
of the existing practices and relationships at national level, but also includes certain 
modernization processes corresponding to international trends, and rapid stabilization, 
which includes measures contributing to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions 
planned by national and sectoral development programs. 
As a result of the implemented measures, by 2020, greenhouse gas emissions will 
amount to 61% of their level in 1990 (92% in the case of business-as-usual scenario), 
but however will almost double in the BAU scenario between 2010 and 2020 (+52% in 
the stabilization scenario). And the largest share of emissions (73%) will continue to fall 
on the energy sector. 
Chart 5: Projections of greenhouse gas emissions (Gg CO2 equivalent, excl. LULUCF) 
Source: Second National Communication of Armenia to the UNFCCC (2009) Annex 3: List of relevant donor projects and programs ongoing and of past 
GEF Program: 
 Armenia – Improving the Energy Efficiency of the Urban Heating and Hot 
Water Supply (UNDP)7:
The project aims to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions resulting from current 
heat and hot water supply practices in Armenian cities. The project consists of four 
components: (1) Strengthening the role of condominiums in organizing and 
managing the heat and hot water supply services at the building level. (2) 
Supporting the restructuring process and building the capacity of the existing DH 
companies to improve the efficiency of their operations. (3) Supporting the emerging 
new service providers in offering their services to the condominiums and structuring 
financing for the investments needed. (4) Documenting and disseminating the 
results, experiences and lessons learned nationally and regionally. 
The project was approved in May 2003. Total project costs sum up to 12,030,121 
US$ whereof GEF project grant amount to 2,950,000 US$. 
 Armenia Energy Efficiency Project (IBRD)8:
The Armenian Energy Efficiency Project will reduce energy intensity of the Armenian 
economy by funding public sector energy efficiency investments and removing 
existing information, existing information, knowledge, regulatory, and financial 
barriers that hamper the wide penetration of energy efficiency investments in public 
buildings and the commercial and residential sectors in the country. 
The project was approved in March 2010. Total project costs sum up to around 
15,910,000 US$ whereof GEF project grant amount to 1,820,000 US$. 
 LGGE Improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings (UNDP)
9
: 
The aim of this project is to reduce GHG emissions and energy consumption in the 
Armenian buildings sector. 
The project was approved in June 2009. Total project costs sum up to around 
3,440,450 US$ whereof GEF project grant amount to 1,045,000 US$. 
 
7
 source: http://gefonline.org/projectDetailsSQL.cfm?projID=1116; 19.7.2010 
8
 source: http://gefonline.org/projectDetailsSQL.cfm?projID=3973; 19.7.2010 
9
 source: http://gefonline.org/projectDetailsSQL.cfm?projID=3935; 19.7.2010 World Bank: 
 Urban Heating Project – Armenia10:
The objective of the Urban Heating Project for Armenia is to support the Borrower to 
increase the use of clean, efficient, safe and affordable heating technologies in 
urban schools and multi-apartment buildings. The changes are related to: (1) 
reallocation of credit proceeds from 'goods and works for others' and 'grants' 
categories both financing capital grants to the urban poor for gas and heating 
services to the 'goods and works for school heating systems' category financing 
rehabilitation of the heating system of urban schools; (2) extension of the project 
closing date by six months to allow rehabilitation of the heating system of additional 
schools; and (3) increase of the disbursement percentage for 'goods and works' 
category of expenses from 80 percent to 90 percent so as to maintain the cofinancing requirement by the Government of Armenia on the same level as before 
the reallocation. 
The project was approved in July 2005 and will be closed by the end of 2010. Total 
project costs sum up to around 21,950,000 US$ whereof IBRD and IDA commitment 
add up to 15,000,000 US$. 
 Electricity Supply Reliability and Energy Efficiency Project11: 
The power sector in Armenia addresses four serious challenges: (1) emerging 
power supply gap, (2) jeopardized power supply reliability, (3) the affordability of 
energy tariffs, and (4) the financial viability of the sector is threatened; This project 
will enhance the reliability of the power supply by improving the power transmission 
network back-bone infrastructure and will reduce the power supply gap by improving 
the utilization of the country’s energy efficiency potential. 
The project is currently under preparation and estimated to be approved by the 
board in March 2011. Total project cost are 44,000,000 US$ whereof IBRD and IDA 
commitment sums up to 36,000,000 US$. 
 
10 source: http://www.worldbank.org.am/external/default/main?pagePK=64027221&piPK=64027220&the 
SitePK= 301579&menuPK=301612&Projectid=P057880; 19.7.2010 
11 source: http://www.worldbank.org.am/external/projects/main?pagePK=64283627&piPK=73230&the 
SitePK=301579&menuPK=301613&Projectid=P116748; 19.7.2010 INOGATE Programme: 
 Harmonization of gas and oil technical standards and practices (E. Europe 
and Caucasus)12: 
The project aims to support the countries' adoption of international standards, rules 
and practices for design, construction, manufacturing, testing, certification, 
accreditation, operation and maintenance applied for all main components of gas 
and oil production / transmission / storage. The project started in December 2007 
and will last till August 2010. The total project budget is 2,930,500 €. 
 Capacity-building for Energy Regulators in Eastern Europe and Central Asia13: 
The project is to promote and advocate good and sound energy regulatory practices 
in the Partner Countries of the INOGATE Programme and to harmonize energy 
regulatory practices among them. The project will allow the transfer of EU best 
practices and the strengthening of cooperation among the countries involved. 
Furthermore, the project will aim to educate relevant ministerial level decision 
makers of these countries about the purposes and benefits of an independent 
energy regulatory organization. 
Beneficiary countries are: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan; The 
project started in January 2009 and will last till July 2010. The total project budget is 
330,000 €. 
 Capacity building for Sustainable Energy Regulation in Eastern Europe and 
Central Asia14:
This is the “successor-project” of the before mentioned one. It started in March 2010 
and is planned to last till October 2011. The calculated budget sums up to 
505,856 €. 
 
12 source: http://www.inogate.org/inogate_programme/inogate_projects/ongoing-inogateprojects/inogate_programme/inogate_projects/ongoing-inogate-projects/harmonisation-gas-and-oiltechnical-standards-and-80104; 20.7.2010 
13 source: http://www.inogate.org/inogate_programme/inogate_projects/ongoing-inogateprojects/inogate_programme/inogate_projects/ongoing-inogate-projects/capacity-building-energyregulators-eastern-46112; 20.7.2010 
14 source: http://www.inogate.org/inogate_programme/inogate_projects/ongoing-inogateprojects/inogate_programme/inogate_projects/ongoing-inogate-projects/capcity-building-sustainableenergy-regulation; 20.7.2010  Harmonization of electricity standards:15
The project's objective is to assist the INOGATE Partner Countries in adopting 
international standards, rules and practices in the electricity sector. It is anticipated 
that cooperation on standardization within the framework of the INOGATE 
Programme will lead to market integration and convergence. The Project seeks to 
increase infrastructure efficiency, enhance quality and reliability of equipment, 
ensure safety in electricity transmission and distribution and facilitate trade and 
investments in modern technologies. 
Partner countries are: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan. 
The project started in September 2009 and will last till March 2011. The total project 
budget is 1,482,500 €.
EBRD:
 Armenian Sustainable Energy Financing Facility (ArmSEFF):16 
The EBRD’s Sustainable Energy Initiative (SEI) was launched in 2006 to address 
the twin challenges of energy efficiency and climate change. SEI market segments 
include, besides others, the segment for Sustainable Energy Financing Facilities 
(SEFFs) through financial intermediaries. One of the long-lasting benefits of this 
segment is the transfer of specific skills to the local market. In addition to the 
economic and environmental benefits of the investments themselves, local bank 
staff becomes familiar with the particulars of sustainable energy investments and in 
which business sectors to find them; prospective borrowers learn why sustainable 
energy projects make good business sense and how to finance them. 
Moreover local engineers become aware of the best practice investment 
opportunities and where to identify them. As a result of regular exposure to 
international experts, this additional capacity builds up from both formal training and 
on-the-job learning by doing. The project development and implementation legacy 
that remains will facilitate the financing of future sustainable energy investment 
opportunities. 
This project will start in near future in Armenia. 
 
15 source: http://www.inogate.org/inogate_programme/inogate_projects/ongoing-inogateprojects/harmonization-technical-standards-rules-and; 20.7.2010 
16 source: http://www.ebrd.org/downloads/research/factsheets/sei.pdf; 20.7.2010 USAID:
 Commercialization of Energy Efficiency Project (CEEP):
17
 
This program is working with private sector energy service companies and the 
banking sector to increase the availability of bank financing for energy efficiency 
projects to encourage the development of viable energy efficiency market. CEEP 
was implemented by Advanced Engineering Associates International (AEAI). 
It started in June 2007 and will end in November 2010ö. The project budget sums 
up to 3,200,000 US. 
International Finance Corporation: 
 Armenia Energy Efficiency Survey Project:18
The main goal of the project is to assess the current market for energy efficiency 
financing in Armenia and to raise awareness among local financial institutions, small 
and medium enterprises (SMEs), and policy makers about existing opportunities for 
energy efficiency financing in the country. By identifying best practices in SME 
energy efficiency and finance, the survey will also provide benchmarks with other 
countries and might lead to a more comprehensive program to increase energy 
efficiency in Armenia and the region. 
The project started in 2008 and is still ongoing. It is supported with funds from the 
Austrian Technical Assistance Trust Fund and IFC. 
Millennium Challenge Account–Armenia (MCA–Armenia):
 Irrigated Agriculture Project:19
In 2006, the Millennium Challenge Corporation signed a five-year Compact with the 
Government of Armenia aimed at reducing rural poverty through a sustainable 
increase in the economic performance of the agricultural sector. The Millennium 
Challenge Corporation is a U.S. Government agency designed to work with 
developing countries, based on the principle that aid is most effective when it 
reinforces sound political, economic, and social policies that promote poverty 
reduction through economic growth. 
MCA-Armenia, a State Non-Commercial Organization established by the 
Government of Armenia, is responsible for overseeing the transparent 
implementation of the Compact signed between the Millennium Challenge 
Corporation and the Government of Armenia. 
Presently MCA-Armenia has one major project – Irrigated Agriculture project (USD 
120 million) which includes Irrigation Infrastructure Rehabilitation component and 
 
17 source: http://armenia.usaid.gov/en/node/270, 20.7.2010 
18 source: 
http://www.ifc.org/ifcext/eca.nsf/Content/Armenia_AdvisoryProjects#Armenia%20Energy%20Efficienc
y%20Survey, 20.7.2010 
19 source: http://www.mca.am/new/enversion/pdf/QB_mca_ENG_13.pdf; 20.7.2010 farmers’ assisting Water-To-Market activity (USD 32 million) along with its 
Institutional Strengthening Sub-Activity (around USD 4 million).