File Name: ATG-NEP-2011-EN
Year: 2011
Country Name: Antigua and Barbuda
Country Code: ATG
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2011
Start Year: 2011
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
AUGUST 2011Prepared by the National Energy Task Force under the Office of the Prime Minister of the 
Government of Antigua and Barbuda and the Department of Sustainable Development of the 
General Secretariat of the Organization of American States with the expert advice 
of the German ProfEC GmbH under the European Union funded initiative 
“Caribbean Sustainable Energy Program (CSEP)”. 
The views expressed herein are presented for informational purposes only 
and do not represent the opinions or official positions of the European Union, 
the Organization of American States, its General Secretariat, 
or any of its member States.
Cover photo: Courtesy of Girvan Pigotti
Barbuda
OFFICE OF THE 
PRIME MINISTER
ST. JOHN’S, ANTIGUA
HONORABLE 
W. BALDWIN SPENCER
PRIME MINISTER
our dependence on energy affects all sectors within our society and has made the commitment to meet the energy needs of the present generation by 2030 while safeguarding the
environment and enabling future generations to meet their own energy needs. 
However, we recognize that there is the need for constant work if we are to achieve 
our goals. There must be greater emphasis placed on Energy Security and Energy Independence if Antigua is to transition from a country that sources our energy from foreign
countries to one that can produce and distribute newer and cleaner forms of energy. 
Antigua must aim at quenching our thirst for energy by becoming a more Energy 
Efficient state through the promotion of cleaner technologies and capacity building
throughout the various sectors.
Antigua & Barbuda National Energy Policy has strategically identified five (5) priority areas
to accomplish our set of goals outlined within the policy. These priority areas are Energy
Cost Reduction, Diversification of Energy Sources, Electricity Reliability, Environmental 
Protection and Stimulate New Economic Opportunities.
It is with great focus on these priority areas that Antigua & Barbuda will be able to meet
our ambitious targets of a reduction in the overall energy intensity of the economy by
10%, a renewable energy penetration of 15% by 2030, an improvement in the quality of
electricity supply, greater focus on the preservation of our environment by reducing our
carbon footprint and the birth of clean energy focused businesses.
At the same time, Antigua & Barbuda Government is committed to exploring different 
options of harnessing the potential of cleaner forms of energy within all the relevant 
sectors of our society. Nonetheless greater emphasis will be placed on the power and
transportation sectors given that these sectors have greatly impacted upon all other 
industries within our society.
I would like to thank all agencies and individuals who have played a roll in the creation of
Antigua & Barbuda's National Energy Policy with special thanks to the National Energy
Taskforce and to Ambassador Joan H. Underwood for her dedication and commitment to
seeing this policy through to its end.
May our work for a cleaner and greener Antigua and Barbuda be a success.
Hon. W. Baldwin Spencer
Prime Minister
Tel: (268) 562-3860 ext. 286
Fax: (268) 562-0351EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................1
1. BACKGROUND .....................................3
1.1 Introduction ......................................................3
1.2 Vision Statement..............................................3
1.3 Outlook on energy and 
the economy ................................................3
1.3.1 Global.........................................................................3
1.3.2 Regional.....................................................................4
1.3.3 National .....................................................................5
1.4 Energy Related Agreements 
and Obligations ...........................................7
1.4.1 National .....................................................................7
1.4.2 Regional.....................................................................7
1.4.3 International..............................................................8
1.5 Power Generation ............................................9
1.5.1 Current Energy Demand...........................................9
1.5.2 Energy Demand Projections ...................................10
1.5.3 Power Producers .....................................................10
2. STRATEGIC INTENT.............................11
2.1 Strategic Objectives........................................12
I. Energy Cost Reduction............................................12
II. Diversification and Efficient Use 
of Energy Sources..............................................13
III. Electricity Reliability................................................13
IV. Environmental Protection.......................................13
V. Stimulate New Economic/ 
Business Opportunities .....................................13
2.2 Means and Pathways ....................................14
3. ENERGY POLICY FRAMEWORK .........16
4. POWER SECTOR .................................17
4.1 Energy Sources ...............................................17
4.1.1 Fossil Fuels/Non-Renewable 
Energy Sources ..................................................17
4.1.2 Renewables .............................................................18
4.1.3 Waste to Energy......................................................18
4.1.4 Emerging Technologies...........................................19
4.2 Energy Efficiency Management.....................19
4.2.1 Supply Side..............................................................19
4.2.2 Demand Side ...........................................................19
4.3 Legal and Regulatory Framework.................20
4.3.1 APUA Act .................................................................20
4.3.2 Land Planning Act...................................................21
4.3.3 Antigua and Barbuda Investment 
Authority Act .....................................................21
4.3.4 Development Control Authority (DCA) Act ..........21
4.3.5 National Solid Waste Management 
Authority Act .....................................................21
4.4 Institutional Framework ................................21
4.4.1 Energy Adisory Panel..............................................22
4.4.2 Sustainable Energy Unit.........................................22
4.4.3 Eastern Caribbean Energy Regulatory 
Authority (ECERA)...................................................23
5. Transportation Sector........................24
5.1 Ground Transportation...................................24
5.1.1 Efficiency and Emission Standards ........................24
5.1.2 Public Transportation..............................................25
5.2 Aviation Transportation.................................25
5.3 Environment and Transport...........................25
6. OTHER USES OF ENERGY...................26
6.1 Cooking ...........................................................26
6.2 Small engines..................................................26
6.3 Legal and Regulatory Framework.................27
6.4 Institutional Framework ................................27
7. IMPLEMENTATION AND 
MONITORING .................................28
7.1 Development of the Sustainable Energy 
Action Plan (SEAP).....................................28
7.2 Reporting and Monitoring.............................28
8. SUPPLEMENTARY 
INFORMATION................................29
8.1 List of Acronyms .............................................29
8.2 Acknowledgements........................................30
TABLE OF CONTENTS1
combined effects of limited demand for imported fossil fuel, diseconomies of scale in electricity
production, low efficiency in electricity distribution and a highly inefficient transportation sector, 
result in ever increasing energy prices for business and households. At the same time, the growth
in global demand for crude oil, uncertainties about future oil supply and unpredictable market 
behavior, mean that oil prices will remain volatile for the foreseeable future, exposing the country
to significant financial risks. For these reasons, and the negative and significant impact that fossil
fuel has on the environment, Antigua and Barbuda needs to re-think the way it sources and 
consumes energy. 
This National Energy Policy (NEP) document sets out the Government of Antigua & Barbuda’s 
approach in achieving its vision that:
By 2030 Antigua & Barbuda will meet the needs of the present generation while safeguarding the environment and enabling future generations to meet their own energy needs. All
citizens and residents will have access to affordable efficient, socially responsible and reliable
forms of energy.
This policy document follows widespread consultation and is intended to foster the development
of an appropriate legal, regulatory, institutional and economic framework. The goals and 
strategies are consistent with the government’s overall macro-economic policies and are designed
to create a stable sustainable and efficient energy sector that fosters national economic and 
social development. 
Priority will be given to the following five goals:
u Energy Cost Reduction - Targeted efficiency and conservation
measures designed to reduce the overall energy intensity of the 
economy by 10% below a 2010 baseline within 10 years.
u Diversification of Energy Sources - Reformed market framework and mandated targets to achieve 15% renewable energy in the
electricity supply by 2030. 
u Electricity Reliability Improvement - Regulatory reform 
designed to protect consumer interest and improve the quality of 
electricity supply.
u Environmental Protection – Laws and regulations which ensure
that environmental considerations are an integral part of the energy
permit process and in the planning and execution of energy related
projects.
u Stimulate new Economic Opportunities – Incentives and
market mechanisms to create an enabling environment for private 
investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency measures, 
including support for education and training. ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
2
will facilitate resource assessments and pre-feasibility studies to understand the technical
challenges, economic feasibility and environmental considerations in relation to deploying
these technologies in an Antigua & Barbuda context. Additionally energy conservation and 
efficiency improvements in supply and demand will be key strategies in achieving the overall
objective lowing costs to consumers. 
A range of policy instruments will be used to stimulate and support investments in new technologies and energy saving measures, including, inter alia, legislative, regulatory and financial
incentives. Although APUA will continue to play a key role in the sector, where practicable 
market mechanisms will be used to achieve higher effectiveness, lower generation costs, 
lower costs to consumers and increased generation using indigenous energy resources.
Transportation
The structure of the Antigua & Barbuda economy – its heavy reliance on air travel particularly
for tourism – and the high level of private vehicle penetration, contribute to its relatively high
energy intensity. Moreover, past Governments policy of shielding consumers from the full cost
of fuel at the pumps, has only served to maintain inefficiencies in ground transportation. 
Recognizing the important role transportation plays in fulfilling the social and economic needs
for access, strategies will be pursued to diversify the options available to consumers, while 
ensuring that they are efficient, safe, affordable and environmentally-friendly. Standards 
relating to fuel efficiency and emissions will be established, as well as economic measures 
designed to support more sustainable transportation choices. Government will take a lead 
role by ensuring the application of efficient vehicles and cleaner fuels within its fleet.
Implementation and Monitoring
In order to give life to the NEP, a Sustainable Energy Plan (SEP) will be created to serve as a
road map for the energy future of Antigua & Barbuda until 2030. The specific strategies to be
pursued will address energy conservation and efficiency, renewable energy development and
education and awareness. 
The implementation of this policy and the development and implementation of the SEP will be
led by the newly created Energy Unit within the Prime Minister’s office, with the support of
other government departments and agencies, the private sector, NGO’s and key stakeholders.
The Energy Unit will have responsibility for articulating the policy and SEP while coordinating
and monitoring their implementation. 
Under a new legal and regulatory framework certain agencies of government, such as the 
Environment Division, Bureau of Standards, Development Control Authority and Antigua &
Barbuda transport Board and the – soon to be created – East Caribbean Energy Regulatory
Authority (ECERA), will have responsibility for oversight and enforcement in order to 
ensure compliance. 
The NEP will be reviewed and amended as required to ensure that the desired outcomes 
are being achieved in the most effective manner. 1. IEA, CO2 emissions from combustion highlights, 2009 - 
http://www.iea.org/co2highlights/co2highlights.pdf
2. BP Statistical Review on World Energy, June 2010 - http://www.bp.com/liveassets/bp_
internet/globalbp/globalbpukenglish/reportsandpublications/statisticalenergy
3 
p
u To increase student achievement in primary, secondary and tertiary education;
u To improve the health of Antiguans and Barbudans;
u To improve the condition of vulnerable groups within the society;
u To improve the safety of people and property;
u To facilitate improved economic vitality of businesses while empowering citizens 
to actively participate in the ownership of the country’s resources;
u To strengthen government’s ability to achieve its results efficiently and effectively 
by improving the productivity of the public sector; and
u To improve cultural and recreational opportunities throughout the country while 
promoting national pride and social responsibility.
These priorities were closely aligned with the Government’s commitments to the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). Sustainable access to reliable and affordable energy is fundamental to the achievement of both the MDGs and the Government’s stated development 
priorities. As a first step to the realization of said 
sustainable access, the Government created the 
Energy Desk within the office of the Prime Minister
and tasked the Desk with developing a National 
Energy Policy (NEP). The following document is the
outcome of that exercise.
1.2 VISION STATEMENT
By 2030 Antigua and Barbuda will meet the energy needs of the present generation while
safeguarding the environment and enabling future generations to meet their own energy
needs. All citizens and residents will have access to affordable, efficient, socially 
responsible and reliable forms of energy. 
1.3 OUTLOOK ON ENERGY AND THE ECONOMY
1.3.1 GLOBAL
Fossil fuel provides 82% of the world’s primary energy supply and is responsible for 94%
of global CO2 emissions1
. Today, coal oil and gas are the main energy sources driving the
world economy, enhancing the quality of life for many in the developed and developing
world. The International Energy Agency (IEA) forecasts that over the next 20 years, global
energy demand will grow by at least 50%, driven by 1.5% annual rise in world population
and sustained economic growth, particularly in the developing world. Based on the current trend, oil is expected to continue to dominate the transportation and petrochemical
sectors, with demand expected to grow by 41% by 2030. Such increases are likely to drive
up future oil prices on the international markets.
According to the BP2010 review2
, based on current production levels, global conventionalANTIGUA AND BARBUD
that unless there are significant new discoveries and sustained investments, global oil 
production will peak before 2020. It therefore means that unless reliable and economical
oil substitutes are found in the near to medium term, it is very likely that supply 
constraints will also push prices up.
Prior to 2000, the average spot price per barrel was about US$20. At the time of writing
this policy, the average spot price is US$110 per barrel. According to the Energy Information Administration (EIA) the forecast of the spot price of oil – high oil case - for the next
decades will reach about US$150 per barrel in 2015 and US$200 per barrel by 20303
.
Those prices will surpass the price during the oil crisis in 2008.
The global challenge is the identification of plausible ways to maintain stable energy
prices, mitigate the adverse effects of high petroleum prices, minimize fossil fuel supply
disruptions, lower the rate of increases in consumption of fossil fuels and minimize the
deleterious effects of climate change and greenhouse gas emissions.
1.3.2 REGIONAL
The Caribbean Community (CARICOM) is an organization of 15 full members, 5 associate
members4 and 7 observer member nations. The members of CARICOM are mainly developing small island States and some low lying coastal States. All the member States have 
limited natural resources, small populations, small economies but widely different 
energy realities.
The fifteen CARICOM states are almost entirely dependent on imported petroleum products. It is estimated that up to 95% of commercial energy consumed in the CARICOM 
region is derived from fossil fuels5
, primarily oil. That figure represents about 90 million
barrels of oil equivalent in a year. 
CARICOM countries are essentially net importers of crude oil and refined petroleum products - the exception of Trinidad and Tobago and lesser degree Suriname- largely from
extra-regional sources. Specifically, CARICOM Member States source petroleum products
from Trinidad and Tobago (PETROTRIN), Curacao (PDVSA), Puerto Rico (Shell), St. Croix
(Hovensa) and the Energy Co-operation Agreement (PETROCARIBE) with Venezuela. 
Due to increasing international demand for petroleum and rising petroleum prices, the
CARICOM Members States6 experience strong negative economic effects. In order to 
counteract said negative effects, CARICOM established the Petroleum Stabilization Fund 
in 2004, and in 2005 certain Member States signed the Energy Co-operation Agreement
(PETROCARIBE). 
4
3. EIA Web site - http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/otheranalysis/aeo_2010analysispapers/
woprices.html
4. CARICOM LAW Website, Document title “Member and Associate States of the Caribbean 
Community”, http://www.caricomlaw.org/doc.php?id=1822 
5. CARICOM Energy Policy, January 2007 edition
6. The Member States which signed the multilateral PetroCaribe Agreement are Antigua and Barbuda,
the Bahamas, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, 
St. Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Suriname.countries. PETROCARIBE has now become the single largest source of concessionary 
finance to the Caribbean Region. PETROCARIBE credits to importing countries from June
2005 to December 2007 amounted to US$1.17 billion. 
In 2003 the Caricom Heads of Government agreed to establish a task force to develop 
recommendations for a Regional Energy Policy. The resulting draft Caricom Energy Policy
2007, articulates the following objectives: 
a) sustainable security of supplies of energy in and for the Community.
b) accelerated development and restructuring of sources of supply of energy,
c) sustained growth of intra-Community trade in energy;
d) enhanced energy conservation and efficiency, and cleaner production in the
Community;
e) increased investment in production, transformation and distribution of viable
energy resources;
f) strengthening and enhancement of the human and institutional capacity in
the Community in the energy sector;
g) programmed expansion of electricity generation, transmission and trade;
h) access to affordable energy by the poor and vulnerable;
i) greater use of renewable energy; and
j) establishment and facilitation of an institutional framework for financing
1.3.3 NATIONAL
Energy Supply: Antigua and Barbuda relies almost exclusively on fossil fuels for electricity generation, transportation and cooking. There are no natural resources of fossil fuels
in Antigua and Barbuda. The country imports a number of refined petroleum products 
including gasoline, jet kerosene, diesel, heavy fuel oil (HFO) and LPG.
The following results of a 2005 study by the Caribbean Energy Information System reveal
that Antigua and Barbuda’s energy costs relative to GDP and GNP exceed those of the
other members of the OECS.
5
Energy Cost vs GDP, GNP and Forex EarningsANTIGUA AND BARBUD
with the previously referenced study from 2005 showing that energy costs consumed 
one-third of the country’s foreign exchange.
Retail Price of Fuel: In August 2009 the Government announced that it would be introducing a partial pass-through pricing system. This announcement came after several years
of subsidized fuel prices which shielded consumers from increases on the international
market, which may otherwise have led to a reduction in demand. Prior to the increase 
in retail prices, consumers in Antigua and Barbuda were paying less for fuel that their
counterparts in the other OECS territories. With the increases, retail prices in Antigua and
Barbuda are now more comparable to the sub-regional average prices for gasoline, diesel
and propane. (See Table 1.1)
Cost of Electricity: In 2010 the average generation cost before transmission was 0.57
EC$/kWh, and the average electricity sales price across all sectors was 1.05 EC$/kWh. 
Table 1.2 below shows that the retail rate for electricity in Antigua and Barbuda is among
the highest in the Caribbean. 
6
7. This data includes sales to power producers, service stations, marine fuel depots 
and airlines as well as all consumers of LPG.
8. WIOC is the principal importer and wholesaler of fossil fuels.
9. CARILEC web site: www.carilec.com/services/Tariff2010.pdf 
Table 1.1 – Retail Prices as at August 2009
Product Prices Ang. A&B DA Gren. Mont. SK&N SLU SVG
Gasoline $11.30 $10.99 $11.50 $11.09 $11.66 $12.07 $11.56 $10.95 $10.61
Diesel $10.67 $9.40 $10.90 $9.82 $10.92 $10.71 $14.25 $10.95 $8.44
20 lb LPG $34.83 $59.00 $32.00 $27.26 $38.56 $28.80 $30.00 $26.00 $37.00
100 lb LPG $168.39 $220.00 $155.00 $131.30 $188.29 $144.00 $140.00 $195.00 $173.50
OECS Avg. 
Retail
Table 1.2 – Tariff Survey Among CARILEC Member Utilitites June 20109
Domestic 29.41 34.13 24.25 4.55 32.84 39.02 36.46 26.55 32.50 25.89
Domestic 113.75 139.63 113.29 16.80 125.80 155.32 166.07 131.17 135.52 103.57
Consumer using
400KWH per
month (US$)
Consumer using
100KWH per
month (US$)
Barbados GRENLEC LUCELEC T&TEC ANGLEC APUA DOMLEC Jamaica VINLEC Bahamassituation would be likely to trigger significant adverse social and economic consequences.
1.4 ENERGY RELATED AGREEMENTS AND OBLIGATIONS
In addition to its integral role in the climate change debate, the sustainable use of energy
has firmly established its place in the international dialogue as a major development issue.
In fact, access to affordable energy is a prerequisite for Antigua and Barbuda’s achievement of the millennium development goals (MDGs).12 In addition to the climate change
and MDG commitments, there are a number of agreements and obligations which must be
taken into consideration by the National Energy Policy.
1.4.1 NATIONAL
While APUA has a legal monopoly for the generation, distribution, supply and sale of 
electricity13, it has entered into long-term power purchase agreements (PPAs). The terms
of the said PPAs must be taken into consideration by the NEP. In addition to the existing
PPAs, APUA plans to commission a 30 megawatt HFO powered plant in 2011. Given the
significant capital outlay associated with this acquisition, its deployment must be factored
into the NEP.
1.4.2 REGIONAL
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Secretariat recently established the
Caribbean Energy Unit, which is charged with supporting national energy policy reviews 
in all member states and developing a regional sustainable energy policy and regulatory
framework. Also at the level of CARICOM, the Single Market and Economy (CSME) 
facilitates the development of regional policy frameworks for energy, agriculture, 
sustainable tourism, agro-tourism, transport etc.
7
Figure 1.3 – Average Electricity Sales Price
10. Antigua Public Utilities Authority, March 2010
11. Forecast was estimated using the forecast of the Global Oil Prices by the Energy and Information
Administration (EIA) – Website: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/forecasting.html. The estimation is based
on the high correlation (R2= 98 %) between Global Oil Prices and Fuel Surcharge. 
12. http://www.undp.org/energy/ 
13The Public Utilities Act (CAP 359)Laws of Antigua and BarbudaANTIGUA AND BARBUD
Barbudas participation in this arrangement has provided funds to finance various social
programmes including an energy subsidy for pensioners. 
At the level of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) the 
Environmental and Sustainable Development Unit has adopted the task of sourcing 
support and funding from various multilateral agencies with the aim of developing 
comprehensive solutions for diversifying the energy mix, Renewable Energy (RE) 
technologies and Energy Efficiency (EE). The solidarity and developing foreign policy
among the Member states is intended to create lucrative options for investors. 
Earlier this year, the Cabinet of Antigua and Barbuda signaled its support in principle for
the proposal to establish the Eastern Caribbean Energy Regulatory Authority
(ECERA). It is anticipated that ECERA will further the efforts of the OECS Secretariat to
promote regional integration. ECERA is intended to harmonize regulatory frameworks by
providing the necessary regulation for the Caribbean electric supply industry (ESI). It is 
projected to provide efficiency as well as promote cross island investments by the utilities
and independent power producers. 
APUA is a member of the Caribbean Electric Utility Service Corporation 
(CARILEC). CARILEC serves its members by providing capacity building for leaders in the
electric utilities across the region. CARILEC has already conducted various training seminars to assist those in the managerial portfolio to consider the benefits, challenges and 
options available in renewable energy.
1.4.3 INTERNATIONAL
The newly negotiated Copenhagen Accord as well as negotiations within the G20 has 
created new avenues for the both developed and developing countries to reduce their
GHG emissions. The pledges advanced by the countries before and after Copenhagen 
add up to a range of emissions reductions of 13-18% below 1990 levels, vs. the 25-40%
that would be necessary to limit global temperature increases to less than 2C above 
pre-industrial levels. 
The G20 talks are progressing along the lines of finance for low carbon economies and the
transfer of technologies, but these are yet to be converted to commitments. These talks
are expected to become more concrete if the UNFCCC fails to produce a new protocol by
2012 that will see all countries taking on commitments to reduce their GHG. If a new protocol is adopted in 2012 Antigua and Barbuda will be legally bound to take on targets to
cut emissions. The adoption of a NEP in 2011 will place the country on the path to meeting any future targets. 
8stipulate that the Authority may give an individual the right to generate and supply 
electricity within Antigua and Barbuda. Any entity which generates electricity without 
obtaining prior, written permission from the Authority shall be guilty of an offence. In the
face of this legislated monopoly, APUA has been very circumspect in the granting of the
right to generate and supply electricity. The authorization has been essentially reserved 
for independent power producers (IPPs) with whom APUA has power purchase agreements (PPA) in order to meet peak demands. 
It is instructive to note that, while the current peak demand in Antigua and Barbuda is 51
megawatts, one such IPP – i.e. the Antigua Power Company (APC) has installed capacity of
79 megawatts. This is 68.4% of the total installed capacity in the country.
1.5.1 CURRENT ENERGY DEMAND
The largest single electricity consumer by sector in Antigua for the period January 1, 2010
to December 31, 2010 was the commercial sector - including tourism - with some 
105,802 MWh. The domestic sector consumed 89,599 MWh, while the governmental 
sector and the industrial sector consumed 7,827 MWh. Figure 1.1 shows energy use 
breakdown by sector. 
In Barbuda, for the same period of time the largest consuming sector was the domestic
sector with some 1542 MWh; the commercial sector with 434 MWh and the governmental
sector with about 205 MWh. 
Based on data provided by APUA, in the past five years the commercial sector has 
accounted for approximately 48% of the billed electrical units in Antigua and Barbuda. 
In comparison, the domestic sector accounted for 40% and the Government for 8%. 
It is important to note that these figures do not include public services such as street 
lights and APUA Water Division plants. 
The foregoing statistics suggest that a concerted effort from all sectors is required in order
to realize the desired level of savings in expenditures related to electricity consumption
9
Figure 1.1 – Antigua & Barbuda Electricity Use by Sector.ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
Over an eight year period from 2002 - 2009, the regional average for demand growth
rates was 25.25%i and 30.31% for APUA, which was in line with the regional average.
APUA projected demand growth rate over the period 2010 - 2017 is estimated to be 16%
with a projected peak demand of 60.7 MWii in 2017, which though not in line with the
previous growth rate period indicates a steady increase in demand over the next eight
year period. 
According to the professional perspective of a technician at APUA, this more gradual increase in the peak demand over this period is due to the economical challenges currently
being experienced resulting in a decline in investment into the country. The projections
also considers individual consumers and the utility embarking on more sustainable forms
of energy in the future resulting in a more gradual increase in the peak demand.
1.5.3 Power Producers
There are eight operating thermal power plants which provide an estimated total net electrical installed capacity of about 83 MW. The average base load is about 42 MW whereas
the peak load in 2009 was about 50MW14. The net electricity generation fed into the grid
in 2009 was about 326,383 MWh. 
The overall system losses including technical losses of generation, transmission and 
distribution as well as economic losses are fairly high at 24%.15
The operating efficiency of the plants varies widely resulting in an average cost of 
production of $0.78 with a minimum reported cost of $0.45 and a maximum of $1.262.
10
PEAK DEMAND (MW)
i. Data from Carilec Benchmarking Study for Caribbean Utilities 2009
ii. Data from APUA Electricity Business Unit 2011 Budget Report 
14. Antiguan Power and Utility Authority, March 2010
Figure 1.2 – Above shows APUA projected peak demand 
over the period from 2010 –2024.and telecommunications. All of these are integral sectors to the development of Antigua 
and Barbuda.
All sectors are affected by high oil prices. This has negative impacts on the country’s trade balance, the economic situation of individual households and general economic competitiveness.
The effects of energy supply interruptions, load shedding and oil price shocks on economic
performance and foreign direct investment attractiveness are therefore of major concern given
the island’s complete dependence on imported fuels. The 
energy policy will ensure linkages are established with other
sectors such as agriculture, transport, construction, tourism 
and finance to achieve coherence in the achievement of the
countries developmental goals. 
While Government's intervention in the day-to-day operation
of the power sector shall be minimal, it will retain primary responsibility for policy formulation, enforcement as well as the
formulation and implementation of result-oriented, national
action plans and programs.
The development of an energy sector policy and implementation of strategies will be consistent with Government’s overall
macro-economic policies, especially under a regime where
there is substantial public participation in the energy sector.
The Government will continue to play a vital role by setting the broad legal framework for the
entire sector as well as setting regulations and standards. For such purposes, the Government
will continuously analyze the results of its interventions and amend its energy policy, the energy strategies and/or the legislation, if necessary. As a result, it is anticipated that Antigua
and Barbuda’s economy and inhabitants will benefit from the supply of cost-efficient energy
and the protection of vulnerable consumer groups, while minimizing negative environmental
impacts and increasing economic competitiveness.
APUA will continue to play a pivotal role in the energy sector. However where practicable
market mechanisms will be utilized to achieve higher effectiveness, lower generation costs,
lower prices to consumers and to promote the increased generation using indigenous energy
resources.
In relation to renewable energy, substantial resources exist for solar and wind power utilization. While the initial costs of these technologies may be relatively high, the levelised cost of
electricity (LCOE)16 is now comparable with petroleum based generation. Furthermore, when
the environmental costs, price volatility, and long term prices trends associated with petroleum
based generations are taken in account, the economics of these technologies appear even
more favorable. 
11
16. LCOE allocates the cost of a generating plant over its useful life to give an indication
of the cost per unit energy. It takes into account the upfront costs, operating costs and
the total electricity produced (KWh) over the working life of the plant in order to arrive
at a $/KWh value. ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
social development by establishing an enabling environment that exploits indigenous energy
resources and reduces the dependence on fossil fuels.
2.1 STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
In order to achieve the strategic intent of the National Energy Policy, affordable, efficient, 
socially sound, reliable and accessible forms of energy will be promoted, especially renewable
energy technologies, energy efficiency practices and energy saving measures, offering the 
potential for reduced utilization of conventional fossil fuels at high prices.
The National Energy Policy is intended to foster the development of an appropriate legal, 
institutional and economic framework and management mechanisms for enabling sustainable
and economically sound energy activities and services.
The National Energy Policy will strengthen Antigua and Barbuda’s competitiveness as well as
its negotiating position in international climate change-talks, emphasizing the need for more
international assistance for climate change mitigation and adaptation measures.
The Government will therefore seek to create an environment where indigenous energy 
resources, energy conservation and energy efficiency are the primary vehicles to securing a
more sustainable energy future. 
The Government of Antigua and Barbuda therefore is committed to the governing objectives
of a more sustainable and independent energy sector, substantially to be achieved by the 
following principal goals:
I. ENERGY COST REDUCTION
a) Prepare and implement a systematic plan to reduce and sustain overall energy 
intensity of the Antigua & Barbuda economy by at least 10% below a 2010 
baseline within 10 years. 
b) Revise building codes and support energy management programs in order to 
reduce consumption at Government and public facilities, industrial plants and
other large users by identifying effective measures to control and improve 
efficiency by 30% over 15 years. 
c) Introduce legislation and appropriate economic incentives to fast track the migration of public and private fossil powered vehicles to low carbon technologies with
the aim of improving efficiency in the transportation sector by 40% in 15 years.
d) Establish minimum efficiency standards for air-conditioning, refrigeration and
other appliances as well as differentiated tariff to incentivize efficiency. 
e) Antigua & Barbuda Government being one of the largest energy consumers will
assume the lead position as driver of cost reduction initiatives by legislating and
implementing cost reduction initiatives with a view to reducing its consumption
and costs by 30% in 10 years.
f) Support energy efficient choices through improved awareness, information and
services that can deliver energy efficiency.
12b) Mandate that the utility includes RE in the electricity supply mix at the following
minimum levels:
u 2015 5%
u 2020 10%
u 2030 15%
c) Provide an enabling legal and regulatory framework for the deployment of RE
technologies with particular emphasis on wind, solar and waste to energy.
III. ELECTRICITY RELIABILITY
a) Through an independent regulator, set commercial and technical standards for the
quality of electricity supply, supported by an appropriate mechanism for monitoring and implementation.
b) Support investment in grid stability to reduce number and duration of operational
disturbances and strengthen the energy infrastructure to enable faster recovery
from disruptions to the energy supply.
IV. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
a) Introduce regulation that defines and clarifies the Environment Division’s role and
authority in coordinating all national energy permits and environmental reviews
for energy related projects.
b) Establish appropriate legal and institutional frameworks to enable Antigua and
Barbuda to capitalize on the various opportunities associated with the Clean 
Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol and other related facilities.
V. STIMULATE NEW ECONOMIC/BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES
a) Develop and implement the curriculum to equip students with the knowledge and
skills to secure employment in the fields of RE and EE. 
b) Provide incentive and financial assistance to 
facilitate the fast migration of residential 
water-heaters.
c) Provide legislation and incentive to create a 
vehicle conversion industry from full fossil 
powered vehicles to hybrids. 
d) Develop and implement a mandatory E-10 
programme.
13ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
Renewable Energy
u Wind (grid-tied wind farms and distributed)
u Sustainable biomass electricity e.g. from agriculture and solid waste, woody residues,
sewage sludge, etc.)
u Solar (PV grid-tied and distributed, solar thermal concentrators, PV hybrid and 
stand-alone systems for homeowners and small businesses)
u Establishing a policy mechanism designed to encourage the adoption of renewable 
energy sources and to help accelerate the move toward grid parity. The options are
mandated quota system and feed-in-tariff. The necessary analysis will be completed 
in order to determine which is more suitable for the Antigua and Barbuda context.
Energy Efficiency and Saving
u Demand side management
u Develop standards for energy audits and provide technical support and capacity 
building for the Energy Service Companies. 
u More awareness on utilization patterns and customs
u Lighting and appliance schemes
u Improved energy balance of buildings
u Commercial and tourism facility efficiency
u National grid (Generation, Transmission & Distribution) efficiency upgrades
u Energy storage devices
u Solar hot water heaters licenses
u Increased technical efficiency by enhanced utility management and transparency
Infrastructure and Utility Management
u Investigation in regional Inter-Island connections and the potential utilization of 
natural resources abundant in neighboring countries
u Increased operational efficiency and institutional reforms of APUA and the 
Development Control Authority (DCA)
u Enabling renewable self-generation in combination with co-generation for hotels and
commercial or industry sector
u Enabling self-generation and net-metering for private households and small businesses
by renewable energy technologies
u Transparency of the energy generation market, increased competition and increased
environmental standards
14u Compulsory recycling of used oil
u Traffic routing systems and traffic patterns
u More efficient and reliable public transport systems
u Support of hybrid, flex-fuel or electric vehicles
u Utilization of regional bio-fuels 
u Increased use of cleaner fossil fuels as liquid natural gas (LNG)
Public Education/Social Marketing
u Institutionalize educational programs to educate students
in different energy topics, e.g. better ways to manage 
energy-usage, bringing about attitudinal change towards
responsible energy use, energy responsibility, among
many others.
u Establishing awareness programs on energy in the 
school curriculum. 
u Promote the use of renewables in schools and 
universities. This could be done by placing solar 
energy generating equipment on roofs at schools 
and universities.
u Establish a National Energy Education Program with the
aim of promoting energy awareness by creating effective
networks among students, educators, business, government
and community leaders to design and deliver objective,
multi-sided energy education program’s activities. 
u Transforming Antigua & Barbuda’s energy systems will require a level of expertise, 
innovation and generational effort. Antigua & Barbuda needs major investments in 
capacity building. To achieve that, the Government will encourage direct investments
to retool local and regional academic institutions as centers for research, education
and workforce training in energy-related fields, both at professional and technical levels.
15ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
implement a national energy policy framework. That framework must not only address 
the adverse impacts of high fossil fuel prices on the economy and the people but must 
also provide a long term development plan for the energy sector and the diversification 
of the energy matrix by using renewables and improving the efficiency in all sectors. 
The ultimate goal is the provision of reliable and affordable energy services to all people 
in Antigua and Barbuda.
Currently Antigua and Barbuda does not have the necessary policies or regulations in
place to foster the development of the various renewable energy technologies, improve
the efficiency of non-renewables or to foster the application of emerging technologies
which have the potential to improve the energy sector in Antigua and Barbuda. An enabling policy is required to accelerate the growth of renewable energy technologies and
beyond. The National Energy Policy is intended to provide governmental institutions as
well as corporate and private citizens and civil society in general with essential guidelines
for the establishment and implementation of a Sustainable Energy Action Plan. It is
through the Sustainable Energy Action Plan that the positions articulated in the National
Energy Policy will be translated into concrete actions and targets. 
The existing energy sector planning appears to be focusing only on the supply of electricity
and the importation of petroleum fuels. Other areas such as the promotion of energy 
efficiency, conservation measures and renewable energy sources only receive attention 
on an ad hoc basis, and such efforts are generally spearheaded by non-governmental organizations such as the Environmental Awareness Group (EAG). This shortcoming ought
to be addressed through appropriate policy, a well-structured and coordinated legal and
regulatory framework, targeted incentives and an appropriately staffed and resourced 
Sustainable Energy Unit. 
As previously highlighted, Antigua and Barbuda’s heavy reliance on imported fuels is 
taxing the economy and is a major contributing factor to increasing inflation. The associated increases in the price of basic food items and services have put pressure on the 
Government to put in place measures that will reduce hardships faced by the citizenry. 
The small business operators are also trying to make ends meet as they are burdened with
debts and high interest rates prompted by increasing fuel prices. As a result of significant
fiscal constraints the Government has had to curtail capital expenditures. Further, the 
absence of a clearly articulated framework to promote mutually beneficial partnerships
and private investments in the energy sector has inhibited the timely development of 
the energy sector.
Antigua and Barbuda is endowed with some renewable energy sources such as solar,
wind, waste to energy (WTE) and Marine energy. These resources may have the potential
to provide Antigua and Barbuda with an alternative and more sustainable energy supply
and reduce its dependence on imported fossil fuels. However, the challenge is how to
make the transition from the current exclusive reliance on fossil fuels to incorporate 
renewable energy sources. 
FRAMEWORK
16Renewable Power, investment promotion and tax incentives. Further, a comprehensive 
assessment of the country’s renewable energy potential is required in order to study and
implement environmentally sound, culturally acceptable and economically viable renewable energy solutions. Finally, it must be acknowledged that the country’s current patterns
of energy production, distribution and consumption are not sustainable in terms of 
resource allocation, environmental impacts, affordability, and energy security.
4.1 ENERGY SOURCES
BASED ON INFORMATION PROVIDED BY WIOC, POWER PRODUCERS 
purchased 34% of the fuel consumed in Antigua and Barbuda in 2009. The comparable
figure for 2008 was 38%. As previously stated, the country relies almost exclusively on
fossil fuels for the generation of electricity, and the tariffs are amongst the highest in the
region. In this context the diversification of the energy sources is one of the key objectives
of the National Energy Policy.
4.1.1 FOSSIL FUELS/NON-RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES
a) The Government’s foreign trade policy will seek to strengthen bilateral relationships with energy supplying countries within and external to the region and 
establish medium- and long-term energy supply commitments.
b) The Government will participate in regional efforts to
explore the economics and financial viability of piped
or shipped natural gas and/or geothermal energy. 
c) The Government through its participation in ECERA
will mandate all energy producers to complete and
submit periodic evaluations and reports on the economic lifetime and operation costs of their existing
power generators. Technical and financial performance benchmarks shall be established to indicate the
most efficient generators and components. The less
efficient generators shall be phased out as soon as
possible, being substituted by Renewable Energy
sources wherever possible.
d) The Government will promote the use of private-public partnerships for capital
projects focusing on specific barriers.
e) Ministry in charge of Public Utilities and the Ministry of Finance will review the 
current method of adjusting the fossil fuels surcharge or taxes and will evaluate
the appropriateness of such calculation methods. In addition taxation will be 
revised to ensure a domestic energy price that reflects international price 
movements such that subsidies are minimized. 
f) Standards and licensing requirements will be developed to address environmental
and safety concerns as well as consumer protection and affordable pricing.
g) The Government will direct efforts to minimize the risk of ecological damage 
resulting from possible spills related to the transport of liquid petroleum fuels.
h) The Government shall take the necessary steps to promote WIOC as a storage 
4POWER
SECTOR
17ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
b) The Government will foster a resource assessment on municipal and industrial
waste streams as well as sustainable agricultural or forest residues with regards to
their suitability for sustainable power generation.
c) In the light of promoting sustainable energy generation, the Government will foster
the elaboration of resource assessments and pre-feasibility studies on the potentials of technologies to generate energy from alternative energy sources. These 
efforts will focus on, but not be limited to:
u Wind power;
u Solar power;
u Biomass and Waste-to-Energy;
d) The relevant Institutions (e.g. Ministry in charge Public Utilities Energy, of Environmental, the Chamber of Commerce, the tourism Authority, APUA, the Investment
authority and others ) will strengthen their respective roles in the contribution to 
a sustainable and efficient planning of the energy sector by:
u Taking advantage of available international funds and grant schemes;
u Promoting appropriate foreign direct investment;
u Participating in regional and international research activities;
u Setting in motion capacity building programs in fields related to energy
generation and distribution;
u Revisiting Antigua and Barbuda’s initial and second national communication on Climate Change.
e) The Government will take a lead in the application of small solar PV systems by
equipping its most suitable public buildings with such technology.
f) The Government will mandate and provide appropriate incentives for the installation of solar water heating systems in the tourism plant.
4.1.3 WASTE TO ENERGY
Waste to Energy (WTE) is a proven, environmentally sound process that provides reliable
electricity generation and sustainable disposal of post-recycling of municipal solid waste
(MSW). Encouraging WTE can have a significant effect on reducing the nation’s greenhouse gas emissions, and WTE can also have a meaningful impact in reducing dependence
on fossil fuels and increasing production of renewable energy. WTE will help to reduce the
burden on the landfill. For these reasons the Government will:
a) Direct efforts to study the waste streams and the waste classification in order to 
estimate the potential for electricity generation and to identify the most suitable
technology. 
b) Propose changes in the current National Solid Waste Management and APUA Acts
in order to improve the management of the sector and allow the NSWMA or its
designated agent(s) to generate electricity. 
c) Direct efforts to reduce waste disposal in landfills on a per capita basis by use of
WTE technologies and recycling development. Such efforts shall include but not 
be limited to the provision of support for ABREC. 
d) Direct efforts to develop and disseminate effective educational programs and 
promote awareness of the benefits of recycling. 
e) Enforce punitive measures to reduce illegal dumping and litter.
18term strategy.
b) The Government will support programs for education on, and early deployment of,
appropriate emerging renewable power technologies
c) The Government will promote the participation of Antigua and Barbuda in demonstration-cooperation programs of environmentally sound emerging technologies.
d) The Government will develop appropriate standards for emerging technologies to
facilitate prudent market penetration
4.2 ENERGY EFFICIENCY MANAGEMENT
Acknowledging that the projected 47% increase in peak demand could increase the 
country’s carbon dioxide emissions if unchecked, the Government is committed to utilizing
proven energy efficiency mechanisms. Through a comprehensive process of legislative and
regulatory reform, the Government will create incentives for power producers to deliver
cost-effective energy savings and for consumers to alter consumption patterns.
4.2.1 SUPPLY SIDE
The Government will establish minimum efficiency standards for electricity generation
transmission and distribution with differential incentives for specific target attainment. 
All power producers shall be mandated to comply with agreed upon standards which will
be developed and promulgated through an appropriate regional initiative.
The Government will encourage the increased utilization of combined-heat-and-power
plants in the productive and commercial sectors in order to increase the energy efficiency
and reduce thermal losses.
4.2.2 DEMAND SIDE
The Government will promote the development and implementation of Demand Side 
Management (DSM) programs with the involvement of power producers. These programs
will seek to:
u Develop institutional mechanisms and energy audits to assess end use energy
consumption and determine efficiency improvement potential;
u Design and implement specific measures to capture said potential;
u Evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed measures; 
u Develop the necessary institutional capabilities to implement these activities on
a broader scale.
u Develop mechanisms to encourage commercial banks and Credit Unions to
support DSM related financing.
The Government will encourage the establishment of energy service companies (ESCO) to
undertake energy efficiency improvements in households and businesses. Accordingly, it
will take actions to catalyze the creation of one or more ESCOs in Antigua and Barbuda. 
It will also solicit the assistance of international donors to assist with the establishment 
of financial mechanisms for the promotion of EE and the deployment of appropriate RE.
One initiative to be launched in this regard is the promotion of green mortgages (both 
residential and commercial) through which customers will qualify for lower interest rates
19ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
consumers and providing cost-benefit examples of potential domestic, commercial 
and industrial energy saving means.
The Government will - in cooperation with development banks and/or international 
institutions - launch an efficiency program in the lighting sector, focusing on less energy
intensive lighting sources, scheduling patterns and timers or sensors.
The Government will in cooperation with development banks and/or international institutions launch a soft-loan program for the establishment of small-scale distributed solar PV
systems and solar hot water systems that are affordable to low and medium income
households.
The Government will take a lead in the application of solar hot water systems by equipping its public buildings with such technology. The generated heat shall be used for as
much as possible purposes as heating water or driving air conditioning installations.
4.3 LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
In order to achieve the required transition to sustainable, energy efficient utility services,
Antigua and Barbuda must create a strong and relevant legal and regulatory framework.
The ultimate goal is to achieve economies of scale while protecting the interest of consumers and security of supply by addressing the challenges on a regional basis through
ECERA. In the interim, the Government will design and implement a transitional regulatory framework to provide a bridge between the existing structure and the long-term
OECS sustainable energy programme. The hallmark of this transition will be the provision
of incentives for the rapid and significant development of alternative energy and energy
efficiency solutions and the associated reduction of the carbon footprint at the level of the
household, commercial enterprise and power producers.
4.3.1 APUA ACT
a) The Government will re-structure the power sector in line with the stipulated 
goals, solutions and individual actions set by the National Energy Policy. 
Said restructuring shall be informed by a comprehensive analysis of the entire
power system including the operation and management of assets and 
supply-demand balance management.
b) A suitable framework will be created to ensure wider access to the electricity 
network for Independent Renewable Energy Power Producers, especially to 
substitute electricity generated by APUA or the historically contracted IPPs.
c) The Government will amend the existing legislation in order to allow households
and businesses to generate electricity utilizing renewable energy sources.
d) Appropriate mechanisms will be developed and implemented to ensure that APUA
and IPPs contribute to capacity building in energy conservation. The idea is to increase consumer education and build capacity around sustainable energy issues.
20renewable electricity generation facilities.
4.3.2 LAND PLANNING ACT
Current work on the land use policy shall be reviewed in order to ensure that the new 
policy makes adequate provision for the use of designated areas for the construction of 
renewable energy plants to include but not be limited to wind farms and waste to 
energy plants.
4.3.3 ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA INVESTMENT AUTHORITY ACT
After appropriate consultations with the business community and the financial services
sector, the necessary amendments will be passed to create incentives for commercial and
residential investments in RE and EE solutions. Among the specific programmes to be introduced is a green mortgage facility which will provide concessionary financing for the
construction of efficient commercial buildings and residences.
Given the front-loaded nature of investments in renewable energy and energy efficiency
measures, the Investment Authority will be tasked with identifying appropriate measures
to enable consumers (both commercial and residential) to realize a reasonable return on
investment. 
4.3.4 DEVELOPMENT CONTROL AUTHORITY (DCA) ACT
The Government will via DCA and appropriate regional initiatives establish building audits
and implement building codes for new buildings while promoting the introduction of 
energy efficiency measures in existing buildings. Legislative changes will also be implemented to enforce building certification requirements. These measures will be preceded 
by appropriate capacity building, targeting architects and contractors as well as the 
DCA itself.
4.3.5 NATIONAL SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY ACT
The success of the NSWMA and ABREC is hampered by the lack of an enabling regulatory
framework. Without mandatory requirements for waste recycling, the management of 
the landfill and the productivity of the waste recycling plant are both well below peak 
performance. The Government will review its overall waste management policy in order 
to ensure that it facilitates the utilization of culturally relevant and economically viable
waste to energy technology at either a national or regional level.
4.4 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
The Antigua Public Utilities Authority (APUA) is a tripartite government statutory agency
set up under the Public Utilities Act No. 10 of 1973 (and subsequently as amended) to 
ensure that consumers receive Telecommunications, Electricity and Water services. 
Policy formulation and introduction of legislation as required to successfully fulfill APUA's
mission comes from the Minister of Public Utilities, who is a member of the Cabinet of 
Antigua & Barbuda. 
21ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
ensuring that they are provided with an efficient, reliable and cost-effective energy service.
Under the new institutional framework, there will be a separation of duties with the introduction of a National Energy Unit and the establishment of an independent regulatory
agency. Further, the National Energy Task Force will be reconstituted as the Energy Advisory Panel to serve in an advisory role on matters related to policy.
4.4.1 ENERGY ADISORY PANEL
The Energy Advisory Panel will serve as a platform for industry players including inter alia
policy makers, regulator, generators, consultants and NGO’s to meet discuss and make recommendations on current issues in the energy sector and advise government on improvements to the National Energy Policy and Sustainable Energy Plan.
4.4.2 SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UNIT
The Sustainable Energy Unit , will have the primary responsibility for updating and improving the National Energy Policy and the Sustainable Energy Action Plan, so that the overall
objectives of the energy sector reform are achieved in the shortest possible time.
It will moreover function as an observer body at the national level, in order to assist the
Ministry with responsibility for Public Utilities, the regulator and other national authorities
in the reasonable implementation and monitoring of energy related policies and laws.
The Sustainable Energy Unit will propose standards for service quality and
pricing systems and collaborate with APUA, the Attorney General’s Chambers and relevant regional international agencies in order to review and
amend the existing legal and regulatory framework. The Sustainable Energy
Unit will collect relevant energy data on a regular basis, in order to support
the planning and evaluation activities. Furthermore, it will be in charge of
compiling energy information periodically to be utilized for sectoral planning and for evaluating the impact of selected policy initiatives and programs. It will establish a database of measurable and transparent
indicators to be recorded and assessed periodically, in order to evaluate the efficacy of the
National Energy Policy and the associated Sustainable Energy Action Plans or activities.
Specific responsibilities of the Sustainable Energy Unit include:
i) Mandating and coordinating studies on energy resources, generation, transformation and marketing in close cooperation with the responsible operating agencies;
ii) Fostering the development of appropriate legislation for the sectors electricity,
transportation, petroleum and gas through a participatory and consultative
process with focus on cheaper and more sustainable services;
(iii) Fostering the development and adoption of appropriate energy efficiency standards and programs;
(iv) Promoting and monitoring power sector demand-side management programs 
and other programs designed to encourage the purchase and adoption of energyefficient appliances by final energy users;
22disseminating appropriate information to private and public sector; 
(vii) Cooperating with national and regional NGOs or institutions active in the energy
and environmental sector to increase the dialogue and organize dissemination 
of relevant information or capacity building programs.
4.4.3 EASTERN CARIBBEAN ENERGY REGULATORY AUTHORITY (ECERA)
While this project is still in the formulation stage, ECERA’s specific responsibilities are likely
to include:
i) Conducting tariff reviews; 
ii) Setting, or advising on, electricity tariffs; 
iii) Monitoring performances, developing and helping to implement technical 
standards for improving performances and tariff incentives if necessary; 
iv) Developing and monitoring data on the electricity sector; 
v) Arbitrating disputes between operators and individual OECS Member States. 
vi) Developing a model market structure, licensing terms, and helping to implement
fair and transparent rules regarding new investors in electricity generation, 
especially from renewable energy sources. 
vii) Developing a framework for sustainable investment in the electricity systems by:
(i) reviewing and approving the investment plans of the utilities, including 
allowing utilities to recover the prudently incurred costs of their investments in
electricity rates; (ii) approving the procurement processes associated with carrying
out these plans in order to ensure that the investments deliver the best value 
for the consumers, with a special emphasis on the procurement of renewable 
energy resources. 
viii) Facilitating the process of formulating and implementing (1) possible renewable
energy (RE) targets, (2) utility obligations and procurement rules to purchase 
electricity from RE sources, (3) mechanisms to recover corresponding costs from
consumers, and (4) standard contractual terms for private suppliers of electricity. 
ix) Upon the request of the government(s), providing expert advice and input to 
national and regional energy policymaking. This could include involvement in 
consultations to help formulate energy policy goals for the individual States, 
responding to the needs for energy security, reliability of electricity supply and 
energy diversification and providing expert advice on the impacts of policies on
consumer electricity prices. 
x) Facilitating broader regional integration (in particular, in the context of the new
OECS Economic Union Treaty) by: (i) Facilitating the design and implementation of
cross-border electricity trade standards; (ii) Promoting, sponsoring and reviewing
specific pre-feasibility and feasibility studies, including for potential regional
(cross-border) investments. 
23ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
Barbuda previously shielded consumers from fluctuations in the price of fuel at the pump.
As a result of that policy, the anticipated inverse relationship between gas prices and consumption patterns was not observed in Antigua and Barbuda. Then in August 2009 the
Ministry of Finance announced the transition to a partial pass through pricing system.
However, on its own the change in pricing mechanism will not lead to the necessary 
reductions in CO2 emissions.
As a result of the importance of tourism (including water sports) and the country’s 
heavy reliance on imported goods, air and marine transportation are also key elements 
of Antigua and Barbuda’s transportation sector and, by extension, energy consumption
pattern. The principal marine users include shipping lines, fisher folk and persons engaged
in recreational water sports. Currently there is little or no regulation and no clear assignment of responsibility for oversight. While the volume of fossil fuels consumed by marine
users is considerably less than that consumed by ground transportation users, there are
significant environmental concerns associated with emissions and the disposal of used
fuel. Therefore, relevant standards will be developed, implemented and monitored.
Since Antigua and Barbuda does not manufacture vehicles and our market is relatively
small in the international context, the country is essentially a technology taker and is 
limited in its ability to promote advanced fuel efficiency standards. In that context, the
National Energy Policy focuses on how vehicles are utilized, improving the quality and 
attractiveness of public transportation and utilizing a combination of fiscal incentives to
promote the use of the most efficient technologies.
5.1 GROUND TRANSPORTATION
The Government will take a lead in the application of efficient vehicles and cleaner fuels
within its fleet. Capitalizing on the country’s small size and relatively flat terrain, the 
Government shall explore the feasibility of introducing electric vehicles into its fleet.
In addition to the changes in its own consumption patterns, the Ministry of Transport in
conjunction with other government institutions – recognizing that transportation is simply
a means to access people and services – will develop and/or promote:
u New legislation for emissions; 
u Regular checks of tire pressure levels to minimize tire rolling;
u Reduce the demand for travel while protecting social and economic needs for
access;
u Improve access by identifying and removing the obstacles to more sustainable
choices such as car pooling, walking and cycling; and
u Mandatory recycling of used fuel;
5.1.1 EFFICIENCY AND EMISSION STANDARDS
In demonstration of its commitment to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its objectives of reducing global GHG emissions and to address the actual and anticipated effects of climate change the Government of Antigua and
Barbuda has presented its initial and second National Communications to the Convention. 
SECTOR
24technologically dependent country, reliant on external sources for virtually all
its technology needs in the transport sector, there are serious constraints to
the levels of intervention that can effectively be made by policy makers in 
Antigua and Barbuda. Consequently many of the changes in transportation 
efficiencies likely to result in reductions in GHG emissions and unit energy
prices will be driven by technology and economic forces independent of 
policies and actions taken at the national level.
Nonetheless, in order to encourage public health and environmental 
protection, legal frameworks have to be defined and implemented to deal
with issues such as mandatory vehicle inspections, vehicular emission standards, appropriate fuel taxation schemes and import duties or tax exemptions to promote fuel efficient
vehicles. In this regard, specific courses of action will include the establishment of target
fuel use standards for vehicles to be imported with high tax levels applied to vehicles
which do not meet said standards. Compulsory labeling and the provision of comparative
data will enable consumers to make more informed choices.
5.1.2 PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
The Government will investigate the utilization patterns of potential passengers in the
public transport to increase the attractiveness, efficiency and safety of the offered service.
The Ministry of Transport and the relevant Authorities will investigate opportunities for: 
u Developing and establishing an energy efficient city transportation system and
modernizing the public transportation system;
u Optimization of the routes and operation times of the public transportation system;
u Tendering and exclusive licensing for the routes covered by public transport;
u Improving the traffic management by utilizing feasible measures such as controlled traffic lights and roundabouts to harmonize traffic flow;
u Increasing the utilization of car-pooling spots; and
u Providing more safety and infrastructure for pedestrians and cyclists.
5.2 AVIATION TRANSPORTATION
The Eastern Caribbean Civil Aviation Authority (ECCAA) is the principal regulatory 
authority for this sector. However, their focus is on matters related to safety and not on
energy efficiency or environmental protection. Currently, at least one airline engages in
the recycling of used fuel. The government will explore the feasibility of more widespread
use of fuel recycling, assigning responsibility for coordination and monitoring to the newly
created Sustainable Energy Unit.
5.3 ENVIRONMENT AND TRANSPORT
As previously stated, this sector provides a difficult area for effecting significant reductions
in emissions. A transportation master plan integrating concerns for energy efficiency and
conservation with wider concerns for improving transportation flows and reducing traffic
congestion is required. Fair competition and improved safety shall be achieved along with
the following actions:
2526
6OTHER
USES OF 
ENERGY
emissions;
u Introduce beneficial tax systems to promote the purchase of more efficient
vehicles, including the new generation of hybrid and flex-fuel vehicles or
electric cars.
b) The Ministry of Transport will develop and implement a campaign to promote the
use of low carbon transportation methods.
c) The Ministry of Transport will mandate the utilization of catalysts or particle filters,
which will also, in addition to current safety considerations, impose and control
maximum levels of harmful emissions, the reduction of which will also yield benefits in fuel consumption.
d) The Government will take actions to limit high sulfur containing diesel and replacing this by cleaner diesel.
e) The Government will analyze the potential, environmental footprint and cost effectiveness of blending fossil fuels with up to 10% of bio-fuels.
f) The Government will analyze the potential of increased utilization of imported LPG
and LNG for the transport sector.
g) The Government shall introduce regulations in order to eradicate the indiscriminate
disposal of used fuel from ground, air and marine transport.
6.1 COOKING
LPG, Charcoal, and some Electricity are the primary energy source used to meet the cooking needs in Antigua and Barbuda. However, Antigua and Barbuda is richly endowed with
a variety of renewable energy resources which include plentiful woody and non-woody
biomass, solar, and wind. Presently, only a meager fraction of the country’s renewable 
energy potential is exploited. 
The Ministry of Work, Transportation and Environment, the Ministry of Agriculture Lands,
Marine Resources & Agro Industries and other relevant Authorities will investigate 
opportunities for: 
u Revision of the tax structure in favour of energy efficient cooking stoves
u Assess the utilization of different cooking fuels that are environmentally
friendly, affordable and efficient cooking fuels.
u Assessing the potential to harness basic biogas technology for cooking or other
renewable energy sources 
6.2 SMALL ENGINES
The Ministry of Finance and Economy and other relevant Authorities will investigate 
opportunities for:
u Revision of the tax structure in favour of energy efficient small engine sizes
(yard equipment, generators, among others).
u Encouraging the importation of energy efficient small engines machinery, 
vehicles, boats, and other fuel-efficient units, for domestic, transportation and
other forms of use
ANTIGUA AND BARBUD27
sustainable energy future, Antigua and Barbuda must define and implement a legal and
regulatory framework. The hallmark of this transition will be: 
u Appropriate regulations at the importer, and distributor levels to ensure use of
energy efficient stoves and small engines.
u Adoption of international standards and best practices for small engines and
cooking fuels.
u Mandated standards and testing programmes for cooking fuels and small engines to be utilized.
u Financial and fiscal incentives that allow market competitive access for the importation of efficient cooking fuels and energy efficient small engines
6.4 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
The institutional framework for other uses of energy in Antigua and Barbuda needs to 
be established based on most aspects of energy uses developing strategies and laws.
However, the laws must provide clear-cut competence for all the authorities to prevent 
issues of dispute of control between different Governmental agencies.
It is expected that the establishment of the Energy Unit can improve the coordination 
between the different energy uses and sources and management of other resources as
well as environmental issues. 
The key players in the implementation of this other uses of energy and their roles and 
responsibilities are described below.
u The Energy Unit will be responsible for the overall implementation of the other
Energy-Uses Policy and will provide expert advice and guidance with respect to
all Other Energy Uses initiatives. 
u The Office of the Prime Minister has portfolio responsibility for Other Energy
Uses, and will have responsibility for the development and implementation of
Other Energy-Uses initiatives, including economic performance. 
u The Environment Division (Ministry of Work, Transportation and Environment)
and the Ministry of Agriculture Lands, Marine Resources & Agro Industries will
provide advice and guidance on the environmental impacts of all Other EnergyUses programmes. The Division will facilitate proposals for consideration of
projects to benefit from the Clean Development Mechanism. 
u The Ministry of Finance and the Economy will be responsible for establishing
appropriate financial or tax incentives.
u Technical and secondary educational facilities will play a key role in keeping
abreast of research in Other Uses of Energy and the linkages between their
uses and impact on human health and the environment, and thus ensuring 
environmental sustainability.ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
the creation of a Sustainable Energy Plan (SEAP). The SEAP is intended to serve as a road
map for the energy future in Antigua and Barbuda from 2010 until 2030. The SEAP will
contain short (1-5 years), medium (5-10 years), and long (10-20 years) term actions designed to enhance the implementation of the policies and goals of Antigua and Barbuda’s
National Energy Policy (NEP). The specific activities contained in the SEAP will foster 
energy conservation, energy efficiency, and diversification of energy sources, sustainable
energy consumption and generation as well as the utilization of renewable energy sources
available in Antigua and Barbuda. 
The strategies identified to meet the above are as follows: 
Strategy 1: Energy Conservation and Energy Efficiency 
Strategy 2: Renewable Energy Development
Strategy 3: Education and Awareness
In order to implement the aforementioned SEAP, the following elements must be 
articulated for each of the three listed strategies:
u Target “quotas” to be accomplished 
u Specific actions to be implemented
u Responsible agency per each action
u Appropriate indicators to measure the outputs of each project
u Level of priority (i.e. short, medium or long term)
u Cost and potential sources of funds for each project
The Energy Unit will be responsible for creating a first draft of the SEAP based on the
above mentioned strategies and points and with the input of key stakeholders at the 
national, regional and international levels. Upon completion, the SEAP is to be submitted
to Cabinet for approval. The approved plan will be tabled in Parliament and subjected to
widespread circulation.
7.2 REPORTING AND MONITORING
Reporting and monitoring provisions are integral to the effective implementation of the
NEP and SEAP. Therefore, the new legal and regulatory framework will make provisions
for mandatory reporting by energy service providers. Similarly, certain agencies will be 
assigned oversight and enforcement powers in order to ensure compliance. Such agencies
include but are not limited to:
u Antigua and Barbuda Bureau of Standards
u Environmental Division
u The Development Control Authority
u National Solid Waste Management Authority
u Antigua and Barbuda Transport Board
u Antigua and Barbuda Airport Authority
u East Caribbean Energy Regulatory Authority
MONITORING
28gy
AOSIS Alliance of Small Island States
APUA Antigua Public Utilities Authority
BPoA Barbados Program of Action 
CARICOM Caribbean Community
CARIFTA Caribbean Free Trade Association
CARILEC Caribbean Association of Electric Utilities
COP Conference of the Parties
CREDP Caribbean Renewable Energy Development Program
CSEP Caribbean Sustainable Energy Programme
ECERA Eastern Caribbean Energy Regulatory Authority
GEF Global Environment Facility
GIN Global Islands Network
GSEII Global Sustainable Energy Islands Initiative
GTZ German Technical Cooperation (in German)
HFO Heavy Fuel Oil
ICT Information and communication technology 
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPP Independent Power Producers
LCOE Levelised Cost of Electricity
MACC Mainstreaming Adaptation to Climate Change 
MDG Millennium Development Goals
MOF Minister of Finance, the Economy and Public Administration
NETF National Energy Task Force
OAS Organization of American States
OECS Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
RET Renewable Energy Technology
SEAP Sustainable Energy Action Plan
SIDS Small Island Developing States
SIDSNet Small Island Developing States Network
SIDSTAP SIDS Technical Assistance Program
UC-SIS University Consortium of the Small Island States
UN United Nations
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNDP United Nations Development Program
UNGA United Nations General Assembly
WB World Bank
WSSD World Summit on Sustainable Development
INFORMATION
29ANTIGUA AND BARBUD
from the Department of Sustainable Development of the Organization of American 
States (OAS), the consultant firm German ProfEC GmbH and Engineer Daryl Jackson. 
The technical and policy assistance was offered as part of the Caribbean Sustainable 
Energy Program (CSEP) funded by the European Commission under the 1st funding 
cycle of the EU Energy Initiative (2006-2011).
The Government expresses its sincere gratitude to all those individual and institutional
stakeholders who took the time to review the draft and to provide feedback. Your input
has been invaluable.
Special appreciation is extended to the members of the National Energy Task Force 
who donated their time and expertise to develop and refine the contents of this policy
document:
1. Charmaine Hackett
2. Kiyode Straker
3. Dalma Hill
4. Milton Pringle
5. Mario Bento
6. Neil Forrester
7. Dianne Black-Layne
8. George Phillips
9. Edwards Baynes
10. Brian Lyn
11. John Birk 
12. Everon Zachariah
13. Fitzmaurice Christian
14. Morris Burns
15. Lowell Spencer
16. Lyndon Francis
17. Kelvin Punter
18. Philmore James
A special thanks to Ms. Julianne Jarvis for her administrative support.
The Energy Desk also thanks Prime Minister Dr. the Hon. Baldwin Spencer for his vision
and leadership which enabled us to complete this task.
Ambassador Joan H. Underwood
Chief Implementation Officer 
INFORMATION
30