File Name: AZE-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Azerbaijan
Country Code: AZE
Category: CPD
Document Title: UN Country programme document for Azerbaijan (2021–2025)
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 1–4 February 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
21 December 2020
Original: English
2017460X (E) 110121
First regular session 2021
1–4 February 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Azerbaijan (2021–2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework...................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ...... ……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management.......................................................................................... 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation ..... …………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Azerbaijan (2021-2025)………………………………………… 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. The Republic of Azerbaijan is an upper middle-income country in the high human 
development category. The population exceeded 10 million in 2020.
1
 
2. The Government of Azerbaijan is seeking to transition the country towards more 
balanced, inclusive and sustainable economic growth. To facilitate the country’s economic 
transition, the Government aims to create conditions for development based on a growing 
non-oil economy.
3. The Republic of Azerbaijan has also had to address the impact of the decades-long conflict 
in and around its Nagorno-Karabakh region, which has resulted in massive displacement and 
extensive damage. The Government has declared its intention to rehabilitate and reconstruct 
conflict-affected areas in and around the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Republic of 
Azerbaijan, in preparation for the return of over 652,000 internally displaced persons. UNDP 
along with the United Nations country team (UNCT) will support Azerbaijan to assess 
recovery needs and help facilitate the voluntary, safe and dignified return of displaced persons 
to their homes.
4. In 2019, the economy of Azerbaijan grew by 2.2 per cent and gross domestic product in 
the non-oil sector had begun to increase at a faster rate than in the oil sector. Projections for 
2020, however, suggest a sharp contraction in both the oil and non-oil sectors of the economy 
due to the combined impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and a fall in 
world oil prices. The fiscal balance is set to record a deficit of 5.7 per cent in 2020.
2
 
5. The devastating impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as both a health emergency and a 
socioeconomic crisis has created development challenges for Azerbaijan which have been 
partly addressed by the Government’s multisectoral response to the pandemic.
6. Absolute poverty declined from 29.3 per cent in 2005 to 5.1 per cent in 20183 but several 
groups of people remain vulnerable to economic volatility, pandemics and natural disasters.
7. The performance of the country’s public sector on the World Bank’s Government 
Effectiveness index has been steadily improving since 2012 due to ongoing public 
administration reforms. Continued modernization of the public sector is needed to better 
formulate and implement policies, and more effectively deliver public and social services. 
8. Having signed and ratified the Paris Climate Agreement, the Government has targeted a 
35 per cent reduction in the country’s greenhouse gas emissions as its intended nationally 
determined contribution to the global climate change effort. Implementation is linked to the 
country’s climate-risk trajectory and climate adaptation strategy.
9. Improvements in national human development have benefited women and girls. The value 
of the Gender Development Index, which measures gender gaps in human development,
improved in 2019 in Azerbaijan.
4 However, faster progress is still needed in key areas of 
gender equality including improving maternal and child health, reducing the gender wage 
gap and increasing women’s political representation. 
10. Azerbaijan has the potential to make considerable progress towards attaining the 
Sustainable Development Goals. The Government nationalized and prioritized 17 Goals, 88 
targets and 119 indicators.
5 The 2019 voluntary national review identified challenges 
affecting acceleration of implementing the Goals in Azerbaijan which need to be addressed.
1 State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
2 World Bank estimate.
3 State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
4
http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/gender-development-index-gdi.
5 Second Voluntary National Review of the Republic of Azerbaijan11. Although the Government’s development strategy, “Azerbaijan 2020: Vision into the 
Future”, concludes at the end of 2020, the Strategic Road Maps on National Economy
maintain relevance with their long-term outlook to 2025. The formulation of a new 
development strategy is under preparation with UNDP to provide support to the Government 
in its formulation and implementation.
12. UNDP is committed to accelerating structural and digital transformations for resilient, 
sustainable and inclusive development through innovative solutions that have multiplier 
effects across the Sustainable Development Goals. The independent country programme 
evaluation conducted in 2019 found that the country office has promoted and piloted 
innovations, particularly in the areas of energy efficiency and environment, aiming to merge 
tech-savvy and entrepreneurial solutions with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
13. The UNDP accelerator lab will work with national partners to test new solutions that 
can be scaled up, help modernize ongoing programmes and projects, champion digital 
transformation and improve quality of life. A good example is the UNDP self-employment 
programme for people with disabilities, whose approach can be expanded to support other 
vulnerable groups.6
14. UNDP will seek to partner with the Government, international financial institutions 
(IFIs), the private sector and civil society to advocate for the 2030 Agenda and mobilize
finance for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. UNDP will continue its 
long-standing partnership with the Government which is the largest single contributor to the 
UNDP programme. The country office will work closely with existing donors such as the 
European Union and the United States Agency for International Development, and vertical 
funds like the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Green Climate Fund (GCF). It will 
also diversify its funding sources by partnering with new donors.
15. UNDP will engage with civil society organizations (CSOs) to build the capacity of 
vulnerable groups and increase community participation. It will also broaden its engagement 
with the private sector to support micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs)
implement the Climate Promise and finance the Sustainable Development Goals.
16. The UNDP partnership with national institutions – combined with a prompt response 
to needs, an efficient procurement system and promotion of the work of CSOs – made it an 
effective development partner in support of key national priorities. 
17. The independent country programme evaluation concluded that UNDP support to
development continues to be highly relevant in Azerbaijan. A key lesson learned from the 
evaluation is that in upper middle-income countries like Azerbaijan, the value added by 
UNDP increasingly takes the form of innovative thought leadership drawn from its 
international experience, its ability to promote integrated approaches and its capacity to 
convene different stakeholders. 
18. The theory of change underlying the country programme is that inclusive and 
sustainable growth will reduce vulnerability and build resilience in the country, particularly 
for the most disadvantaged. The Government faces increasingly complex and linked 
development challenges that defy simple solutions, requiring greater collaboration across 
sectors and partners. 
19. To address this, UNDP offers coordinated, integrated, whole-of-government and 
multisectoral approaches that aim to facilitate systemic reforms. With its reputation as a 
neutral and impartial partner, and through its integrator role, UNDP can use platforms to 
support dialogue between different stakeholders, including the most marginalized, and 
6
https://wwwazundporg/content/azerbaijan/en/home/projects/creating-inclusive-and-decent-jobs-for-socially-vulnerable-grouphtmlstrengthen its convening and normative role for nationalizing and achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals. 
20. UNDP will facilitate systemic reforms around structural transformations that support 
the Government’s priority of economic diversification through the development of the nonoil sector. UNDP will work with the Government, MSMEs and CSOs in partnership with 
other national and international stakeholders to support sustainable, inclusive and green 
growth, to modernize governance and institutions for better public and social services 
delivery, and to respond to the challenges of climate change and environmental degradation. 
21. Drawing on gender-disaggregated data to report on results, UNDP will mainstream 
gender equality across all areas of its work in Azerbaijan. To assist the Government to meet 
its climate action goals, UNDP will facilitate the country’s shift to a greener, circular 
economy that is resilient to climate risks, is energy-efficient and sustainably manages natural 
resources. Benefiting from the spread of digital governance, public institutions will be 
strengthened at the national and local levels to develop and implement policies that deliver 
better public and social services. Greater engagement of civil society and the private sector
in public decision-making processes will also be fostered.
22. UNDP contributed significantly to public awareness of the Sustainable Development 
Goals and integrating them in national policies, exemplified by the first regional forum on 
the Goals for Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States, organized with the 
Government. The President’s decision to establish the National Coordination Council for 
Sustainable Development was strongly supported by UNDP. The Council was mandated to 
define the national priorities and monitor the country’s progress towards the 2030 Agenda. 
UNDP helped the Government to prepare two voluntary national reviews on the 
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and present them to the high-level political forum on 
sustainable development in 2017 and 2019. 
23. UNDP will continue to support the National Coordinating Council, most notably in the 
preparation of new voluntary national reviews and by promoting the Goals. Working with
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the office of the Resident Coordinator on 
the Joint SDG Fund, UNDP will apply the integrator approach to support the establishment
and operationalization of a holistic and participatory integrated national financing 
framework. The Government will use the framework to enhance its efforts in coordinating
financing of Sustainable Development Goal implementation in the country, in cooperation 
with stakeholders and partners. UNDP recognizes the importance of diversifying sources of 
development finance through new mechanisms and by attracting potential investors,
24. UNDP will support the United Nations system in Azerbaijan to play a strategic role to 
expand the public policy dialogue between the Government, the IFIs and the private sector.
UNDP will continue to ensure that the country programme contributes to regional/global 
knowledge-sharing through South-South and triangular cooperation by sharing the country’s
expertise and practices in relevant areas. The experience of the Azerbaijan Service and 
Assessment Network and the Agency for Sustainable and Operational Social Security can be 
relevant to other middle-income countries seeking to modernize the delivery of government
services. In addition, UNDP will partner with the European Union on interventions involving 
several Eastern Partnership countries in such areas as climate change, local development and 
conflict transformation. 
25. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) for 
2021-2025 is aimed at reducing social and economic inequalities by contributing to inclusive 
and sustainable development in support of the 2030 Agenda.
7 UNDP will contribute to the 
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in the country by applying an integrated 
7Draft UNSDCF, 2020.approach to the strategic pillars in the UNSDCF. UNDP will further contribute to the 
collective delivery of results through joint programming and inter-agency cooperation within 
the United Nations system in the country. 
26. UNDP will partner with the UNCT in strategic areas such as the development of new 
national strategies and Sustainable Development Goal nationalization and advocacy. Joint 
programmes with United Nations agencies will be sought in several areas including on the 
integrated national financing framework and on women and disability with UNFPA, female 
economic empowerment with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the 
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), basic services for people with disability with the 
United Nations Children’s Fund and employment-related interventions with the International 
Labour Organization.
27. Working with the Government, UNDP will provide technical leadership in the UNCT
for the implementation of the COVID-19 socioeconomic recovery plan as well as the 
development of a dashboard to monitor progress with the recovery.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
28. The country programme is grounded in the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, which is 
anchored in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its principles of leaving no 
one behind. Despite substantial improvements in national living standards in recent years, 
some women, youth, children, people with disabilities, elderly persons, refugees, displaced 
communities, informal workers, labour migrants and rural populations remain vulnerable. 
Working in tandem with government and other partners, the UNDP programme aims to 
reduce vulnerability by supporting economic diversification, inclusive growth and 
sustainable development aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals.
Inclusive growth that reduces vulnerability and builds resilience
29. Inclusive growth is a key driver for reducing vulnerability and building more resilience, 
particularly for the poor and most disadvantaged, many of whom live in rural areas. To reduce 
vulnerability, the Government has prioritized increased income-generating opportunities 
combined with human capital development. UNDP will therefore focus on multisectoral, 
integrated solutions providing the necessary skills, vocational education and training and
access to decent jobs, sustainable livelihoods and business opportunities in the non-oil sector.
Drawing from the UNDP Azerbaijan socioeconomic assessment for COVID-19, assistance 
will be provided to the Government to strengthen employment and social protection for those 
most affected by the pandemic.
30. With young people comprising one quarter of the population of Azerbaijan, UNDP will 
continue promoting the engagement of youth as productive human capital. Partnering with 
labour-market stakeholders, UNDP will leverage synergies through its integrated platform 
approach to boosting youth employment, entrepreneurship and skills development via youth 
employment projects.
31. UNDP will play an active role in facilitating inclusive growth by scaling up its flagship 
Women’s Resource Centres across the country, building on its partnership with the State 
Committee for Family, Women and Children Affairs and the Ministry of Labour and Social 
Protection of the Population, and working together with UN-Women and the Swiss Agency 
for Development Cooperation. Vulnerability will be further reduced by supporting youth 
platform labs, social protection, inclusive education and traditional arts programmes. 
Engaging with both the private sector and financial institutions as engines of growth, MSMEs 
and social enterprises will be developed to become future-oriented businesses using digital 
and energy-efficient technologies.
32. Gender inequalities will be addressed by strengthening the national capacity to combat 
gender-based violence, providing support for entrepreneurial initiatives and vocational education of rural women, empowering women to be more active in public decision-making, 
and expanding the digitalization of resources and services for better economic, educational 
and public engagement. Systemic action will be taken to promote gender equality at the levels 
of both policy formulation and implementation. Partnering with civil society, UNDP will 
advocate for the rights of women and other disadvantaged groups. In addition, vocational 
rehabilitation for people with disabilities will be modernized and public awareness of their 
rights will be raised.
33. Tourism, information technology and agro-industry are priority non-oil sectors for 
economic diversification and job creation. UNDP will strengthen its partnership with the 
State Tourism Agency, including building the capacity of the Mingachevir Tourism College,
to further develop sustainable tourism. Local employment and entrepreneurship in the 
tourism sector will be increased through ecotourism, handicraft production, increased 
involvement of women in tourism start-ups, strengthened capacity of the tourism industry
and the establishment of a green supply chain for MSMEs specializing in rural tourism.
Stronger institutions for delivery of quality public and social services 
34. Through evidence-based policy development and cost-effective policy implementation, 
working at both the national and local levels, UNDP will provide thought leadership on good
governance and institutional capacity-building to improve public sector service delivery. The 
evidence base will be strengthened for effective decision-making and the horizontal and 
vertical integration of national and subnational institutions will be supported to facilitate 
proper planning and responsiveness to crises. 
35. Tapping into the UNDP innovation culture and its support for e-governance, UNDP 
will collaborate with the Government to make the delivery of public sector services more 
accessible, affordable and inclusive through digitalization, particularly for the vulnerable, as 
demonstrated by past collaboration on the automation of the payment of social protection 
benefits. In this context, UNDP will support the Government’s efforts to digitally transform 
the country by helping with the modernization of information and communication technology 
infrastructure and the expansion of e-communication and e-services. 
36. UNDP will contribute to the development of digital skills and an enabling environment 
for digital innovation through support to the smart cities road map, the youth Internet 
governance forum and a national digital strategy. Building on existing relationships with the 
Ministry of Education and the State Agency for Vocational Education, and in partnership
with the European Union, UNDP will increase its support for the reform of the vocational 
education and training system. Innovative measures will be piloted including work-based 
learning, new course curricula for future skills and the application of digitalization and online 
training. In addition, the capacity of vocational education and training providers will be built 
and the infrastructure and equipment of selected providers will be modernized. 
37. As part of institutional capacity-building to support health reforms, the capacity of the 
national health-care procurement system will be enhanced to improve the cost-effective 
procurement of essential medicines for treating tuberculosis and HIV in Azerbaijan. There 
will also be scope for UNDP to support public health procurement and digital health solutions 
in response to COVID-19 and other pandemics. 
38. Working with the Government and other relevant stakeholders, UNDP will seek to 
strengthen the national capacity for conflict prevention and sustaining peace. Further efforts 
in this area will focus on strategic advice and dialogue, integration of United Nations
normative frameworks into national action plans, skills development and advocacy and 
support for internally displaced persons to access their rights and sustainable solutions. 
UNDP will help to establish a new Women’s Resource Centre serving conflict-affected 
communities. UNDP will continue its longstanding partnership with the Azerbaijan National 
Agency for Mine Action.39. The capacities of CSOs to engage in development issues will be strengthened. Building
on its integrator role, UNDP will advocate for the inclusion of civil society, including 
organizations representing youth, women and persons with disabilities, to build enabling 
ecosystems for social entrepreneurship and innovation.
Protecting the environment and addressing climate change
40. UNDP will promote environmental protection and address climate change to reduce the 
vulnerability of the population, particularly in rural areas, and build resilience to natural 
disasters. A vision for green growth is required to help mitigate environmental risks, increase 
agricultural productivity and respond effectively to climate change.
41. Working with the Government, the private sector and civil society, UNDP will seek to 
integrate climate change considerations into national policies, strategies and planning 
frameworks. The Government will be supported to enhance its nationally determined 
contribution by incorporating global climate change mitigation through the UNDP Climate 
Promise. The country’s capacities for monitoring greenhouse gas emissions will be 
strengthened and the national measurement, reporting and verification system will be 
upgraded.
42. UNDP will assist the Government to prepare key climate change reports and plans 
including the country’s national communications report to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, its National Climate Change Adaptation Plan and a new 
climate change road map aligned with European Union legislation. Support will be provided 
to the re-established State Commission on Climate Change chaired by the Deputy Prime
Minister. 
43. UNDP will engage with the Government on climate change adaptation and mitigation, 
energy efficiency and the transition to low-carbon technologies. These actions will be 
concentrated on rural communities and those who are more affected by the consequences of 
climate change and water scarcity. 
44. Green agriculture will be supported by promoting water-efficient irrigation methods,
increasing the production of local crops and landraces through improved biodiversity and
supporting sustainable farming practices.
45. Rural women, one of the more disadvantaged groups in the country, will be key 
beneficiaries of UNDP engagement on climate change, energy efficiency and renewable 
energy. Working with the private sector, women will be economically empowered. Access 
to technologies will be increased and green energy entrepreneurship models and climatesmart agriculture will be supported. 
46. Partnerships with the public, private and not-for-profit sectors as well as capacitybuilding and advisory services, will be provided to support energy transitions such as the 
long-term low greenhouse gas emission strategy. Working with the Government, GEF, GCF, 
the International Renewable Energy Agency, United Nations Economic Commission for 
Europe, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and other partners, UNDP 
will address energy-efficiency issues by unlocking the market for retrofitting buildings and 
increasing the production of renewable energy. The energy efficiency of buildings will be 
monitored and green standards will be applied in the planning and design of construction, 
particularly for public buildings and social housing. 
47. With scarce freshwater resources and its coastal Caspian Sea location, Azerbaijan is 
highly vulnerable to climate change and water scarcity. UNDP will support the Government’s 
efforts to improve water management to address this vulnerability. Since the country is prone 
to climate-induced floods and droughts, UNDP will assist the Government at the regional, 
national and local levels to mitigate against climate change and build resilience to natural 
disasters in line with the country’s obligations under the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction.III. Programme and risk management 
48. The development of the country programme was closely aligned to the formulation of 
the UNSDCF, which was prepared through an inclusive and participatory process informed 
by the United Nations-led Common Country Analysis. A strategic prioritization workshop 
was convened in January 2020 where national priorities were determined with the United 
Nations, government counterparts and key stakeholders. UNDP also consulted with all 
relevant government bodies in the preparation of the country programme.
49. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers to 
country programmes is prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies 
and procedures and the internal control framework.
50. The country programme will be nationally executed but may be replaced by direct 
execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure. Cost 
definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged 
to the concerned projects. Together with the Cabinet of Ministers, UNDP will exercise joint 
ownership responsibility for the programme. As part of the UNSDCF Steering Group, UNDP 
will continue to actively lead in joint workplans and monitoring frameworks to contribute to 
a coherent approach within the United Nations system.
51. All United Nations activities, programmes and projects in all districts and areas of the 
Republic of Azerbaijan will continue to be fully coordinated, agreed and implemented by the 
offices of the United Nations system in Azerbaijan with the respective counterparts within 
the Government of Azerbaijan. They will be implemented in full respect for the sovereignty, 
territorial integrity and independence of the Republic of Azerbaijan within its internationally 
recognized borders and in accordance with the United Nations Charter and all relevant United 
Nations Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. 
52. The role of the private sector and financing institutions in areas such as economic 
transformation, MSMEs and financing start-ups will be pursued, particularly targeting youth, 
women, smallholder farmers and small entrepreneurs at the local level. Partnerships with the 
Government will be further strengthened in view of the Government’s increasing cofinancing of the UNDP programme.
53. In order to accommodate a sizeable (64 per cent) increase in programme value 
compared to the previous country programme, UNDP will strengthen its programme and 
operational capacity including if necessary, through the recruitment of additional staff in key
positions. The programme assumes that the Government will continue to pursue its policy 
reforms to modernize the country as well as provide investments that transform the economy
and promote inclusion. 
54. The risks to the programme originate from the uncertainty of external financing given 
the high middle-income context of Azerbaijan, the risk-aversion of the banking sector to 
introduce innovative financing mechanisms to support MSMEs and decreasing energy prices. 
If living standards fall as a result of overlapping health, economic and/or security crises, 
UNDP would need to mitigate the risks through reprogramming and enhanced resource 
mobilization.
55. UNDP will apply a portfolio-based approach to have holistic programmes around 
development priorities and broaden the donor and partner base to mobilize resources for their 
realization in response to the risk of decreased financing. To help manage these risks, UNDP 
will integrate social and environmental standards and accountability mechanisms through 
establishing early warning arrangements, a strengthened stakeholder response mechanism
and compliance review and grievance mechanisms.IV. Monitoring and evaluation
56. UNDP will promote responsibility and accountability throughout the programme 
management cycle by aligning the country programme monitoring and evaluation framework 
with that of the UNSDCF. The programme results and resources framework is fully aligned 
with the integrated results and resources framework of the UNDP Strategic Plan. UNDP will 
work with the Cabinet of Ministers, as the coordinating government institution, and with 
partners and beneficiaries to assess progress on implementation, foster learning and ensure 
timely decision-making.
57. To track the contribution of the programme to transformative change and strengthen 
learning within the organization, UNDP will increase its in-house capacity for gender- and 
age-disaggregated data collection, analysis and utilization. Evaluation findings will be 
incorporated into decision-making to adapt ongoing programmes as well as design new 
projects to achieve defined strategic results. The programme will supplement traditional tools 
with innovative ones such as multilevel mixed evaluation methods, crowdsourcing, micronarratives, real-time reporting and engagement with civil society to strengthen data collection 
and analysis. To improve the quality of decentralized evaluations as well as increase use of 
evaluation findings for learning and adaptation, UNDP will establish a quarterly assurance 
mechanism.
58. UNDP will continue to rely on evaluations to inform its programming decisions and 
approaches. It will cooperate with United Nations agencies and government counterparts to 
strengthen national statistical and analytical capacities for monitoring and reporting on the 
Sustainable Development Goals. The UNDP gender marker will be used to monitor 
expenditures and improve planning and decision-making, with UNDP aiming to invest at 
least 15 per cent of its budget in interventions to achieve results in gender equality.Annex. Results and resources framework for Azerbaijan (2021-2025)
The baselines and targets for the UNSDCF Result Matrix will be agreed by the United Nations agencies, the Government counterparts and other stakeholders.
National Coordination Council for Sustainable Development is a coordinating partner.
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: INCLUSIVE GROWTH THAT REDUCES VULNERABILITY AND BUILDS RESILIENCE
UNSCDF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: People furthest behind participate in and benefit from a diverse and innovative economy encompassing future-oriented labour-market 
transformation and access to decent work
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME 
($)
Indicator (SDG 9.3.1): Proportion of small-scale 
industries in total industry value added.
Baseline: 0.8 %
Target: share of SMEs in GDP is 35%; in 
Employment is 40 %
Indicator: Number of MSMEs and social 
enterprises operating in lower-income communities.
Baseline: 0
Target: min 500 
Indicator: Number of people (disaggregated) with 
adequate knowledge and resources to set up 
MSMEs.
Baseline: 285 women 
Target: 425 women 
Indicator (SDG 8.6.1): Proportion of people of 
working age not in education, employment or 
training.
Baseline: 23% (2017)
Target: 15%
State Statistical Committee; 
annually
-
-
- Ministry of Labour and 
Social Protection of the 
- Population, State Committee 
for Family, Women and 
Children Affairs, UNDP 
report; annually
Ministry of Labour and 
- Social Protection of the 
- Population 
Output 1.1. Vulnerable groups, particularly the poor, 
women and people with disabilities (PWD), are empowered 
to gain universal access to financial and non-financial assets 
to build productive capacities and benefit from sustainable 
livelihoods and jobs.
Indicator 1.1.1 Number of vulnerable populations including 
PWD receive tailored support for activation, social and workoriented rehabilitation for self-employment or employment into 
the formal labour market in the regions
Baseline: 0
Target: min 700 (425 women)
Data source; frequency: Ministry of Labour and Social 
Protection of the Population, UNDP report; annually (targets 
are revised as a result of COVID-19).
Indicator 1.1.2 Number of young women and men gaining the 
skills and access to secure a decent job within 12 months of 
receiving training in the regions.
Baseline: 0
Target: 202 employed (of which 112 are women) 
Data source; frequency: UNDP report; annually.
Output 1.2 Vulnerable groups empowered to benefit from 
skills and resources to achieve financial resilience through 
establishing MSMEs and social enterprises.
Indicator 1.2.1 Number of MSMEs and social enterprises 
operating in lower-income communities.
Baseline: 0
Target: min 500 (150 women-led businesses)
Data source; frequency: Ministry of Labour and Social 
Protection of the Population, UNDP report; annually.
- Ministry of Labour and 
- Social Protection of the 
- Population 
- State Committee for Family, 
- Women and Children’s 
- Affairs 
-
- Ministry of Economy 
-
- National Coordination Council 
for Sustainable Development
-
- Ministry of Agriculture 
-
- Ministry of Youth and Sports
-
State Tourism Agency 
-
State Agency on Vocational 
Education
State Agency for Public Service 
and Social Innovations
State Statistical Committee
European Union
USAID
Qatar Fund for Development
German Cooperation 
Regular:
$567,000
Other:
$21,257,103 Output 1.3 Green supply chain for MSMEs specializing in 
rural and ecotourism has been established.
Indicator 1.3.1 Number of operators of regional and local 
MSMEs who became members of the Regional Tourism 
Associations/Public-Private Partnerships structure.
Baseline: 0
Target: 120
Data source; frequency: State Tourism Agency, UNDP 
report; annually.
Output 1.4 Opportunities to acquire capabilities including 
future-oriented skills valuable in the labour market as well 
as support in finding employment after graduation have 
been created.
Indicator 1.4.1 Number of people enrolled in short-term 
flexible courses at vocational educational centres and later 
employed in the regions.
Baseline: 0
Target: 2,000 enrolled (of which 1,000 employed) 
Data source; frequency: State Agency on Vocational 
Education, UNDP report; annually.
Output 1.5 Nature-based solutions and mechanisms 
developed and supported for improving rural community 
resilience.
Indicator 1.5.1 Number of households (and number of women) 
directly involved in the sustainable farming of native crops in 
rural areas.
Baseline: 8 (of which 1 woman-led household)
Target: 54 (of which 17 women-led households)
Data source; frequency: Ministry of Agriculture, UNDP 
report; annually.
Foreign, Commonwealth and
Development Office of the 
United Kingdom
CSOs
Private sector
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: STRONGER INSTITUTIONS FOR DELIVERY OF QUALITY PUBLIC AND SOCIAL SERVICES 
UNSCDF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: People furthest behind benefit from enhanced national capacities and governance structures for social protection and quality public and social 
services, in line with Azerbaijan’s international commitments
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – Accelerate structural transformation for sustainable development 
Indicator: Number of vocational education and 
training centres modernized to render a quality 
education for those who seek to acquire relevant 
skills including technical and vocational skills, for 
employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship.
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Indicator: Number of civil society organizations 
that receive capacity-building on engagement in 
State Agency on Vocational 
Education; annually
UNDP report; annually
Output 2.1 Strengthen institutional capacity to effectively 
develop and implement governance programmes, public 
service delivery and services to bridge digital divide and 
to promote social cohesion.
Indicator 2.1.1 Number of innovative digital solutions 
introduced to enhance demand-driven public services.
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Data source; frequency: Ministry of Transport, 
Communication and High Technologies, State Customs 
CittUNDP tll
Presidential Administration of 
Azerbaijan
State Agency for Mandatory 
Health Insurance
Ministry of Labour and 
Social Protection of the 
Population 
Regular: 
$250,000
Other:
$49,592,503public policymaking, local development and 
confidence-building.
Baseline: 0
Target: 25
Output 2.2. Modernize vocational education centres to 
meet the growing labour market and social needs.
Indicator 2.2.1 Number of established public-private 
partnerships to modernize vocational and education centres as 
well as to promote capacity-building measures for both 
vocational education and training and private sector 
stakeholders.
Baseline: 0
Target: 10
Data source; frequency: State Agency on Vocational 
Education, UNDP report; annually.
Output 2.3 Strengthen the national health-care 
procurement system and improve the treatment of 
tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS patients. 
Indicator 2.3.1 Number of types of essential medicines 
procured.
Baseline: 0
Target: 22 types of medicines for tuberculosis; 25 types of 
medicines for people living with HIV 
Data source; frequency: Ministry of Health, State Agency 
on Mandatory Health Insurance; Administration of the 
Regional Medical Divisions (TABIB), UNDP report; 
annually.
Output 2.4 Civic participation, particularly women’s
activism, through civil society organizations strengthened 
to promote inclusion, accountability and innovative 
approaches to respond to emerging public needs.
Indicator 2.4.1. Number of targeted initiatives to promote 
inclusive dialogue and support for conflict-affected 
communities.
Baseline: 1
Target: 4
Data source; frequency: UNDP report; annually.
Output 2.5 Strengthen community-based mechanisms to 
address gender-based violence and domestic violence to 
build community resilience through women’s economic 
empowerment, increased trust in State institutions, and 
broad attitudinal change.
Indicator 2.5.1 Number of regions with the built capacity of 
community-based mechanisms to provide essential services to 
provide essential services to gender-based violence and 
domestic violence survivors.
Baseline: 0
Target: 10 regions
Data source; frequency: UNDP report, annually.
State Committee for Family, 
Women and Children’s 
Affairs 
Ministry of Economy 
National Coordination Council 
for Sustainable Development
Ministry of Youth and Sports
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Health 
Ministry of Transport, 
Communication and High 
Technologies
State Agency for Public Service 
and Social Innovations
State Statistical Committee
State Agency on Vocational 
Education
Azerbaijan National Agency for 
Mine Action
State Customs Committee
Scientific-Research Institute of 
Lung Diseases
Qatar Fund for Development
German Cooperation
European Union 
CSOs
Centre for Analysis of 
International RelationsNATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PROTECTING THE ENVIRONMENT & ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE
UNSCDF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: People including those left behind benefit from climate strategies and environment protection policies that ensure natural resources are sustainably 
managed, livelihoods are protected and resilience strengthened
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 – Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises 
Indicator (SDG 13.2.1): Preparation of 
communication on the establishment or 
operationalization of an integrated 
policy/strategy/plan which increases their ability to 
adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change, and 
foster climate resilience and low greenhouse gas 
emissions development in a manner that does not 
threaten food production (including a national 
adaptation plan, nationally determined contribution, 
national communication, biennial update report or 
other).
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Indicator: Square metres covered by the energy 
management information system.
Baseline: 0
Target: 1,000,000 square metres
Indicator: Number of energy-saving solution 
applications that integrate the Leaving No One 
Behind principle.
Baseline: 0
Target: 10
Indicator (SDG 7.b.1): Proportion of communities 
vulnerable to land degradation that have been 
covered by adaptation policies.
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Ministry of Ecology and 
Natural Resources; annually
Ministry of Energy; annually
Ministry of Ecology and 
Natural Resources, Ministry 
of Energy, UNDP report; 
annually
Ministry of Agriculture,
annually
Output 3.1 Climate change measures integrated into 
national policies, strategies and planning frameworks.
Indicator 3.1.1 Number of national and subnational plans 
and/or strategies that integrate climate change principles 
developed.
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Data source; frequency: Ministry of Ecology and Natural 
Resources, State Statistical Committee, UNDP report; annually
Output 3.2 Ensure conservation and sustainable land 
management important for biodiversity and food security.
Indicator 3.2.1 Number of hectares that is compatible with the 
integrated regional land-use plans.
Baseline: 0
Target: min 300,000 ha
Data source; frequency: Ministry of Agriculture State 
Statistical Committee, UNDP report; annually
Output 3.3 Innovative solutions developed to promote 
energy efficiency on national and subnational levels.
Indicator 3.3.1 Number of municipalities applying enhanced 
energy management information system and green social 
housing.
Baseline: 0
Target: 15
Data source; frequency: Ministry of Energy, UNDP report; 
annually.
Output 3.4 Integrated national financing framework 
(INFF) coordinated structure established with the 
Government, development partners and private sector to 
operationalize future SDG-aligned policies including Green 
Strategy. 
Indicator 3.4.1 Number of INFF-coordinated structures
established to promote green growth.
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Data source; frequency: Ministry of Economy, UNDP report; 
annually.
Ministry of Ecology and Natural 
Resources 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Ministry of Energy 
Ministry of Economy
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Emergency 
Situations
National Coordination Council 
for Sustainable Development
Academy of Science
State Oil Company of the 
Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR)
State Commission on Climate 
Change 
National Confederation of 
Employer
Confederation of Trade Unions 
of Azerbaijan 
Global Environment Facility 
Special Climate Change Fund 
Green Climate Fund Adaptation 
Fund 
Local executive authorities
United Nations Youth Advisory 
Council
Baku City Executive Power
Regular: 
$250,000
Other:
$18,104,967State Housing Construction 
Agency 
State Agency for Alternative 
and Renewable Energy Sources
European Union
Qatar Fund for Development
German Cooperation
Private Sector
CSOs