File Name: BDI-NES-2011-EN
Year: 2011
Country Name: Burundi
Country Code: BDI
Category: NES
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2011
Start Year: 2010
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Background
Only two percent of Burundi’s population have access to 
electricity. Of these, most live in Bujumbura, the capital 
city. Since 1993, the country’s energy infrastructure has 
been largely destroyed as a result of inter-ethnic conflict. 
Additionally, an embargo in 1996 and the scarcity of foreign currency have contributed to energy projects receiving 
little investment. Burundi’s electrical grid supplies 30.6 
MW, most of which comes from the Rwegura and Mugere 
hydropower plants (generating 18 and 8 MW respectively).
The extreme demand on these two plants makes the 
power supply highly unreliable. During the dry season the 
power supply deficit can increase from 13 to 23.5 MW, 
meaning that people increasingly turn to expensive, dieselpowered generators as an alternative source of energy. 
Technical and commercial losses of 24.4% have further 
reduced the availability of electricity. Burundi’s energy environment also harms its natural resources: high population 
growth and reliance on traditional biomass for cooking 
have contributed to severe deforestation, exacerbating the 
damage caused during the 1993 to 2004 political crises.
Strategic Targets
The objective of EUEI PDF‘s project “Energy Strategy and 
Action Plan for Burundi” was to support the Ministry 
of Energy and Mines in developing a new national energy 
policy. Burundi’s 2006 energy sector policy requires updating and amending, taking into account the country’s 
domestic situation and integrating the regional energy 
strategy developed with the East African Community (EAC). 
This will be complemented by an implementation strategy and investment plan, all of which will be in line with 
the country’s national poverty reduction strategy adopted 
in 2007: the Cadre Stratégique de Croissance et de Lutte 
contre la Pauvreté (CSLP).
Strategy Actions
Major recommendations of the new national energy policy 
(Lettre de Politique Energétique Nationale), developed 
with the support of EUEI PDF, were made for the following 
sub-sectors:
Biomass
The effective measurement of wood-fuel production and 
consumption is essential to achieving the sustainable use 
of Burundi’s wood-fuel resources. In another step towards 
balancing demand and supply, important improvements 
can be made by increasing the energy efficiency of forestry 
and wood combustion. Three main activities thus stand in 
focus: awareness creation among consumers, the promotion of improved cooking stoves and improved demand 
measurements.
Petroleum Products
The heavy cost of oil imports on Burundi’s balance
of trade has to be reduced through increased market
competition and better regulation of consumption. A
new pipeline to Bujumbura could also improve the
security of Burundi’s oil supply.
Electricity
The policy proposes three phases to develop the
electricity sector:
 Recovery: The sub-sector will concentrate on (i) repairing and modernising existing equipment, (ii) reducing 
demand and (iii) taking urgent measures to limit the 
consequences of shortages
 Equipment: The implementation of new strategic areas 
concentrates on: (i) development of national and regional hydropower, (ii) formation of a highly interconnected 
transmission system, and (iii) resumption of peri-urban 
and rural electrification
 Expansion: In order to achieve a tenfold increase in generation capacity of 300 MW by 2020, private nickel and 
other metal extraction industries need to be established 
to help meet the country’s growing electricity demand. 
Energy Strategy and Action Plan for Burundi
Region Burundi 
Project Partner Ministry of Energy and Mining 
Directorate General of Energy and Water
Project Manager Steffen Behrle 
Term November 2009 – April 2011F
ifti
Renewable and non-Conventional Energy
Two strategies have been devised to develop solar energy 
in Burundi: 
 Priority is given to the electrification of social infrastructure (schools, hospitals, health centres, pumping 
stations, local administration offices) in remote, off-grid 
areas
 In the medium to long-term perspective, Burundi’s electrical grid will be connected to solar power stations
The following strategic points were proposed for
wind power:
 Development of a wind atlas
 Electrification of social infrastructure in off-grid and 
remote areas
 Wind-powered water pumps in isolated areas
 Development of utility-scale wind parks for grid 
connection
Burundi possesses large deposits of peat in the order to 50 
million tonnes. Household energy needs could be met by 
carbonising peat with agricultural waste in small, cost-efficient, and widely distributed stoves. Located at the margins 
of the Rift Valley, Burundi is also well placed to benefit 
from geothermal energy. However, exploration costs are 
too high for the country to carry alone.
Governance
In addition, important recommendations are proposed 
regarding instruments of governance, the most relevant of 
which are legal, institutional and regulative, and relate to 
energy tariffs, private sector involvement, regional cooperation and research and development.
Finally, resource needs for implementing the energy policy 
are specified according to processes, human resources, 
financial resources, and monitoring and evaluation.
The Way Forward
Adoption of the energy strategy has been delayed due 
to local, parliamentary and presidential elections from 
May to July 2010, as well as election-related tensions and 
violence. Nevertheless, the draft strategy was discussed at 
a workshop on rural electrification in Kigali, Rwanda, in July 
2010. The strategy was agreed on at a national stakeholder 
workshop in Bujumbura in November 2010. The final documents were submitted to the Ministry of Energy and Mines 
in March 2011. The government of Burundi is expected to 
adopt the energy policy – including the associated implementation strategy and investment plan – in 2011.
provide an effi cient 
and sustainable 
source of energy.