File Name: BFA-CPD-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Burkina Faso
Country Code: BFA
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 22-26 January 2018
Start Year: 2018
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
22 November 2017
Original: English
1720759X (E) 211217
First regular session 2018
22-26 January 2018, New York
Item 2 of the provisional agenda 
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Burkina Faso (2018-2020)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. Programme rationale ........................................................................................................................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Burkina Faso (2018-2020) ………………………………… 9I. Programme rationale 
1. From October 2014 to December 2015, Burkina Faso underwent one of the most eventful 
periods in its post-independence history. After 27 years in power, the departure of President 
Blaise Compaore in January 2016 ushered in the establishment of a transitional regime, peaceful 
presidential and legislative elections, and a new era for citizens. While all changes inspired
optimism, they carry high expectations for the new government to immediately deliver on 
commitments made during the transition that reflect the new social contract and restore 
confidence. The most prominent commitments are related to the reform and renewal of the 
justice system,1reconciliation and national unity, and the effective application of 
transparency/anti-corruptions measures. In addition, Burkina Faso’s active civil society and 
hopeful youth population, who were commended for constructive engagement during the 
transition, are putting in place mechanisms and tools for continued citizen engagement and 
accountability. High expectations call for participatory, inclusive approaches to governance
based on rule of law, and that are captured in the popular slogan plus rien ne sera comme avant
(things will never be the same again).
2. In 2017, the population of Burkina Faso hit an estimated 19.6 million2and is projected to 
increase to 21.5 million by 2020. More than 40 per cent of the population lives in poverty.
3 A
2013-2014 Development Cooperation Report showed a low rate of project implementation for 
the period prior to the popular uprising. The government implemented 69 per cent of projects, 
while development partners implemented less than 60 per cent. This trend was confirmed in the 
2017 mid-term report of National Economic and Social Development Plan (NESDP), which
showed a financial implementation rate of only 21.3 per cent. This backlog in implementation
puts additional pressure on an administration that must keep pace with rising public expectations.
3. Since 2014, Burkina Faso—a member of the G5 Sahel countries—has been hit by multiple
terrorist attacks by extremist groups. Most are concentrated in the North and Sahel regions, and 
in areas bordering Mali and Niger. A few attacks took place in the capital. All expose how 
vulnerable Burkina Faso is to the effects of the Malian crisis, and the need for: i) an immediate 
review of the security strategy to better prepare the sector for new threats, ii) providing those 
working in security with new knowledge and training that is aligned to the evolving context, and 
iii) ensuring that governance in the sector is consistent with the principles of efficiency and 
democratic control as adopted by Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), 
African Union, and the United Nations. The situation calls for greater state presence, including
the immediate provision of basic social services to border communities, which traditionally have 
lower human development levels, to prevent and mitigate the risk of youth being exposed to 
religious extremism. In March 2016, a United Nations, government, and development partner 
assessment was carried out in provinces affected by the attacks. It recommended measures be
taken to promote social cohesion between local populations and refugees from Mali, as well as 
mining companies that disregarded social responsibilities to local populations. 
4. Despite efforts made by authorities, and a legislative environment conducive for the 
empowerment of women, socio-cultural norms reinforce gender inequalities and drive
investment decisions in favor of men. Women represent 52 per cent of the population4 but only 
account for 24.2 per cent of the workforce in the public and formal private sectors.5The country 
was ranked 123 out of 144 countries in the 2016 Global Gender Gap Index. The absence of 
instruments and measures to incentivize the application of the law on gender equality preserves
the status quo.
 
1 Pact for Renewal of the Justice System to promote rule of law and address impunity, signed 28 March 2015.
2 Accessed online from: www.insd.bf/.
3 Continuous Multi-Sector Survey (CMS) 2014.
4 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) 2010.
5 National Institute of Statistics and Demography 2015DP/DCP/BFA/3
5. The 2016–2020 NESDP estimates that approximately 20 per cent of the population suffer 
from food insecurity. Dated agricultural practices (e.g. clearing new land, use of fertilizers and 
pesticides, brush fires) contribute to land and soil erosion, and the depletion of water resources. 
The socio-economic conditions of close to 70 per cent of the country’s population, whose 
livelihood depends on agriculture, engage in unsustainable production practices for subsistence
and income-generating activities. Collective and sustained efforts are needed to scale-up 
adaptation practices that have resulted from bilateral partner financing, and Adaptation and 
Global Environment Facility (GEF) funds. Doing so will support communities, in particular 
women and youth, to be active beneficiaries and leaders of sustainable agro-silvo-pastoral 
production systems6. 
6. The population of Burkina Faso is vulnerable to the triple threat of: i) competition for landuse and potential conflict over access to natural resources, ii) instability resulting from lack of 
employment opportunities for rural youth, and iii) the risk of people being radicalized due to 
social and economic disenfranchisement. Limited access to modern energy services has created 
problems that undermine the effectiveness of government policies for the sustainable 
management of environmental resources and forests, including bio-diversity conservation.
Nationally, some 18.8 per cent of the population has access to electricity.
7 This number is only
3 per cent for rural populations that, in addition, have no access to other forms of modern energy 
services. Because women and young girls are expected to gather fuel, and carry out tasks that 
require mechanical/modern energy sources, it takes them away from other productive activities 
and/or opportunities for education. Access to electricity and modern energy services from 
sustainable sources is a priority in the NESDP. Consequently, the government, with support 
from UNDP and the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF), formulated an 
integrated local economic programme (PADEL) to address inequality and exclusion.
Programme goals are to: i) increase poor household and rural community access to modern 
energy services, ii) accelerate local economic development, and iii) ensure social protection. To 
effectively implement the programme, institutional capacity support and accelerated delivery
measures are required because of demand and limited capacities at the local levels.
7. Because it is located at the center of the Sudano-Sahelian region, Burkina Faso issusceptible
to variations in climate and prone to recurrent cycles of drought and floods. The worst recorded 
floods date back to 2009, causing $102 million US dollars in damage and $120 million US 
dollars in reconstruction.
8 Despite joint early recovery efforts, affected populations continue to 
struggle. From 2011 to 2016 Burkina Faso suffered the consequences of climate-related hazards
linked to the unsustainable use of environmental resources. According to the Permanent 
Secretariat in charge of Emergency Preparedness and Response (SP/CONASUR), between May 
2012 and April 2017 floods and violent winds in all 13 regions affected 264,177 people. Eightythree people were killed, 384 injured, and 17,393 were left homeless. Women and girls have 
been more acutely affected by such crises, as they have to walk longer distances to draw water. 
The situation has been exacerbated by the destruction of 485 toilets in the five most-affected 
regions over the last five years. Women and girls have to resort to makeshift toilets in places 
that do not offer protection or dignity. It is imperative that prevention and risk management
responses take into account gender aspects. The 2016 and 2017 Risk Inform9indices show the 
coping capacity of populations is relatively weak (6.2 out of 10) and immediate risks are security 
and climate-related, with the Sahel region being the most exposed to multiple hazards. 
8. An independent review of the current cycle10 reveals that UNDP enjoys the trust of major 
stakeholders and partners at all levels. This includes civil society, academic institutions, 
religious organizations, as well as youth and women’s groups. The review found UNDP has a
 
6 Refers to the practice of combining forestry and grazing of domesticated animals in a sustainable manner.
7 NESDP (2016-2020).
8 Post Disaster Needs Assessment, final report, by the Government of Burkina Faso, United Nations, and the World Bank, April 2010.
9
Index for risk management is a collaborative project between the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and European Commission.
10Review of Projects Financed by UNDP
March 2017unique capacity to convene a broad range of partners and was instrumental during the transitional
period, and in the run up to the presidential elections. The 2016 UNDP partnership survey 
confirmed UNDP is recognized for its: i) competence and expertise in providing evidence-based
and context-specific policy advice, and strategic technical support; ii) contribution to 
governance and national capacity development efforts; iii) unique ability to facilitate inclusive 
multi-stakeholder dialogues, and iv) neutrality in leading high-level political dialogues.
9. At the decentralized and community levels, GEF evaluations showed that projects 
formulated and implemented with UNDP support were used to generate evidence to inform the 
design of the national programme on community-based adaptation approaches to climate 
change. Furthermore, scaling-up village-level energy enterprises by way of multifunctional 
platforms - which have benefitted women and young girls by reducing their burden of chores by 
70 per cent (and distance travelled by 36.5 per cent)
11 all while increasing their overall income
- is considered to be one of the most successful programmes in the country. It is part of the 
reason why the government has pushed to increase access to energy services.
10. Despite positive results, there has been a shortfall in reaching marginalized populations, 
systemically integrating gender considerations, and formulating exit strategies. This is because 
indicators were weakly defined, and improving institutional performance is difficult to 
measure.12 Specific recommendations on resilience were made to UNDP, urging the 
organization to collaborate with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Food 
Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to prioritize investments 
in local level approaches and the active engagement of communities. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
11. The overarching goal of the country programme is to contribute to an inclusive, peaceful, 
climate-resilient society that is on a path to sustainable economic growth. It is aligned with the 
2016–2020 NESDP, which is anchored in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)
framework and 2063 Agenda. Programme priorities are tied to the principle of “leaving no-one 
behind,” as well as the urgency to deepen the democratic process. Other priorities include 
accelerating delivery of basic social services, extending development benefits to marginalized 
communities, and building community resilience to prevent, anticipate and mitigate risk.
Transformational pathways are premised on building the capacity of institutions for 
development and accountability, accompanied by scaling-up successful interventions from the 
previous programme, and increase the access rural populations have to modern energy services. 
Such measures can stimulate rural economies and private sector engagement, expand 
opportunities for women, and prevent the unsustainable use of natural resources.
12. The programme for Burkina Faso is outlined in the United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework (UNDAF) for 2018 to 2020. It focuses on actions required to achieve outcomes 1.1, 
3.2, and 4.2. The programme addresses challenges specific to the Sahel region of Burkina Faso,
and relies on United Nations coherence and new partnerships with the World Bank and Islamic 
Development Bank to secure resources required for prevention. The UNDAF supports the
national Emergency Programme for the Sahel, and is aligned with the United Nations Integrated 
Sahel Strategy. UNDP will contribute to the “New Way of Working” in the context of 
“Delivering as One” in the Sahel by working along the humanitarian-peace and securitydevelopment continuum, which involves strengthening partnerships with the United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) on security and anti-corruption measures along border 
areas. UNDP will support South-South cooperation initiatives in Liptako Gourma and G5 Sahel 
areas.
 
11 Ibid.DP/DCP/BFA/3
13. UNDP will use its position and expertise in capacity development and policy advice to 
support efforts in Burkina Faso across three inter-dependent pillars: i) institutional effectiveness, 
rule of law, social cohesion and security, ii) inclusive, sustainable, job-inducing growth, and iii) 
resilience to climate shocks. UNDP will offer upstream policy advisory services including 
through the United Nations Development System Mainstreaming Accelerating and Policy 
Support (MAPS) approach. UNDP will employ technical support, tools and systems for 
strengthening the capacity of a selected number of institutions (public procurement, coordination 
and monitoring, oversight and accountability, anti-corruption), provide implementation support 
services, and facilitate the establishment of dialogue platforms and multi-stakeholder 
engagement. UNDP will integrate gender in all interventions through use of the Gender Seal to 
create incentives for positive action and the systematic integration of gender considerations.
Institutional efficiency, rule of law, social cohesion, and security
14. This programme component is imperative for helping the government deliver on its 
promises, and adopt a proactive approach to prevention and risk mitigation regarding factors 
that may undermine the pace of reforms or fuel social discontent. This component supports the 
first pillar of the NESDP, which is aimed at institutional reform and modernization of the state,
and is anchored to the Sustaining Peace Strategy and SDG Goal 16.
15. Drawing on recommendations from the inter-organizational mission on sustaining peace in 
Burkina Faso, and the Global Focal Point on Justice, Police and Corrections, UNDP will focus
on strengthening operational capacities for the effective implementation of commitments made 
during the transition, working directly to support rule of law and governance in the security 
sector. This will be done alongside supporting transitional justice and social cohesion, and 
transparency and accountability measures. UNDP will expand efforts related to legal aid;
ensuring communities have increased access to justice. UNDP will provide technical support to 
the High Council on Reconciliation and National Unity, including advice on transitional justice
instruments and protection of families. In addition, UNDP will facilitate inclusive dialogue 
platforms with civil society, youth and women’s associations, and religious leaders. With 
regards to governance in the security sector, UNDP will work with state and non-state bodies to
strengthen democratic and civilian oversight mechanisms, thereby building confidence in 
institutions. In line with government-expressed commitments, UNDP will support the
implementation of recommendations from the Universal Periodic Review to ensure the legal 
environment is conducive to uphold and enforce socio-economic, political and cultural rights of 
all, marginalized populations, including people living with HIV. 
16. Building on its expertise and capacity development mandate, UNDP will support ministries 
and institutions responsible for coordination and public procurement with transparent tools and
systems to address corruption concerns and the delivery of goods and services. UNDP will draw 
on the government’s political will and an established culture of engagement with civil society, 
youth, the media, and academic institutions to strengthen the capacities and accountability of
state agencies in battling corruption, oversight bodies, and media and civil society organizations. 
Media outlets and members of civil society will be urged to sensitize, engage and highlight 
critical issues related to inclusion and rule of law.
17. UNDP will provide a platform for channeling United Nations system support for nonresident organizations to the Sahel Emergency Programme and border communities. UNDP will 
facilitate South-South cooperation on national reconciliation and transitional justice using 
experiences from Togo, Tunisia, and Côte d’Ivoire. In the Sustaining Peace initiative context, 
UNDP will strengthen existing partnerships with the European Union, Government of Japan, 
and bilateral partners including the governments of Sweden, Denmark, Austria and Canada. 
Within the United Nations system, UNDP will use the coherence and integration agenda to 
strengthen relations with United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs on youth,
the United Nations Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations Department for 
Peacekeeping Operations, and the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO). Toprepare Burkina Faso for voluntary reporting, UNDP will assess ways the country can benefit 
from the Global Alliance on SDG 16.
Inclusive and sustainable growth, decent work and food security
18. This pillar contributes to SDGs 1, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12 and 13. The governance, security, and 
social cohesion aspects of the previous pillar will be integrated with UNDP efforts on livelihoods 
(particularly for youth), growth, and food security. This supports the government strategy of 
eradicating multi-dimensional poverty and inequalities, and ensuring an inclusive sustainable
growth trajectory. Interventions will focus on policy support using the MAPS approach to 
intensify work already started on the SDGs by helping government identify sectors with strong 
potential, and to align the implementation of the NESDP with selected priority indicators. 
Secondly, UNDP will provide implementation support services for the delivery of already
approved programmes to address multi-dimensional poverty. This service is part of the
implementation of PADEL that UNDP will support by expanding access to energy services to 
achieve inclusive and sustainable growth throughout the country. Efforts will be based on 
successful models of village-level energy enterprises and multi-functional platforms. It is 
expected greater energy access will help strengthen the effectiveness of government policies for
the sustainable management of environmental resources and forests, including bio-diversity 
conservation. Additionally, UNDP will scale up community-based adaptation practices in the 
Mouhoun, Central-North, Central-South and Central-West regions, and apply technologies to
promote sustainable agro-silvo-pastoral production patterns, conserve biodiversity, and create 
job opportunities for women and youth (in line with the government commitment to the “3S” 
initiative).13 Focusing on border communities is expected to positively boost youth employment 
in rural areas and prevent radicalization. UNDP will help facilitate access to mentoring and job 
opportunities for youth by adapting the YouthConneckt14 platform and to foster greater 
engagement among youth. 
19. UNDP will use the MAPS approach to mobilize partners and identify sustainable financing
opportunities for addressing challenges in data collection, monitoring and capacity gaps in the 
national statistics system. UNDP, in partnership with the World Meteorological Organization,
will draw on previous attempts to adapt and improve climate and meteorological information
systems. This will be done to improve early warning systems and generate reliable data to inform
policy and planning in climate-sensitive sectors. 
20. In November 2016, Burkina Faso hosted the first ‘green academy’, bringing together 
stakeholders and United Nations organizations involved in the Partnership on Action for Green 
Economy (PAGE) and Switch Africa Green.14 UNDP and FAO will advise on opportunities for 
green jobs, and UNDP will assist the government in identifying and accessing climate finance 
from the GEF and the Green Climate Fund. South-South and triangular cooperation with 
Mozambique will be explored to codify environment and climate change initiatives into the 
budgeting process. Best practices on sustainable water and land management practices in Niger
will be promoted.
Resilience to the effects of climate change, natural disasters and humanitarian emergencies
21. Burkina Faso developed a five-year plan (2016-2020) to build resilience and strengthen 
local capacities in risk-reduction and disaster-preparedness, within the context of the Sendai 
Framework of Action. This component will support the implementation of the national plan and 
focus on: i) the formulation of resilience plans for communities that are yet to recover from past 
shocks, ii) strengthening coordination and data collection capacities at local levels, and ensuring 
 
12 The “3S” initiative focuses on sustainability, security and stability.
13 See YouthConneckt Africa: https://www.youthconnektafrica.org/.
14 Partners include UNDP, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Environment Programme, the 
International Labour Organization, the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, and the Global Green Growth Institute.DP/DCP/BFA/3
that the specific needs of women and children are considered, and iii) developing institutional 
capacities, and providing technical support for emergency preparedness and disaster risk 
reduction. 
22. UNDP will support the National Agency for Emergency Preparedness and Response to 
work better with sector ministries, and advocate for resources for resilience plans. The strategy 
will draw on already existing platforms of humanitarian and development partners, which will 
be reviewed to align with the ‘New Way of Working’ and transitional priorities of Burkina Faso, 
as well as facilitate joint analysis, planning and monitoring efforts.
III. Programme and risk management 
23. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results, and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels, with respect to country programmes, is prescribed in 
the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures of the organization, and the Internal 
Control Framework. In accordance with Executive Board decision DP/2-013/32, all direct costs 
associated with project implementation will be charged to concerned projects. In this respect, 
the office will have resources to deploy expertise to effectively implement the country 
programme. UNDP will review structures and procedures to ensure they are “fit for purpose” 
when implementing the programme, and agile enough to adapt to evolving contexts, United 
Nations reforms, and the new UNDP strategic plan.
24. The programme will be nationally executed and implemented within the broader framework 
of the UNDAF for 2018-2020. This will be done in collaboration with the Ministry for 
Development Cooperation and Aid Coordination. Due to growing public expectations and 
demand for services and implementation support, UNDP will support the implementation of 
programmes that are financed by the government. Projects will use the most appropriate 
modalities to ensure the effective and efficient delivery of tools and services, and sustainability 
of results. Direct implementation will be used to safeguard UNDP accountability in all complex
programming situations. 
25. Resources will be made available through the systematic use of the Harmonized Approach 
to Cash Transfers (HACT), and in coordination with other United Nations organizations to 
manage fiduciary risks. UNDP will strengthen the capacities of national execution partners and 
develop exit strategies plans.
26. The main risks include: (i) insecurity caused by extremist groups, (ii) natural disasters 
(floods and drought), and (iii) insufficient resources, difficulties, in mobilizing adequate 
resources due to shifting partner priorities.
27. To mitigate risks related to extremism, UNDP is including security sector reform, youth 
employment and sustaining peace as priorities for this programme. With regards to resource and 
partnership-related risks, UNDP will use risk monitoring as a tool for producing reports, 
decision-making, and to diversify its partnership and resource-mobilization strategy by fostering 
engagement with the private sector (mainly mining corporations to promote corporate social 
responsibility and influence investments in favor of local communities), foundations and 
international financial institutions. This will prompt greater respect for contractual clauses and 
strengthen strategic communication by placing greater importance on the visibility of results.
28. To manage the expanded programme portfolio, the country office will strengthen its 
procurement, finance and logistics capacities, while using flexible contractual modalities to 
ensure appropriate staffing adjustments vis-à-vis fund availability, and programme activities.
UNDP quality assurance and social and environment standards will be applied to all UNDPfunded projects and offered as a full package to the government for the assessment of NESDPand related projects. UNDP will strengthen its financial oversight, programme and project 
supervision, and its evaluation system for partners to guarantee the optimal use of resources 
allocated to interventions, and manage potential fiduciary risks.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation 
29. Monitoring of the programme will be guided a results-based management and quality
assurance approach. Programme deliverables will be monitored by implementation institutions, 
beneficiary representatives, the UNDP country office, and through various steering committees.
Outcomes and outputs will be monitored on a regular basis through quarterly and annual reports. 
UNDP will support data collection at the beginning of the programme to inform situations that 
lack references. Results and resource framework outcomes indicators will be revised to take into 
account outcomes indicators in the new Strategic Plan. 
30. At least 5 per cent of programme resources will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation 
initiatives to fund data collection, monitoring, and quality assurance of deliverables. The country 
office will strengthen its in-house capacity for data collection, analysis and utilization to track 
programme contributions against transformative change. Opportunities for joint reviews and 
evaluations with other United Nations organizations will be explored. The gender marker will be 
taken into account in the planning, decision-making, and accounting of programme expenditure 
and investments.
31. Programme indicator data will be collected according to sex, age, geographical area, and 
other markers to grasp changes more accurately. Collected data will feed into the NPSED
implementation report, the monitoring system, and UNDP knowledge-sharing platforms. UNDP
and programme partners will strengthen the capacity of institutions involved in NPSED
monitoring to improve the quality of data and better cater to programme beneficiaries, leave no 
one behind, and improve progress toward the SDGs. Specialized research institutes and 
universities will be approached and asked to provide assistance in testing the theories of change 
underlying national strategies and policies supported by the programme. Where appropriate, they 
will be asked to review programme outcomes.Annex. Results and resources framework for Burkina Faso (2018-2020)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Institutions Reform and Modernization of the Administration
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 1.1 By 2020, the effectiveness of institutions is improved and the people of Burkina Faso, particularly those most exposed to the risks of conflict and 
insecurity, live in peace and security in a state governed by the rule of law
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Citizen expectations for voice, development, the rule of law and accountability are met by stronger systems of democratic governance
UNDAF outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs
Major partners / 
partnerships
frameworks
Indicative resources by 
outcome ($)
Quality of policies and Institutions 
(CPIA)
Baseline: 3.6 (2015); Target: 4.8
Corruption Index perception
Baseline: 38/100 (2015); Target: 
52/100
Proportion of vulnerable persons with 
access to justice services including 
minors in conflict with the law 
Baseline: 70% (2016); Target: 80%
Number of persons benefiting from 
multisectoral assistance following a 
conflict
Baseline: 2145 (2017); Target: 1839
Rate of Implementation of UPR 
recommendations
Baseline: 35% (2015); Target: 45%
(2020)
Ibrahim Index for Governance in 
Africa
Baseline: 52.2/100 (2015); Target: 
65/100 (2020)
Perception in percentage of Risk of 
conflicts 
Baseline: 60.3% (2015); Target: 39.6%
World Bank CPIA
Responsibility: UNDP
Transparency International annual 
report
Responsibility: UNDP
Statistical Yearbook of the 
Ministry of Justice, Human 
Rights and Citizen Promotion
(MJDHCP) annual report
Responsibility: General direction 
of Studies and Sectoral Statistics
(DGESS) of MJDHCP
Annual report of MJDHCP
Responsibility: DGESS of 
MJDHCP; Annual report of 
MJDHCP
Responsibility: DGESS of 
MJDHCP
Mo Ibrahim Foundation report
Responsibility: UNDP
Report on Overview of 
Community conflicts
Responsibility: DGESS of the 
MJDHCP
Output 1.1: Selected institutions at national and decentralized 
levels with functional capacities, including procedures, systems and
tools for efficient and transparent public procurement
Indicator 1.1: Average implementation rate of projects and 
programmes 
Baseline: 69.37%; Target: 90%
Source: General Direction of Economy and Planning annual report, 
Frequency: Annual
UNFPA, UNICEF,
European Union, World 
Bank, and ministries in 
charge of the economy.
Regular: 7,383,000
Other: 1,500,000
Output 1.2: Secretariat for coordinating NESDP and decentralized 
entities with technical capacities and tools to formulate and monitor 
programmes based on SDG aligned indicators
Indicator 1.2.1: Percentage of programmes and sectoral policies 
targeting the most vulnerable populations.
Baseline: 0%; Target: 80%
Source: General Direction for Economy and Planning (DGEP)
report
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.2.2: Proportion of SDG-oriented NESDP monitoring 
reports produced by the national statistical system
Baseline: 0%; Target: 100%
Source: Strategic Plan/NESDP annual reports
Office of the Prime Minister
Ministry in charge of 
economy and finances
National Institute of 
Statistics and Demography
Output 1.3: Institutions in charge of rule of law, legal aid and 
national reconciliation with operational capacity to deliver justice 
services to the population and facilitate the reconciliation process
Indicator 1.3.1: Number of transitional justice cases processed by 
the Higher Council for Reconciliation and Unity (HCRUN)
Baseline: 1,000 Target: 5,065
PBSO
High Commission for
Human Rights
Higher Council for 
Reconciliation and Unity Source: HCRUN annual report
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.3.2: Number of transitional justice cases processed 
through legal aid
Baseline: 0 Target: 100
Source: annual report of Ministry in charge of justice 
Frequency: Annual
Association of Women 
Lawyers of Burkina Faso 
Center for Democratic 
Governance
National Aids Council; 
Ministries in charge of 
justice, Human Rights, 
Environment; National 
Commission
Networks and associations 
coalitions against HIV/AIDS 
and health promotion; 
Women Lawyers 
Association (AJB); Burkina 
Faso Movement for Human 
and People Rights 
(MBDHP)
Output 1.4: National security framework and security sector actors 
with knowledge and tools to carry out their mission in accordance with 
democratic principles.
Indicator 1.4.1: Percentage of newly recruited defense and security 
Force personnel with relevant knowledge on human rights and 
democratic principles.
Baseline: to be determined (TBD); Target: 60% 
Source: Project Implementation report
Frequency: annual
Indicator 1.4.2: Existence of the reform of security sector strategy
Baseline: No; Target: Yes
Source: Ministry of security’s annual report 
Frequency: Annual
UNFPA, United Nations 
Volunteers, United Nations 
High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR), 
UNODC, PBSO, 
governments of Luxembourg 
and Japan, and European 
Union
Ministries in charge of 
security, defense, justice.
MBDHP
The National Council of 
Civil Society Organizations
Output 1.5: Civil society organizations (CSO), Community leaders
(including women) at central and local levels and border areas have
inclusive dialogue forums and citizen oversight mechanisms.
Indicator.1.5.1: Percentage of CSO alerts towards public 
institutions and private companies that gave rise to positive 
responses
Baseline: TBD %; Target: 90% for public institutions and private 
companies respectively
The Joint United Nations 
Programme on HIV/AIDS 
(UNAIDS), UNFPA, World 
Health Organization 
(WHO), and UNICEF.
National Aids Council; Source: National Council of CSOs annual report 
Frequency: Annual
Indicator.1.5.2: Proportion of religious leaders with proven ability 
to conduct interreligious dialogue.
Baseline: 0% Target: 60%
Source: Project Report, Ministry of Territorial Administration 
annual report
Frequency: Annual
Indicator.1.5.3: Percentage of CSOs implementing civic education 
programmes, including advocacy on participation of women in 
decision-making bodies.
Baseline: 10%; Target: 80%
Source: National Council of CSOs annual report
Frequency: Annual
Indicator.1.5.4: Percentage of media broadcast of civic education 
programmes per year, including advocacy on participation of 
women in decision-making bodies.
Baseline: 10% Target: 80%
Source: Ministry of Communication’s annual report
Frequency: Annual
Indicator.1.5.5: Number of functional existing collaboration 
schemes between communities, authorities and security forces to 
achieve greater collaboration and confidence in institutions.
Baseline: 0 Target: 9
Source: Ministry of Security annual report
Frequency: Annual
MJDHPC, Environment; 
National Commission; 
Municipalities 
National Anti-Corruption 
Network 
Higher Council of 
Communication
Ministry of Communication
Observatory of the Media 
Burkina Faso
National Council of CSOs
African Network of 
Journalists for Integrity and 
Transparency
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Revitalize Productive Sector and Stimulate Employment Creation
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 3.2 By the end of 2020, populations, especially young people and women in intervention areas (urban/rural), increase their income, adopt 
sustainable production and consumption patterns, and improve their food security
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor 
and excluded
Number of households with access to 
modern energy services 
Baseline: 6.4% (2015); Target: 30%
Number of youth and women 
benefiting of green jobs created
Baseline: 6,000 (2015); Target: 50,000
Statistical Yearbook of the 
Ministry in charge of 
environment
Directory of green jobs created
Responsibility: DGESS of 
Ministry of Environment, 
Output 2.1: Targeted households have modern energy services for their 
livelihood and domestic consumption.
Indicator 2.1.1: Proportion of households with access to modern energy
including for productive uses.
Baseline: 0 Target: 50% (Women: 50%; Youth: 50%)
Source: Ministry in charge of youth and employment annual report; 
Frequency: Annual
Ministries in charge of 
the environment; and 
energy
Municipalities
Regular: 7,279,000
Other: 353,018,000Area of degraded land in protected 
areas recovered (hectares)
Baseline: 10500 ha (2014); Target: 
25000 ha
Coverage of cereal needs
Baseline: 96% (2015); Target: 140%
Commercialization rate for agricultural 
products (including cash crops) 
Baseline: 25% (2010); Target: 37.5%
Proportion of conservation areas under 
development
Baseline: 25% (2015); Target: 31%
Percentage of population in food 
insecurity (phases 3, 4 and 5)
Baseline: 1.31% (2015); Target: 0%
Green Economy and Climate 
Change (MEEVCC)
Annual report of MEEVCC
Responsibility: DGESS of 
MEEVCC
Agricultural Campaign 
Evaluation Reports
Responsibility: DGESS of the 
Ministry of Agriculture and 
Hydraulic Development
(MAAH) 
Agricultural Campaign 
Evaluation Reports
Responsibility: DGESS of the 
MAAH
Statistical Yearbook of the 
MEEVCC
Data of Harmonized 
Framework of the Permanent 
Secretariat for the coordination 
of agricultural sector policy
Responsibility: Secretariat for 
the coordination of agricultural 
sectoral policy
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of women’s associations managing local level
energy enterprises (multifunctional platforms) with mixed energy 
sources using renewable energy daily
Baseline: 54; Target: 200
Source: Ministry of Energy’s annual report
Frequency: Annual
Bellem Wend Tiiga15
(BELWET)
Private sector
Output 2.2: Youth and women have leadership and business skills to 
create and benefit from green and information communication 
technology (ICT) related job opportunities in targeted areas
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of businesses created by youth and women 
using the ICT and incubators’ platforms in targeted areas
Baseline: 0 Target 700 (Women: 200; Youth: 500)
Source: Project report 
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of youth and women with leadership and 
business skills to create and benefit from green job opportunities in 
targeted areas
Baseline: 0 Target 700 (Women: 200; Youth: 500)
Source: Annual report of MEEVCC
Frequency: Annual
Ministries in charge of 
the economy;
the environment; and 
energy
Municipalities
BELWET
Private sector
Output 2.3: Central and local institutions, communities and CSOs in 
target areas with technical knowledge to adapt new practices and 
capacities to integrate management of sustainable natural resources in 
their development plans
Indicator 2.3: Number of targeted municipalities and regions with 
development plans mainstreaming sustainable natural resource 
management and practices being applied.
Baseline: 0. Target: 12 (3 Regional; 9 communal)
Source: DGEP’s annual report
Frequency: Annual
Ministries in charge of 
decentralization;
Environment; and energy
Municipalities
BELWET
Output 2.4: Local communities in the Sahel, Mouhoun, Central North, 
Central-South and Central West enabled to apply sustainable and 
climate-adapted agricultural techniques
Indicator 2.4: Proportion of local communities demonstrating 
knowledge of sustainable and climate-adapted agricultural techniques 
Baseline: 25% Target: 50%
Ministries in charge of 
the economy and 
environment
Ministries of energy and 
agriculture
 
15 Private organizationSource: Permanent Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable 
Development’s annual report
Frequency: Annual
GEF
Green Climate fund
Government of Austria 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Revitalize Productive Sector and Stimulate Employment Creation
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 4.2 By 2020, populations, especially vulnerable groups, in target areas are more resilient to climatic and environmental shocks
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Countries are able to reduce the likelihood of conflict and lower the risk of natural disasters, including from climate change
Number of persons vulnerable to climatic, 
environmental shocks
Baseline: 1,053,000 (2016) Target: 400,000 
National Council of 
Emergency Relief and 
Rehabilitation ‘s Annual 
Report 
Responsibility: National 
Council for Emergency 
Relief and Rehabilitation
Output 3.1: National and local institutions have a gender sensitive 
risk management/governance system in place focusing on disaster 
prevention, preparedness interventions and recovery
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of national and local institutions with a 
gender sensitive risk management/governance system for disaster 
prevention, preparedness, response and recovery.
Baseline: 8 Target: 12
Source: (SP/CONASUR) annual report
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.1.2: Proportion of indicators related to disaster victims or 
persons at risk of disasters disaggregated by sex
Baseline: 40% Target: 70%
Source: (SP/CONASUR) annual report; Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.1.3: Number of region with population resilience plan.
Baseline: 2 Target: 13 
Source: SP/CONASUR annual report
Frequency: Annual
Ministries in charge of 
social affairs, economy, 
and security.
Governments of 
Luxembourg and Japan
Regular: 5,500,040
Other: 2,500,000
Output 3.2: National and local institutions involved in disaster risk 
management have strengthened technical capacities to address 
disasters and other emergencies 
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of contingency plans developed at regional 
and local level with contributions from women and youth
Baseline: 21 (local: 14, regional: 7) Target: 67 (local 54; regional: 13)
Source: SP/CONASUR annual report
Ministries in charge of 
social action, economy, 
and security.
Governments of 
Luxembourg and Japan
Output 3.3: Central and local institutions in charge of emergency
response have the capacity to ensure coordinated response in case of 
disasters
Indicator 3.3.1: Number of regions with capacity to ensure 
coordinated response in case of disasters
Baseline: 0 Target: 13 
Ministries in charge of 
social action, economy, 
and security.
Governments of 
Luxembourg and JapanSource: SP/CONASUR annual report
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.3.2: Existence of a single coordinating decision-making 
structure at the central level
Baseline: no Target: yes 
Source: SP/CONASUR annual report
Frequency: Annual