File Name: BGD-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Bangladesh
Country Code: BGD
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 August–2 September 2021
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
28 June 2021
Original: English
2109038X (E) 160721
Second regular session 2021
30 August–2 September 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Bangladesh (2022–2026)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Bangladesh (2022-2026).................................................. 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework
1. Bangladesh has made significant progress in human development, poverty reduction and 
economic growth, which makes it eligible to graduate from least developed country (LDC) status 
by 2026. Food production tripled between 1973 and 2019 and from 2009 to 2019, annual gross 
domestic product (GDP) growth averaged 7 per cent and per capita income rose from $754 to 
$1,909. This in turn has resulted in the reduction of poverty from 35 to 20 per cent in the same 
period. Gains in educational attainment, lower fertility rates, agricultural growth, disaster resilience
and remittance inflows all contributed to this reduction. As the service and industry sectors account 
for the bulk of GDP, investments in training and upskilling in sectors such as agriculture and
manufacturing will help deliver better human development outcomes.
2. Despite a positive macroeconomic outlook, Bangladesh continues to face unprecedented 
development challenges due to its vulnerability to shocks, some of which are transboundary in 
nature. The magnitude of people affected by climate-induced disasters remains a concern with an 
estimate that one of every seven Bangladeshis will experience displacement by 2050. Bangladesh 
faces considerable policy challenges which need to be addressed to achieve sustainable growth. 
The overdependence on ready-made garment exports and remittance inflows has amplified external 
vulnerabilities in the economy. Job creation and poverty reduction rates have slowed since 2010, 
hurting youth and women most. Rapid and largely unplanned urbanization has severely 
undermined liveability. Simultaneously, inequalities have widened and progress remains 
geographically uneven. As of 2019, 24.6 per cent of the population were multidimensionally poor 
and another 18.2 per cent were vulnerable to multidimensional poverty.
1 Religious and ethnic 
minorities and various vulnerable communities, such as the urban poor and those in remote areas,
are disproportionately disadvantaged. Pre-existing inequalities have been further exacerbated by 
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, resulting in millions of people being pushed below 
the poverty line. The impact also includes a decline in exports, lower private investment and 
subsequent job losses. A continued focus on digital transformation throughout the economy and 
governance structure, making Internet and mobile devices affordable and accessible, is critical and 
will have a strong impact on reducing poverty and inequality.
3. While there have been improvements in outcomes such as maternal mortality and educational 
enrolment rates, challenges around women’s empowerment persist due to discriminatory social 
norms and practices and violence against women. Although Bangladesh is the best performer in 
South Asia in closing the gender gap,
2
child marriage rates are high. These vulnerabilities have 
been amplified by COVID-19, where loss of livelihoods, increase in unpaid care work, child 
marriage and domestic violence have disproportionately affected women.
4. UNDP is widely recognized as a trusted development partner. It has an established convening 
role and works with public, private and civil society stakeholders to facilitate more inclusive 
solutions as the integrator across the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. UNDP works at
both national and local levels on evidence-based policymaking and strengthening capacity for 
planning, implementation and monitoring. 
5. During the preceding programme cycle, UNDP work was aligned to the Government’s agenda 
as evidenced by the 2019 independent country programme evaluation. UNDP has helped to address 
complex development challenges by focusing on the needs of the poorest and the most vulnerable, 
including the urban poor and those in lagging regions such as Chattogram Hill Tracts. The UNDP 
comparative advantage lies in its proven track record of ably supporting climate change adaptation 
and mitigation, environmental and disaster risk management, access to justice, e-service delivery, 
accelerating digitization and social protection. It has contributed to improvements in civic 
engagement, more effective local governments, revenue collection, budget execution and 
allocation of resources to advance gender equality. Initial climate change mitigation interventions 
1 Human Development Report 2020: Briefing note for Bangladesh. http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country
t/BGDdfDP/DCP/BGD/4
were successful in laying the foundations for future emission reductions. UNDP has played a useful 
role in the response to the Rohingya3crisis, focusing on the longer-term development implications 
of the crisis and its impact on host communities. 
6. At the same time, shortfalls and challenges of the country programme 2016-2021 provide
lessons for the proposed programme. While UNDP support to local governance has brought 
incremental improvements, inadequate decentralization has limited the impact. Additionally, 
advocacy for green growth and climate change mitigation has had limited result; transformation at 
the grass-roots level did not translate into commensurate progress at the policy level; and 
implementation of the Chattogram Hill Tracts Peace Accord remains incomplete, making this 
region vulnerable to demographic, religious and regional cross-currents, including the recent influx 
of Rohingyas. However, the Government of Bangladesh remains committed to ensure the full 
implementation of the Peace Accord. UNDP also faced challenges in mobilizing resources for 
democratic governance and justice sector reform. There was uneven policy-level progress on 
achieving gender parity and the increasing number of development challenges require 
transboundary solutions. Unanticipated developments such as the Rohingya influx, COVID-19 
pandemic and accelerated LDC graduation underscored the need for agility and adaptability to 
remain relevant. The pandemic also revealed that: (a) investments by Digital Bangladesh have 
helped business continuity, but there is now an urgent need to narrow the digital divide; and (b) 
more focus on mitigating disruption of supply chains is required as part of disaster risk reduction. 
While increasing government co-financing is key to locking in project gains and ensuring
sustainability, there is clearly untapped potential of the private sector for achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals. Delayed project approvals have constrained timely project 
delivery and resource mobilization. Addressing these challenges is a prerequisite for a successful 
delivery of the proposed country programme.
7. During the consultations on the new country programme, UNDP, together with stakeholders 
including the Government, development partners, civil society, the private sector and other United 
Nations agencies, identified a series of strategies that will entail a new way of working. This 
country programme is firmly anchored in the development aspirations and priorities enshrined in 
the 8th Five Year Plan, is an integral part of the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), 2022-2026 and is aligned to the UNDP Strategic Plan.
8. Considering that the overall focus of national development during this programme period will 
be on LDC graduation, it will also be the principal priority for the UNDP country programme. The 
overall theory of change is that if sustainable economic growth is accelerated with increased 
equitable opportunities for decent income opportunities, if institutions, ecosystems and people are 
more resilient to disasters and climate change, and if a more accountable and inclusive governance 
system is in place, then people in Bangladesh – especially the most vulnerable – benefit from 
inclusive and equitable socioeconomic opportunities and services, increased transparency and civic 
participation in public affairs and a sustainable graduation from LDC status.
9. This theory of change will require the country programme both to build on existing work and 
to adopt new and innovative development solutions, including:
(a) Addressing spatial poverty traps through localization of the Sustainable Development Goals 
in lagging regions and environmentally critical areas. This will also help to inform future 
decentralization efforts;
(b) Building alliances for advocacy for green growth and climate change mitigation, nature-based 
solutions and universal coverage of the social safety net;
(c) Identifying transboundary solutions for common development challenges;
(d) Intensifying strategic engagement with the private sector for achieving the Goals;
(e) Advancing the culture of innovation for new-generation governance, citizen-centric public 
service delivery and digital solutions to ensure last-mile connectivity;
(f) Supporting Bangladesh in its global positioning and branding.
3 This country programme does not include programming related to the Rohingya crisis. The Government of Bangladesh refers to the 10. Gender equality and women’s empowerment is a cross-cutting priority. Overall, this country 
programme will have an elevated investment in social transformation for gender equality and 
empowerment of women, youth and other vulnerable groups, and in increasing awareness and 
engagement on civil rights and responsibilities. UNDP will promote leadership and participation 
of women in decision-making, in promoting sustainable development and sustaining social 
cohesion. It will advocate for increased employment and economic opportunities for women so 
that they can act as change agents to further reduce the gender gap. UNDP will mobilize its global 
knowledge and expertise to remove structural barriers; raise awareness of and prevent harmful 
social norms and practices such as gender-based violence; and build institutional and individual 
capacities for equal participation in social, economic and political activities.
11. To this end, UNDP will play three specific interconnected roles:
(a) Designing future-proof policies to ensure the relevance of the Government’s planning;
(b) Policy advocacy through cutting-edge research to ensure that risks and opportunities are 
debated and integrated into policy planning;
(c) Acting as a facilitator to bring together traditional and non-traditional stakeholders. UNDP is 
well positioned to facilitate a stronger engagement between the United Nations and the private 
sector and to leverage the wealth of human capital in the country. One of the priorities is to 
deploy innovative development financing options through public-private partnerships.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
12. This country programme envisions that the people of Bangladesh – especially the most 
vulnerable – contribute to and benefit equitably from the integrated social, environmental and 
economic dimensions of sustainable and inclusive development. To that end, this country 
programme will support three strategic priorities of the UNSDCF: (a) inclusive and sustainable 
economic development; (b) a sustainable, healthy and resilient environment; and (c) 
transformative, participatory and inclusive governance.
13. Outcome 1 (also UNSCDF Outcome 1), pathway to inclusive and sustainable economic 
development, envisions that by 2026, more people in Bangladesh, particularly the most vulnerable 
and marginalized from all gender and social groups and those from lagging districts, benefit from 
sustainable livelihood and decent work opportunities resulting from responsible, inclusive, 
sustainable, green and equitable economic development. It will focus on achieving the following 
key results: 
(a) The Government is supported to design and implement conducive policies, regulatory 
frameworks and a governance mechanism for Sustainable Development Goal financing to attract 
investment from diversified sources in labour-intensive, responsible and green economic sectors;
(b) Women and youth, especially those who own cottage, small and medium-sized enterprises, 
benefit from market-driven skills development, from access to financial and non-financial services 
to adopt appropriate technologies, and from innovative business models driving improved 
productivity, competitiveness, resilience and sustainability of enterprises and jobs;
(c) Policy and regulatory frameworks enabling greater access to and utilization of inclusive, 
gender-responsive and resilient basic social and protection services are strengthened.
14. Efforts will be directed towards a sustainable LDC graduation through: (a) catalysing and 
institutionalizing innovative financing solutions, especially support for an integrated national 
financing framework and public-private partnerships; (b) supporting the transition to climatesmart, green and digital technologies through policy, legal and fiscal reforms; (c) strengthening the 
resilience of and access to the entire business supply chain and market system with a focus on
cottage, small and medium-sized enterprises; (d) boosting entrepreneurship with a focus on 
women; (e) the development of a future-proof labour market with a focus on responsive skill 
enhancement; (f) accelerating social protection system reforms for a nationally appropriate 
universal approach; (g) supporting the business sector to be human rights-compliant; and (h) DP/DCP/BGD/4
enterprises. Business associations will be assisted to develop responsible business conduct 
guidelines; promote awareness among the member businesses; and implement integrated digital 
solutions to achieve more productive, commercialized and climate-resilient businesses. Integrated 
support to the informal economy will be provided through a series of interventions and existing 
platforms such as measures to safeguard the urban poor and new poor, social protection/cash 
transfer and strengthening supply chains in rural and in urban settings. 
15. Outcome 2, pathway to a sustainable, healthy and resilient environment (UNSDCF outcome 
3), envisions that by 2026, ecosystems are healthier, and all people, in particular the most 
vulnerable and marginalized in both rural and urban settings, benefit from and contribute to, in a 
gender-responsive manner, a cleaner environment, an enriched natural resource base and lowcarbon development, and are more resilient to climate change, shocks and disasters. It will focus 
on achieving the following key results: 
(a) More people, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized, have increased capacities, 
knowledge and skills to adopt sustainable consumption behaviours and lead in climate 
action;
(b) Institutions have strengthened capacities to develop and deliver policies, strategies and
legal instruments to improve and restore ecosystem health and manage risks, such as 
climate change, disaster, pandemics and humanitarian crises;
(c) Government, the private sector and civil society demonstrate enhanced commitment and 
capacities to provide efficient oversight for environmental policies and legal frameworks, 
identifying financing solutions and prioritizing green investments.
16. UNDP will continue assisting the Government to mainstream environmental conservation and 
sustainability into national and regional development processes with due consideration to 
obligations under multilateral environment agreements.
17. UNDP interventions will focus on identifying, piloting and scaling up data-driven and techbased smart policies and solutions that are environmentally friendly, circular and risk-informed. 
UNDP will work on: (a) improving the institutional and regulatory frameworks governing the 
environmental sector; (b) providing technical and financial support, including through small grants 
instruments, for promotion of community engagement in co-management and monitoring of 
natural resources to increase local ownership, improve livelihoods and reduce poverty; and (c) 
mainstreaming ecosystem-based approaches and nature-based solutions into policymaking, 
community development and landscape restoration. UNDP will advocate for an inclusive and 
participatory institutional ecosystem that will enable women and youth to act as change agents. 
This will require an all-of-society engagement, including volunteers and local community groups 
for environmental awareness, including consumption behaviour changes. UNDP will address 
sustainable energy for all and insecurity by unlocking retrofit markets for energy-efficient,
renewable and cleaner sources and facilitate access to international climate financing mechanisms 
for mitigation and adaptation. UNDP will ensure intersectoral coordination across its nature, 
climate, disaster and environment portfolio. 
18. In the COVID-19 context, UNDP will pay significant attention to minimizing the negative 
fallouts of the Anthropocene. UNDP will support science- and data-based investment and 
policymaking capacities to address the environment-health nexus. A green and resilient recovery 
will be boosted by promoting sustainable settlements through low-emission and circular-economy 
models, and integrating climate adaptation and mitigation into sectoral strategies and action plans 
in line with the Sendai Framework and the Paris Climate Agreement. UNDP will provide policy
and technical support for biodiversity management, resilient livelihoods and strengthen national 
capacity for disaster risk management.
19. Outcome 3, pathway to transformative, participatory and inclusive governance, envisions that 
by 2026, more people, especially the most vulnerable, benefit from more equitable, nondiscriminatory, gender-responsive, participatory and accountable governance and justice, in a 
peaceful and tolerant society governed by the rule of law. It will focus on achieving the following 
results:(a) The Government and other duty bearers, along with all rights holders, are better able to 
uphold standards, practices and norms that promote social cohesion, human rights, nondiscrimination and empowerment of women and other vulnerable groups;
(b) Public institutions and other quasi-formal institutions and normative and policy frameworks 
have enhanced capacities and frameworks to ensure accountable and gender-responsive 
governance according to the rule of law;
(c) Civil society organizations (CSOs), especially district CSO networks, oversight bodies and 
the private sector, are better able to participate meaningfully in decision-making and to 
promote, protect and respect human rights and to fight against discrimination.
20. UNDP will continue supporting the Government, Parliament, judiciary and oversight 
institutions towards improved accountability and transparency at multiple levels, focusing on
quality service delivery. Key lines of action include improving the availability of quality data on 
the Sustainable Development Goals and enhancing national management of disaggregated data,
including the statistical capacity for monitoring progress towards the Goals; and strengthening
local government capacities in planning and public finance management, along with advocacy and 
capacity-building for mainstreaming social audits and implementation of the national integrity 
strategy.
21. UNDP will continue strengthening the institutional capacity of the National Human Rights 
Commission to fulfil its mandate. Intensified efforts will be made to strengthen the reporting 
capacity of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to follow up on the Universal Periodic Review and 
monitor its implementation. As peace consolidation remains fragile in the Chattogram Hill Tracts, 
UNDP will continue its support for democratization and strengthening of decentralized governance 
institutions. In the area of access to justice, UNDP will strengthen capacities for judicial case 
management and ease of access to judicial services through digitalization and legal aid. UNDP will 
continue to support village courts for alternate dispute resolution and other redressal mechanisms, 
particularly for disadvantaged groups. Continued strengthening of the capacities of the police, in
particular the Bangladesh Women’s Police Network and Prisons Directorate, will help ensure 
gender-responsive justice in line with United Nations standards. Considering the strategic 
importance of the Economic Relations Division (ERD) as a custodian of improving development 
effectiveness, UNDP will continue to provide technical support to strengthen evidence-based 
policymaking through the national knowledge repository (“ERDPEDIA”) and mobilize external 
resources with increased focus on broadening and deepening the contributions of non-resident 
Bangladeshis to the economy and society. 
22. UNDP will continue supporting strategic dialogue platforms aimed at broadening the civic and 
political space for youth and marginalized groups and providing information on human rights, legal 
aid and public services. Capitalizing on the country’s short window of demographic dividend, 
UNDP will work with youth to help them achieve their potential and contribute to achievement of 
the Sustainable Development Goals. UNDP will provide skills training; promote digital literacy to 
improve decent income opportunities for youth, the spread of misinformation and hate speech; and 
advance social cohesion through promotion of cultural activities. UNDP will also promote 
ecotourism that will help environmental conservation while also creating sustainable livelihood 
opportunities. 
23. UNDP will apply a cross-portfolio approach to programming and ensure a dynamic linkage 
and interaction between the three outcomes both programmatically and operationally. Internal 
mechanisms are already in place to facilitate cross-fertilization, implementation, joint monitoring, 
information sharing, and joint learning. This will help address programme fragmentation and
enhance synergy and promote both the “One UNDP” and the “One UN” spirit.
24. UNDP will strive to strengthen partnerships with bilateral and multilateral donors, 
international financial institutions, international organizations and other emerging partners. UNDP 
will continue its leading role in its areas of comparative advantage, e.g., scaling up key 
development accelerators related to regional and urban development, localizing the Sustainable 
Development Goals in lagging districts including Cox’s Bazar, Kurigram and Satkhira with 
emphasis on coordinated programming nexusclimate actions and social protectionThe other key DP/DCP/BGD/4
foundations and associations of non-resident Bangladeshis to design innovative solutions that are 
catalysed on blended development financing. The Adaptation Fund, Global Environmental 
Facility, Green Climate Fund and other multilateral funds will remain critical partners, with a 
vision to scale up existing programming areas and introduce new ones in line with government
priorities. 
25. In line with the United Nations reform agenda, UNDP will expand its portfolio of inter-agency 
partnerships, especially around issue-based coalitions with relevant agencies on transboundary 
issues, youth employment, women’s economic empowerment, urbanization, financial inclusion, 
anti-corruption, the impact of climate change on women and environmental sustainability, and data 
and Sustainable Development Goal monitoring, with a focus on supporting cohesive and integrated 
United Nations action and leveraging volunteerism in programme implementation. Through its 
well-established platforms and networks, e.g., a2i (“Aspire to Innovate”), specializing in 
introducing innovation to simplify public service delivery, UNDP will continue championing
South-South and triangular cooperation; and facilitate sharing of knowledge and experience on 
topics such as climate change, disaster risk reduction, digitization, innovation and private sector 
development. 
III. Programme and risk management 
26. This country programme document serves as the primary unit of accountability to the 
Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level. 
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country 
programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and 
procedures and internal control framework.
27. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced 
by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure. The 
harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United 
Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
28. This country programme faces the following risks: (a) the collateral impacts of COVID-19
have yet to fully unfold and be understood, making the operating context even more volatile, 
uncertain, complex and ambiguous; (b) a protracted COVID-19 pandemic can make LDC 
graduation unsustainable for Bangladesh and undermine the ability of UNDP to deliver planned 
results; (c) shortfalls in official development assistance, as a consequence of both LDC graduation 
and the possibility of economic recession in donor countries caused by the pandemic; and (d) 
catastrophic events could cause massive loss of lives and assets and compromise long-term 
development objectives. 
29. UNDP will strengthen its risk management procedures for risk identification, mitigation and 
diversification. This will include applying a portfolio approach to programming, focusing on 
fostering a linkage between humanitarian response, development and peace. Systems thinking will 
underpin this work, ensuring holistic approaches to complex problems including predicting and 
responding to future emerging trends and unforeseen requests for support from the Government.
30. The LDC graduation will have several implications for funding, including a reduction in the 
regular resources allocation for the country programme. UNDP will adopt a diversification 
approach to resource mobilization through renewed partnerships at country and regional levels, 
increased private sector engagement, fostering new partnerships and increased government 
financing as a catalyst to attract more resources from development partners. UNDP will ensure that 
its business processes are efficient and cost-effective.
31. Disasters may reduce the ability of communities and stakeholders to stay engaged in 
development initiatives. Mitigating actions will include disaster preparedness and a business 
continuity plan which UNDP will update to strengthen programme resilience for uninterrupted 
delivery. Risk management will include the systematic and portfolio-wide use of these registers32. Frequent monitoring of the political economy and operating context will inform modifications 
in the theory of change and planned programmes. UNDP will use risk monitoring as a tool for early 
warning, risk management, risk mitigation and decision-making in line with the UNDP social and 
environmental standards and accountability mechanisms.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
33. The programme will be aligned to corporate monitoring and evaluation requirements including 
United Nations Evaluation Group norms and standards and a dedicated budget allocation to 
improve internal capacities in monitoring and evaluation. UNDP will capitalize on initiatives such 
as the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency programme on environment and 
climate change to strengthen country office capacities for integrated programming, social and 
environmental standards, gender mainstreaming, data and knowledge management including
linking research work to advocacy, and collaboration with the United Nations country team and 
other partners.
34. UNDP will adopt innovative approaches to monitoring and evaluation e.g., third-party 
monitoring, to help ensure transparency in documenting achievements, progress and lessons 
learned. Improved quality of project monitoring through collection of aggregated data will help 
measure the success of the programme and contribute to learning of lessons and decision-making. 
Results-oriented monitoring will enhance accountability, and robust evaluations with strengthened 
gender aspects will generate evidence for results achieved. 
35. UNDP will apply a cross-portfolio approach for three evaluations to inform course correction 
responding to evolving national contexts; identify opportunities for synergies across the country 
programme; scale up solutions; enhance portfolio development; and promote joint learning and
innovation, both internally and with partners. 
36. UNDP will partner with United Nations organizations and data-generating entities (e.g.,
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics) to strengthen national capacities for monitoring progress towards 
the Sustainable Development Goals through nationally owned sources of data, and to enhance data 
quality and availability. Reliable disaggregated data are essential to ensuring universal access to 
development outcomes. DP/DCP/BGD/4
Annex. Results and resources framework for Bangladesh (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: SDGs 1, 5, 8 and 10
National Priority: Inclusive Economic Growth through Macroeconomic Stability (SDG 8), Reducing Poverty and Inequality (SDGs 1 & 10), Employment (SDG 8), and Gender (SDG 5) and 
Inequality (SDG 10)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: By 2026, more people in Bangladesh, particularly the most vulnerable and marginalized from all gender and social 
groups and those from lagging districts, benefit from sustainable livelihoods and decent work opportunities resulting from responsible, inclusive, sustainable, green and equitable economic 
development.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), BASELINES, 
TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including 
indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS 
/ PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME ($)
Indicator: Annual growth rate of 
real GDP per employed person 
Baseline: 5.85% (2018-2019) 
Target: 5.5% (2026) 
Indicator: Growth rates of (a) 
household expenditure or (b) 
income per capita among the 
bottom 40 percent of the population 
and the total population 
Baseline: (a) 7.7); (b) 9.1 (2016) 
Target: (a) 9.5; (b) 9.3 (2026) 
Indicator: Proportion of population 
covered by social protection
Baseline: 27.8% (2016)
Target: 35.0% (2026)
Source: Bangladesh Bureau 
of Statistics (BBS)
Frequency: Annual
Responsible Institutions: 
BBS
Source: BBS
Frequency: Triennial
Responsible Institutions: 
BBS, General Economics 
Division 
Source: BBS
Frequency: Annual
Responsible Institutions: 
Cabinet Division, General 
Economics Division, BBS
Source: BBS
Frequency: Triennial
Responsible Institutions: 
Cabinet Division, General 
Economics Division, BBS
Output 1.1: The Government is supported to design and implement conducive 
policies, regulatory framework and SDG financing governance mechanism to 
attract investment from diversified sources in labour-intensive, responsible and 
green economic sectors.
Indicative Indicator 1.1.1. Amount leveraged and materialized for financing 
prioritized SDG and/or climate action from public budget gradually increased. 
Baseline: TBD, Target: 20% increase (2026); Source: Project review reports, 
Frequency: Annual
• Cabinet Division
• Finance Division
• Bangladesh Bank
• General Economics 
Division
• Local Government 
Division 
• Ministry of Social 
Welfare
• Ministry of 
Chittagong Hill 
Tracts Affairs
• Ministry of Labour 
and Employment
• Public-Private 
Partnership 
Authorities
• National Skills 
Development 
Agency
• United Kingdom 
Foreign,
Commonwealth and
Development Office
Regular
4,170,000
Other
56,670,000
Output 1.2: Women and youth, especially those who own cottage, small and 
medium-sized enterprises, benefit from market-driven skills development, 
access to financial and non-financial services to adopt appropriate 
technologies, innovative business models driving to improved productivity, 
competitiveness, resilience and sustainability of enterprises and jobs.
Indicative Indicator 1.2.1. Number of people accessing financial services as a 
direct result of UNDP interventions. Baseline (2020): women: 2,462,492, men: 
3,650,000, Target (2026): women: 8 million; men: 12 million; Source: Project 
survey reports, Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 1.2.2. Number of new full-time equivalent jobs created, 
and livelihoods strengthened for youth 15+ years old as a direct result of UNDP 
interventions. Baseline (2020): women: 41,160, men: 4,165, Target (2026): 
women: 81,356, men: 8,600; Source: Project survey reports, Frequency: AnnualDP/DCP/BGD/4
Indicator: Proportion of 
population living below the 
national poverty line
Baseline: Upper poverty line 
(UPL): 20.5%; Lower poverty line 
(LPL): 10.5% (2019)
Target: UPL: 15.6%, LPL: 7.4% 
(2026)
Indicative Indicator 1.2.3. Number of districts that develop the mechanism for 
effective funding allocations to facilitate women’s economic empowerment.
Baseline (2020): 0, Target (2026): 5; Source: Official documentation of local 
government institutions / Project review reports, Frequency: Annual
• Swedish 
International 
Development 
Cooperation Agency
• Government of 
Canada
• Danish International 
Development 
Agency
• Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation
• ILO
• UNCDF
• UNICEF
• UN-Women
Output 1.3: Policy and regulatory frameworks enabling greater access to and 
utilization of inclusive, gender-responsive and resilient basic social and 
protection services are strengthened.
Indicative Indicator 1.3.1. Number of people accessing basic services as a 
direct result of UNDP interventions. Baseline (2020): poor: 4,620,983; women: 
4,420,492; persons with a disability (PWDs): 812,460; Youth: 2,867,376
Target (2026): poor: 6,662,398; women: 6,381,199; PWDs: 1,173,368; Youth: 
4,129,608; Source: Project impact assessment reports/project survey reports,
Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 1.3.2. Number of underserved citizens receiving digital 
Government to People (G2P) payments.
4 Baseline (2020): 3.72 million, Men: 
1.75 million, Women: 1.97 million, Target (2026): 8.75 million, Men: 4.11 
million, women: 4.64 million; Source: Annual Project Review Reports/Project 
Dashboard, Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: SDGs 7, 9, 11-15
National Priority: Power, Energy and Mineral Resources (SDG 7), Transport and Communication (SDG 9), Urban Development (SDG 11), and Environment, Climate Change and Disaster 
Management (SDGs 13-15)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: By 2026, ecosystems are healthier, and all people, in particular the most vulnerable and marginalized in both rural and 
urban settings, benefit from and contribute to, in a gender responsive manner, a cleaner environment, an enriched natural resource base, low-carbon development, and are more resilient to climate 
change, shocks and disasters.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 – Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
Indicator: (a) Number of deaths 
and (b) directly affected persons 
attributed to disasters per 100,000 
population
Baseline: (a) Deaths: 0.2045
(2016), (b) Affected persons: 
Data Source: DDM
Frequency: Annual
Responsible Institutions: 
DDM, MODMR, 
Output 2.1: More people in Bangladesh, especially the most vulnerable and 
marginalized, have increased capacities, knowledge, and skills to adopt 
sustainable consumption behaviours and lead in climate action. 
Indicative Indicator 2.1.1. Number of people adopted diversified, climateresilient livelihood options. Baseline (2020): women: TBD; men: TBD, Target 
(2026): women: 56,159; men: 55,711; Source: Project assessment reports, 
• Local Government 
Division 
• Department of 
Environment (DoE)
Regular
11,260,000
Other
119,040,000
4 Gender-disaggregated targets will be setDP/DCP/BGD/4
12,881 (2015) 
Target: Deaths: TBD (2026), 
Affected Persons: 2,000 
Indicator: CO2 emissions (tonnes 
per capita)
Baseline: 0.91 (2011)
Target: 1.38 (2026)
MOCHTA, MOEFCC
Data Source: DoE,
DPHE
Frequency: Annual
Responsible Institutions: 
DoE, DPHE
Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 2.1.2. Number of people with year-round access to 
reliable and safe drinking water. Baseline (2020): women: 34,527; men: 34,758 
Target (2026): women: 104,026; men:106,459; Source: Water option database, 
Water quality monitoring report, Operations and Maintenance survey results. 
Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 2.1.3. Number of disaster-resilient houses that are 
community assets. Baseline (2020): 70,000; Target (2026): 380,000, Source: 
Documents of Department of Disaster Management (DDM)
Indicative Indicator 2.1.4. Number of people with secured jobs and improved 
livelihoods in crisis or post-crisis settings. Baseline (2020): women: 36,335;
men: 39,300, Target (2026): women: 75,000; men: 80,000, Source: Annual 
project reports, Frequency: Annual
• Department of 
Disaster 
Management (DDM)
• Bangladesh Forest 
Department
• Ministry of Disaster 
Management and 
Relief (MoDMR)
• Ministry of Fisheries 
and Livestock
• Ministry of 
Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change
(MOEFCC)
• Directorate General 
of Health Services
• Department of 
Public Health 
Engineering (DPHE)
• Planning 
Commission
• District councils
• Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare
• Ministry of 
Chittagong Hill 
Tracts Affairs 
(MOCHTA)
• GCF
• GEF
• United States 
Agency for 
International 
Development 
• Sida
• European Union
• FCDO
• Unilever
• FAO
• UNCDF
Output 2.2: Institutions have strengthened capacities to develop, manage and 
deliver policies, strategies, and actions to improve ecosystem health and 
manage dynamic risks, such as climate change, disasters, pandemics, and 
humanitarian crises.
Indicative Indicator 2.2.2. Number of vulnerable households (women, poor 
and marginalized people) who benefit from climate change adaptation finance. 
Baseline (2020): 2,717, Target (2026): 15,000, Source: Annual progress review 
reports/ Upazila Parishad performance assessment report, Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 2.2.3. Number of cities with subnational mechanisms 
being implemented for mitigating risks to urban centres. Baseline (2020): 17 
cities, Target (2026): 20 cities, Source: Project impact assessment, Frequency: 
Annual
Output 2.3: Government actors, the private sector and civil society 
demonstrate enhanced commitment and capacities to provide efficient oversight 
functions for environmental policies and legal frameworks, identifying 
financing solutions, and prioritizing green investments. 
Indicative Indicator 2.3.1. Degree of integration of climate finance for both 
adaptation and mitigation in medium-term budget framework (MTBF) and 
medium-term macroeconomic policy statement (MTMPS). Baseline (2020): DP/DCP/BGD/4
Moderately integrated, Target (2026): Fully integrated5, Data source: MTBF 
and MTMPS, Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 2.3.2. Consumption of ozone-depleting H-CFCs [Ozonedepleting potential]. Baseline (2020): 65.35, Target (2026): 23.61, Source: DoE 
document, Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 2.3.3. Percentage of plastic waste managed by municipal 
governments. Baseline (2020): 20%, Target (2026): 40%, Source: Project 
progress report/city corporation documents, Frequency: Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: SDGs 5, 10, 16
National Priority: Governance (SDG 16), gender (SDG 5) and inequality (SDG-10)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: by 2026, more people, especially the most vulnerable, benefit from more equitable, non-discriminatory, genderresponsive, participatory, accountable governance and justice, in a peaceful and tolerant society governed by the rule of law.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Indicator: Proportion of 
population satisfied with their last 
experience of public services
Baseline: 39.69% (2018)
Target: 60% (2026)
Indicator: Number of queries 
attended to by government 
institutions under right to 
information act
Baseline: 12,852 (2019)
Target: 12,500 (2026)
Data Source: BBS
Frequency: Triennial
Responsible Institutions: 
Cabinet Division
Ministry of Public Affairs
Dara Source: Information 
Commission
Frequency: Annual
Responsible Institutions: 
Information Commission
Output 3.1: The Government and other duty bearers, along with all rights 
holders, are better able to uphold standards, practices and norms that promote 
social cohesion, human rights, non-discrimination and empowerment of women 
and other vulnerable groups.
Indicative Indicator 3.1.1. Number of people who have access to informal 
justice. Baseline (2020): women: 88,849, men: 216,126, Target (2026): women: 
200,000, men: 450,000; Source: Project management information system 
(MIS), Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 3.1.2. Percentage of citizens (disaggregated by 
women/men, poor, marginalized groups) who are satisfied with the services of 
Upazila Parishads. Baseline (2020): women: 58.3%, men: 72.4%, poor: 41.7%, 
marginalized groups: 50.0%, Target (2026): women: 70%, men: 75%, poor: 
78%, marginalized groups: 55%; Source: Project evaluation reports, Frequency: 
Annual
Indicative Indicator 3.1.3. Number of victim cases of sexual and gender-based 
violence redressed through institutional responses from NHRC and NLASO. 
Baseline (2020): 0, Target (2026): 50, Source: Documents/Reports of NHRC 
• Cabinet Division
• Law and Justice 
Division
• Local Government 
Division
• Ministry of 
Chittagong Hill 
Tracts Affairs
• Ministry of Law, 
Justice and 
Parliamentary 
Affairs
• Ministry of Public 
Affairs
• Ministry of Home 
Affairs
• Information 
Commission
Regular
7,080,000
Other
95,000,000
5 Moderately integrated: Chapter 1 of MTMPS reflects climate dimension; Fully integrated: All chapters of MTMPS reflect climate dimensionDP/DCP/BGD/4
and NLASO, Frequency: Annual • National Human 
Rights Commission
(NHRC)
• National Legal Aid 
Services 
Organization
(NLASO)
• Parliament
• DANIDA
• Swiss Agency for 
Development and 
Cooperation
• European Union
• UNEP
• UNV
• UN-Women
Output 3.2: Public institutions and other quasi-formal institutions and 
normative and policy frameworks have enhanced capacities and frameworks to 
ensure accountable and gender-responsive governance according to the rule of 
law.
Indicative Indicator 3.2.1. Increased rate of complaints and settlements 
cognizance by the NHRC. Baseline (2015): 46%, Target (2026): 60%; Source: 
NHRC, Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 3.2.2. Percentage of Union Parishads with access to a 
local village court. Baseline (2020): 32%, Target (2026): 76%; Source: Project 
MIS, Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 3.2.3. National and subnational governments have 
capacities to formulate gender-responsive policies, plans and budgets. Baseline 
(2020): No, Target (2026): Yes; Source: Project evaluation reports, Frequency: 
Annual
Output 3.3: CSOs, especially district CSO networks, oversight bodies and the 
private sector are better able to participate meaningfully in decision-making and 
to promote, protect and respect human rights and to fight against 
discriminations.
Indicative Indicator 3.3.1. Number of CSOs, community-based organizations, 
religious and youth organizations participating in citizen engagement activities. 
Baseline (2020): 24,
6 Target (2025): total: 100, women’s organizations: 30, 
youth organizations: 50, Source: Project progress reports, Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 3.3.2. Number of CSO coalitions formed to advance 
human rights actions at grass-roots level. Baseline (2020): 0, Target (2026): 50, 
Source: Project report, Frequency: Annual
Indicative Indicator 3.3.3. Number of government decisions and measures on 
promotion of tolerance and inclusivity with inputs from CSOs supported by 
UNDP. Baseline (2020): 2, Target (2026): 7, Source: Project Progress reports, 
Frequency: Annual
6 Disaggregated baseline data will be collected later in 2021 once the new phase of the “Partnerships for a Tolerant, Inclusive Bangladesh” project starts.