File Name: BGD-NEP-2005-EN
Year: 2005
Country Name: Bangladesh
Country Code: BGD
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: November 2005
Start Year: nan
End Year: nan
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
(Updated in 2005)
GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF 
BANGLADESH
MINISTRY OF POWER, ENERGY AND MINERAL 
RESOURCES
DHAKA, NOVEMBER 2005Contents
SL NO. NAME OF POLICY SELECTION PAGE
1. STRATEGY PLANNING & 
MANAGEMENT
I
2. INTEGRATION OF ENERGY 
OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
II
3. SMALL AND CAPTIVE 
POLICY
III
4. PRIVATE SECTOR POWER 
GENERATION POLICY
IV
5. RENEWABLE ENERGY 
POLICY
V
6. VI
7. VII
8. VIII
9. IX
10. X
11. XI
12. XII1.0 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background
Improving access to energy in Bangladesh is a fundamental contribution to 
poverty reduction and key to attaining the United Nations Millennium 
Development Goals. As energy is prerequisite for social and economic 
development it is essential to move towards sustainability in energy systems 
both in order to protect natural life-support systems on which humanity 
depends, and to eradicate poverty.
With rapid change of global as well as domestic situation it has become 
necessary to update National Energy Policy (NEP) of Bangladesh, which 
was formulated in 1996 to proper exploration, production, transmission, 
distribution and rational use of energy sources to meet the growing demand 
on a sustainable basis. It involves survey, exploration, exploitation and 
distribution of indigenous natural gas; development of coal in the northern 
part of the country: establishment of petroleum refining facility and 
distribution systems; and establishment of power generation plants and 
networks for transmission and distribution of electricity. It is also necessary 
to take proper steps to enhance renewable energy development activity to 
meet the future challenge.
Energy demand in Bangladesh is rising swiftly. Demand is outstripping the 
production and transmission & distribution capability. Especially power 
demand exceeds generation capacity. There are also some bottlenecks in 
power transmission and distribution system. All these leads to increased 
load shed and poor quality of power supply.
Out of 140 million people about 50 million have direct access to electricity. 
Per capita electricity generation in 2005 was only 158 kWh. In 2003-04 
about 1.24 million households had piped natural gas connections and only 
2.32% of total households used kerosene as cooking. Per capita 
consumption of commercial energy and electricity in Bangladesh is one of 
the lowest even among the developing countries. At present about 65% of 
total final energy consumption is met by different type of traditional biomass 
fuels (e.g. agricultural residues, wood fuels, animal dung etc.).Shortcomings of the past energy development programmes and management 
practices are identified as follows.
(a) It has not been possible to undertake systematic survey, exploration 
and exploitation of energy resources throughout the country due to 
financial constraints. As a result, it has not been possible to ensure 
balanced development of energy resources of different zones of the 
country and balanced development of different sub-sectors of the 
energy sector.
(b) It has not been possible to undertake systematic development of 
Power Generation, Transmission and Distribution projects and 
rational use of electricity in the country.
(c) Expansion of energy consuming sectors e.g. industrial sector have 
been constrained due to shortage and unreliable supply of 
commercial energy.
(d) Energy agencies have not been operated and managed efficiently.
(e) Energy prices have not been set on a rational basis.
(f) Effective measures have not been taken to ensure proper use of energy 
through integration of economic development activities.
(g) Unplanned and inefficient use of fuels is contributing to 
environmental degradation.
(h) Adequate attention has not been given to meet the total energy needs 
of rural areas.
(i) Adequate attention has not been given to undertake systematic 
research programmes to develop indigenous technological 
capabilities.
(j) Adequate attention has not been given to develop trained manpower 
for the efficient management of the sector.
Government made vision and policy statement in 2000 for power sector 
development. Government’s vision is to provide reliable and affordable 
power to all by 2020. To materialize the vision Gas, prime fuel for power 
generation provides a special window of opportunity. Again to increase the 
security and reliability of power supply, diversified use of fuel shall get 
importance. Considering all these there should be homogeneous 
development of all segments of energy sources and sector to achieve the 
desired goal. It is essential to take measures on both the supply and demand 
side in order to improve access to advanced low-emission energy forms and 
to renewable energy sources, and to improve the energy efficiency.To ensure sustainable development of energy sector, updated National 
Energy Policy will address various issues to overcome shortcomings 
mentioned above.
1.2 Objectives
The objectives of the revised National Energy Policy (NEP) are outlined as 
follows.
(i) To provide energy for sustainable economic growth so that the 
economic development activities of different sectors are not 
constrained due to shortage of energy.
(ii) To ensure optimum development of all the indigenous energy sources.
(iii) To meet the energy needs of different zones of the country and socioeconomic groups.
(iv) To ensure sustainable operation of the energy utilities
(v) To ensure rational use of total energy sources.
(vi) To ensure environmentally sound sustainable energy development 
programmes, with due importance to renewable energy, causing 
minimum damage to environment.
(vii) To encourage public and private sector participation in the 
development and management of the energy sector.
(viii) To integrate energy with rural development to boost rural economy.
(ix) To bring entire country under electrification by the year 2020.
(x) To ensure reliable supply of energy to the people at reasonable and 
affordable price.
(xi) To develop a regional energy market for rational exchange of 
commercial energy to ensure energy security.
1.3 Policy and Guidelines
Policy and Guidelines listed bellow on Power and Energy are 
presented in the following sections of this document.
(i) Strategic Planning and Management
(ii) Integration of Energy and Rural Development(iii) Small and Captive Power Policy
(iv) Private Sector Power Generation Policy
(v) Renewable Energy Policy
(vi) ******
(vii) ******
(viii) ******
(ix) ******
(x) ******