File Name: BHR-CPD-2016-EN
Year: 2016
Country Name: Bahrain
Country Code: BHR
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 6 - 9 September 2016
Start Year: 2017
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
12 July 2016
Original: English
1611960 (E) 050816 
Second regular session 2016
6 - 9 September 2016, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Bahrain (2017-2020)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. Programme rationale ................................ .................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships ................................ ... 5
III. Programme and risk management ................................ ....... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation ................................ ............. 8 
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Bahrain (2017-2020)............................. 9I. Programme rationale 
1. The Kingdom of Bahrain is an island state with a population of 1.3 million (630,744 
Bahrainis and 683,818 non-Bahrainis).1 With a strong oil sector and public sector investment, 
growth in Bahrain has averaged 3.6 percent annually between 2009 and 2014. Gross domestic 
product (GDP) per capita increased from $22,445 million dollars in 2003 to $22,864 million 
dollars in 2014 (constant price)2, while the gross national income per capita was $21,843 
dollars.2 Real GDP expansion for 2014 was 4.5 percent and the non-oil economy grew by 4.9 
percent.3
2. Bahrain continues to perform well on the World Economic Forum scale, ranking 39th in the 
2015-2016 Global Competitiveness Report.4 As a result of the government’s economic 
diversification and private sector led-growth policies, non-hydrocarbon sectors have shown 
higher growth rates, marking a gradual shift away from the energy-intensive and natural gasdependant industries.
3. By successfully exploiting its resource wealth Bahrain has acquired high-income status and 
an improved standard of living for its citizens. This is reflected in the country’s Human 
Development Index ranking of 0.824 (very high human development category), which places it 
45th globally.5In 2015, Bahrain launched the last MDG report with the support of UNDP and 
the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA).6 The report 
shows that Bahrain achieved seven of the eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)—
MDG 7 was partially achieved due to the country’s geographic characteristics.7
4. Bahrain played an important role in the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda process, a 
commitment that is safeguarded by aligning national plans, strategic frameworks and policies to 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The Government of Bahrain will harmonise SDG 
reporting with existing national indicators. This is an area where it can benefit from UNDP 
expertise, particularly in terms of alignment, improved measurement and the monitoring of 
development indicators.
5. Strong economic growth, investment, and high standards of living have created a 
foundation that can be used to transform achievements into long-term sustainable development 
gains. The period of high oil prices, which lasted until 2014, enabled the Government of 
Bahrain to boost public spending in the housing, energy, health and education sectors, thereby 
satisfying the demand for free healthcare and education in the face of rapid population growth. 
Almost 32 billion dollars worth of projects have been planned to cover vital infrastructure the 
upcoming years, but because fossil fuels comprise 80 percent of total government revenue8the 
 
1 This CPD focuses on Bahraini citizens, with a particular emphasis on less privileged citizens.
2
Information and E-Government Authority.
3 Bahrain Economic Development Board Quarterly Report, March 2015.
4 Accessed online from TradingEconomics.com: http://www.tradingeconomics.com/bahrain/competitiveness-rank. 
5 UNDP HDR, 2015.
6
 Bahrain National MDG Report, 2015.
7
Ibid.
8
Information and E-Government Authority portal, 2015.
“Bahrain aspires to shift from an economy built on, and driven by, oil wealth to 
a productive, globally competitive economy shaped by the government and 
driven by a pioneering private sector—an economy that raises a broad middle 
class of Bahrainis who enjoy good living standards.”
Bahrain Vision 2030reduction in oil prices has made the government’s fiscal position volatile. Increased borrowing 
and utilization of other financial mechanisms has sustained public investment. 
6. The total population of Bahrain grew annually by 7.38 percent between 2001 and 2010. 
The country has a large youth population (48 percent under the age of 29 and 27.2 percent 
between the ages of 15 and 29 in 2014) and there is high demand for affordable housing, 
unemployment benefits and social services, especially for less privileged9citizens. There is a 
housing backlog of over 61,414 units, and the government has committed to investing $7.6 
billion dollars in order to build 25,000 housing units by 2018 for Bahraini citizens. Considering 
the size of the current waiting list it is imperative that stakeholders review targeting 
mechanisms and provide sustainable housing solutions. 
7. The government continues to address challenges related to public administration efficiency; 
public sector management; accountability and transparency; undiversified revenues, and the 
implementation of sustainable social and environmental policies. By recalibrating the subsidy 
system, and management of social services, the government can conserve fiscal resources while 
improving the quality of social services to citizens, particularly the less privileged. 
8. Data from the Supreme Council of Women10 shows that out of 40 elected members of 
parliament there are three women, and one female minister in the Cabinet. Women comprised 
sixty nine percent of graduates from public higher education institutions, and 54 percent from 
private institutions in 2013 and 2014.11 According to the two latest censuses, women accounted 
for 26 percent of the national workforce in 2001 and this number peaked at 34 percent in 2010 
before dropping to 31 percent in 2014.12
9. His Majesty The King appointed the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry to 
publish a report in November 2011 that made recommendations to legal procedures and their 
methods of implementation, in an effort to reform the justice, human rights, law enforcement, 
security services, and media sectors and bring them in line with international practices. A 
national commission was created in March 2012 to follow-up on the implementation of the 
recommendations. A series of constitutional amendments were endorsed in 2012 (as a result of 
the National Consensus Dialogue in 2011), which led to a larger role for the national 
parliament, and following elections in 2014 the Government Programme of Action 2015-2018 
and biennial budget were approved by Parliament. In accordance with recommendations, the 
National Institute for Human Rights was assigned greater responsibilities and brought in line 
with the Paris Principles through Law No. 26 of 2014, which secured the institute’s financial 
and administrative independence. Reforms spearheaded by the government have led to a 
consolidation of the country’s human rights infrastructure.
10. Efforts are underway to enforce environmental policies and raise public awareness for 
environmental conservation. With domestic and industrial demand for natural gas rising, and 
low energy efficiency levels in the main sectors, meeting the needs of a growing population 
poses major challenges. Energy intensity13 is high, making renewable energy, as well as the 
efficient use of existing energy resources, a top priority. Situated in one of the most waterstressed regions in the world, Bahrain has limited water resources. The country mainly relies on 
desalination processes, which is powered by electricity that is generated through the use of 
natural gas.
 
9
‘Less privileged citizens’, as outlined in Bahrain’s Decree Law No 18 of 2006-Social Welfare, covers families and individuals who have 
no income or a minimum monthly income of $180 dollars per individual, $390 dollars for a family of less than five individuals, or
$400 dollars for a family with more than five members.
10 Established by Amiri Order No.44, 2001.
11 High Council of Education.
12 Information and E-Government Authority.
13 0.186 tons of oil/$1,000 dollars.11. After parliament endorsed the Government Programme of Action 2015-2018, UNDP 
engaged in intensive consultations with the government to refocus UNDP programmes. UNDP 
was instrumental in assisting the government in supporting less privileged households through 
the formulation and implementation of social strategies14 for the elderly, disabled and 
children—the latter in close collaboration with the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF).15 Furthermore, UNDP played a role in guiding the work of the region’s first 
Sustainable Energy Unit, which drives national efforts to diversify Bahrain’s energy sources by 
enhancing energy efficiency and increasing the use of renewable energy. Together with the 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, UNDP supported the country’s 
adoption of two Free Trade Agreements. In addition, the Bahrain Institute for Public 
Administration (BIPA) is the most important provider of training, research, and guidance to 
public administration. UNDP and BIPA launched the Middle East and North Africa Public 
Administration Research programme (MENAPAR) in the country to spearhead networking in 
public administration-related issues and research throughout the region.
12. Although UNDP gained the trust of several counterparts for long-term development gains, 
more can be done to improve the organization’s visibility in, and substantive contribution to, 
Bahrain.16 Gaps in programme funding were often caused by coordination challenges and to 
close these gaps the government formed a Coordination Committee to strengthen 
communication, coordination, and decision-making for the current country programme. The 
Coordination Committee agreed on the establishment of a government-funded envelope so 
projects can be replenished annually. UNDP office costs will be covered through two annual 
allocations directly from Ministry of Finance. To ensure further alignment with national 
processes, the CPD cycle will be aligned with the national plan and budget. 
13. UNDP has a comparative advantage in Bahrain because it is a trusted partner that supports 
policy development and institutional capacity building in the areas of economic diversification, 
sustainable energy, government efficiency and effectiveness, and the advancement of women, 
youth, the elderly, and disabled people. As the new programme rolls out UNDP will continue to 
work in these areas, in close coordination with the Bahrain Economic Development Board, the 
World Bank, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the United Nations 
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), ESCWA, the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization, the Office of the High 
Commission for Human Rights, the International Labor Organization, the Office of Drugs and 
Crime, UNFPA and the United Nations Information Center to focus on pertinent issues such as 
debt reduction, fiscal policy, financial subsidies, climate change adaptation, environmental 
degradation, direct entrepreneurial development, supporting small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs), and investment promotion.
14. Bahrain Vision 2030, the Government Programme of Action, and Government Framework 
are three national strategic documents that feed into the UNDP framework. These documents 
outline ways to reduce public dependency on government revenue and the sale of fossil fuels by 
restructuring the economic model towards a diversified economy that focuses on tourism, ecommerce, a knowledge based economy, innovation, and growth generated by the private 
sector. Strategies have been devised to reduce government expenditure through enhanced 
government efficiency, effectiveness and accountability towards citizens, and improving social 
investment and services for less privileged citizens. 
15. UNDP, in cooperation with its partners, will support the Government of Bahrain in 
implementing the sustainable development agenda. The UNDP country programme will focus 
on fostering sustainable development in Bahrain by supporting the transition from a state-
 
14 UNDP Childhood and Disabilities Project Final Evaluation Report, May 2014.
15 The National Child Strategy was developed in coordination with UNICEF (the organization is a non -resident agency).
16 Evaluation of the UNDP Bahrain Country Programme 2012-2016.driven, oil-dependent economy to a diversified, private sector-led economy that emphasizes 
new and alternative energies, generates long-term employment for the country’s growing 
population, and safeguards revenues for less privileged citizens. Doing so will involve 
developing policies and strategies that incentivize private sector development and sharpen the 
country’s competitive advantage globally, while the introduction of alternative energies will 
require technical sector plans and policies that deliver energy efficient resources and economic 
gains. On the institutional front, UNDP will support Bahrain as it shifts its service provider 
model towards being an ‘enabler of services’. This will improve government efficiency and 
policy formulation abilities, as well as oversight capacity. It will also ensure stronger 
government accountability and transparency. UNDP will boost the capacities of the parliament 
and organisations like the Bahrain Institute for Political Development (BIPD), and support 
government efforts in delivering improved targeting of social benefits and affordable housing.
16. UNDP will focus on upstream policy support, state of the art thinking and capacity 
development. Deliverables will be channelled through the two pathways the Government of 
Bahrain has agreed upon.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
17. The first pathway in the new CPD focuses on socio-economic results linked to the economy 
and safeguarding less privileged citizens. The second focuses on institutional changes proposed 
in several governance areas. Pathways and associated activities are highlighted below. UNDP 
will assist the government by supporting policy formulation and implementation in specific 
sectors.17
Support to economic diversification and efficient social service delivery in Bahrain
18. UNDP and the Government of Bahrain will develop evidence-based planning and policy 
approaches to make investments in priority sectors and achieve the SDGs. UNDP will assist 
government institutions in developing their capacities to harness the benefits of preferential 
market access and a knowledge-based competitive economy.18 In partnership with specialised 
United Nations organizations and programmes, UNDP will develop and coordinate the 
economic diversification policy and innovation framework in Bahrain. Competitiveness 
assessments will be used to identify new economic areas that require support, and compliment 
trade and export. Bahrain has two bilateral free trade agreements and support will be provided 
to maximize the utilisation of those agreements. UNDP will complement work carried out by 
UNIDO on SME development by introducing policy level interventions that focus on enhancing 
the legal, regulatory and institutional SME frameworks. In coordination with the Ministry of 
Works, Municipality Affairs and Urban Planning, and the Supreme Council of Environment, 
UNDP will support the formulation and implementation of the sustainable development plan for 
Hawar Island, which covers eco-tourism, employment generation, and environmental 
protection. If successful, this process will be scaled-up and replicated at other sites in Bahrain. 
19. UNDP will work through the Sustainable Energy Unit to provide policy support on ways to 
increase reliance on alternative fuels, and in setting national targets for energy efficiency and 
renewable energy. The latter will be done through the development and implementation of the 
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan and National Renewable Energy Action Plan. UNDP 
will collaborate with UNEP and the Supreme Council of the Environment to implement the 
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) and National Environment Strategy, 
focusing on environmental protection, waste management and climate change. Emphasis will be 
on the integration of energy and environmental considerations, specifically in the areas of 
 
17 Sectors include health, housing, social development, youth, industries, education, labour and energy.
18 In partnership with Tamkeen and UNIDO, UNDP will look into launching entrepreneurship programmes for youth and women.housing, urban planning, the promotion of SMEs and the implementation of the innovation 
policy. UNDP may assist the Supreme Council for Water in developing a national water policy 
using the Integrated Water Resources Management framework.
20. One of the goals of the economic diversification strategy is to boost social cohesion by 
safeguarding government revenue and social protection/safety nets for the less privileged in the 
country. Social initiatives for children, elderly, and persons with disabilities will be 
implemented in a participatory manner and UNDP will provide policy advice on international 
practice for establishing sustainable social nets. UNDP will look into supporting the 
establishment of a national committee secretariat to ensure support is delivered to those who 
need it. Additionally, the organization will work with the Ministry of Labour and Social 
Development on ways to restructure and realign subsidies. UNDP and the United Nations 
Human Settlements Programme will work together to support the Ministry of Housing as it 
brings its policies and strategies on rationalising subsidies, promoting new energy practices, and 
renewable technologies in social housing in line with international standards. 
21. UNDP assisted the Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs in developing the National Youth 
Strategy for 2005 to 2009. It will now explore possibilities to assist in the implementation of the 
new strategy for 2017-2021, which will include youth engagement and an action plan to 
implement the strategy. UNDP will look for ways to mobilize resources from the Ministry of 
Youth and Sports Affairs and the private sector, possibly by organizing mobile conferences (via 
the ‘SDG Bus’) in order to raise awareness among youth and local communities about SDG 
goals and targets.19
22. Bahrain has created Equal Opportunity Units in most ministries and UNDP will build on 
this by encouraging public institutions to achieve higher levels of gender equality and women’s 
empowerment. UNDP will collaborate with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and 
the Empowerment of Women (UN Women) assist the Supreme Council of Women in the 
implementation of the National Plan for the Advancement of Bahraini Women (2013-2022). 
Other efforts involve promoting the advancement of women by supporting female political 
candidates and implementing a national strategy that protects women from domestic violence. 
Furthermore, support will be provided to stakeholders on the integration of gender 
considerations into government and non-government plans. In collaboration with the University 
of Bahrain (UoB), courses on policy, awareness raising, and advisory services will take place to 
promote policies that support women in the labour market.
Support to make Bahraini institutions and programmes effective, responsive and accountable 
in line with international standards and practices
23. Because the government strives to modernize its services, internal operations, and 
technology (for greater effectiveness and citizen involvement) UNDP will continue to support 
BIPA by providing expertise and advice on evidence-based policy-making and the 
reengineering of government processes. In addition, UNDP will support MENAPAR in 
employing new research practices and in policy-making and partnership building. Through 
MENAPAR, good South-South practices and knowledge on public administration, egovernment, and labour arbitration will be shared. UNDP will support the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs to position Bahrain as a global partner through the facilitation of regional and 
international conferences (including a regional conference on Youth and SDGs) and the 
production of a partnership report.
24. To increase transparency and accountability, and improve the effectiveness of 
communications between the government and general public, UNDP will assist Parliamentary 
Committees in their evidence-based, decision-making efforts. This will help the Parliamentary 
 
19 The ‘SDG Bus’ is a mobile, high-tech conference facility that helps raise awareness and engage youth on SDG implementation.Secretariat better understand its modified role and new functions, and Members of Parliament 
will receive additional support in drafting legislative documents, budgetary analysis, and 
adopting relevant international conventions. UNDP will assist the Special Investigations Unit in 
formulating and implementing a communication strategy that will improve the handling of 
witness protection cases and forensic evidence, and the operationalization of the case 
management system. UNDP will work with BIPD on an interactive website for awarenessraising and civic engagement, and provide capacity development training to primary 
stakeholders on ways to enhance their roles on anti-corruption, and economic and electronic 
security.
25. UNDP will advise relevant stakeholders on methods for integrating SDG targets, setting up 
appropriate monitoring mechanisms, and ensuring SDG targets are mainstreamed into existing 
and future national strategies (thereby allowing ministries to simultaneously report against 
relevant SDGs targets). In line with the 2030 Agenda, special attention will be given to 
coordinating outreach efforts for civil society, youth organizations, and local communities when 
it comes to increasing their involvement in the implementation of the SDGs.
III. Programme and risk management 
26. This document serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for 
results alignment and resources assigned to the UNDP programme at the country level. 
Accountability of managers at the country, regional, and headquarters levels—with respect to 
country programmes—is prescribed in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures 
and the Internal Control Framework.
27. At the national level, MoFA will take the lead in implementing the country programme for 
Bahrain. UNDP will only revert to direct execution of the programme as a response to force 
majeure. The country programme will be further detailed in the joint government-UNDP 
country programme action plan.
28. The board for the country programme is comprised of members from the Coordination 
Committee (MoFA, Ministry of Finance, Office of the First Deputy Prime Minister, the 
Ministry of Cabinet Affairs, and UNDP). Board members will make strategic decisions on the 
country programme, oversee alignment with national priorities, and ensure it is effectively 
implemented according to disaggregated data. Meetings will be held at least four times a year to 
monitor projects and offer adaptive measures and/or avenues of recourse. The Committee will 
agree on corrective action should results be delayed or off target. If necessary, towards the end 
of 2018 the country programme will be reviewed (prior to the Government Programme of 
Action 2019-2022) to ensure full alignment with bi-annual national and 2019-2022 budget 
cycles.
29. Bahrain is a net contributing country and the government has committed20 to funding the 
four-year country programme with a minimum allocation of $12 million dollars.21 According to 
the bi-annual national budget cycle, country programme planning takes place every four years 
so the mid-term review coincides with the formulation of the new Government Programme of 
Action. MoFA’s leadership of the Coordination Committee is needed to ensure a steady flow of 
funding for the successful implementation of the country programme and to mitigate the risk of 
diminished resources.
30. National partners will be responsible for implementing the country programme. UNDP will 
orient partners on their roles and responsibilities using social screening and stakeholder 
response mechanisms. The social screening mechanism is applied to the design and formulation 
of all programmes and enforced through implementation. For highly technical areas where other 
 
20 The commitment was approved in a cabinet financial committee on 26 May 2016.
21 This amount excludes UNDP office costs.United Nations organizations have a clear comparative advantage, UNDP will opt for jointimplementation. The Coordination Committee will decide whether to use direct implementation 
for UNDP support on strategic initiatives and specific issues such as programme and project 
monitoring, conferences, events, outreach activities, development research (e.g. National 
Human Development Report), innovation facilities, policy advice, and partnership reports.22
31. One challenge for UNDP is delivering a high enough level of expertise and cutting-edge 
programming to meet the expectations of the Government of Bahrain. To overcome this hurdle 
UNDP will utilize its expertise in innovation and in the development of new perspectives, ideas, 
and approaches. UNDP will support the government in the adoption of new techniques such as 
proxy indicators that measure the SDGs, or crowdsourcing that helps stakeholders find solutions 
for youth unemployment and climate change. 
32. The UNDP country office provides efficient and effective programme delivery by 
delegating staff to work specifically on the monitoring and communication of development 
results. 
IV.Monitoring and evaluation
33. UNDP will provide capacity development to the Information and e-Government Authority 
to support the national statistics system and ensure adequate collection and analysis of statistics 
in the context of the Government Programme of Action, Government Priority Framework, and 
the SDGs. 
34. The UNDP ‘Gender Marker’ will be used to track gender-focused resource allocation as 
per UNDP policy, and to improve the integration of gender considerations as the country 
programme is implemented.
35. UNDP Bahrain, through its enterprise resource planning system Atlas, will allocate an 
amount under each project budget to cover the cost of data collection, monitoring by 
programme assurance staff, independent monitoring, evaluation, communications, and audits. 
Projects will utilize data gathered for evidence, analysis and communication purposes. UNDP 
will rely on institutional tools for planning, management, monitoring and reporting (e.g. the 
integrated work plan and the UNDP results and resources framework). This will enable 
stakeholders to establish stronger correlations between national, regional and global results.
36. The Evaluation Plan includes a balanced selection of outcomes and projects, along with a 
results-based approach that can be used to identify lessons learned along with initiatives that 
can be replicated. 
37. UNDP will contribute to Bahrain’s knowledge management agenda by supporting 
MENAPAR’s research capacity; a series of competitiveness analyses based on the World 
Economic Forum methodology; the Sustainable Energy Unit’s studies on Bahrain’s energy mix,
and the establishment of curricula, policy courses, and advisory services on gender-aware 
economics for the region.
 
22 UNDP will support MoFA to produce partnership report(s) that position Bahrain as a global partner.Annex. Results and resources framework for Bahrain (2017-2020)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Bahrain aspires to shift from an economy built on oil wealth to a productive, globally competitive economy, shaped by the Government and driven by a pioneering 
private sector – an economy that raises a broad middle-class of Bahrainis who enjoy good living standards through increased productivity and high-wage jobs 
OUTCOME 1: Economic diversification and efficient social services are sustainable and leave no one behind
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and 
excluded
Outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s) 
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs Major partners/partnerships
Frameworks
Resources by 
outcome ($)
Outcome indicator 1.1. % 
contribution of the 
hydrocarbon sectors to GDP
Baseline: 21% (2013)
Target: 6% Reduction
Outcome indicator 1.2. 
Renewable energy % of total 
installed capacity
Baseline (2015): 0%
Target: 2.5% 
1.1. Data source Economic 
Development Board (EDB) 
database, annually
Responsibility: EDB
Data source: UNDP project 
report
Frequency: annually
Data source: Study of 
utilisation of the toolkit
Frequency: end of cycle
Data source: Independent 
project evaluation; 
MOWMAUP
Frequency: end of cycle
1.2. Data source: Ministry of 
Energy, EDB database and 
reports, annually
Responsibility: MoE
Data source: Meeting minutes 
Frequency: quarterly
Output 1.1. Capacity of key institutions developed to conduct research, coordinate and 
implement policies that strengthen Bahrain’s competitiveness, innovation, and harness 
the preferential market access benefits
Indicator 1.1.1. No. of competitiveness studies conducted
Baseline (2015): 0
Target: 2
Indicator 1.1.2. Toolkit is available for Bahraini businesses to utilize the preferential market 
access
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
Indicator 1.1.3. Integrated Plan for Hawar Islands developed
Baseline (2015): Not developed
Target: Fully developed
Ministry of Industry, Commerce and 
Tourism (MoIC); Ministry of Works, 
Municipality Affairs and Urban 
Planning (MoWMAUP); National 
Tourism Authority; Bahrain Chamber 
of Commerce; Bahrain Development 
Bank; Tamkeen; Ministry of Youth and 
Sports Affairs (MOYSA); Supreme 
Council for Women (SCW); 
UNCTAD; UNIDO, and the EDB
Other: 
1,400,000
Output 1.2. Capacity of relevant ministries developed to identify, formulate and 
implement policies, and deliver efficient and innovative social services that target 
Bahrain’s less privileged citizens
Indicator 1.2.1. 
A secretariat to coordinate the social strategies (childhood, elderly, disability) is functional 
Baseline: Not functional
Target: Fully functional
Ministry of Labour and Social 
Development (MoLSD); Ministry of 
Housing (MoHo); Ministry of Health; 
MOYSA; Sustainable Energy Unit 
(SEU); UN-Habitat; UNEP, and WHO
Other: 
1,800,000 Outcome indicator 1.3.
National energy efficiency 
(EE) targets are set and 
achieved.
Baseline: No EE target in 
place 
Target: EE target of 5% 
established and achieved 
Data source: MoLSD annual 
Report; Independent 
decentralised project evaluation 
Frequency: end of cycle
Data source: MoLSD Annual 
Report
Frequency: end of cycle
Data Source: MoYSA reports 
Frequency: end of cycle
Data source: Housing policy 
available on MoHo website 
Frequency: end of cycle
Data source: MoHo database 
Frequency: quarterly
Data source: Assessment of the 
Health Improvement Strategy 
Frequency: end of cycle 
1.3. Data source:
SEU reports, annually
Responsibility: SEU 
Data source: Assessment of 
BIPA programmes
Frequency: end of cycle
Indicator 1.2.2. % of targeted beneficiaries reached by MoLSD programmes and initiatives
Baseline (Beneficiaries %, 2014): Children (19%), Elderly (10%), People with disabilities 
(90%)
Target:23 Children (25%), Elderly (30%), People with disabilities (100%)
Indicator 1.2.3. A comprehensive study on social targeting options developed to inform 
social entitlements
Baseline: Not developed
Target: Partially developed
Indicator 1.2.4. Youth strategy and action plan updated with reference to SDGs
Baseline: Not updated
Target: Partially updated
Indicator 1.2.5. Housing policy updated and implemented
Baseline: 2002 Housing Policy not updated
Target: fully updated
Indicator 1.2.6. Waiting period for a housing service by eligible applicants
Baseline: 10-15 years 
Target: 5 years
Indicator 1.2.7. Extent to which the Health Improvement Strategy integrates and references 
the SDGs
Baseline: Not integrated
Target: Fully integrated 
Output 1.3. Capacity of institutions developed to integrate and implement gender 
considerations in a number of policies and strategies
Indicator 1.3.1. Extent to which BIPA integrates gender considerations in public service 
capacity development programmes
Baseline: Not integrated 
Target: Partially integrated 
SCW; Information and E-Government 
Authority (IGA); Bahrain Institute of 
Public Administration (BIPA); UoB; 
UN Women; United Nations Economic 
and Social Commission for Western 
Asia (ESCWA); related national and 
international NGOs, civil society 
organizations (CSOs), academic 
institutions, official bodies and entities
Other: 
1,000,000Outcome indicator 1.4. 
Social targeting options 
adopted and implemented 
Baseline: Not developed
Target: Targeting options 
partially adopted
Data source: National policies 
and strategies, UNDP study 
Frequency: end of cycle
Data source: UNDP project 
Frequency: end of 2018 
Data source: UNDP project, 
BIPA and SCW reports 
Frequency: annually
Data source: UoB records
Frequency: end of 2017
Data source: UoB
Frequency: ongoing
1.4. Data source: MoLSD 
Reports, annually 
Responsibility: MOLSD
Data source: MoE
Frequency: annually 
Data source: MoE report 
Frequency: annually 
Data source: SEU
Frequency: annually 
Indicator 1.3.2. No. of national policies and strategies reviewed that reference gender 
considerations
Baseline: 0 
Target: 5 
Indicator 1.3.3. No. of female candidates running in national or local elections that are 
provided with capacity development support
Baseline: 0
Target: 50 
Indicator 1.3.4. No. of women benefitting from private and/or public measures to support 
women’s preparedness for leadership and decision-making roles24
Baseline: BIPA 2016 end of year records will provide a baseline
Target: 50 above baseline
Indicator 1.3.5. No. of Women economic advancement modules designed and developed
Baseline: 0
Target: 12 
Indicator 1.3.6. No. of participants in women economic advancement policy makers course
Baseline (2015): 0
Target: 40 (at least 20% female)
Output 1.4. Ministries have the capacity to integrate and implement renewable energy 
and energy efficiency policies, environmental standards, climate change considerations 
and natural resource management into national strategies and policies 
Indicator 1.4.1. National Energy Efficiency Action Plan developed
Baseline: 1
Target: 4
Indicator 1.4.2. National Renewable Energy Action Plan developed
Baseline: 1
Target: 4
Indicator 1.4.3. No. of Energy Efficiency sectoral initiatives implemented
Baseline (2015): 0
Target: 6
SEU; Minister of Oil and Gas office); 
National Oil and Gas Authority; 
Electricity and Water Authority; 
Supreme Council of the Environment 
(SCE), and UNEP
Other: 
4,200,000Outcome indicator 1.5. 
SP Indicator 4.4.A.1:
Proportion of women in 
Parliament (%)
Baseline (2014): 7.5%
Target: 15%
Outcome indicator 1.6.
Special Law for disability 
entitlement is issued
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
Data Source: SCE
Frequency: annually
1.5. Data source: Parliament 
homepage, SCW 
Frequency: continuous
Responsibility: SCW and 
Parliament
1.6. Data source: MoLSD 
report
Frequency: end of cycle
Responsibility: MoLSD
Indicator 1.4.4. Extent to which comprehensive measures implemented to achieve lowemission and climate-resilient development objectives improved25
Baseline (2015): Not improved
Target: Partially improved
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Bahrain aspires to shift from an economy built on oil wealth to a productive, globally competitive economy, shaped by the Government and driven by a pioneering 
private sector – an economy that raises a broad middle-class of Bahrainis who enjoy good living standards through increased productivity and high-wage jobs
OUTCOME 2: Bahraini institutions and programmes are effective, responsive and accountable in line with international standards and practices
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Countries have strengthened institutions to progressively deliver universal access to basic services
Outcome indicator 2.1. 
GoB national statistics 
information adapted to 
encompass SDGs
Baseline: Not adapted
Target: Fully adapted
2.1. Data source: IGA 
database
Frequency: annually
Responsibility: IGA
Data source: BIPA report 
Frequency: annually 
Data source: MoFA reports 
Frequency: end of cycle
Output 2.1. Capacity of public administration developed on policy making, government 
performance, managing change, innovation and using international practice
Indicator 2.1.1. No. of participants in relevant BIPA public sector training courses
Baseline (2015): 3000
Target per year: 5000 (at least 20% female)
Indicator 2.1.2. No. of communication initiatives supported to position Bahrain’s 
partnerships, diplomacy and negotiations
Baseline: 0 
Target: 5
BIPA; Civil Service Bureau; EDB; 
MoYSA; SCW; MoLSD; IGA, and
MoFA
Other: 
1,000,000Outcome indicator 2.2.
No. of SDG indicators 
monitored by national 
information systems
Baseline: 0
Target: At least 50% of 
relevant indicators
Outcome indicator 2.3.
Public sector and other 
institutions put in practice 
knowledge products and 
effective practices through 
MENAPAR
Baseline: 0 (No. products or 
practices)
Target: 4
Data source: BIPA report 
Frequency: annually 
Data source: BIPA report 
Frequency: annually
Data source: BIPA Annual 
Report
Frequency: annually
2.2. Data source: Reports from 
MENAPAR
Frequency: annual
Responsibility: BIPA
Data source: MoYSA reports
Frequency: annually
Data source: MoYSA reports 
Frequency: annually
2.3. Data source: Reports from 
the (BIPD) and media reports
Frequency: regularly
Responsibility: Parliament 
Media & Outreach Department
Data source: UNDP Regional 
Hub assessment.
Data source: Government 
Reports, relevant Ministries 
Reports
Frequency: annually
Indicator 2.1.3. No. of Regional South-South and triangular cooperation partnerships that 
deliver measurable and sustainable development benefits for participants26
Baseline: 1 partnership
Target: 5 partnerships
Indicator 2.1.4. MENAPAR legally registered, and its by-laws and operational guidelines 
formulated
Baseline: Not formulated
Target: Fully formulated
Indicator 2.1.5. No. of research papers and case studies adopted in MENAPAR through 
south-south cooperation 
Baseline (2015): 6
Target: 20
Output 2.2. Capacity of selected partners from youth organizations strengthened to 
support and advocate for national development
Indicator 2.2.1. No. of SDG awareness campaigns co-organized with youth partners.
Baseline: 0
Target: 20
Indicator 2.2.2: No. of SDG Youth conferences conducted with youth partners.
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
MOYSA, Tamkeen, SCW, and the 
Ministry of Cabinet Affairs (MoCA)
Other: 
500,000
Output 2.3. Selected ministries and stakeholders have the capacity to develop evidencebased plans and policies, which integrate the SDGs and national statistics, and align 
them to the Government Programme of Action
Indicator 2.3.1. Extent to which the Government Programme of Action 2019 – 2022 is SDGaligned.
Baseline: Assessment of SDGs target mainstreaming into the GPA 2015-2018 to be 
conducted in 2017
Target: Fully aligned
Indicator 2.3.2. Relevant SDGs are incorporated in national policies
Baseline: 1 policy 
Target: 5 policies
MoCA; Office of the First Deputy 
Prime Minister; IEA; National 
Committee for Information, and MoFA
Other: 
400,000Outcome indicator 2.4. 
Parliament outreach 
programmes with society 
strengthened 
Baseline: No. of outreach 
activities in 2017
Target: No. of outreach 
activities in 2020
Data source: G.C.C. Regional 
Statistic Office (GCCSTAT)
Data Source: MoCA and IGA 
Frequency: end of cycle
Data source: Independent 
evaluation and project reports 
Frequency: end of cycle
Data source: Judicial and 
Legal Studies Institute (JLSI)
Frequency: annually
Data source: JLSI database 
Frequency: annually
Data source: NIHR National 
Strategy 2015-2018, to be 
reported at the end of cycle
Data source: BIPD website 
tracker software
Frequency: continuous
Data source: Survey among 
members of parliament
Indicator 2.3.3. National information system indicators are linked to the relevant SDGs 
indicators.
Baseline: To be defined once SDGs indicators are defined
Target: 90%
Indicator 2.3.4. Extent to which updated and disaggregated data is being used to monitor 
progress on national development goals aligned with post-2015 agenda27
Baseline: Not started
Target: Partially used
Output 2.4. Capacity of relevant institutions that promote rule of law and 
accountability developed in line with international practices
Indicator 2.4.1. Degree to which SIU adapts international norms and practices
Baseline: 2
Target: 4 (on a scale of 1=to 5=excellent)
Indicator 2.4.2. E-library operational for legal professionals 
Baseline: No
Target: Yes 
Indicator 2.4.3. No. of training events for the judicial sector on international conventions 
and practices in implementation of international legal frameworks
Baseline: 1
Target: 6
Indicator 2.4.4. No. of training courses for the staff and partners of NIHR conducted to 
ensure foundational knowledge of human rights and outreach mechanisms in line with 
international standards
Baseline: 0
Target: 8
Public Prosecutor’s Office—Special 
Investigation Unit, Judiciary Training 
Institute, and the National Institution 
for Human Rights
Other: 
450,000
Output 2.5. Key institutions have improved capacity to represent Bahraini citizens
Indicator 2.5.1. No. of hits (and downloads) on BIPD website
Baseline (2015): 300 (70)
Target: 2000 (500)
Parliament and the BIPD 
Other: 
1,270,000Frequency: beginning and end 
of cycle
Data source: UNDP Project 
report
Frequency: annually
Data source: UNDP project 
report
Frequency: annually
Indicator 2.5.2. No. of standard operating procedures updated by the Parliament Secretariat 
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Indicator 2.5.3. No. of capacity development and awareness sessions conducted with the 
Parliamentary Committees discussing international agreements
Baseline: 0
Target: 10 
Indicator 2.5.4. No. of members of parliament receiving training on law-making, 
representation, oversight, and budget
Baseline: 0
Target: 30
_______________