File Name: BIH-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Bosnia and Herzegovina
Country Code: BIH
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 August to 4 September 2020
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United 
Nations Population Fund and 
the United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
5 July 2020
Original: English
2008916X (E) 280720
Second regular session 2020
31 August to 4 September 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Bosnia and Herzegovina (2021-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
Annex
Results and resources framework for Bosnia and Herzegovina (2021-2025) 8I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Bosnia and Herzegovina is an upper middle-income country in southeast Europe with a 
population of about 3.5 million.
1 Accession to the European Union is an overarching priority. 
Over two decades after the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement, European Union accession 
is constrained by limited reform progress and frequent institutional and political deadlocks that 
hamper public sector performance and weaken citizens’ trust in government. Bosnia and 
Herzegovina continues to be a fragile state.
2 The opinion on the Bosnia and Herzegovina 
European Union membership application3indicates the country needs to significantly step up 
the process to align with European Union acquis and enforce related legislation. Aside from 
a broad consensus for joining the European Union,
4
a shared vision for the country has been 
difficult to achieve. However, with United Nations support, authorities at all levels collaborate in 
the design of the Sustainable Development Goals Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina5, which 
offers a unique opportunity for a common sustainable development agenda.
2. The human development and economic development trends show vulnerability. The 2018 
human development index was 0.769, placing the country in the high human development 
category. Of critical importance, the population is shrinking and ageing. Out-migration is an 
urgent challenge, representing a loss of young people and skilled workers upon which future 
sustainable development will depend: two million citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina are 
currently working or residing abroad6 – the highest share in the western Balkans7 – and 
projections suggest the population could decline to below 2.3 million by 2100.
8
Unemployment stands high at 15.7 per cent,9 particularly among young people (47.3 per 
cent), women, persons with disabilities, and Roma. A large proportion of the population, 
especially the elderly and the socially excluded, are trapped in hand-to-mouth existence, with 
some 18.9 per cent estimated to be living below the income poverty line.
10 The most obvious 
source of exclusion is belonging to an ethnic group different from the majority, followed by 
disability and sexual identity. The unemployed, the uneducated and older persons are highly 
excluded, while Roma represent the smallest excluded group though historically they have 
experienced the highest degree of exclusion by far.
11
3. Annual economic growth ranged from 3.1 to 3.5 per cent between 2016-2019;
12 in 2020,
this is expected to drop to -1.9 per cent owing to the COVID-19 crisis.
13 To be stronger and 
more competitive, the economy requires better infrastructure and a better policy and 
investment environment for private sector growth. The economy displays a high level of 
carbon and energy intensity: carbon dioxide emissions currently amount to 25,539 Mt CO2, 
with the energy sector, agriculture, industrial processes and waste the largest sources of CO2
emission.
4. High energy inefficiency contributes to the highest air pollution in Europe,
14 which causes 
one of the highest average mortality rates by air pollution in the world. Cities are failing to 
1 2013 population census in Bosnia and Herzegovina; its final results have not been officially published due to dispute between the two entities.
2
2019 fragile state index.
3 Analytical report, Commission Opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina application for membership of the European Union, May 2019. 
4 The European Union Stabilisation and Association Agreement and candidacy for the European Union agreed in 2016.
5 Supported by Sweden.
6 Ministry of Security of Bosnia and Herzegovina, migration profile, 2018. 
7 Trends in International Migrant Stock: The 2017 Revision, the United Nations, 2017.
8 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs population projections in the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, ibid, 7. 
9 2019 labour force survey, Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
10 Human Development Report: Beyond income, beyond averages, beyond today: Inequalities in human development in the 21st century, UNDP, 2019.
11UNDP, regional Roma survey 2017.
12World Bank, country report for Bosnia Herzegovina, 2019.
13 2020 growth is projected at -1.9 per cent, a significant revision from the pre-COVID-19 projection of 3.4 per cent for 2020. The World Bank, April 2020.
14 World Air Quality Report
2020 (Available at wwwiqaircom)cope with challenges associated with climate change, higher demand for public services and 
shrinking public budgets, which affects quality of life for nearly 50 per cent of the population. 
5. Natural and human-induced hazards represent another aspect of vulnerability, with poor 
people, women, persons with disabilities, elderly, minorities and farmers being most at risk. 
Landmines still contaminate 2.1 per cent of the territory,
15 affecting more than 500,000 
people, while there are 5,000 tons of ammunition surplus. Capacities to effectively address 
hazards and crises need to be further strengthened, as was confirmed during the COVID-19 
pandemic.
6. Responding to the country’s priorities, the new United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework for Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2021-2025, represents a single 
coherent framework for policy advice, advocacy, stronger coordination and delivery of 
results by the United Nations system in collaboration with authorities and socioeconomic 
partners. These results will support the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, towards sustainable and inclusive growth and prosperity, with renewed efforts 
to give young people reasons to stay and to create a better future for Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
7. UNDP programme and partnership capabilities support and complement the United 
Nations system into a more effective whole. In the Cooperation Framework, UNDP will 
apply the established platform of support for the efforts of national authorities and the United 
Nations to nationalize Agenda 2030 towards effective localization of the Sustainable 
Development Goals through public planning and financing systems and through area-based 
integrated United Nations interventions. Towards financing and acceleration of Agenda 
2030, UNDP will serve as a provider of innovative solutions and a convener of broad-based 
partnerships, including with the private sector and the international financial institutions 
(IFIs). UNDP brings its engagement with over 80 per cent of local governments country-wide 
and with authorities at all levels (villages, municipalities/cities, cantons, entities to the state 
level) to serve as a ‘vertical connector’ towards effective policy and programme results. The 
independent country programme evaluation finds that “UNDP has been able to facilitate 
cooperation between governmental entities in the country. For the country’s highly 
fragmented and politicized governance system, this has been a significant contribution. 
UNDP provides its partners with a compelling value proposition, and government entities 
have shown they are willing to co-finance – often at significant amounts”. Finally, UNDP 
brings a solid practice of collaboration with other United Nations organizations through joint 
projects and programmes, leveraging and integrating multi-sectoral development support in 
areas such as social inclusion, disaster risk reduction, women economic and political 
empowerment. 
8. UNDP work in the previous country programme period, 2016-2020, brought about positive 
country-level change in the areas of governance, flood recovery, economic growth and 
employment, and climate change adaptation and mitigation. By offering people-centred and 
efficient recovery assistance, and leveraging $74 million from donors and governments, 
UNDP helped set the country back on its development path, following the 2014 devastating 
floods.16 The sound UNDP contribution to the country strategic planning and management 
system should be utilized as the policy backbone for localizing Agenda 2030, further 
strengthening local-level programme convergence. UNDP made significant contributions to 
institutionalizing energy efficiency in the public sector and is well positioned in climate 
change adaptation and mitigation. The outcome evaluation recommends that “Further 
expansion in the environment and energy sector is merited, including maintaining UNDP 
strong position in climate change, energy and water management, while taking advantage of 
new opportunities in waste, biodiversity and chemicals management”. Leveraging its internal 
15 Bosnia and Herzegovina Mine Action Centre (http://www.bhmac.org/?page_id=747&lang=en).
16 After action review of UNDP response to Bosnia and Herzegovina 2014 floods
2016collective thinking, UNDP identified that digital transformation, societal transformation and 
governance transformation are accelerators for development.17
9. UNDP will contribute to three out of five outcomes of the Cooperation Framework, 2021-
2025: sustainable and inclusive growth, people-centred governance, and social cohesion. In 
the first two areas, UNDP is in a position to lead United Nations efforts aiming at economic 
transformation, while capitalizing on its strong environment and climate change portfolio, 
ensuring a sustainable growth lens. 
10. In developing the Cooperation Framework and country programme document, UNDP has 
consulted with authorities, socioeconomic partners and the international community. 
National authorities have confirmed the relevance of the set priorities and scope of work and 
have expressed their commitment to collaborate towards sustainable development results. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
11. The programme aims to achieve a set of interconnected changes that will strengthen 
institutional and community-level conditions for sustainable and inclusive growth, with 
benefits that are more widely and fairly shared. 
12. The 2030 Agenda is unlikely to be achieved by 2030 without rapid, ubiquitous change and 
innovation. By advancing its data systems and embracing continuous learning, the UNDP is 
gearing up to be a front-runner in nurturing such capabilities and offering support that can leapfrog 
development, based on its experience and wide field presence that underpin its integrator role. The 
UNDP Accelerator Lab is a powerful tool for innovative development work by the entire United 
Nations system in the country. 
13. While the country has yet to adopt a country-wide development strategy, strategic 
priorities are expressed by: (a) the draft Sustainable Development Goals Framework in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina; and (b) the Socioeconomic reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
that are a response to the 2019 European Union opinion and analytical report. The country 
programme will be guided by and effectively blend the 2030 Agenda, European Union
accession and Green Deal priorities, promoting a forward-looking, resource-efficient 
approach to development. 
14. In line with the pathways defined by the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, and national 
priorities, the country programme will work in the areas of sustainable growth, peoplecentred governance and social cohesion. These efforts contribute to the country’s progress 
towards European Union accession and towards better services for citizens delivered thanks 
to more effective, participatory governance. Inclusive, gender-sensitive and free-thinking 
communities contribute to a society where people feel safe and secure. Growth is more 
sustainable and inclusive, steered by policies that enable a shift towards a circular economy, 
skills and jobs of the future, while preserving ecosystems and biodiversity. The country is 
strengthening its resilience to climate change, natural or human-induced disasters; and 
recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic applies green and smart solutions and makes 
communities and institutions stronger. Improvements at scale in these areas will create the 
space and conditions for improved quality of life and will contribute to reducing 
outmigration.
15. To foster sustainable and inclusive growth, UNDP will leverage and integrate the 
environment and economic development sectors towards a low-carbon economy, 
environment protection and resilience. The country programme will support low-carbon 
economic development focused on productive sectors and fast-growing industries, including 
by tapping into diaspora capital. In partnership with national authorities, development 
partners, United Nations organizations and the private sector, UNDP will support economic 
17 Sense-making protocol intelligence report
UNDP in Bosnia and Herzegovina2019recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic crisis, including by introducing e-business, ecommerce and digital economy assistance packages to small businesses, and it will transition 
towards circular, low-carbon production cycles. To respond adequately to the complexities 
and interaction between climate, the environment and a low-carbon economy, UNDP will 
galvanize collaboration among the private sector, authorities, academia and technology hubs, 
piloting innovative policy labs and solutions. To support decent work and contribute to 
people’s staying in the country, UNDP partners with the Government of Norway, the 
European Union and the Government of Italy, to advance entrepreneurship and 21st century 
skills and close the skill gaps that prevent some groups – particularly youth, women and 
persons with disabilities – from entering the labour market. UNDP will facilitate private 
sector and IFI engagement in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
Framework, including by introducing sustainable business models and by helping overcome 
natural and human-induced crises. To ease pressure on the environment and ensure a resilient 
economy, UNDP will support measures towards the circular and digital economy, stimulated 
by adequate policy frameworks. UNDP will further raise the level of ambition for a gendersensitive climate policy and expand the climate change adaptation and mitigation portfolio, 
with energy, water management and disaster risk management and air quality serving as poles 
of growth. Expanding partnerships with the Global Environment Facility, the Green Climate 
Fund and other vertical funds will be critical for achieving results. UNDP will support 
implementation of nature-based solutions, essential for tackling multiple developmental 
challenges, be they climate crises, inequality or poverty. A portfolio of innovative 
experiments by the Accelerator Lab will boost these efforts. This priority derives from the 
first outcome of the Cooperation Framework for Bosnia and Herzegovina and contributes to 
Goals 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15. 
16. Within the people-centred governance area, UNDP will add value to United Nations
system efforts to support authorities in integrating the Sustainable Development Goals
Framework into country strategic planning documents and in subsequently implementing 
them. UNDP will support the country-wide harmonized strategic planning system and its 
effective connection with the budget. In partnership with the International Labour 
Organization (ILO), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the United Nations Entity for 
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the World Health 
Organization (WHO), UNDP will support national authorities to align the public finance 
system with the Goals and create conditions to catalyse private sector financing for 
sustainable development. UNDP will continue to engage with partners at all levels through a 
next generation local governance portfolio, focusing on quality and inclusive service delivery, 
public finance management, utility governance, as well as future cities and sustainable urban 
development. UNDP will collaborate with authorities at entity and state level on initiatives 
focused on new capabilities, digital transformation and e-governance, which is expected to 
have a democratizing effect, strengthening the social contract and improving public 
performance. As much as it poses challenges to public service, the COVID-19 pandemic 
provides a strategic opportunity for a shift towards e-government and e-services that enables
more effective, accessible and uninterrupted public service, alongside improved interinstitutional crisis management and response. UNDP will further support security institutions 
for better cooperation in a harmonized system, particularly border and police structures, and 
for the improved effectiveness and transparency of law enforcement institutions through 
digitalization of systems and services. Based on its strong experience, UNDP will strengthen 
government resilience to shocks and crises, including the COVID-19 pandemic. This priority 
derives from Cooperation Framework outcome 4 and contributes to Goals 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13, 
15, 16.
17. Social cohesion will also be among the main priorities and act as an enabler for the rest 
of the programme. In partnership with UNICEF, UN-Women, the European Union and 
institutions across governance levels, UNDP will continue to support active and inclusive 
communities and civil society for sustained dialogue among citizens, including those marginalized, and between citizens and governments. UNDP will empower women to claim 
their space in public life and decision-making. Social innovation and modern technologies 
will be used to bolster solidarity among people. To address the latent risk of conflict and 
bridge social divides, UNDP will support trust building and critical thinking, especially 
among young people, and will seek to mobilize community action to contribute to mitigating 
the COVID-19 crisis. In collaboration with United Nations organizations and international 
partners, UNDP will scale up existing domestic and regional peace-building initiatives, 
further contributing to sustainable peace. UNDP will explore approaches to foster 
behavioural and mind-set changes in society and mainstream them across the programme for 
maximized effect. This priority derives directly from outcome 5 of the Cooperation 
Framework and contributes to Goals 5, 10 and 16.
18. The country programme will ensure synergies across all three areas: sustainable growth,
social cohesion, and good governance. Accelerated, sustainable, low-carbon economic 
growth and shared prosperity in the country depends on the sustainable management of its 
considerable natural wealth and adequate and integrated governance levers. Social inclusion 
is instrumental for sustainable growth and good governance via active citizens and 
empowered communities. Resilient development will only be in place if governance systems 
and growth solutions are resilient to human-induced and natural risks and crisis. Each priority 
area is designed to reinforce the rest of the country programme for improved quality of life 
and new opportunities, which motivate people to stay in the country.
19. Diverse partnerships will be at the heart of country programme implementation. UNDP 
will expand its collaboration with parliaments and governments at all levels, and seek to 
enlarge the network of civil society organizations, youth-led groups, media, innovation 
centres, technological parks, research and development organizations, universities, the 
energy community and many others for more impactful programme delivery. UNDP will 
expand regional cooperation in the areas of environment, disaster risk reduction, water, 
economic development, tourism, innovation, and vibrant civil society. The private sector will 
be among key partners, with a strong role towards sustainable and inclusive growth. UNDP 
will partner with the IFIs to catalyse development financing for the Goals. Main United 
Nations system partners include: the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), ILO, the International 
Office of Migration (IOM), UNICEF, UN-Women, UNESCO, UNFPA, the United Nations 
Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) and WHO. Strategic partners include the 
European Union, the Governments of Sweden, Switzerland, Norway, the United Kingdom, 
as well as the the European Union Force for Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR), German 
international aid agency (GIZ), the Italian Development Cooperation, the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe 
(OSCE), the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the World 
Bank. Communication will be strategically utilised to amplify development partnerships and 
policy efforts.
III. Programme and risk management 
20. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. 
21. The country programme will be nationally executed, as defined in the Cooperation 
Framework, 2021-2025. A steering committee, set in the framework of the Cooperation 
Framework and comprising a designated coordinating representative of authorities and cochaired by the Resident Coordinator, will ensure that UNDP support is delivered in line with 
the defined priorities. 22. Modalities for implementation will be agreed on with authorities and be selected 
depending on need and project-related circumstances. Projects supported by vertical funds, 
as well as those previously approved, will use a mix of national and direct implementation 
modalities, for which the country office is fully capacitated. Involvement of the country office 
in support of both modalities is a risk mitigation measure, considering the complexity and 
specificity of the country governance structure. When using the national implementation 
modality, or engaging responsible parties in the implementation, UNDP will act in line with 
the policy for the harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) to assess potential 
implementing partners’ ability to manage resources, capacitate them on a wide range of 
project, financial and procurement related areas, and assure their quality performance. 
23. Authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and UNDP agreed that the provision of support 
services by UNDP (for national implementation), as required, would not involve a separate 
letter of agreement. 
24. The main external risks for programme delivery are related to political deadlocks, which 
will most likely continue to hamper the pace of policy reforms and overall pace of 
development. The country may face major talent and labour gaps created by out-migration 
and low birth rates. Unfavourable economic and trade trends, including global recessionary 
fears, may negatively affect the current account and balance of trade. There are risks of 
natural hazards, disease outbreaks – including new waves of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
challenging the preparedness of authorities and society.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
25. UNDP has designed the country programme results framework, 2021-2025, defining 
results, indicators, baselines, targets and other relevant elements, in line with the UNDP 
Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, and the Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025. 
26. The monitoring framework will help assess UNDP contributions to sustainable 
development in the country. A multi-year plan will be developed to guide UNDP work, based 
on research and data analytics to test certain hypotheses of the country programme’s theory 
of change or strategic programmatic opportunities.
27. The programme will reinforce innovative tools to manage data collection and analysis at 
the country programme document outcome and output levels. The existing monitoring tools 
will be modernized to enable measurable tracking of performance through collection of 
project-level data and lessons to facilitate continuous organizational learning.
28. Evaluations will be conducted in accordance with the evaluation plan, including project, 
programme and outcome evaluations, joint United Nations programme evaluations, or other 
United Nations-level evaluations. The evaluation plan, 2021-2025, envisages ten mandatory 
project evaluations, agreed and costed with donors and included in the approved project 
documents. An internal country programme mid-term review will be undertaken. UNDP will 
join other United Nations organizations in conducting the Cooperation Framework, 2021-
2025, final evaluation. 
29. To ensure effective implementation of the monitoring and evaluation plans, at least 5 per 
cent of the country programme budget will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation
activities.
30. Knowledge management measures will be implemented to maintain analysis of 
evaluation recommendations and lessons from monitoring actions within the programme or 
project and beyond.
31. Quality assessments of programming will be conducted against UNDP quality standards 
for all projects throughout their entire life cycle.Annex. Results and resources framework for Bosnia and Herzegovina (2021-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 
Sustainable Development Goals Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Smart growth pathway
Joint socioeconomic reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2019-2022: I. Sustainable and accelerated economic growth, increased competitiveness of the economy and improved business 
environment.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: Outcome 1. By 2025, people benefit from resilient, inclusive and sustainable growth ensured 
by the convergence of economic development, and management of environment and cultural resources.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1: Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions; Outcome 2: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including 
indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME
(United States 
dollars)
Indicator 1.a. Number of policy, financial 
or other stimulus measures endorsed to 
promote sustainable, green economy and 
low-carbon growth and living.
Baseline (2019): 17.
Target (2025): 25.
Indicator 1.e. Number of people who 
benefit from new jobs and improved 
livelihoods as a result of United Nations
support.
Baseline (2019): 
- 28,057 people (8,690 women).
- Number of people whose jobs are 
safeguarded from COVID-19 crisis: N/A
Target (2025):
- 31,000 people (9,200 women).
- Number of people whose jobs are 
safeguarded from COVID-19 crisis: 400 
(150 women).
Indicator 1.f. Change in agriculture and 
rural development sector performance:
a. Number of agriculture and rural 
development frameworks/strategies 
adopted
b. Number of value chains 
strengthened
c. Percentage increase in revenue of 
targeted agri-food operators
Official reports by authorities 
(annually). United Nations
and UNDP programme 
reports and (annually).
Biodiversity Assessment 
Tool, UNEP (annually). 
Progress reports of the 
European Union (annually). 
Reports on the 
implementation of the 
Sustainable Development 
Goals Framework in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina (annually).
Nationally determined 
contributions and the national 
energy and climate plan and 
reports on their 
implementation (annual). 
WHO Global Health 
Observatory data – Exposure 
to ambient air pollution.
Local governments’ 
strategies and formal reports.
United Nations programme
reports.
Output 1.1. Authorities and communities have in place capacities and 
tools to ensure sustainable management and protection of natural 
resources. 
Indicator 1.1a. Extent to which biodiversity is mainstreamed into 
strategies and economic sectors (e.g., agriculture, tourism). (Rating: 
4. Full inclusion; 3. Partial; 2. Inadequate; 1. No inclusion).
Baseline (2019): 2.
Target (2025): 3.
Source, frequency: National reports (annually); official documentation 
from the European Union related to progress in the relevant sectors 
(annually); UNDP programme monitoring (bi-annually).
Indicator 1.1b. Number of persistent organic pollutants-contaminated 
sites with environmental management plans drafted and approved. 
Baseline (2019): 0.
Target (2025): 3.
Source, frequency: National reports (annually); UNDP programme 
monitoring (annually).
Output 1.2. Governments at all levels, particularly sub-national 
governments, implement climate change adaptation and 
mitigation measures for resilient and sustainable development.
Indicator 1.2a. Extent of change in energy consumption in public 
sector.
Baseline (2019): 205 kWh/m2
Target (2025): 180 kWh/m218
Source, frequency: Energy management information system 
(quarterly); UNDP programme monitoring (annually).
Relevant ministries, local 
governments, 
communities, civil 
society organizations,
diaspora, UNICEF, ILO, 
UN Women, UNEP, 
FAO, the European 
Union, IFIs, the 
Governments of Sweden, 
Norway, GIZ, Italian 
Development 
Cooperation, private 
sector, USAID, national 
nature parks, innovation 
hubs, universities.
Regular
1,055,000
Other
92,284,929
18 The baseline was calculated based on the typology of public buildings in Bosnia and HerzegovinaBaseline (2019): 
a. Frameworks/strategies: 4
b. Value chains: 8
c. Percentage increase in revenue: 0%
Target (2025): 
a. Frameworks/strategies: 9 
b. Value chains: 12
c. Percentage increase in revenue: 20%
Indicator 1.g (SDG indicator 15.1.2):
Proportion of important sites for terrestrial 
and freshwater biodiversity that are covered 
by protected areas, by ecosystem type (a. 
Freshwater; b. Land).
Baseline (2019): a: 6%; b: 0.
Target (2025): a: 10%; b: 42%.
Indicator 1.h. Total annual emissions of 
carbon dioxide (in millions of metric tons)
Baseline (2019): 25,539 Mt CO2.
Target (2025): 23,000 Mt CO2. 
Indicator 1.i(SDG indicator 11.6.2): Air 
pollution/annual mean levels of fine particulate 
matter (PM2.5 mean annual exposure -
micrograms per cubic meter).
Baseline (2019): 29.6 ug/m3.
Target (2025): 21 ug/m3
.
Indicator 1.j (SDG indicator 
11.b.1/12.8.1): Percentage of local
governments that adopt and implement 
local disaster risk reduction strategies in 
line with the Sendai Framework for 
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 (a. 
%; b. extent to which action plans include 
gender equity considerations and sex 
disaggregated data; Rating: 4. Full 
inclusion; 3. Partial; 2. Inadequate; 1. No 
inclusion).
Baseline (2019): a. 40%; b. 2
Target (2025): a. 50%; b. 3 
Reports from the Agency for 
Statistics of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina (annual).
Agency for Statistics of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
(quarterly).
Indicator 1.2b. Number of women benefiting from climate change 
adaptation or mitigation activities.
Baseline (2019): 41,202 women. 
Target: (2025): 60,000 women.
Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports (quarterly).
Indicator 1.2c: Extent to which greenhouse gas (GHG) data 
collection is systematised, institutionalized and informs policymaking 
(Rating: 4. Fully; 3. Partially; 2. Inadequately; 1. Not in place).
Baseline (2019): 1. 
Target: (2025): 3
Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports (quarterly).
Output 1.3. Smart growth principles accelerate sustainable, resilient and 
inclusive economic development, contribute to decent work, and 
leverage development financing by the private sector.
Indicator 1.3a. Number of companies that strengthen their competitiveness 
or apply sustainable growth and resilience principles in their business 
operation as a result of UNDP support.
Baseline (2019): 638 companies.
Target (2025): 1,140 companies.
Source, frequency: UNDP programme monitoring (quarterly).
Indicator 1.3b: Percentage annual increase of the volume of investments 
leveraged from the private sector for development as a result of UNDP 
work. 
Baseline (2019): 1.21%.
Target (2025): 3%.
Source, frequency: Business Intelligence System TRON, UNDP 
programme monitoring (annually).
Indicator 1.3c: Number of innovative and scalable solutions developed 
and applied for circular and green economy. 
Baseline (2019): 1
Target (2025): 10
Source, frequency: UNDP programme monitoring (quarterly).
Indicator 1.3d: Number of companies supported to mitigate the impact 
and recover from the COVID-19 crisis and number of jobs safeguarded. 
Baseline (2019): 0/0.
Target (2025): 100 companies and 300 jobs.
Source, frequency: UNDP programme monitoring (quarterly).
Output 1.4 Young people, especially women, Roma and persons with 
disabilities, gain 21st century skills enabling them to get decent jobs.Indicator 1.4a: Number of young people (especially women and 
young people) who gain 21st century skills.
Baseline (2019): 589 (378 women; 211 men). 
Target (2025): 952 (585 women: 367 men).
Source, frequency: UNDP programme monitoring (quarterly).
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 
Sustainable Development Goals Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Good governance and public sector management pathway.
Joint socioeconomic reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2019-2022: I. Sustainable and accelerated economic growth, increased competitiveness of the economy and improved business environment
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: Outcome 4. By 2025, people contribute to, and benefit from more accountable and transparent governance 
systems that deliver quality public services and ensure rule of law.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development; Outcome 3: Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises.
Indicator 4.1: Percentage of local 
governments and cantons with SDG-centred 
and gender-sensitive development strategies 
and implementation plans as part of a 
coherent development planning and 
management system.
Baseline (2019): local governments –
0%; cantons: 0%.
Target (2025): local governments – 60%; 
cantons: 80%.
Indicator 4.c (SDG indicator 6.1.1, 6.2.1): 
Percentage of population living in 
households with access to basic services.
Baseline (2019): water supply: 75%; 
sanitation: 41%.
Target (2025): water supply: 85%; 
sanitation: 50%.
Indicator 4.d (SDG indicator 16.6.2): % 
Population satisfied with the last experience 
of use of public services.
Baseline (2019): 38%.19
Target (2025): 45%.
Indicator 4.i: Availability of socioeconomic assessments of COVID-19 
impacts of vulnerable groups and policy 
and financing options for stimulus 
support.
Baseline (2019): No.
Target (2025): Yes.
Reports from the 
development planning and 
management structures at 
state and entity levels 
(annually).
Monitoring reports for the 
implementation of the 
Sustainable Development 
Goals Framework in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina (annually). 
Water sector reports from the 
World Bank (annually). 
United Nations programme
reports.
Transparency International 
(annually). World Bank 
reports/global governance 
index (annually). United 
Nations programme reports 
and citizen satisfaction 
surveys (biennial). SDGs 
dashboard (biennial).
Output 2.1 Collaboration between authorities and societal actors is 
supported for the design of evidence-based and gender-sensitive policy 
and regulatory frameworks that enable reforms and system change. 
Indicator 2.1a: Number of new/revised policy, strategic and regulatory 
frameworks designed in a collaborative, evidence-based and gendersensitive manner.
Baseline (2019): 5.
Target (2025): 25.
Source, frequency: Adopted policy/strategic/regulatory frameworks 
(annually).
Indicator 2.1b: Number of innovative and scalable solutions and 
approaches that evidently and sustainably improve public consultation and 
citizen engagement in policy design and delivery, including for the 
socially excluded.
Baseline (2019): 1.
Target (2025): 5.
Source, frequency: Public consultation tools, solutions utilised (annually).
Output 2.2 Governments across all levels have enhanced capacities for 
transparent and effective policy and financial management, including 
digital capacity, which translate into accelerated development results, 
accountability and people-centred public services. 
Indicator 2.2a: Percentage of local governments which meet the good 
local governance benchmarks.
Baseline (2019): 0.
Target (2025): 30%.
Source, frequency: Good local governance seal evaluation reports by local 
governments, associations of municipalities and cities, UNDP programme 
reports (annually). 
Parliaments; relevant 
ministries, local 
governments, UNICEF,
UN-Women, UNFPA, 
the World Bank, the 
Governments of 
Switzerland, Sweden and 
the United Kingdom, the 
European Union, GIZ, 
UN-Habitat, NATO, 
EUFOR, OSCE, 
universities, IFIs, civil 
society organizations, 
media.
Regular
615,000
Other
54,039,976
19 Transparency International
Perceptions of public administration Bosnia and Herzegovina2017Indicator 2.2b: Number of institutions/local/cantonal governments and/or 
utilities that, with UNDP support, leverage technology and innovation for: 
(i) policy design; and/or (ii) information systems; and/or (iii) e-services; 
and/or (iv) future city and urban development.
Baseline (2019): 1 institution; 1 city; 5 municipalities; 1 canton, 0 utilities.
Target (2025): 5 institutions; 3 cities; 20 municipalities; 3 cantons;
20 utilities.
Source, frequency: Authorities’ annual reports, UNDP programme reports 
(annually). 
Indicator 2.2c: Percentage of total savings/additional revenues generated 
annually through improved public finance management by local governments 
and cantons. 
Baseline (2019): United States dollars 0%. 
Target (2025): United States dollars 3%.
Source, frequency: Authorities’ annual financial reports, UNDP 
programme reports (annually). 
Indicator 2.2d: Number of medical facilities with improved health 
treatment conditions.
Baseline (2019): 0.
Target (2025): 6.
Source, frequency: Ministry of Health reports, UNDP programme reports 
(bi-annually).
Indicator 2.2e: Number of individuals benefitting from improved 
COVID-19 prevention and case management.
Baseline (2019): 0.
Target (2025): 500.
Source, frequency: Ministry of Health reports, UNDP programme reports 
(bi-annually).
Indicator 2.2f: Number of people with improved access to quality public 
services 
Baseline (2019): 478,791 (175,735 women).
Target (2025): 700,000 (300,000 women).
Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports (bi-annually). 
Output 2.3 The judiciary and law enforcement agencies have 
enhanced capacities to ensure rule of law, safety and security.
Indicator 2.3a. Percentage decrease in remnants of war ammunition 
surplus.
Baseline (2019): 5,000 tonnes of surplus ammunition.
Target (2025): 0 tonnes of surplus ammunition.
Source, frequency: EUFOR progress report; Bosnia and Herzegovina reports to the United Nations. Official reports (annually).
Indicator 2.3b. Level of capabilities of the public security system for 
border management and combatting illicit arms’ trafficking (Rating: 4. 
Fully; 3. Partially; 2. Inadequately; 1. Not in place).
Baseline (2019): 2.
Target (2025): 3.
Source, frequency: Official reports from authorities (annually); UNDP 
programme reports; Sector-specific reports from the European Union
(annually). 
Indicator 2.3c. Number of small arms and light weapons disposal events 
led jointly with police agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Baseline (2019): 2 events. 
Target (2025): 10 events.
Source, frequency: Official reports from authorities (annually); UNDP 
programme reports; Sector-specific reports from the European Union
(annually). 
20 The targets for 2025 are set relatively close to the baseline
still with an expected positive changeIn the past several yearsthe findings showed negative results
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 
Sustainable Development Goals Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Society of equal opportunities pathway.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: Outcome 5. By 2025, there is stronger mutual understanding, respect and trust among 
individuals and communities.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development; Outcome 3: Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises.
Indicator 5.a: Proportion of people who 
express a general level of trust in society.
Baseline (2019): 23% (male: 27%; 
female: 19%/urban population: 26%, 
rural population: Urban: 19%.
Target (2025): 24% (male: 28%; female: 
20%/urban population: 27%, rural 
population: Urban: 20%.20
Indicator 5.c (SDG indicator 16.b.1 and 
16.7.2): Self-assessed levels of trust and 
engagement amongst young people, 
where 1 is negative and 5 is positive: (a) 
young people’s (15-30) attitudes on interethnic trust, cooperation, education and 
the media; and (b) young people’s 
attitudes on their civic engagement and 
partnership with government 
representatives.
Baseline (2019): (1) 3.6/5; (2) 2.3/5.
Target (2025): (1) 4/5; (2) 4/5.
United Nations perception 
survey in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina (biennial). 
Dialogue for the future 
baseline perception survey,
2018. United Nations
perception survey (biennial).
Output 3.1 Citizens empowered with public and online spaces 
and opportunities to engage in the creation of diverse, 
inclusive and gender responsive communities.
Indicator 3.1a: Number of people who pro-actively participate in 
civic forums for inclusive decision-making, peaceful and 
democratic development.
Baseline (2019): 30,427 (11,390 women; 19,037 men) 
Target (2025): 36,924 (13,700 women, 23,224 men)
Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports (bi-annually). 
Indicator 3.1b: Number of women who actively engage through 
collective mechanisms in social, economic and political life.
Baseline (2019): 11,390.
Target (2025): 14,897.
Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports (quarterly). 
Indicator 3.1c: Number of structural interventions and 
innovative solutions introduced to accommodate participation of 
women in decision-making. 
Baseline (2019): 0.
Presidency of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina; local 
governments, UN-Women, the 
Governments of Switzerland, 
Sweden, community hubs; civil 
society organizations, media.
Regular
80,000
Other
6,875,000Indicator 5.d: Number of young people 
participating in community-level 
initiatives that promote dialogue, social 
cohesion and appreciation of diversity.
Baseline (2019): 25,000 (51% female).
Target (2025): 27,500 (51% female).
Target (2025): 5.
Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports, assessments, 
studies (annually). 
Indicator 3.1d: Number of young people who improve critical 
thinking and leadership skills and apply these skills in their 
communities to bridge social divides.
Baseline (2019): 1,162 (527 women; 635 men)
Target (2025): 2,012 (1,086 women; 926 men)
Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports, photos, media 
coverage (quarterly).
Output 3.2 Civil society organisations, including youth-led 
civil society, have enhanced capacities to proactively engage in 
sustainable development partnerships 
Indicator 3.2a: Number of civil society organisations benefiting 
from enhanced organisational and technical capacity enabling 
them to steer democratic processes and implement developmentoriented initiatives. 
Baseline (2019): 484.
Target (2025): 809.
Source, frequency: Reports from the European Union (annual) 
and UNDP programme reports (annually). 