File Name: BLR-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Belarus
Country Code: BLR
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 August – 4 September 2020
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
17 July 2020
Original: English
2009701X (E) 290720
Second regular session 2020
31 August – 4 September 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Belarus (2021-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Belarus (2021-2025) 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. According to World Bank data (2019), the Republic of Belarus is an upper-middle-income 
country. The population of Belarus amounts to 9,413,446 people (2019). Ranked 50th out of 
189 countries on the Human Development Index, 2019, it is in the ‘very high human 
development’ category. Belarus is committed to the principles of ‘leaving no one behind’ and 
eliminating the inequalities and discrimination faced by vulnerable groups. The country ranks
27th in the Gender Inequality Index, 2018. The proportion of women in the National 
Assembly of the Republic of Belarus increased from 29.2 per cent in 2014 to 33.1 per cent
in 2018. Having scored 77 out of a possible 100 points in the Global Sustainable 
Development Goals Index, 2019, Belarus was ranked 23rd and rated above average for the 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia region.
2. Belarus is positioned to respond to coronavirus disease (COVID-19) through its public 
health capacities with laboratories, testing, and isolation of cases. Nevertheless, the economic 
and social effects of global crises linked to the pandemic will add to vulnerabilities of the 
national economy and, if systemic measures are not taken to support at-risk sectors and 
population groups, could reduce longer-term growth perspectives.
3. Belarus pursues sound macroeconomic policies. Along with maintaining an exportoriented economic strategy, the Government has set export diversification as a priority. In
2018, the share of exports of high-tech goods increased to 2.7 per cent, while the share of 
exports of information and communication services exceeded 20 per cent. Government 
efforts also include improving the business climate by increasing investment protection 
guarantees, simplifying administrative procedures, and improving the legal framework. 
However, economic risks to sustainable development remain, due to low levels of labour 
productivity, business investment, and research and development expenditure as a percentage 
of gross domestic product. In addition, demographic risks associated with low birth rates, 
high differences in the life expectancy of men and women, the outflow of youth from the 
country, and the gender pay gap persist in Belarus. 
4. The national vision for sustainable development is premised on the National Strategy for 
Sustainable Development for the period until 2035, which should be adopted in 2020. The 
document prioritizes sustainable development of the family institution and qualitative growth 
of human capital, employment, and decent incomes for the population, digital transformation 
of the economy, and widespread innovations, creation of a developed business environment 
and sustainable infrastructure, ensuring environmental safety, and shifting towards 
sustainable production and consumption models (circular economy). 
5. Belarus plays an active role in the development of integration processes. Belarus is an 
active member of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the Collective Security 
Treaty Organization, the Union State of Russia and Belarus, Eurasian Economic Union.
Starting in January 2020, a representative of Belarus assumed the office of the General 
Secretary of the Collective Security Treaty Organization. In 2020, Belarus took over the 
presidency in the bodies of the Eurasian Economic Union, and the Council of the Eurasian 
Economic Commission. In addition, in 2021 the country will chair the Supreme State Council 
of the Union State and will co-chair the CIS. UNDP sees the leading role of Belarus as an 
opportunity to accelerate joint progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development 
Goals in the region.
6. In 2019, UNDP returned to its role and mandate of a professional development agency 
and thought-leader on issues of sustainable human development. The understanding of 
UNDP as a strategic, equal partner and integrator in promoting sustainable development 
comes to the fore of cooperation. This has been a big step, based on the value offer, expertise, 
knowledge, professionalism, and values of the UNDP. UNDP also plays a responsive role as 
a support platform of the United Nations development system, providing an integrator function in support of country efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development.
7. A unique architecture for managing the process of nationalizing and achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals has been established in Belarus, allowing it to be considered
as a platform for sharing best practices in achieving the Goals. In 2017, a Mainstreaming, 
Acceleration and Policy Support mission identified four accelerator platforms for Goals
achievement in Belarus: green transition for inclusive and sustainable growth; future 
generation orientation; digital transformation and social innovation; and a gender equitable 
society. These accelerators serve as guidelines for the country programme, 2021-2025.
8. Through its country programme, 2016-2020, UNDP contributed to the implementation of 
national priorities, in particular to reducing inequalities, introducing international best 
practices and expertise, and developing intersectoral coordination and cooperation. An 
independent evaluation of the country programme during 2016-2018 highlighted the UNDP 
contribution to promotion of Belarus as a reliable, competent partner in the international 
arena, including in terms of its accession to the World Trade Organization. UNDP promoted
country priorities in sustainable natural resource management, biodiversity and landscape 
conservation, and helped prevent soil degradation and preserve endangered species of wild 
animals and plants. UNDP supported local development, leading to the growth of
entrepreneurship and the number of small and medium-sized enterprises in Belarus. 
9. The lessons learned emphasized that UNDP work may be further strengthened and 
expanded in supporting sustainable socio-economic development at the regional and local
levels, developing private sector and public-private partnerships, and using new financing 
mechanisms and tools. Other strategic areas include advancing cooperation in technology,
innovation, research and development, and national capacity-building.
10. UNDP has taken an active part in developing the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025. Under the framework, UNDP will 
contribute directly to four outcomes closely corresponding to the UNDP Strategic Plan, areas 
of knowledge and comparative advantages. The outcomes are: economic development driven 
by inclusive green growth and stimulating entrepreneurship; implementing essential climate 
change mitigation and adaptation measures; laying the foundations of a digital ecosystem;
and promoting equal economic and social opportunities for men and women. 
11. UNDP adds value through its demonstrated experience in project implementation, 
building national capacities, results-based management, and breadth of thematic expertise. 
UNDP has extensive experience in working with international partners to attract development 
financing. UNDP software and administrative tools, such as clearly established standard 
operating procedures, policy and knowledge networks, and response mechanisms, enable it 
to respond flexibly and quickly to government requests while ensuring transparency, 
efficiency and effectiveness. UNDP is represented in all regions of Belarus through a network 
of regional coordinators. UNDP brings international expertise and best international practices 
to the country in such areas as nationalization of the Sustainable Development Goals, 
mediation, local tourism development, regional economic development, illicit trafficking of 
weapons, wetlands restoration, and biodiversity conservation. UNDP also brings innovative 
solutions and experimental approaches, using the global network of UNDP Accelerator Labs.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
12. This country programme is based on the results of UNDP and United Nations national 
strategic consultations with key stakeholders and UNDP partners from the Government, the 
National Assembly, civil society organizations, academia and the private sector. The main 
goal of the programme is to support the effective development of Belarus as a country with 
a strong economy, developed human capital, and a high quality of life, through the 
widespread adoption of digital and green technology, support to the development of private initiative, and promotion of regional and local development, including in areas affected by 
the Chernobyl catastrophe. 
13. By synchronizing the processes of the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework and country programme development with national planning cycle, 
UNDP ensures both full alignment of the programme with the national priorities and 
Sustainable Development Goals and the financial sustainability of programme 
implementation, in cooperation with national public and private stakeholders and 
international partners.
14. Through this country programme UNDP will deliver its policy and programme support 
to the Government based on emerging needs, including response to the COVID-19 pandemic 
and its aftermath. Support will be four-pronged, comprising preparation, response, recovery, 
and lessons learned. Its global procurement networks, dedicated expertise and economies of 
scale allow UNDP to build resilient health systems and provide procurement services of 
health products and essential medicines. To address the socio-economic impact of COVID19 in both the short and longer term, UNDP will deliver policy and programme interventions 
focused on employment and livelihoods of vulnerable groups, access to social services and 
social protection, disaster risk reduction, and financing strategies. To ensure inclusive and 
integrated responses, UNDP will support national and subnational capacities for planning, 
coordination and implementation, partnerships and communications. Volunteers can boost 
community engagement and digital solutions deployed in many spheres, building on the 
excellent information technology and technological potential in Belarus.
15. This programme provides for the possibility of co-financing for development by using 
international technical assistance, private sector resources and cofinancing of projects. While 
keeping the focus on stronger partnerships with traditional donors (including the Global 
Environment Facility, the European Union, Germany, Japan, Poland, the Russian Federation, 
South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America),
further development of emerging partnerships with China, South-South cooperation and the 
private sector is considered a promising direction.
16. In addition to co-financing of international technical assistance projects, the document 
provides for approbating the opportunity of UNDP to provide development support services 
to national partners. UNDP can provide services in such areas as development of 
entrepreneurship, promotion of innovation and investment, climate action, regional 
development, and strengthening the capacity of national partners.
17. Implementation of the country programme will follow the principle of ‘leaving no one 
behind’ by targeting vulnerable groups: low-income persons, the unemployed and those laid 
off or prospectively fired due to structural reforms, people of retirement age, those living in 
rural areas – especially women and population living on territories affected by the Chernobyl 
catastrophe – people with disabilities, those living with HIV, persons released from detention, 
and people whose health or livelihoods may be affected by pandemics. 
18. In collaboration with other United Nations organizations, UNDP will continue to provide 
integrated support to Belarus in nationalizing and localizing the Sustainable Development 
Goals. UNDP will provide expert and technical support in developing regional development 
strategies, testing new mechanisms for financing the Goals, improving the national indicator
platform for the Sustainable Development Goals, and supporting the functioning of the 
national architecture for achieving them.
19. UNDP will continue to provide expert support to the Government of Belarus in strategic 
areas such as socio-economic impact assessment, building resilience to pandemic and shocks,
climate, social protection for vulnerable groups, and inclusive national planning.Priority area 1. Economic development based on the principles of green and inclusive 
growth (related Sustainable Development Goals targets: 1.2; 2.3; 2a; 8.3; 8.5; 8.9; 9.3; 
9.4; 12.1; and 12.6).
20. This area is aligned with national priorities in environmental security, transition to 
rational models of production and consumption, productive employment and decent incomes. 
Activities will contribute to the achievement of outcome 1 of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025.
21. UNDP will facilitate the transition to a low-carbon green economy and improvement of 
corporate environmental responsibility, which will entail adopting comprehensive 
programmes and mechanisms to increase the efficiency of resource use, including through 
innovative eco-technology.
22. UNDP will support the digital transformation of the economy and widespread 
innovations, which will have a significant impact on the integrated development of the 
country and the rational distribution of productive forces.
23. Through existing mechanisms, UNDP will provide expert and other support for the rapid 
development of the services sector until 2025, with an emphasis on high-value-added services 
(scientific, professional and other).
24. Based on its gained experience in implementing projects on green economy and local 
development, UNDP will support national efforts to develop a green, circular economy , 
which, in its turn, will facilitate economic growth through more efficient use of available 
resources, waste processing, and production of goods from secondary resources.
25. In close cooperation with the Ministry of Economy, state institutions, local authorities 
and the private sector, UNDP will support entrepreneurship and private sector development, 
innovation and public-private partnerships, including social sectors, and effective regional 
and local development, taking into account location-specific social and economic conditions 
and the needs of the population, including vulnerable groups.
26. Special attention will be paid to the development of lagging regions by fostering 
sustainable and innovative local development capacities and improving the quality of life and 
self-realization of citizens in both urban and rural areas. UNDP will continue to support 
activities aimed at overcoming the consequences of the Chernobyl catastrophe.
27. UNDP stands ready to provide expert support and best international practices to the 
Government and interested national parties in developing social and environmental standards 
to improve the quality of public property management in accordance with the national 
interests. This will allow the economy to adapt quickly to technological changes in the 
context of globalization, accelerate the process of innovative development, and contribute to 
the development of human capital and private initiative. UNDP will provide support in the 
field of trade development in the context of the accession of Belarus to the World Trade 
Organization.
Priority area 2. Implementation of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures
(related Goals targets: 1.2; 2.4; 2.5; 2a; 7.2; 7.3; 9.3; 9.4; 12.5; 13.1; 13.2; 13.3; 15.1; and 
15.3).
28. This area is aligned with the national priority in environmental security and transition to 
rational models of production and consumption and contributes to the achievement of 
outcome 2 of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-
2025.
29. In close partnership with the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental 
Protection, UNDP will support country efforts to tackle climate change, focusing on 
mitigation measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. On the adaptation side, UNDP will 
work with climate dependent sectors, including agriculture, forestry, and water management,to enhance their resilience and preparedness to the climate change-related challenges. 
Through its Climate Promise Initiative, UNDP will assist Belarus in preparing the second
nationally determined contributions, making the national commitment to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions given the increase in its absorption even more ambitious, so as to reach the 
previously announced overall target of 35 per cent emissions reduction by 2030. 
30. Building on the results of the projects implemented, UNDP will promote the energy 
efficiency of the Belarusian economy, in particular in the ‘Buildings’ and ‘Industry’ sectors. 
In cooperation with the Energy Efficiency Department of the State Committee for 
Standardization of the Republic of Belarus, UNDP will explore opportunities to support the 
establishment of a sustainable and effective energy services market in Belarus. UNDP will 
support national efforts to expand the use of renewable energy sources, including 
technologies for the use of renewable energy to cover the energy demand. The use of electric 
vehicles will be promoted, along with a charging network for sustainable transport. UNDP 
will enhance the national systems for managing chemicals and waste, including hazardous 
waste containing persistent organic pollutants, to minimize the impact on the environment 
and human health.
31. Actions to support the conservation and sustainable use of biological and landscape 
diversity, land degradation prevention will be expanded. They will include economic 
instruments and measures to ensure the restoration and sustainable use of ground and surface 
waters, land resources, fresh-water eco-systems and ecotourism development. UNDP will 
assist in scaling up activities aimed at reducing the risk of natural and man-made disasters
and improving emergency preparedness, including transboundary wildfire risks, based on the 
requirements of the relevant environmental conventions.
32. UNDP will support Belarus in fulfilling its obligations under the key environmental 
international agreements, among which are the Paris Agreement, the Stockholm Convention 
on Persistent Organic Pollutants, the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, 
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, and the Ramsar Convention on 
Wetlands of International Importance.
33. UNDP will help raise environmental and climate awareness by increasing environmental 
education, involving the public in environmental monitoring and improving environmental 
management at the local level.
Priority area 3. Development of an effective digital ecosystem (related Goals targets: 
4.3; 4.4; 9.4; 11.3; 11.7; 16.7; and 17.8).
34. The area is aligned with the national priorities in digital transformation of the economy
and large-scale spread of innovations, developed business environment and sustainable 
infrastructure. The programme activities will contribute to the achievement of outcome 4 of 
the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025.
35. In order to support Government efforts towards digital transformation, UNDP will 
support the formation of a full-fledged digital ecosystem, including implementation of 
activities consolidating efforts of the State, society and business within the framework of the
organizational and technological platform ‘Smart industry of Belarus’, innovation and 
industrial clusters.
36. Based on existing practices, UNDP will promote the development of innovative 
entrepreneurship by establishing innovation infrastructure in regions and expanding the range 
of services, ensuring full implementation of the innovation cycle; and increase the efficiency 
of commercializing the results of intellectual activity, including invention and engineering, 
and promoting youth engagement. 
37. UNDP will promote the development of tools to provide support (financial, consulting) 
to innovative and high-tech start-ups in the early stages of development, leading to the 
development of new tools (venture financing). UNDP will support research in the field of cluster development and conceptual and methodological support of a cluster policy, as well 
as regional innovation ecosystems.
38. UNDP will support the development of innovative entrepreneurship by increasing 
research efficiency and commercialization, developing required skills in the field of access 
to information, and personal data and privacy protection, as well as a wide scope of digital 
knowledge and skills. In developing measures to increase digital literacy, special attention 
will be paid to creating accessible distance learning systems for vulnerable groups, including
older people, people with disabilities, people in prison, released workers, women on 
maternity leave, and rural residents. 
39. Together with national partners, UNDP will support the development of an electronic 
public service system and infrastructure to provide electronic services to individuals and 
companies through the digitalization of public administration in key sectors such as the 
judicial system and rulemaking, justice, health care, environmental protection, citizenship,
migration, road safety, the tax system, transport corridors, customs and border management.
40. Building on the experience and best practices of the project on green urban development, 
UNDP will support the development of a national urban development policy and concepts of 
‘smart cities’ and ‘smart districts’ based on the principles of green urban planning and the 
interests of all groups of the population. 
41. Based on needs and regional characteristics, UNDP will assist in developing an 
investment platform supporting existing enterprises and development of new bankable 
projects in selected Chernobyl-affected areas. Aimed at narrowing the development gap 
between the capital and the regions, the platform will accelerate local innovation, and points 
of resilience and growth. UNDP will also launch an ‘accelerator lab’ to serve as a space for 
innovation, experimentation, and piloting solutions to development challenges and 
opportunities.
Priority area 4. Fuller participation of vulnerable groups in socio-economic life (related 
Goals targets: 1.3; 3.5; 5.5; 5b; 5c; 8.5; 10.3; 16.7; and 17.18). 
42. This area is aligned with the national priorities in productive employment and decent 
incomes, sustainable development of the family institution and quality growth of human 
capital. The envisaged activities will contribute to the achievement of outcome 5 of the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025.
43. UNDP will support the development and implementation of measures to reduce
inequality and discrimination against men and women and strengthen the role of women in 
non-traditional sectors, expand their economic opportunities and promote their participation 
in public- and private-sector decision-making. 
44. UNDP will assist national partners in improving the collection, monitoring, analysis and 
use of sex- and age-disaggregated data, including on vulnerable groups, in line with the 
human rights-based approach to data and the principles of gender equality. The approach 
implies data analysis focusing on the most disadvantaged and marginalized groups and on 
existing inequalities among the population.
45. To strengthen women’s role in and contribution to the economy, with equal opportunities 
and wages, UNDP will help develop measures and solutions to incorporate a gender 
perspective into national entrepreneurship programmes, with a focus on supporting women’s 
entrepreneurship.
46. To ensure the inclusiveness of education and its labour-market orientation, UNDP will 
facilitate the development and implementation of career guidance and counselling 
programmes for vulnerable groups, with a focus on the needs of children, adolescents and 
youth with disabilities. 47. Another area UNDP intends to develop together with national partners is volunteering. 
One billion volunteers contribute to their communities globally – yet volunteering remains a 
largely untapped resource with a huge potential to achieve people-centric and socially 
inclusive sustainable development. In line with the Plan of Action to Integrate Volunteering 
into the 2030 Agenda and the national draft law on volunteering, that will be developed in 
2021, volunteers can contribute to achieving the programme priorities at all levels.
III. Programme and risk management
48. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed 
in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control 
Framework.
49. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable responses to force 
majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
50. Programme and risk management arrangements of this country programme correspond
fully to the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures, Financial 
Regulations and Rules, and decisions of the Executive Board.
51. The country programme will be implemented in coordination with the Ministry of 
Economy of the Republic of Belarus. The key programme management principles will 
include joint monitoring. 
52. This programme is developed at a challenging time as Belarus and the world are 
experiencing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, it provides for a UNDP 
policy and programme offer and project annual workplans as instruments allowing UNDP 
the flexibility to respond to the emerging needs and priorities of the situation.
53. Implementation of the programme is associated with a range of external economic, 
environmental, health and social factors in addition to internal risks. The impact of the global 
pandemic, prospects of slow economic growth, implications of the tax manoeuvre, various 
levels of regional economic development, aftermaths of the Chernobyl catastrophe, and low 
adaptability of the social protection system to the accelerating process of population ageing
will determine the importance of addressing external risks. UNDP will work on strengthening 
relationships with the national counterparts, identifying growth points of regional 
development, and increasing the flexibility and targeting of social services to mitigate 
external risks.
54. To address external and internal risks, a separate risk register has been developed by 
UNDP listing current external, operational, programme and communication risks, with risk 
owners and mitigation strategies identified. UNDP reviews and updates the register on a 
regular basis.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
55. Monitoring and evaluation of the country programme is aligned with the monitoring, 
reporting and evaluation of United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework. UNDP, together with other United Nations organizations, will contribute to annual reviews and joint evaluations of the framework to validate progress in relation to 
envisaged short- and long-term outcomes.
56. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation of the country programme will be based on the use 
of national data in collaboration with the National Statistical Committee and using the 
national platform for reporting indicators of the Sustainable Development Goals. This will 
be supplemented by the use of socio-environmental standards, beneficiary feedback, 
frequency of reviews, and local monitoring.
57. Monitoring and evaluation will be carried out at both project and programme outcome 
levels to track the effectiveness and sustainability of programme results. The evaluation 
indicators are consistent with the national indicators for the Sustainable Development Goals
and are based on national statistics and annual country reports on the Goals. The observance 
of the principle of gender equality will be controlled by monitoring the share of expenses for 
the implementation of related activities.
58. UNDP will continue to promote the collection, management, monitoring, analysis and 
use of relevant, reliable and disaggregated data, including on vulnerable groups, in line with 
the fundamental principles of the Sustainable Development Agenda and the human rightsbased approach to data. UNDP will work with the National Statistical Committee, 
government agencies, academia, research institutions, and civil society, to strengthen their 
capacities in monitoring and evaluating the national development programmes.
59. As an innovative tool, UNDP plans to hold annual meetings with national partners to 
present key performance results, exchange updates on country programme implementation
and discuss future cooperation plans. It will strengthen mutual accountability, transparency, 
alignment, and dialogue between UNDP and national partners.Annex. Results and resources framework for Belarus (2021-2025)
National priority or goal: Environmental security; transition to rational models of production and consumption (circular economy); productive 
employment and decent incomes.
United Nations Sustainable Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP #1. By 2025, all people, including 
adolescents, young men and women, men and women aged 65 and older, other vulnerable groups, benefit from green and inclusive economic 
development, realized through comprehensive regulatory frameworks, promotion of business activities, private sector partnerships, and increased 
participatory decision-making. 
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
UNSDCF outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s)
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs
(including indicators, baselines and targets)
Major partners / 
partnerships and 
frameworks
Estimated cost by 
outcome 
($ thousands)
Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDG) national indicator: 8.1.1 
Annual growth rate of real gross 
domestic product (GDP) per capita 
(%)
Baseline (2019): 101.9 
Target (2025): 104.9 
Source: National reporting 
platform (NRP)
SDG national indicator: 8.5.2 
Unemployment rate, by sex and 
persons with disabilities (%)
Baseline (2019): 4.2; male – 5.1; 
female – 3.2; persons with 
disabilities aged 18-74 – 16
Target (2025): 5 
Source: NRP
National Statistical Committee 
(Belstat)
National platform for 
reporting indicators of SDGs 
(NRP)
Ministry of Economy
Frequency: annual
Output 1.1. Measures for the development of green, 
circular, low-carbon economy, considering the 
interests of vulnerable groups, developed and 
introduced
Indicative indicator 1.1.1. SDG national indicator: 12.1.1.1. 
Sustainable consumption and production (SCP) national 
action plans are in place or SCP mainstreamed as a priority 
or a target into national policies.
Baseline (2019): 1 
Target (2025): 1
Data source, frequency: NRP, annual
Output 1.2. Financial and non-financial mechanisms
enabling effective regional development, including in 
Chernobyl-affected areas and ensuring inclusion of 
vulnerable groups, introduced
Indicative indicator 1.2.1. SDG national indicator: 1.2.1 
Proportion of population living below the national poverty 
line, by sex (%)
Baseline (2019): 5.0; male – 5.2; female – 4.9
Target (2025): 5.0 
Data source, frequency: NRP, annual
Ministry of Natural 
Resources and 
Environmental Protection
(MNREP)
Ministry of Economy
(MOE)
Ministry of Emergency 
Situations (MES)
Energy Efficiency 
Department of the State 
Committee for 
Standardization (EEDSCS)
Ministry of Industry (MOI)
Ministry of Agriculture and 
Food (MAF)
Ministry of Forestry
(MOF)
State Committee on 
Science and Technology
(SCST)
National Academy of 
Science (NAS)
Academic and educational 
institutions
Regular: $400
Other: $19,660Indicative indicator 1.2.2. SDG national indicator: 10.2.1 
Proportion of people living below 50% of median income, 
by sex and persons with disabilities (%) 
Baseline (2019): 5.7; male – 5.9; female – 5.6; persons with 
disabilities – 4.2
Target (2025): 5.0 
Data source, frequency: NRP, annual 
Output 1.3. Entrepreneurship, competition, 
innovation, decent jobs, and income diversification 
promoted, focusing on vulnerable groups and 
considering COVID-19 impact
Indicative indicator 1.3.1. Percentage of workforce 
employed in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), 
sole proprietorships
Baseline (2018): 33.9 
Target (2025): 37.4
Data source, frequency: Belstat, annual
Indicative indicator 1.3.2 Share of SME gross value added
in GDP (%)
Baseline (2018): 24.5
Target (2025): 30 
Data source, frequency: Belstat, annual.
Local authorities
Private sector
Non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) 
National priority or goal: Environmental security; transition to rational models of production and consumption (circular economy).
UNSDCF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP #2. A significant contribution to climate action is made by 2025 through the introduction of key 
measures of climate change adaptation and mitigation.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 3 – Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
Environmental Performance Index 
ranking of Belarus
Baseline (2018): 44
Target (2025): 30 
Belstat
NRP
MNREP
MES
EEDSCS
Output 2.1. Climate change adaptation and mitigation 
measures and solutions developed and introduced
Indicative indicator 2.1.1 Annual emissions of carbon 
dioxide (million tons CO2 equivalent)
Baseline (2018): 92
MNREP
EEDSCS
MOE
MES
Regular: $400
Other: $19,462Source: Environmental 
Performance Index
Pollutants discharged into the 
atmosphere (tons per square 
kilometre)
Baseline (2018): 6
Target (2025): 5.5
Source: Belstat
Frequency: annual 
Target (2025): 110
Data source, frequency: MNREP, annually.
Output 2.2. Solutions for promoting energy efficiency, 
development of the market for energy services, and 
expansion of the use of renewable energy sources 
developed and promoted
Indicative indicator 2.2.1. SDG national indicator: 7.3.1.1 
Energy intensity of GDP (kilograms of coal equivalent per 
million roubles) (in 2005 prices)
Baseline (2018): 380.5 
Target (2025): 353 
Data source, frequency: NRP, annual
Indicative indicator 2.2.2. SDG national indicator: 7.2.1.1. 
Ratio of the volume of production of primary energy from 
renewable energy sources to the volume of gross fuel and 
energy consumption (%) 
Baseline (2018): 6.2 
Target (2025): 7
Data source, frequency: NRP, annual
Output 2.3. Measures enhancing biodiversity 
conservation, control of invasive species of animals and 
plants, sustainable water resources and land 
management implemented
Indicative indicator 2.3.1. Number of functioning river 
basin coordination mechanisms that include neighbouring 
countries
Baseline (2019): 2 
Target (2025): 5
Data source, frequency: Project and official government 
reports; annual
Indicative indicator 2.3.2. Hectares of valuable forest, 
wetland and freshwater ecosystems under sustainable 
management 
Baseline (2019): 67,885
Target (2025): 82,885
MOI
MAF
MOF
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Energy
State Customs Committee 
(SCC)
NAS
Academic and educational 
institutions
Local authorities
Private sector
NGOsData source, frequency: Project and official government 
reports; annual
Output 2.4. National emergency preparedness for 
major hazards strengthened, in line with regional 
factors and international environmental conventions
Indicative indicator 2.4.1. Number of events/safety trainings 
held to strengthen the system of national emergency 
preparedness
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025):20 
Data source, frequency: official government reports; annual.
National priority or goal: Digital transformation of the economy and large-scale spread of innovations; developed business environment and 
sustainable infrastructure.
UNSDCF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP #3. By 2025, foundations of an efficient digital ecosystem are formed, including, as part of smart 
sustainable cities, enabling interaction of the state, society, and business, with equal participation of women and men, adolescents, youth, and 
representatives of vulnerable groups.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Share of administrative procedures 
and government services provided 
electronically
Baseline (2018): 25%
Target (2025): 75%
Source: NCES
SDG national indicator: 17.8.1
Proportion of individuals using the 
Internet (%), by sex and place of 
residence
Baseline (2019): 82.8; men – 82.5; 
women – 83; cities and urban 
settlements – 86.9; rural 
settlements – 71.3
Target (2025): 83 
Belstat
NRP
National Centre of Electronic 
Services (NCES)
Frequency: annual
Output 3.1. A system and infrastructure for electronic 
public services for individuals and businesses based on 
digitalization of public administration enhanced
Indicative indicator 3.1.1. The proportion of administrative 
procedures carried out in relation to legal entities and 
individual entrepreneurs in electronic form, of the total 
number of administrative procedures carried out in relation 
to legal entities and individual entrepreneurs
Baseline (2018): 16.8% 
Target (2025): 30% 
Data source, frequency: Belstat, annual
Indicative indicator 3.1.2. Number of new digital 
systems/solutions developed to enhance public 
administration in key sectors
Baseline (2019): 0 
Ministry of 
Communications and 
Informatization (MCI)
Ministry of Justice
National Centre of Legal 
Information
MOE
Ministry of Architecture 
and Construction 
State Border Committee
SCC
SCST
NCES
Regular: $400
Other: $6,300Source: NRP Target (2025): 10
Data source, frequency: Project reports; annual
Output 3.2. Development of a national urban policy 
that integrates fully the ‘smart city’ (‘smart district’) 
concepts and piloting solutions supported 
Indicative indicator 3.2.1. SDG national indicator: 11.2.1.
Proportion of population that has convenient access to 
public transport, by sex and place of residence (%)
Baseline (2019): 84.2; men – 84.5; women – 83.9: cities and 
urban settlements – 91.5; rural settlements – 63.9
Target (2025): 90
Data source, frequency: NRP; annual
Indicative indicator 3.2.2. Number of concepts of the 
development of ‘smart cities’ developed at the national 
level
Baseline (2019): 1
Target (2025): 11
Data source, frequency: MCI; annual
Output 3.3. Development of additional education in the 
field of ICT and other skills in demand on the labour
market enhanced with a focus on employability of 
vulnerable groups
Indicative indicator 3.3.1. Number of people engaged in 
non-formal education and trainings in business 
administration, information and communication 
technologies
Baseline (2019): 0 
Target (2025): 600 
Data source, frequency: Project reports; annual
Output 3.4. A system of e-participation to improve 
public engagement in the life of the society and 
decision making developed and promoted
Indicative indicator 3.4.1: Proportion of the population 
using the Internet to interact with government, including for 
obtaining information, in the total population aged 6-72 
years (%) 
Academic and educational 
institutions
Local authorities
Private sector
NGOsBaseline (2018): 13.1 
Target (2025): 20 
Data source, frequency: Belstat; annual
National priority or goal: Resilient development of the family institution, quality growth of human capital; productive employment and decent 
incomes.
UNSDCF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP #4. By 2025, improvements in data collection, gender equality policies, and child and elements of 
gender budgeting have created conditions for men and women of all ages, including those aged 65 years and older, as well as girls and boys, to better 
realize their rights and improve the quality of their lives, including through increased opportunities for employment and better protection from 
gender-based and domestic violence.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
SDG national indicator: 5.5.1. 
Proportion of seats held by women 
in (a) national parliaments and 
(b) local governments (%)
Baseline (2018): (a) national 
parliaments – 34.55; (b) local 
governments – 48.2
Target (2025): (a) 40; (b) 50
Source: NRP
The Global Gender Gap Index 
ranking of Belarus
Baseline (2019): 29
Target (2025): 20
Source: World Bank
• Belstat
• NRP
• MOH
Frequency: annual
Output 4.1. National system of collection, monitoring, 
analysis, and use of disaggregated data strengthened in 
accordance with the human rights-based approach,
gender equality and ‘leaving no one behind’ principles
Indicative indicator 4.1.1. SDG national indicator: 17.18.1.1 
The number of global indicators formed to monitor the 
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (units)
Baseline (2018): 74 
Target (2025): 93
Data source, frequency: NRP, annual
Output 4.2. Measures and solutions to reduce 
discriminatory practices, narrow the wage gap, and 
introduce gender aspects into state medium-term 
programmes developed
Indicative indicator 4.2.1. SDG national indicator: 8.5.1.1. 
Ratio of average wages of women and men (%)
Baseline (2019): 73.1
Target (2025): 80 
Data source, frequency: NRP, annual
Indicative indicator 4.2.2. SDG national indicator: 5.5.2 
Proportion of women in managerial positions (%)
Ministry of Labour and 
Social Protection
MOE
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Finance
National Statistical 
Committee of the Republic 
of Belarus
Academic and educational 
institutions
Local authorities
Private sector
NGOs
Regular: $368
Other: $5,620Baseline (2019): 45.8 
Target (2025): 47 
Data source, frequency: NRP, annually.
Output 4.3. Measures to strengthen the healthcare 
system, especially at the primary care level, for the 
response to COVID-19 and prevention and control of 
NCDs, HIV and infectious diseases, developed and 
introduced
Indicative indicator 4.3.1. SDG national indicator: 3.3.1 
Number of new HIV infections per 1,000 uninfected 
population, by sex and age
Baseline (2018): 0.25; male – 0.33; female – 0.17; 
0-14 years – 0.004; 15 years and older – 0.30
Target (2025): 0.2 
Data source, frequency: NRP, annual