File Name: BLR-NEP-2006-EN
Year: 2006
Country Name: Belarus
Country Code: BLR
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2006
Start Year: 2006
End Year: 2010
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

1. 
ACTION FICHE FOR BELARUS / SUPPORT TO ENERGY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION 
IDENTIFICATION 
Title 
Total cost 
Aid method / 
Management mode 
DAC-code 
Support to the Implementation of a Comprehensive Energy Policy 
for the Republic of Belarus 
EC contribution: € 5 million 
Project approach / Centralised management 
23 010 Sector Energy Policy and administrative management 
2.1. 
RATIONALE 
Sector context 
Belarus enjoys a strategic location between Russia and the European Union, and therefore plays a key role 
as a transit route for energy exports from Russia to European markets (outright transit of oil and gas and 
export of oil products refined in the country). The country's economic growth has been strong in recent 
years, despite the roadblocks in a centrally directed economy with, still, a high rate of inflation. Until 
recently, it received heavily discounted oil and natural gas from Russia and much of its GDP growth can 
be attributed to the re-export of Russian crude oil and export of refined oil products at raising world 
market prices. 
However, Russia has now increased gas prices from US$47 per thousand cubic meters to US$110 per 
tcm, and will gradually increase its prices to EU countries levels by 2011. Also, Belarus is endowed with 
limited indigenous energy resources (3 million tons of oil equivalent of primary energy resources, or 11%, 
are produced annually compared to 26 mtoe consumed) and is heavily dependent on imports of primary 
fuels from its single supplier. This is a key issue for Belarus' economic security1. The need for action (to 
modernise the energy sector, improve energy efficiency, and increase the use of domestic energy 
resources) has been recognised by the President and the government, and has been reflected in the 
government's energy strategy. According to official statistics, Belarus GDP's energy intensity is twice as 
high as in developed countries with similar climatic conditions. 
Belarus has ratified the Kyoto Protocol (KP) and is an Annex-1 Party to the UN Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC). However unlike other Annex-1 transition economies, Belarus is unable to 
engage in international emissions trading (ШТ) or project-based activities through the Joint 
Implementation mechanism (JI) since it does not have yet an emissions allowance under KP Annex B. 
Two areas where the country has nonetheless huge JI potential are energy efficiency investments, and 
land use change and afforestation. 
The Belarus National Energy Strategy2 is centred on both the supply side and the consumer side, with 
clearly stated objectives: 
• Geographical diversification of the sources of energy supplies; 
• Development of domestically available energy sources through the increase of share of renewable 
sources; 
Already before 2007, although the revenues stemming from energy exports largely offset the cost of energy 
imports (about 20 percent of GDP each), the latter caused a significant strain on Belarus' trade balance. 
Copy available at the EC Delegation to Ukraine and Belarus • Dramatic improvement in energy efficiency, based on the existing Energy Saving Programme 
(2006-2010), with a particular focus on citizens' ownership. 
The proposed action will address some of these strategic priorities, with an emphasis on those requiring 
participation of the citizens and allowing for their involvement in local initiatives. The proposed action 
will also take into account the development of the technical discussion at experts' level on energy 
between the Commission and Belarus. 
2.2. Lessons learnt 
The EC has not yet supported this type of activities in Belarus but has long demonstrated its willingness to 
support the people of Belarus by assisting regions and people suffering from the consequences of the 
Chernobyl catastrophe and others. 
Under its 2005-2006 allocation for Belarus, the Tacis programme has focussed on addressing the needs of 
the population. The EC has also consistently granted assistance to démocratisation and civil society in 
Belarus. 
As regards the implementation of EC funded projects, technical assistance to Belarus was hampered in 
2002-2003 by the suspension of tax exemption to Tacis projects. In addition, a registration procedure was 
imposed by the Belarusian authorities on projects implemented in Belarus. This registration procedure 
has led to a slower implementation of the previous EC Action Programmes for Belarus. 
2.3. Complementary actions 
In the Regional Action Programme 2006, €5 million were allocated to support implementation of the KP. 
Building on an earlier project, the action aims at supporting the beneficiary countries, including Belarus, 
in their efforts towards reducing greenhouse gas emissions, enforcing compliance with the UNFCCC and 
the KP, and implementing the JI as well as the Clean Development Mechanisms (CDM) developed by EU 
countries. Belarus has a track record of energy cooperation with the EU as a member of the INOGATE 
Programme. Belarus officially joined it on 30 December 1999 and is in particular a stakeholder of the 
Hydrocarbons Metrology Centre under construction in Boyarka, Ukraine. The World Bank and the UNDP 
have been so far the most active donors / IFIs in the field of the proposed action: 
The World Bank 
The Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme grant (US$ 50,000) funded in 2005 technical 
assistance for the Committee on Energy Efficiency to explore market mechanisms to improve energy 
efficiency through the operation of energy servicing companies (ESCOs) and options of strengthening the 
country's energy efficiency programme drawing on successful experience of neighbouring countries. The 
Social Sector Energy Retrofitting Project (US$ 22.6 million) assists in the rehabilitation of the heating 
system, thermal insulation, and lighting in over 450 public buildings (schools, hospitals, orphanages, and 
community homes for the elderly and the disabled). The related Climate Change Pilot Project (US$ 1.0 
million) is aimed at demonstrating opportunities for greenhouse gas emission abatement through energy 
efficiency and renewable energy utilisation in the supply of heat and hot water to social sector buildings. 
The UNDP 
The UNDP's Country Programme Document 2006-2010, expected soon to be approved by the 
government, focuses on a few priority areas, including environmental sustainability. As for foreseen 
projects, the "Biomass Energy for Heating and Hot Water Supply in Belarus" project (US$ 3,129,000; 
implemented 2003-2007) addresses the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by increasing the 
institutional and financial capacity of the government to support biomass energy projects and the capacity 
of customers to finance and implement them. A second project "Removing barriers to energy efficiency authorities and State enterprises in identifying energy efficiency opportunities, particularly in the 
DH&CHP sector. Alongside these two major partners, GTZ has focused some actions on the sustainable 
restructuring of energy systems in buildings and the promotion of renewable energies. 
2.4. Donor coordination 
Coordination with other donors and IFb has taken place during the formulation phase. Close contact has 
been established with the World Bank through its base office in Ukrame. The EC and the Bank will put 
findings in common, for instance those of the Energy Sector Review currently under preparation to 
analyze the impact of higher energy prices on Belarus' economy. A specific donors coordination model 
was set up in the autumn of 2003 for the CORE Programme (Cooperation for Rehabilitation), allowing to 
reach out to the people, emphasising a participatory approach and active involvement of those affected by 
the Chernobyl accident. This frame defines a ready-for-use forum, compatible with the Paris Declaration 
(it is managed by the Belarusian government), to build on and co-ordinate donor activities outside the 
strict remit of the CORE Programme. 
3. DESCRIPTION 
3.1. Objectives 
The National Indicative Programme (NIP) 2007-2010 focuses on two priority areas: (1) social and 
economic development, including actions to alleviate the consequences of the Chernobyl catastrophe; and 
(2) democratic development and good governance. The overall objective of the action is to provide 
targeted assistance to the Belarusian government and population: 
- in profiling and implementing energy sector reform in such a way as to bring the country closer to 
the EU approaches to energy policy, foster sustainable development and social welfare by 
improving the economy's and social sphere's energy efficiency and use of indigenous and 
renewable energy resources (First NIP priority area); 
- in empowering the Belarusian citizens and their associations to play an active role in achieving 
energy policy objectives at the local level, and in areas where social participation should be 
encouraged, notably via citizens' involvement in pilot projects (Second NIP priority area). 
3.2. Expected results and main activities 
3.2.1 Expected results 
- Comprehensive, socially-responsible and cost-effective energy sector policy, maintained as 
appropriate and effectively implemented, based on a sector analysis and ad-hoc feasibility studies, 
drawing on lessons from relevant EU energy supply security and savings and resource restructuring 
experience, put in place by the Belarusian government and citizens 
- Comprehensive set of methodological tools to evaluate and monitor energy policy implementation 
- Accurate and realistic medium-term investment needs assessment framework, with identified and 
quantified funding sources 
- Appropriate legal, human and technical capabilities of all project stakeholders (section 3.3) to 
effectively fulfil their roles and responsibilities under the energy policy 
- Two large pilot projects put in operation to provide benchmarks on the use of specific technologies, 
with a high demonstration and replication potential. This includes fostering a climate in which 
further initiatives by local communities could develop and raising awareness on how local 
communities can influence their own situation in the field. 
3.2.2 Main activities on energy policy maintenance and energy sector reform; the two last ones, targeting more the grassroots 
level, focussing on implementation of energy efficiency and renewable energy policies, and foreseeing to 
raise awareness of the concerned target groups and to develop local and grassroots initiatives. Each of 
these components will include capacity-building measures for the relevant stakeholders, including the 
population, in order to ensure successful project implementation and sustainability. Finally, the rapid pace 
of forthcoming changes in the energy sector, as anticipated by the various actors met during the 
formulation phase, requires retaining enough flexibility to fine-tune the envisaged activities prior to 
starting actual project implementation. 
Component One: Support to the implementation of the national energy strategy, including reform of 
the energy sector 
This component will address the institutional strengthening the bodies involved in the implementation of 
the strategy; in particular, the regulatory bodies in the gas and electricity markets, whose tariff-setting 
methods and pricing models for international energy services will be revisited as appropriate, taking into 
account the need for full cost recovery and the international energy market situation. If and as needed, 
resources will also be made available under this component to contribute to national energy policy 
upgrades, taking into account recent international developments, and the EU responses to current energy 
security challenges. 
- Institutional strengthening of the bodies involved in the implementation of the energy strategy of 
Belarus, focussing in particular on: 
- strengthening the role of the regulatory bodies in the gas and electricity markets, with an 
emphasis on tariff-setting issues (full cost recovery concern, introduction of greening 
incentives,...) 
- developing and implementing state-of-the-art methodological tools: 
to establish and follow up Belarus' overall energy balance 
- to evaluate and monitor the results of the nation's energy efficiency and energy 
independence policies (from the re-assessment of statistical tools and procedures, data 
gathering and evaluation methods, down to the revision of the approach used to estimate 
the economy's energy intensity) 
- to assess the actual economic feasibility and potential of domestically available 
alternative energy sources (brown coal, peat, different sorts of waste) and renewable 
sources (wind, solar, hydro, geothermal, biogas, biomass, biofuels) 
- encouraging participation of Belarusian scientists in EU R&D programmes relevant to the 
national energy strategy (in particular, research on alternative and renewable energy sources) 
- providing the related education and training of officials and organisations (central and local 
levels, citizens associations,...) concerned by the above-mentioned aspects of the national 
energy strategy. 
- Proper preparation of industrial assets modernisation plans, using investments needs appraisal for a 
number of priority sites defined together with the Belarusian government. Significant attention will 
be paid to the dissemination of knowledge on energy saving technologies in the concerned 
businesses. 
- Provision of extensive information to upgrade the current energy strategy, as appropriate arid as 
requested by the Belarusian government. 
Component Two: Implementation of energy efficiency policies government programmes) and organisations to promote and implement energy efficiency initiatives, this 
component will devote a large amount of resources to pilot projects targeting the Belarusian citizens, 
NGOs, schools, universities, enterprises and household users of energy, as well as local and regional 
authorities. 
- Development and implementation (with initial participation of EU experts) of 
comprehensive norms on energy savings in building construction, as well as 
development and introduction of benchmarking techniques and energy audit tools 
focussed on improving the collection, analysis and use of data in public and private 
buildings, heating, transport and industrial sectors to identify, manage and monitor 
opportunities for improving energy efficiency; 
- Development and implementation of methodologies for feasibility studies adapted to 
selected priority sectors / areas for energy efficiency (e.g. in the farming sector); 
- Dissemination to the citizens of information on the concepts relevant to comprehend, 
support and originate energy efficiency initiatives, and on-the-ground assistance to the 
citizens and their organisations to implement them; 
- Establishment of a technologies and procedures catalogue/web site specialised in energy 
savings suitable for Belarus's situation; 
- Pilot project in energy saving techniques with high demonstration replication potential. 
This scheme will focus on establishing a reference Intelligent Energy district, adapted to 
the local situation, and on implanting that model in a representative regional centre. It 
will also expand existing initiatives on the ground and foster extensive dissemination of 
the chosen model. 
Component Three: Development of renewable and alternative sources of energy 
This component will address the development of diversified energy sources and maximise the efficiency 
and use of local fuels. It will equally involve a pilot project on sustainable development at the local level, 
requiring the involvement of the same stakeholders as the previous component. 
- Design of standard projects based on use of alternative or renewable energy resources 
for further replication, including assistance in having them co-financed under the Kyoto 
Protocol schemes 
- Renewable Technology catalogue/web site suitable for Belarus development including 
tools for self-assessment 
Pilot project targeting the development of renewable energy sources (excluding 
biomass) with the highest potential of demonstration and replication, focussing on the 
development of distinct renewable technologies on the same site. This pilot project will 
elaborate on the energy efficient farming model mentioned under the previous 
component. 
3.3. Stakeholders 
Stakeholders will include the Cabinet of Ministers; central administrative bodies (Ministry of Energy; 
Ministry of Economy; Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Education; Statistics Committee; State Committee 
for Standardisation, m charge of energy savings; State Property Fund, as supervisor of State-owned secondary schools at local level; private and State-owned businesses; citizens and their associations. The 
project may also have to deal with the ad hoc Parliamentary committees. 
In order to ensure co-ordination of activities, the Cabinet of Ministers will act as main beneficiary for the 
project, whereas different activities will be conducted with different partners or groups of partners, as 
appropriate with regard to the project's objectives. 
3.4. Risks and assumptions 
3.4.1 Risks 
• The implementing consultant does not dispose of an appropriate delegation of authority to conceive 
and implement the programme; 
• Staff required from the public authorities is not assigned to the programme or is not made sufficiently 
available to participate in the activities; 
• Difficulties and delays in implementation (preparation of appropriate organisational structures, 
training, staff numbers); 
• The government does not provide infrastructure or other logistical and legal support for the pilot 
installations. 
3.4.2 Assumptions 
• Stable political and economic situation; 
• Commitment of the concerned government bodies to actively support the project implementation; 
• Support and willingness of all stakeholders involved to work together for a successful implementation 
of the energy strategy component and the pilot projects; 
• Close co-operation between experts and other stakeholders involved. 
3.5. Crosscutting Issues 
Environmental improvements will take place as a result of the project implementation which will improve 
energy efficiency in all sectors and foster utilisation of renewable sources of energy. Besides, the 
institution building and support in energy strategy implementation will contribute to the development of 
good governance, human rights and gender equality. 
4. IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES 
4.1. Implementation method 
Centralised management via the EC delegation in Ukraine and Belarus. A limited part of the action may 
be implemented through joint management with an International Organisation (IO) for tasks covering 
dissemination, communication, visibility and pilot projects. 
The International Organisation will satisfy the criteria laid down in article 53 quinquies paragraph 1 of 
the Financial Regulation and will be chosen in an objective and transparent manner - considering the 
delegated tasks - among the active IO in Belarus (United Nations Development Programme-UNDP; 
World Bank;...). The agreement to be signed with the IO will fully respect the requirements laid down in 
article 43 of the Implementing Rules to the Financial Regulation. 
4.2. Procurement and grant award procedures 
All contracts implementing the action must be awarded and implemented in accordance with the 
procedures and standard documents laid down and published by the Commission for the implementation 
of external operations, in force at the time of the launch of the procedure in question. contract procedures for EC external actions. The maximum possible rate of co-financing for grants is 
80%. Full financing may only be applied in the cases provided for in Article 253 of the Implementing 
Rules of the Financial Regulation where financing in full is essential to carry out the action in question. 
4.3. Budget and calendar 
The budget of the action is indicatively broken down as follows: 
Consultancy / Policy advice: € 1,000,000 
Dissemination / Good governance activities € 1,600,000 
Pilot projects, including equipment3: € 2.400.000 
Total: € 5.ОПП.000 
The operational duration as from the signature of the Financing Agreement is foreseen to be 48 months. 
4.4. Performance monitoring 
The project will be monitored according to standard procedures. Project monitoring and evaluation will be 
based on periodic assessment of progress on delivery of specified project results and towards achievement 
of project objectives. 
4.5. Evaluation and audit 
There will be two evaluations: a mid-term one, which will allow adjusting the project activities, and a expost evaluation, which will focus in particular on the long-run impact of the action. 
Audits may also be conducted on the systems and procedures used if need be. Audit and evaluation 
contracts will be concluded by the Commission. 
4.6. Communication and visibility 
Communication and visibility will be ensured by dissemination activities during participation in seminar, 
tramings, involving the science society in the pilot project for collecting data and analysis and publication 
and excursions as well. Visibility tasks will be performed according to the EC rules and 
recommendations. 
3
 Excluding infrastructure works, which will remain the responsibility of the Belarasian authorities. 