File Name: BOL-CPD-2023-EN
Year: 2023
Country Name: Bolivia
Country Code: BOL
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 January – 3 February 2023
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
7 December 2022
Original: English
22-27848X (E) 091222
*2227848*
First regular session 2023
30 January – 3 February 2023, New York
Item 7 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Plurinational State of 
Bolivia (2023-2027)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Bolivia (2023-2027) ........................................................ 11I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework1
1. The country programme for Bolivia responds to the development priorities identified in 
the Patriotic Agenda, 2025; the Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES), 2021-2025;
and the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2023-2027; all of 
which are framed in the “Vivir Bien”
2
(Living Well) development model. The programme
contributes to the Sustainable Development Goals (the ‘Goals’) and the UNDP Strategic 
Plan, 2022-2025.
2. Economic growth over the past two decades positioned the country in the middleincome category, averaging gross domestic product growth of 4 per cent. Bolivia experienced
reductions in extreme poverty (from 38 to 14 per cent between 2006 and 20213) and 
inequalities, particularly for the most vulnerable groups (Gini index from 0.59 to 0.42
between 2006 and 2021
4
). Nevertheless, economic development continues to depend on 
strategic natural resources, mostly fossil fuels and minerals, which remain sensitive to 
international prices and have limited productivity levels.
3. The Global Climate Risk Index, 2021, places Bolivia as the 10th most vulnerable country 
in the world, experiencing cyclical droughts, forest fires and floods. In the last four years, 
forest fires and agricultural burning have affected more than 15 million hectares, damaging
biodiversity, ecosystems and life systems of rural communities.
5 Bolivia is risking its 
development sustainability: in 2020, the annual average rate of deforestation was 262.178 ha/
year6and 310 m2/person/year for 2016-20177. Current mining practices contaminate the 
water and soil, affecting communities and protected areas where sustainable modes of 
production should be used. The main environmental challenges are deforestation, water 
contamination from human settlements in rural and urban areas, mining and other productive 
sectors, and air emissions, mainly in large cities.
4. With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and its compounded effects, the country saw
an increase in self-employment (86 per cent in 20218) and higher levels of unemployment
(from 4.8 per cent in urban areas at the fourth quarter of 2019 to 5.2 per cent for the same 
period in 2021).
9
5. Women are mainly outside the labour market, representing 60 per cent of the 
economically inactive population10. Young women are employed in fragile11 jobs, with low 
wages and a greater burden of care. Teenage pregnancies, standing at 16.5 per cent of the 
population,
12 comprise another stark indication of the structural inequalities faced by 
adolescents and young women. People with disabilities (0.9 per cent of the population13) and 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer persons, who represent between 5 and 
10 per cent of the national population face exclusion and marginalization, with harmful 
effects on their economic and social well-being.14
6. Public services face significant obstacles to guaranteeing the realization of human rights.
In the health-care system, communicable and non-communicable diseases prevail, as well as 
1 Based on the common country analysis, 2022.
2
‘Living Well’ means living life in plenitude, in harmony with Mother Earth.
3 National Institute of Statistics, 2021
4
INE, Gini index for monthly per capita income, 2021
5 Vice Minister of Civil Defence, 2022
6 Nationally determined contributions, 2022
7 Bolivia SDG Municipal Atlas, 2020
8
INE, 2021
9
INE, Continuous Employment Survey, 2020
10 International Labor Organization (ILO), 2021, and López-Calva, 2021, Common country analysis (CCA), 2022
11 Precarious: lacking security, with low salary, limited benefits and social protection.
12 National health information system, 2021DP/DCP/BOL/4
limited capacity for service delivery (for example, 73.6 per cent of childbirths take place in 
health facilities15 and childhood vaccination schemes reach only 68 per cent coverage16). The 
coverage and quality of social programmes, health care services and services addressing
gender-based violence (which affects 70 per cent of women17), are insufficient to meet the 
population needs.
18
7. Digital gaps limit access to information, education, and social programmes, particularly 
for rural populations and women. In 2020, Internet connectivity stood at 70.45 per cent in 
urban areas and 21.4 per cent in rural areas. Internet access was available to 61.92 per cent 
of men and 58.04 per cent of women.
19
8. As the social cohesion index for Bolivia in 2020 was 24.4,
20 it is important to improve 
people’s appreciation of democracy by strengthening values, behaviours and attitudes that 
encourage collectivism – such as collaboration, cooperation, reciprocity and trust.
9. The proportion of parliamentarian (deputy) positions occupied by women in the 
legislative assembly is 50 per cent, compared to 46.9 per cent for the 2020 general elections. 
There was historical participation of women in the senate assembly, at 55.6 per cent. 
Nevertheless, 23 women are mayors of the 336 municipalities in Bolivia21, equivalent to 
7 per cent; two are mayors of largest municipalities.
22
10. The programme will be informed by the findings and recommendations of the
independent country programme evaluation report, 2018-2022. Other sources of learning are 
the Multidimensional Poverty Index of the Ministry of Planning and Development and the 
PDES evaluation, 2016-2020.
23 UNDP developed the Municipal Risk Index as a useful 
metric for decision-making in the emergency response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
11. Localization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in 18 subnational 
governments using multidimensional poverty approaches through integrated, multilevel, and 
multisectoral planning interventions, contributed to a comprehensive analysis of the 
interaction between environment, development, justice and household deprivation, as well as 
innovative tools to promote evidence-based territorial planning.24
12. In the context of COVID-19 impacts and response, UNDP conducted socioeconomic 
analyses25 and provided leverage points to support the entry and re-entry of women into the 
labour market, especially in small and medium-sized enterprises. The measurement of 
COVID-19 impacts on households provided evidence of the magnitude of the shock and the 
need to incorporate dimensions such as “catastrophic spending”
26 and pandemic information 
components into mitigation measures.
13. In the wake of increased political polarization and conflict, UNDP worked to restore
confidence in democratic institutions. Technical assistance was provided for national and 
subnational elections (88 per cent citizen participation), including through multi-stakeholder 
socio-political dialogues, implementation of gender parity, alternation of political 
representation and the design of new prevention and transformation of conflict tools. 
Challenges remain in reducing social and political polarization, increasing citizen confidence 
15 PAHO, 2021
16 UNICEF, 2022
17 INE, 2016. Survey on Prevalence and Characteristics of Violence against Women
18 INE
19 INE
20 UNDP, Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation, Social cohesion reflections, 2021
21 Supreme Electoral Tribunal, 2021
22 Supreme Electoral Tribunal, 2020
23 UNDP independent country programme evaluation, 2022
24 Ibid.
25 Socioeconomic Impact of the COVID
19 Pandemic in Bolivia2020UNDP and other United Nations organizationsin institutions, and achieving national and regional agreements to advance institutional 
reforms that will help improve governance effectiveness.27
14. Across all its interventions, UNDP considered the needs of men and women and 
promoted socioeconomic and political rights. With the launch of its Acceleration Lab, UNDP 
enhanced country capacities to break ground through catalytic development interventions
towards resilient urban work. In the new programme portfolio, UNDP adopts a systemic 
transformation approach, applying collective intelligence methodologies to solve complex 
problems and brokering co-created solutions to confront development challenges.
15. In 2021, within the framework of South-South cooperation, UNDP provided technical 
assistance on electoral issues to Ecuador, Honduras, Iraq and Mozambique, fostered crossfertilization of experiences in the care sector, and promoted economic autonomy for women. 
Exchanges on lithium governance and gender equality best practices are planned with 
Argentina and Chile, and Paraguay, respectively.
16. Between 2019 and 2022, UNDP established more than 25 strategic partnerships with key 
actors in the Bolivian financial and private sectors, such as the Productive Development 
Bank, the Financial System Supervisory Authority, and the Association of Private Banks, and 
with international cooperation partners to strengthen the ecosystem of sustainable finance 
and develop innovative financing instruments under the lens of the Goals, with the aim of
implementing impact investments in social and environmental areas. With UNDP support, 
the Productive Development Bank developed a framework for issuing thematic bonds, and 
the Association of Private Banks designed a system for measuring impacts on sustainable 
development. UNDP also provided support to the establishment of the Sustainable Finance 
Roundtable (as part of the Global Compact in Bolivia).
17. In response to health care sector needs, especially on communicable and noncommunicable diseases, UNDP has been a major contributor to strengthening national 
capacity for eradicating malaria and tuberculosis. It also provided critical support and 
coordination through the United Nations response to mitigate and recover from the effects of 
COVID-19.28 These actions were brokered in coordination with the Pan American Health 
Organization (PAHO).
18. The UNDP comparative advantages for the programme will leverage:
(a) Its long-standing collaboration with the Government and development actors as a 
strategic partner contributing to the implementation of the 2025 Patriotic Agenda, the 
PDES, and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
(b) Its experience in developing multilevel solutions to improve public service delivery
that realizes people’s rights, increases sustainable productivity, reduces structural 
inequalities, and strengthens democratic institutions. These development solutions 
include the creation of institutional capacities, space for inclusive multi-stakeholder 
dialogue, and data generation that delivers evidence, metrics, and monitoring and 
evaluation systems to better track development impacts.
29
(c) Its organizational flexibility and modalities of implementation such as South-South 
cooperation (in the areas of electoral processes, lithium, care and economic autonomy);
access to global networks of capacities, innovation and knowledge (such as the 
Accelerator Labs, COVID-19 response, post-conflict and good governance); and
environmental and social safeguards and impact investments related to sustainable 
finance.
(d) Its experience, in partnership with the United Nations Volunteer (UNV) programme 
and the Ministry of Justice and Institutional Transparency, in a new collaborative model 
and public policy that promotes volunteerism as a mechanism for effective governance, 
and co-design of innovative strategies based on human rights and gender equality.
27 CCA (2022)
28 DP/DCP/BOL/4
(e) Its lessons learned, from social cohesion studies by the Spanish Agency for 
International Development Cooperation, to strengthen social cohesion in key localities.
(f) Its strategic partnerships and synergies with public and private stakeholders, which
have proved able and useful mechanisms to scale up development responses.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
19. The vision of the programme for 2023-2027
30 is to promote transformational and 
multidimensional changes in the systems and policies of Bolivia through a portfolio
approach31 that delivers positive peace and sustainable development in harmony with Mother
Earth.
People exercise their rights and benefit from social policies and sustainable 
development results
20. This area relates to UNDP signature solutions on poverty and inequality, gender equality 
and governance.
21. The UNDP theory of change is that if the provision of health services, digital 
inclusiveness, social programmes, and the national care system are strengthened, then more 
equal societal outcomes can be achieved whereby people can exercise their rights and enjoy 
greater well-being during their life cycle, thereby benefiting from sustainable development 
outcomes.
22. Because:
(a) The update of epidemiological profiles to local contexts, adequate management of 
the healthcare system information and use of technological innovations in hospital 
administration will contribute to improving the health-care system’s response capacity;
(b) Creation of an inclusive digital ecosystem that involves the digital transformation
of public administration and bridging digital gaps for women’s economic empowerment
and vulnerable populations’ inclusion will contribute to expanding people’s access to
information, education and opportunities for development;
(c) Support to devising integral social policies and programmes with criteria to improve 
distributive justice, and the gathering of data and evidence for monitoring and evaluation, 
will contribute to the development of a comprehensive social programmes for the most 
vulnerable, based on the life cycle, social co-responsibility and equality, to respond and 
build response capacity to shocks and crises; and 
(d) Support to developing a regulatory framework for life-cycle based care systems, 
adequately costed, aligned to national accounts and based on social and public coresponsibility, will contribute to equitable distribution of the care burden and expanded
opportunities for women.
23. UNDP Bolivia will review the experiences of Argentina and Uruguay to learn about the
transformational changes that have contributed to developing a policy and advocacy agenda 
to the benefit of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer population.
24. Actions related to the improvement in health, social programmes and care services 
delivery will be carried out in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Sports, the 
Ministry of Development Planning, the Ministry of Justice and Institutional Transparency, 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Cultures, Decolonization and 
Depatriarchalization and the Ministry of Labour and Social Security, local government
entities, civil society organizations and indigenous communities. UNDP will seek synergies 
and joint actions with UN-Women, PAHO/WHO, UNFPA, the United Nations Children’s 
30 In addition to four selected outcomes, the programme contributes to other United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
outcomes and outputsFund (UNICEF), the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the International 
Labour Organization (ILO) and relevant donors (including the Global Fund and Sweden).
UNDP will support multilevel public policies to strengthen health information systems; the 
establishment of a ‘care laboratory’ for evidence generation; social programmes; access to 
innovations and financial markets for women to carry out their enterprises; consolidation of
mechanisms for economic autonomy; and policies for the promotion of youth.
Nature-based sustainable development model aligned with inclusive economic and 
governance mechanisms
25. This area integrates an inclusive economic development model and a ‘Living Well in 
harmony with Mother Earth’ approach (outcomes 2 and 3), in line with the UNDP nature 
strategy, 2022-2030, which highlights how nature’s rights are undervalued in our 
anthropocentric economic, development, political and social systems, which hold back bold,
urgent actions to protect, restore, manage and use its ecosystems in a just, inclusive and 
sustainable manner and accelerate progress across the 2030 Agenda. This area relates to the 
six signature solutions of the UNDP Strategic Plan.
26. The UNDP theory of change is that if economic and productive activities are promoted 
bearing in mind the preservation of ecosystems and their environmental functions, mitigation
of and adaptation to climate change and reduction of vulnerability to climate risks and 
disasters; and if private and public incentives are increased to improve employment quality,
diversification and improvement of productivity, generation of value, transformation of raw 
materials, and access to sustainable finance, then the factors for achieving sustainable 
economic growth in balance with Mother Earth can be comprehensive, achieving inclusive 
socioeconomic recovery from shocks, reducing socio-environmental conflicts and 
strengthening the response capacity of economic actors to future environmental and health 
crises. 
27. Because:
(a) Implementing strategies for the monitoring and sustainable management of 
protected areas, forests, biodiversity, water sources and land benefit from the Living Well
approach and from environmental governance models based on innovation, technology and 
digitalization, including in support of national commitments (such as nationally determined 
contributions).
(b) Strengthening disaster risk reduction, including recovery preparedness, damage and 
loss assessment, early warning and climate security systems, can contribute to reducing 
human and ecosystems vulnerabilities; 
(c) Developing energy transition schemes and institutional conditions to encourage 
public-private investments and shared risks, and implementing environmental, social and 
governance standards, will improve economic productivity and increase opportunities for
implementing the Living Well model;
(d) Developing sustainable finance regulatory frameworks to make social and 
environmental impact investments, close financing access gaps, and implement new financial 
and non-financial sustainable mechanisms and instruments, including thematic bonds, 
vertical and private investments funds, will improve the quality of employment, economic 
autonomy, response capacity and participation in the sustainable development model of the 
country; and 
(e) Implementing transparency and traceability mechanisms through innovation in data 
collection, together with digital and technological transformation to improve the productivity 
of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, industries that prioritize strategic and incomegenerating sectors (agriculture, manufacturing and energy), and prioritized agro-industrial 
sectors, will enable sustained and diversified growth, and access to new niche markets that 
value sustainability and resiliency practices.
28. South-South cooperation efforts in sustainable financing, traceability of forest and nonDP/DCP/BOL/4
management experiences will be critical to this priority. Exchanges are planned with 
Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador and Peru, to bring leverage and lessons learned to 
shape the path of Bolivia.
29. These results will be achieved through strategic partnerships with the Ministry of 
Productive Development and Plural Economy, the Ministry of Development Planning, the 
Ministry of Environment and Water, the Ministry of Labour and Social Security, the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Economy and Public Finance, the Ministry of National 
Defence, subnational governments, civil society organizations, the private and public 
financial sectors, international financial institutions and indigenous communities. UNDP will 
strengthen and consolidate synergies with ILO, the United Nations Human Settlement 
Programme, the World Food Programme, UNICEF, the Food and Agriculture Organization
and donors including Germany, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.
Positive peace to achieve social cohesion
30. This area relates to the signature solutions on poverty and inequality, the environment, 
governance, gender equality and resilience. 
31. The UNDP theory of change is that if confidence in coordinated actions and dialogues 
between public authorities and social actors increases and agreements are achieved granting 
legitimacy to governmental management, all of which contribute to an inclusive democratic 
institutional framework for peaceful conflict management, then the institutional framework 
where the State, civil society and the market interact afford new opportunities for effective 
governance as a precondition to delivering social cohesion.
32. Because:
(a) Multi-stakeholder, multi-sectoral dialogue, and citizen initiatives on development 
priorities strengthen governance mechanisms, including electoral systems;
(b) The development of state capacities and civil society structures that promote 
democracy can strengthen conditions for the effective exercise of rights and contribute 
to safeguarding democratic institutions;
(c) The improvement in the performance of relevant public institutions based on multistakeholder agreements and territorial and sectoral prioritization – such as strengthening 
components of social cohesion and sustainable economic development – can contribute 
to the implementation of public policies that increase citizen trust in state capacity;
(d) New governance mechanisms aimed at strengthening social cohesion and building 
peaceful coexistence incorporate actions to promote gender equality, inter-culturalism 
and youth empowerment; and 
(e) Strengthening institutional and civil society capacities for non-violent management 
of socio-political conflict can reduce social and political polarization through conflictsensitive actions.
33. UNDP will work with the Vice President’s office, the Ministry of Development 
Planning, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice and Institutional 
Transparency, the Ministry of Environment and Water, the Plurinational Legislative 
Assembly and subnational government, working with UN-Women, UNHCHR and UNICEF,
among others. UNDP will scale up a new governance approach to strengthen multistakeholder agreements that make strategic public policies viable. In the electoral area, 
UNDP will promote the consolidation of gender parity and a strong, actionable agenda 
against gender-based political violence.
34. UNDP will apply the ‘Do No Harm’ tool from 2023 to the programme to generate a 
permanent context assessment process, internalizing the assessment's results in the
implementation strategies. The analysis will allow UNDP to identify actions that address
dividing and connecting factors, particularly in preventing conflict context and emphasizing 
a transformation perspective, as appropriate.35. The country office will share its experience and good practices with Chile and Ecuador 
through multicultural dialogues on conflict contexts, constitutional reforms, and indigenous 
autonomy. South-South cooperation efforts in this area will seek best electoral practices in 
Latin America and the Caribbean region (Panama) and good governance examples for the 
lithium industry (Argentina and Chile), among others.
36. These programme areas are linked to cross-cutting interventions: (a) data gathering, 
evidence, metrics and monitoring and evaluation systems; (b) citizen co-responsibility in 
development; and (c) mainstreaming gender policy, intersectionality and a rights-based 
approach.
37. To implement the programme, UNDP will engage entities and actors ensuring:
(a) Political will and institutional commitment of government, private sector and civil 
society and non-governmental organizations for strategic development issues of social, 
political and environmental sensitivity, dialogue, coordination and joint actions; and 
(b) Systemic approaches catalysing sustainable financing and promoting public-private 
collaboration.
38. Within the framework of technological autonomy, UNDP contributes to axis 5 of the 
PDES, “Education, research, science and technology”. The digital readiness assessment
developed with the AGETIC company will be a key input to strengthening the digitalization 
agenda of Bolivia. The programme sees innovation and digitalization as ways to enable costeffective interventions, including (a) innovative sustainable financial mechanisms;
(b) governance platforms; (c) multidimensional measurement tools; (d) digitally improved 
performance of public administration (PDES, axis 7 ‘Judicial Reform, Digitalized and 
Transparent Public Administration’), entrepreneurship and new market access, digital gaps,
especially in employment, education and women’s equality; and (e) resource mobilization
through innovative instruments. These enablers will catalyse opportunities to scale
programme results for greater sustainable impact.
39. In coordination with UNV, UNDP will integrate volunteerism into selected 
programmes,
32 supporting capacity development efforts and inclusion of people in different
situations of vulnerability.
III. Programme and risk management
40. This programme outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the 
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, 
regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the 
UNDP programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control 
framework.
41. The programme will be executed using mixed implementation modalities, including 
national direct execution to enable response to force majeure. The harmonized approach to 
cash transfers will be used in a coordinated manner with other United Nations organizations 
to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
42. The scope of the national execution of the programme will respond to the institutional, 
political and social conditions for effectiveness and risk management relevant to the 
portfolio. The risk management strategy includes early warning tools.
43. UNDP will maintain dialogues with all stakeholders to identify any potential harm 
caused by UNDP and will promote the use of grievance mechanisms and the UNDP social 
and environmental standards policy. DP/DCP/BOL/4
44. Coordination for monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the country 
programme will be conducted with the Ministry of Development Planning and the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs. UNDP will be part of the National Steering Committee overseeing the
implementation and monitoring of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework. 
45. The programme will be implemented according to results-based management and 
capacity-building models to increase effectiveness and efficiency and ensure its contribution 
to the Living Well approach, the PDES, and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
46. In addition to development project interventions, UNDP will use programmatic
instruments such as engagement facilities, results-based payments, development services, 
innovation challenges and other instruments that diversify the programmatic portfolio and 
drive strategic innovation, digital transformation and sustainable financing for development. 
47. Programme risks relate to:
(a) The increase in social and political polarization and conflict hamper coordination 
and dialogue, increasing uncertainty and citizen distrust in institutions. In coordination 
with strategic partners, UNDP will develop periodic social conflict mappings, promote 
conflict-sensitive actions; and foster effective, inclusive and pluralistic governance 
platforms. UNDP will promote the benefits of socio-cultural diversity and equality 
between genders in all of its actions;
(b) The economic and fiscal context limits development financing, creates redistributive 
conflicts, degrades living conditions, deepens structural inequalities and weakens the 
response capacity of the State to respond to environmental and socio-political shocks. 
UNDP will monitor socioeconomic, governance and social cohesion indicators, 
contribute to evidence-based public policy design, strengthen access to public services,
and promote inclusive multi-stakeholder dialogues;
(c) The persistence of events associated with climate change (droughts, fires, floods, 
contamination of water sources), environmental damage, land-use change and loss of 
biodiversity, threaten livelihoods. In the short term, UNDP will support disaster risk 
reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation mechanisms by supporting 
implementation of the nationally determined contributions – including non-carbon 
market initiatives – fostering transitions to sustainable energy and agriculture, and 
integrated management of water resources.
48. In compliance with UNDP policies, each intervention will be subject to UNDP social 
and environmental standards. When the risks identified are substantial, targeted studies, 
evaluations and action plans may be applied to feed back into the design and implementation 
strategy of the intervention. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
49. UNDP will implement a monitoring and evaluation strategy with a comprehensive 
approach, agile tools and mechanisms for accountability and data validation measures linked 
to the gender and communication strategies and the programme management module, in 
accordance with the ‘Quantum+’ instruments. 
50. The country office gender strategy defines action lines and indicators to guarantee gender 
equality, close gender gaps, and promote women’s rights. The strategy will contribute to 
integrating gender indicators to monitor its action plan. The new portfolio will aim at using 
the highest gender marker scores to ensure mainstreaming. The country office uses gender 
equality certification to support staff capacity development.
51. The monitoring and evaluation of the programme will source inputs and methodologies 
from the United Nations Inter-agency Monitoring and Evaluation Group.52. The evaluation system includes mid-term, final and external evaluations through
stakeholder consultations, and a knowledge management subsystem to develop collective 
learning and improve internal efficiency. UNDP will ensure that methodological instruments
used by the National Institute of Statistics, the Social and Economic Policy Analysis Unit and 
statistical systems are strengthened through enhanced monitoring of progress in the PDES
and achievement of the Goals. UNDP will contribute by supporting evidence-based public 
policies and innovations in multidimensional well-being metrics.DP/DCP/BOL/4
Annex. Results and resources framework for Bolivia (2023-2027)
National priority: Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES), axis 1. Rebuilding the economy, retaking macroeconomic and social stability; 5; 6. Health and sports to protect life; 7. Judicial 
reform, digitized and transparent public management.
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #1 (1.4. United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework – UNSDCF). Groups or populations in situations of extreme 
vulnerability have access to social policies and programmes developed by the State, at different levels, that respond to their most urgent needs.
Related Strategic Plan outcome 2. No one left behind.
Cooperation framework outcome 
indicator(s), baseline(s), target(s)
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines, targets)
Major partners / partnerships /
frameworks
Estimated cost 
by outcome 
(in $ thousands)
1.1. Extreme poverty rate33
Baseline (2020): 13.7%
Target (2027): 5.3%
1.2. Human Development Index
Baseline (2019): 0.718
Target (2027): 0.75
Sources: Social and Economic Policy 
Analysis Unit (UDAPE), National 
Institute of Statistics (INE), Ministry of 
Development Planning (MPD)
Frequency: Biannual
1.1. Public health-care management 
levels have improved capacities to
analyse timely and quality information 
for decision-making. 
1.1.1. Number of strengthened national 
information systems for communicable
diseases34 (IRRF.1.4.1.a)
Baseline (2022): 1
Target (2025): 3
Source: UNDP, MSD, annual
1.1.2. Number of strengthened HIVAIDS monitoring and reference centres
that improve their management and 
resolution capacity and include 
differentiated services.
Baseline (2022): 0
Targets (2025): 10 (1, national 
9, departmental)
Source: UNDP, MSD, annual
1.1.3. Number of civil society 
organizations affected by and vulnerable 
to HIV, tuberculosis and malaria 
strengthened to improve their capacity to 
manage demand for quality health 
services at different management levels.
Baseline (2022): 0
MPD
Ministry of Justice and Institutional 
Transparency (MJTI)
Ministry of Health and Sports (MSD)
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MRE)
Ministry of Cultures, Decolonization and 
Depatriarchalization
Ministry of Labour and Social Security 
(MTEPS)
UDAPE
Financial System Supervisory Authority 
(ASFI)
Plurinational Women’s and 
Depatriarchalization Service 
National Institute of Health Laboratories 
Subnational governments (SNGs)
35
United Nations organizations
Global Fund
Unitaid
Fiotec/Fiocruz
Swedish International Development 
Cooperation Agency (SIDA)
Spanish Agency for International 
Development Cooperation (AECID)
Academia36
Global Compact Network Bolivia (GCNBolivia)
Regular resources 
657
Other resources 
21,900.101
33 PDES
34 HIV, tuberculosis and malaria
35 Departmental, municipal and local associations
36 Universities
research and study centresTarget (2025): 6
Source: UNDP, MSD, annual
1.2. People and institutions have skills 
and conditions for digital 
transformation
1.2.1. Number of evidence-based 
proposals37 that promote access 
(disaggregated by sex) and use of digital 
tools in prioritized SNGs
Baseline (2022): 1 
Target (2027): 7
Source: UNDP, annual
1.2.2. Percentage of public and financial
services users38 (by sex and age) using
digital tools (IRRF.6.1.1.b)
Baseline (2022): to be determined (TBD)
Target (2027): 25%
Source: UNDP, annual
1.3. Access to better opportunities 
through the implementation of social 
programmes and care support systems 
based on gender equality 
1.3.1. Number of evidence-based 
methodological tools to design social 
programmes and care programmes
validated
Baseline (2022): 1
Target (2027): 3
Source: UNDP, MPD, SNG, annual
1.3.2. Number of public policies of care 
system developed with strategic 
stakeholders (IRRF.6.1.2)
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 3
Source: UNDP, MJTI, SNG, annual
37 Framed around the following areas: infrastructure, public management, regulation, financing, inclusion, and people (social programmes, health care services and crisis situation response)
38 See footnote 36DP/DCP/BOL/4
National priority: PDES, axes 1; 2. Industrialization with import substitution; 3; 9. Integration and international relations with sovereignty. 
Cooperation Framework outcome involving UNDP #2 (2.1 UNSDCF): Actors of the plural economy, with emphasis on those who make up the food systems and other productive sectors, increase 
their production and participation in markets, with sustainability and sovereignty.
Related Strategic Plan outcomes: 2. No one left behind; 3. Building resilience
2.1. Number of micro, small, medium, 
and large enterprises and craftsmen (led 
by men and women) that increase 
participation in the national market39
Baseline (2020): 946
Target (2025): 1,450
Sources: MPD, UDAPE, INE
Frequency: Annual
2.1. Micro, small, medium and large 
enterprises improve their capacities
to increase incomes, productivity, 
diversification, access to markets, 
digital transformation and/or job 
quality.
2.1.1. Number of micro, small and 
medium enterprises, emphasizing those 
led by women, indigenous people, 
youth and migrants (by sex and age),
that adopt instruments to generate 
sustainable incomes and response 
capacity
Baseline (2022): 250 
Targets (2027): 1,000 
Source: UNDP, Productive 
Development Bank (BDP), SNG, 
business associations, annual
2.1.2. Amount of impact investment 
funding, from public and private 
sources, mobilized to reinforce 
sustainable, resilient value chains
(IRRF.E.3.1)
Baseline (2022): $1 million
Target (2027): $500 million
Source: UNDP, ASFI, BDP, annual
2.1.3. Number of financial and nonfinancial reports on micro, small,
medium and large enterprises’
contributions to sustainable 
development impacts
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2027): 10
Source: UNDP, financial and nonfinancial institutions, annual
MPD
Ministry of Productive Development and 
Plural Economy
Ministry of Environment and Water
(MMAyA)
MTEPS
Ministry of Economy and Public Finance
MRE
SNG
Plurinational Authority of Mother Earth
(APMT)
ASFI
United Nations organizations
Global Environment Facility (GEF)
Green Climate Fund (GCF)
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action 
Facility
Adaptation Fund
Development Bank of Latin America
(CAF)
SIDA
AECID
BDP
Academia
GCN-Bolivia
Foundations and NGOs
Private sector 
Regular resources
800
Other resources
11,164.599
39 PDES2.2.Socioeconomic actors in food 
systems improved their knowledge to 
move towards more sustainable 
practices and mechanisms,
biodiversity friendly, integrated 
natural resources management, and 
resiliency to climate change.
2.2.1. Percentage of total area of 
agribusiness production that is 
managed under sustainable practices
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2027): 20%
Source: UNDP, MMAyA, annual
2.2.2. Number of small-scale 
production units40 (led by men and 
women) that adopt practices and 
mechanisms to increase their response 
capacity and adaptation to climate 
change 
Baseline (2022): 50 
Target (2027): 80
Source: UNDP, MMAyA, SNGs
annual
2.3. Women, youth and indigenous 
people, and those in situations of 
vulnerability, strengthen their 
capacities to exercise their rights as 
essential economic agents for 
inclusive development and 
diversified responsibilities in the 
care economy.
2.3.1. Number of evidence-based
policies and instruments designed, 
validated and/or funded to foster 
gender and generational equality 
related to economic, financial and 
labour fields (IRRF.E.3.2)
Baseline: 2
Target: 5
Source: UNDP, MJTI, SNG, annual
40 Family and communalDP/DCP/BOL/4
2.3.2. Number of production units (led 
by women, youth and indigenous 
people) in food systems and strategic 
productive sectors having access to 
financial and digital services
Baseline (2022): 50 
Target (2027): 80
Source: UNDP, MMAyA, SNG, 
annual
National priority: PDES, axes 2; 3; 4; Deepening the process of industrialization of natural resources; 8. Sustainable and balanced environment; 9.
Cooperation Framework outcome involving UNDP #3 (2.3 UNSDCF): State agencies, social organizations, in particular nations and rural indigenous peoples and afro-descendant communities, 
manage the territory, natural resources, environment, disaster risks and energy transition through inclusive, multi-level and multisectoral governance mechanisms.
Related Strategic Plan outcomes: 1. Structural transformation; 3. Building resilience
3.1. Number of mitigation, adaptation 
and monitoring actions, emphasizing 
gender gaps, to fight climate change 
through impact-effective response 
measures in harmony and balance with 
Mother Earth41
Baseline (2020): 6
Target (2025): 13
Sources: MRE, MPD, MMAyA
Frequency: Annual
3.1. Plurinational State 
governmental authorities and social 
actors strengthen their capabilities 
to implement nationally determined 
contributions and Living Well in 
harmony with Mother Earth.
3.1.1. Number of climate changevulnerable municipalities with 
technical capabilities in gendersensitive development, integral 
planning, multi-hazard risk reduction,
climate change adaptation, recovery 
preparedness, and damage and loss 
assessment42
Baseline (2021): 20
Target (2027): 25 municipalities
Source: UNDP, SNG, APMT, annual
3.1.2. Number of social actors43 (by 
sex and age) and prioritized 
populations benefiting from forest-area 
conservation incentives that implement 
sustainable practices44 (IRRF.4.1.1)
Baseline (2022): 3
Target (2027): 18
MPD
MMAyA
MEFP
MRE
Ministry of National Defence
SNG
APMT
ASFI
United Nations organizations
GEF
GCF
NAMA Facility
Adaptation Fund
CAF
SIDA
AECID
BDP
Academia
GCN-Bolivia
Foundations and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs)
Private sector 
Regular resources
750
Other resources
37,434.397
42 PDES
43 Indigenous people, with UNV support 
44 Energy transitionSource: UNDP, MMAyA, annual
3.1.3. Area (in hectares) of forest areas 
managed under conservation incentives 
through sustainable practices 
Baseline (2022): 45,880
Target (2027): 61,145
Source: UNDP, MMAyA, annual
National priority: PDES axis 1; 7; 9; 10. Cultures decolonization and depatriarchalization
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #4 (3.3 UNSDCF): The State and society strengthen social cohesion, inter-culturalism, depatriarchalization and the constructive and peaceful 
transformation of conflicts, and promote societies free of racism and all forms of discrimination.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: 2. No one left behind 
4.1. Number of annual reports on 
monitoring and results of effective 
governance and gender sensitivity in the 
fulfilment of autonomic competencies45
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 5
Sources: MRE, MJTI, MPD, INE
Frequency: Annual
4.1. Institutional, public, private and 
social actors have capabilities to 
implement governance mechanisms for 
multilevel coordination and 
articulation, and inclusive public 
policies management.
4.1.1. Number of agreements to 
implement multidimensional, resilient 
health-care systems integrated into local 
government planning (IRRF.6.1.2)
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2027): 6
Source: Selected SNGs, annual
4.1.2. Number of subnational platforms 
that build public policy agreements to 
reduce vulnerabilities and inequalities
related to public services, gender and 
other sensitive areas
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2027): 6 
Source: Selected SNGs, annual
MPD
MRE
MJTI
Ministry of Government
MMAyA
MEFP
Vice-President’s office 
Plurinational Legislative Assembly (ALP)
SNG
United Nations organizations
SIDA
AECID
European Commission
Academia
Supreme Court and Departmental Electoral 
Courts
i)
Regular resources
750
Other resources
7,961.860
4.2. Bolivian State strengthens its 
institutional framework to guarantee 
the exercise of rights, administration of 
justice, transparency and 
accountability.
45 PDESDP/DCP/BOL/4
4.2.1. Gender-sensitive strategy to reform 
the property registration system 
developed and validated by multi-actor 
and multilevel platforms
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2027): 1 
Source: UNDP, MJTI, annual 4.2.2. Number of coordinated agreements 
between TSE and ALP to reform the 
electoral system
(IRRF.2.4.1.b)
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2027): 2 
Source: UNDP, TSE, ALP, annual 4.3. Society and State reduce levels of 
polarization and distrust, promoting 
dialogue, social cohesion and a 
peaceful climate, with participation of 
vulnerable populations.
4.3.1. Number of governance platforms 
to build agreements on social cohesion, 
economic reactivation and environment 
function (IRRF.2.1.3.b)
Baseline: 0
Target: 4 
Source: MRE, selected SNGs, annual
4.3.2. Number of multi-actor and 
multilevel platforms designed for 
monitoring, reporting and verification in 
selected nationally determined 
contribution sectors with territorial and 
gender-sensitive approach
Baseline: 0
Target: 2 
Source: UNDP, MMAyA, MPD, annual