File Name: BRB-NEP-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Barbados
Country Code: BRB
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2019
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Barbados National
Energy Policy
2019 –2030LIST OF TABLES
LIST OF FIGURES
LIST OF ACRONYMS
FOREWORD
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
CORE VALUES
VISION STATEMENT
VISIONARY GOALS
OVERALL OBJECTIVES
TARGET ENERGY MIX
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION
1.1 PURPOSE OF THE BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY 
POLICY (BNEP) (2019-2030)
What is the BNEP designed to achieve?
1.2 SECTION 1 OVERVIEW
1.3 BARBADOS ENERGY SECTOR- BRIEF DISCUSSION
Electricity
Solar Water Heaters
Solar PV
Wind Energy
Bio-energy
Natural Gas for Domestic Cooking and Industry
Transportation
Energy Efficiency
BREA
Energy Consumers
Petroleum
Barbados Energy Roadmap - Produced 
by IRENA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
6
6
7
8
14
16
17
20
20
22
25
26
26
26
26
28
28
28
28
28
28
29
29
29
29
30
304.2.1 Oil and Gas Supply Sector Objectives
Policy Measures - Oil and Gas Supply
4.2.2 Renewable Energy Supply
Renewable Energy Supply Sector Objectives
Sector Objectives Specific to Solar Energy
Sector Objectives Specific to Bio-energy
Sector Objectives Specific to Wind Energy
Energy Storage - Renewable Energy
Policy Measures - Renewable Energy Sector 
and Storage 
4.3 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND 
ENERGY CONSERVATION
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Sector 
Specific Objectives
Policy Measures - Energy Efficiency 
and Conservation
4.4 ELECTRICITY SECTOR
Electricity Sector Specific Objectives
Policy Measures Electricity Supply
4.5 ENERGY AND TRANSPORTATION
Transport Sector Specific Objectives
Policy Measures Transport Sector
4.6 ENERGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Energy and Environment Sector Objectives
Policy Measures -Energy and the Environment
Climate Change
Climate Change Sector Specific Objectives
Policy Measures for Climate Change
Human Resources and Institutions: Capacity 
and Development
4.7 HUMAN RESOURCES AND INSTITUTIONS - 
CAPACITY SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
PliMfHR
1.4 REGIONAL ENERGY CONTEXT AND ITS 
INFLUENCE ON BARBADOS
1.5. INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONTEXT AND ITS 
INFLUENCE ON BARBADOS 
1.5.1 Economy
 Expected Future International Energy Market 
1.5.2 Climate Change
1.5.3 Technology
1.6 REGULATORY AND LEGISLATIVE CONTEXT 
1.7 BARBADOS ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND 
DEMAND - SUMMARY CHARTS AND TABLES 
1.7.1 National Energy Use 
1.7.2 Electricity Generation
1.8 MULTI-CRITERIA APPROACH (MCA)
SECTION 2: PRELIMINARY ENERGY MIX TARGETS 
Energy Efficiency Target
The Natural Gas Factor
SECTION 3: VISION, GOALS, AND 
OVERALL OBJECTIVES
3.1 STRUCTURE
3.2 CORE VALUES
3.3 VISIONARY GOALS
3.4 OVERALL OBJECTIVES
SECTION 4: SECTOR SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES 
& MEASURES
4.1 INTRODUCTION
4.2 ENERGY SUPPLY
66
66
67
69
71
72
72
72
74
75
 
76
76
77
78
80
80
81
81
83
84
84
84
86
86
86
87
88
31 
32
32
 34
37
37
38
40
40
 42
45
47
49
51
53
54
57
58
61
63
64
64
TABLE OF CONTENTS cont’d4.8 ENERGY AND THE CROSS-CUTTING 
SECTORS - OVERVIEW AND OBJECTIVES
4.8.1 Agriculture
Agriculture Sector Specific Objectives
4.8.2 Tourism
Tourism Sector Specific Objectives
Industry, Manufacturing and Construction
4.8.3 Manufacturing, Construction and Building Sector 
Specific Objectives
Key Policy Measures for the Waste
Management Sector
4.8.4 Waste Management Sector Specific Objectives
Water 
Water Sector Specific Objectives
4.8.5 Health and Safety
Health and Safety and Environment Sector 
Specific Objectives
Disaster Management
Sector Specific Objectives - Disaster Management
Key Policy Measures - Cross Cutting Areas
4.9 TRADE IN GOODS AND SERVICES WITHIN 
THE ENERGY SECTOR
Trade in Energy Specific Objectives
Policy Measures - Energy Trade
4.10 ENERGY ACCESS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Energy Access and infrastructure Specific 
Sector Objectives
Policy Measures for Energy Access 
and Infrastructure
4.11 ENERGY INVESTMENT AND FINANCING 
Investment and Financing Sector Objectives
Policy Measures Energy Investment 
and Financing
4.12 IMPLEMENTATION, GOVERNANCE AND 
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Governance and Regulatory Framework Sector 
Specific Objectives
Policy Measures - Governance and 
Regulatory Framework
SECTION 5: POLICY TARGETS & DEVELOPMENT 
OF IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
SECTION 6: DEVELOPMENT OF INDICATORS & 
MONITORING SYSTEM
REFERENCES
89
90
90
90
91
91
91
92
92
92
92
92
93
93
95
95
96
96
96
98
98
98
98
98
98
99
103
103
105
109
124Table 1: List of Main Indicators
Table 2: Total Fuel Consumption for Electricity 
Production 2015
Table 3: Estimations of Installed Capacity 
by Technology
Table 4: Estimations of Installed Storage
Table 5: Main Indicators and Targets for BNEP
23
43
48
49
106
List of TABLES
40
41
43
44
54
59
100
101
Figure 1: Total Barrels of Oil Demand per Day
Figure 2: Demand by Energy Source 2006 to 2015
Figure 3: Fuel Inputs for Electricity Production 
2015 Barbados
Figure 4: Electricity Sales by Demand Group
Figure 5: Policy Inverted Pyramid
Figure 6: Summary Table of Vision Statement 
and Visionary Goals
Figure 7: Priority Geographical Areas for Renewable 
Energy Deployment
Figure 8: Source: Dr. Thomas Rogers, A Desktop 
Study into the Wind Resource in Barbados, 2017
List of FIGURESList of Acronyms
BCC Barbados Community College
BDS$ Barbados Dollar
BFF Bridging Fossil Fuel
BL&P Barbados Light and Power Co. Ltd.
BNEP Barbados National Energy Policy
BNOC Barbados National Oil Company
BOE Barrels of Oil Equivalent
BOPD Barrels of Oil per Day
BREA Barbados Renewable Energy 
 Association BTU British Thermal Unit
BWA Barbados Water Authority
CIF Cost Insurance and Freight
C-SERMS Caribbean Sustainable Energy 
 Roadmap and Strategy CARICOM
 Caribbean Community
MEWR Ministry of Energy and Water 
 Resources DRC Domestic 
 Resource Cost
EIA Energy Information Administration
ELPA Electric Light and Power Act
EU European Union
EV Electric Vehicle
FCA Fuel Clause Adjustment
FOB Freight on Board
FTC Fair Trading Commission
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GWh Gigawatt hours
IADB Inter-American Development Bank
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on 
 Climate Change
IPP Independent Power Producer
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency 
kt Kilotonne
kW Kilowatt
kWh Kilowatt hours
LEED Leadership in Energy 
 and Environmental Design
MCA Multi-Criteria Approach
MMBTU Million British Thermal Units 
MTBE Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether
MUS$ Millions of US Dollars
MWh Megawatt hours
NDC Nationally Determined Contributions
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NPC National Petroleum Corporation
OTEC Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
PAM Policy Analysis Matrix
PPA Power Purchase Agreements
PUB Public Utilities Board
PV Photovoltaics
RER Renewable Energy Rider
RFP Request for Proposals
SEFB Sustainable Energy Framework 
 for Barbados 
SIDS Small Island Developing States
SJPI Samuel Jackman Prescod Institute 
 of Technology
TCF Trillion Cubic Feet
TVET Technical Vocational Education 
and Training 
UNEP United Nations Environment 
 Programme 
UWI University of the West Indies
WDA Woodbourne Development AreaIt is with great pleasure that I present the Barbados 
National Energy Policy 2019-2030. This revolutionary 
policy will see the transformation of Barbados from 
a petroleum based economy to the first green, 100% 
renewable energy and carbon neutral island state in 
the world. This initiative will build a sustainable energy 
sector based on the use of renewable energy, energy 
efficiency and conservation with the export of fossil 
fuels found either onshore or offshore, to assist in the 
development of this new paradigm.
We are cognizant of the fact that fossil fuels dominate 
Barbados’ current energy mix, as over 90% of the 
energy used for electricity production in Barbados is 
derived from carbon based fuels which is a drain on 
foreign exchange resources. In addition, the volatility 
in pricing associated with these products exposes 
the economy to exogenous shocks which adversely 
impacts the competitiveness and economic resilience 
of the country. The Government has therefore taken 
the decision to totally transform the economy of 
Barbados through the de-risking of its direct link to the 
FOREWORD
exposure of volatile fossil fuel markets and has created 
a timeframe during which Barbados’ transition to a 
sustained Green Economy can and must be achieved.
The Barbados National Energy Policy 2019-2030 
through its set of visionary goals and objectives has 
fully endorsed the Government’s agenda and in this 
regard has as its vision:
“Energy security and affordability through diversity 
and collaboration: Establishing and maintaining a 
sustainable energy sector for Barbados.”
The Barbados National Energy Policy establishes a 
comprehensive policy for Barbados in areas relating 
to the supply and consumption of energy across 
all associated sectors. It was developed using a 
collaborative approach, which included several rounds 
of interviews, stakeholders meetings and consultations 
throughout Barbados’ energy sector. All views were 
considered. The policy also benefitted from the 
consideration of extensive research of regional and 
international jurisdictions that have experienced both 
challenges and opportunities in their transition to a 
sustainable energy sector.
The key approach used in developing the policy was 
a Multi-Criteria Approach (MCA), where the impact 
of the policies chosen were taken from as wideranging a perspective as possible. This meant that the 
cross-cutting nature of the sector was highlighted 
and the often competing interests relating to finance, 
economics, the natural environment, technology and 
social development were considered and consolidated. 
The ambitious Barbados National Energy Policy has 
crafted a course of action to safeguard the responsible 
exploration and production of fossil fuels both onshore 
and offshore, which will be exported and some of 
the proceeds used to further develop the island’s 
sustainable energy sector.As we embark upon this new journey, let us be ever 
mindful that we have set in train an energy revolution 
that will enrich the lives of all Barbadians and inspire 
others around the world.
The Barbados National Energy Policy presents to 
us a course of action, that once implemented will 
result in a diverse sector where energy is reliably 
produced, efficiently consumed and makes a tangible 
contribution, however minute, to climate mitigation.
This policy at its core seeks to ensure that energy is 
affordable to all, while powering our society on the 
basis of collaboration. Our task is therefore not only 
to produce energy but to do so in a manner which 
enfranchises the population by creating a market for 
the wealth generated to be spread and remain onshore. We must therefore as a Small Island Developing 
State strive to realise the goals of this policy work and 
recognise that the sole responsibility for its failure or 
success lies with us.
I wish to express my heartfelt gratitude to all 
the stakeholders who made contributions to the 
development of this policy and to the staff of the 
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources for their 
tireless efforts in this regard. 
This is a “big deal”; the realisation of which will define 
our future
Energy security and affordability 
through diversity and 
collaboration: Establishing and 
maintaining a sustainable energy 
sector for Barbados.
“DIVISION OF ENERGY TEAMEXECUTIVE SUMMARYThis Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP) 2019-2030 
document is designed to achieve the 100% renewable 
energy and carbon neutral island- state transformational 
goals by 2030. These include:
• Provision of reliable, safe, affordable, sustainable, 
modern and climate friendly energy services to all 
residents and visitors.
• Zero domestic consumption of fossil fuels 
economy wide.
• Export of all hydrocarbons produced both on land 
and offshore.
• Maximising local participation (individual and 
corporate) in distributed renewable energy 
(RE) generation and storage (democratisation 
of energy).
• Minimise the outflow of foreign exchange.
• Creating a regional centre of excellence in 
RE research and development.
The BNEP builds on efforts of previous projects 
and activities to establish a comprehensive policy 
for Barbados in areas relating to the supply and 
consumption of energy across all associated sectors. It 
was developed using a collaborative approach, which 
included several rounds of interviews and consultations 
throughout Barbados’ energy sector in 2016 and 2017, 
as well stakeholder meetings in 2018. The policy also 
benefitted from the consideration of research and 
documented accounts of regional and international 
jurisdictions that have experienced both challenges 
and opportunities.
The key approach used in developing the BNEP was a 
Multi-Criteria Approach (MCA), where the impacts of 
the policies chosen were taken from as wide-ranging 
a perspective as possible. This meant that the 
cross-cutting nature of the sector was highlighted 
and issues related to finance, economics, the natural 
environment, technology and social development were 
considered in a consolidated manner.
The BNEP spans all aspects of the energy sector, 
and provides a framework for moving the island 
from a fossil fuel based economy to one completely 
based on renewable energy sources. The policy 
provides direction for managing this revolutionary 
transformation and ensuring viability from all points of 
view along the way.
There is reason for optimism in Barbados’ bold 
embrace of renewable energy technology, as it builds 
on its reputation of being a leader in the Caribbean 
and the western hemisphere. Indeed, the success of 
the solar water heating industry is a source of pride for 
the country, the recent development of the local solar 
photovoltaic (PV) industry and the burgeoning electric 
vehicle market in Barbados are also encouraging. The 
BNEP provides a basis for building on these successes 
while seeking to expand the use of these and other 
renewable energy technologies such as wind and 
biofuels.
However, even as Barbados promotes the development 
of renewable energy, there are ongoing plans to 
explore for fossil fuel resources offshore. This 
patrimony will be pursued aggressively with the view 
to maximise foreign exchange gains from the export of 
any exploited hydrocarbons.
Recognising the importance of the prudent use of 
energy resources as a way to ensuring sustainability 
and a thriving economy, the BNEP also highlights the 
importance of energy efficiency throughout the various 
sectors and subsectors in the industry.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARYMajor sectors of the energy economy that were 
identified inter alia in completing the BNEP were the 
following: • Oil and Gas Supply • Renewable Energy Supply • Energy Efficiency and Conservation • Electricity • Transportation • Environment • Human Resources • Health and Safety • Trade • Governance and Regulation • Other Cross-Cutting Sectors.
This MCA deviated to some extent from previous 
approaches where the least cost approach was more 
dominant. It was thought that in considering these 
sometimes conflicting elements of development, a 
number of core values for energy development in 
Barbados had to be identified. While these core values 
were not ranked, they clarified some of the priorities 
to be considered in making the decisions. The values 
formed the basis of the Vision Statement and Visionary Core Values
The Core Values identified were:
• Economic enfranchisement – ensuring the average 
Barbadian can participate and benefit equitably in 
the new energy paradigm
• Environmental responsibility - elimination of
Barbados’ carbon footprint
• Stability - price, regulatory, technical
• Reliability - including continued access to energy
• Efficiency in the production and consumption of all 
energy resources
• Diversity - reduction of vulnerability through use of 
multiple sources
• Ownership of business - opportunities for local 
investment that minimise the outflow of 
foreign exchange
• Maximum use of indigenous energy resources
• Maximum level of collaboration
• Multidisciplinary cross-cutting approach
• Systematic development of the energy sector based 
on renewable energy
• Education, awareness and capacity building 
• Environmental protection and ecology, especially in 
connection with climate change and public health
• Innovation - develop Barbados as a centre of 
excellence for research and development in 
renewable energy
From these analyses the following Vision Statement 
and Visionary Goals were developed for Barbados.BNEP Vision STATEMENT
Energy security and affordability through diversity and 
collaboration: Establishing and maintaining a sustainable 
“
energy sector for Barbados. “An energy sector that 
offers a diversity of 
sustainable energy 
options...Visionary Goals:
Visionary Goal 1: An energy sector that offers 
a diversity of sustainable energy options, with a 
trajectory to achieve 100% Renewable Energy by 2030 
(core value - diversity).
Visionary Goal 2: An energy sector where 
consumption and production of energy resources 
occur with the maximum level of efficiency feasible 
(core value - efficiency).
Visionary Goal 3: An energy sector that offers basic 
energy products and services that are affordable to 
local citizens (core value - affordability).
Visionary Goal 4: An energy sector that offers 
continuous and reliable supply of energy 
(core value - reliability).
Visionary Goal 5: An energy sector that offers 
opportunities for development of human capacity and 
collaboration (core value - capacity and collaboration).
Visionary Goal 6: An energy sector that offers 
significant opportunities for local entrepreneurship 
and international investment (core value - 
entrepreneurship).
Visionary Goal 7: An energy sector that minimises 
the environmental impacts and contribution to global 
climate change (core value - environment).
Visionary Goal 8: An energy sector that is governed 
by sound management and clear legal regulatory 
frameworks (core value - regulation).
Visionary Goal 9: An energy sector that positions 
Barbados as a centre of excellence for innovation, 
research and development in renewable energy 
(core value - innovation).
Visionary Goal 10: An energy sector that provides 
opportunities for all Barbadians (including the most 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change) to 
participate in and benefit from the transformation 
to 100% RE (core value - equity).
Overall Objectives
From these Visionary Goals, the following Overall 
Objectives were developed for the energy sector.
Overall Objective 1: Increasing the amount of 
renewable energy sources used in the energy mix 
to 100% (related to Visionary Goal 1).
Overall Objective 2: Achieving affordability and access 
to all classes of consumers in energy products and 
services (related to Visionary Goal 3).
Overall Objective 3: Achieving stability and 
predictability in energy product prices over the long 
term (related to Visionary Goal 3).
Overall Objective 4: Establishing a consistent and 
comprehensive legislative and regulatory framework to 
govern activities in various energy sub-sectors (related 
to Visionary Goal 8).
Overall Objective 5: Increasing diversity in the types of 
energy sources used within the energy sector (related 
to Visionary Goal 1).
Overall Objective 6: Increasing the extent of 
renewable energy resources used in Barbados 
that are obtained from indigenous sources 
(related to Visionary Goal 6).
Overall Objective 7: Encouraging local investment 
in energy projects and programmes in Barbados, 
with a view to increasing the number of shareholders 
and players in the various energy sub-sectors 
(related to Visionary Goal 6).
Overall Objective 8: Promoting more local 
entrepreneurial activities in renewable energy and 
increasing fossil fuel energy development for export 
throughout the energy sub-sectors (related to 
Visionary Goal 6).
Overall Objective 9: Increasing collaboration within 
the energy sub-sectors and among the cross-cutting 
sectors that have an impact on energy supply or 
consumption (related to Visionary Goal 5).Overall Objective 10: Improving the efficiency in the 
production and consumption of energy products within 
the various sub-sectors (related to Visionary Goal 2).
Overall Objective 11: Improving the awareness and 
understanding of energy production and consumption, 
its impacts and the associated environmental and 
socio-economic consequences within all sections 
of the public (related to Visionary Goal 5).
Overall Objective 12: Increasing the number of 
persons locally with qualifications and skills relating to 
energy production and management of renewable and 
fossil fuel sources (related to Visionary Goal 5).
Overall Objective 13: Reducing the environmental 
impacts associated with the production 
and consumption of energy resources 
locally (related to Visionary Goal 7).
Overall Objective 14: Ensuring reliability 
and continuity of energy supply in the 
various local energy subsectors (related 
to Visionary Goals 4).
Overall Objective 15: Attaining the 
lowest price sustainable by the local 
economy for various energy sources 
consumed in Barbados, while maintaining 
environmental efficiency (related to 
Visionary Goal 3).
Overall Objective 16: Establishing 
effective partnerships between national 
and international entities for local energy 
projects (related to Visionary Goal 6).
Overall Objective 17: Establishing 
effective systems to support 
a hub for research and development in 
renewable energy (related to Visionary 
Goal 9).
Overall Objective 18: Maximise the use of small 
scale distributed generation within the energy mix 
(related to Visionary Goal 10).
These Overall Objectives were used as the basis for 
Specific Sector Objectives within the different sectors, 
some of which were identified above. The discussion 
and list of Specific Sector Objectives are included in 
the main document.
The Specific Sector Objectives were used as the basis 
of some suggested measures also included in the main 
document. These measures will be expanded in the 
development of the Implementation Plan, which is 
expected to emerge as the next stage of the work 
after the completion of the BNEP.Target Energy Mix
The BNEP used a planning horizon of 11 years 
(2019-2030), and assessed current activities and 
projections in energy use for Barbados to develop 
targets in percentage mix for energy use in GWh. 
These targets were set more as a basis for discussion 
than as absolute goals. They generated much debate 
throughout the consultation process and are expected 
to be reviewed and modified if necessary within 
the timeframe.
Targets can be viewed as minimum levels to be 
obtained. However, if stakeholders are able to exceed 
the targets, this would be desirable, especially if 
they improve financial, environmental, economic or 
technological performance.
The proposed target mix is anticipated to result in an 
annual total energy savings of $400 - $800 million per 
year at current market prices. The discounted social 
profit or benefit to Barbados is estimated at $3.9 billion 
annually from the removal of fossil fuels. In order 
to achieve the above benefits the heavy fossil fuel 
reductions required are:
During the planning horizon (2019 to 2030) there 
will still be economic activities such as construction, 
cruise tourism, air transport and fisheries which may 
not be technologically possible to power completely 
by renewable energy. It is also noted that there are 
currently approximately 22,000 local consumers of 
natural gas and the network is likely to be expanded. 
It is the Government’s policy to phase out local 
consumption of natural gas by 2030, replacing 
natural gas with an appropriate renewable fuel(s).
The above fossil fuel reduction targets can be stated 
as increased production of energy from renewable 
energy targets for electricity generation where 
feasible. The targets below are expressed in terms 
of renewable energy.
In this approach, factors including economic deficits, 
level of taxation, GDP, oil prices, and costs of tradeable 
and non-tradeable goods were considered.
The indicators below are among those that will be used 
to monitor the performance of the energy sector over the 
planning horizon:
49%
fossil fuel 
reduction 
by 2023
100%
fossil fuel 
reduction 
by 2030 52%
Increase in 
renewable
energy 
by 2023
100%
Increase in 
renewable
energy 
by 2023It is important to note that the Implementation Plan 
will not only develop indicators and targets, but it will 
also identify more specific programmes, determine 
strategies and assign the roles and responsibilities to 
various groups, organisations and agencies to achieve 
these objectives. There will also be an assessment 
of resources needed for various actions, and some 
suggestions of funding options for consideration.
Establishing the appropriate indicators is critical in 
determining an effective system of monitoring that will 
allow the BNEP to be updated and revised on a timely 
basis for continuous improvement. It is expected that 
the government will work with members within the 
different sectors to develop the Implementation Plan.
The recently developed NGO, Barbados Renewable 
Energy Association (BREA), is expected to play a role 
in the area of renewable energy development and 
energy efficiency, advocating on behalf of the energy 
sector. Other stakeholders likely to be involved will 
include The Barbados Light & Power Co. Ltd. (BL&P), 
the Barbados National Oil Co. (BNOC), the Fair Trading 
Commission (FTC), the Barbados National Standards, 
Government Electrical and Engineering Department, 
various government ministries in energy and other 
Name of Indicator (Units) Baseline (2015)
Aggregate Energy Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 324
Total Energy Consumption per Capita (BOE/Persons) 5.03
Percent Share of Renewable Energy of Total Energy (%) 2
CO2 Emissions/Final Consumption (kt/BOE) 0.0029
Total No. of Persons Employed in the Energy Sector (No.) N/A
Electricity Generation Efficiency (%) 37
Percent of electric vehicles (%) 0
Percentage of distributed generation (%) 2
Percent Share of Renewable Energy Investment of Total GDP (%) 0.6
Table 1: List of Main IndicatorsOver the years, Barbados 
has sought to maintain an 
energy sector where energy 
resources are universally 
available at reasonable prices.
“INTRODUCTION
SECTION 1 1.1 Purpose of the Barbados National 
Energy Policy (BNEP) (2019-2030)
The BNEP was developed to provide clear direction to the 
government in the short, medium and long term, for the 
development of renewable and non-renewable aspects 
of energy. Issues related to energy production, energy 
consumption and energy efficiency are considered 
and addressed.
What is the BNEP designed to achieve?
The BNEP is intended to provide a framework to guide 
decision making with regard to energy development 
in Barbados. At the outset, it defines a broad Vision 
Statement followed by Visionary Goals and Overall 
Objectives up to 2030. Later in the document, specific 
objectives under the various sub-sectors are identified. 
There are also some recommended measures that are 
expected to play a role in achieving the goals identified.
It is important to note that the BNEP is NOT designed 
to prescribe specific, detailed actions to be taken 
in any of the sub-sectors identified. It also does not 
determine specific targets within the various sub-sectors, 
strategies needed within the sector, or specific roles and 
responsibilities of individuals or agencies that are required 
to achieve its stated goals and objectives.
All these aspects are undeniably important if the 
BNEP is to be effective, but it is expected that these will 
be explored in more detail in the Implementation Plan, 
which will be developed as a follow-up to this document.
Nonetheless, the BNEP suggests some sector-wide 
targets for energy mix based on the Ministry of Energy 
and Water Resources (MEWR) data, highlighting the 
availability and cost of various energy sources.
The policy’s 11-year planning horizon allows for the 
assessment of long- term scenarios and impacts, with 
frequent reviews of the document as circumstances 
change. It is recommended that a policy review be 
undertaken at least once every five years. Modifications 
to policy recommendations are not only possible, 
but expected.
1.2 Section 1 Overview
This first section discusses the Barbados energy sector, 
highlighting achievements, activities and challenges 
up to 2017. The section also provides an assessment 
of likely present and future influencing factors on the 
sector from a regional and international perspective. 
The legislative and regulatory framework that governs 
activities within the energy sector in Barbados is then 
presented within the context of information emerging 
from these factors.
Charts detailing the current energy mix and associated 
costs are presented, as is a description of the MultiCriteria Approach (MCA), which is used as the 
underlying approach for developing the BNEP.
The section sets the context for the Objectives and 
Targets outlined later in the document.
1.3 Barbados Energy Sector - 
Brief Discussion
Over the years, Barbados has sought to maintain an 
energy sector where energy resources are universally 
available at reasonable prices.
The island can be proud of the fact that there is 
virtually 100% access to electricity and that gradually, 
more sustainable forms of energy were being 
integrated into the energy mix in terms of electricity 
INTRODUCTIONThe island can be proud of the fact that there is virtually 100% access to 
electricity and that gradually, more sustainable forms of energy were being 
integrated into the energy mix in terms of electricity delivery and other 
energy services.
delivery and other energy services. However, the main 
fuel for electricity generation remains Bunker “C” 
heavy fuel oil and the main fuels for transportation 
remain diesel and gasoline. The rate of transformation 
to RE in both the electricity generation and transport 
sectors must be aggressively accelerated to meet the 
2030 Vision.Electricity
The island’s electric utility, The Barbados Light & 
Power Co. Ltd. (BL&P), established in 1899, was one of 
the earliest in the Caribbean. It is a vertically integrated 
monopoly, regulated by the Fair Trading Commission 
(FTC), and is now totally owned by Emera Inc., a 
Canadian based company. Their existing license, which 
was gained in 1986, allows BL&P to have the sole 
franchise to sell electricity in Barbados up to 2028.
Given the planning horizon of the BNEP, the issue of 
extension of the license or a change in the structure 
of the electricity market will need to be addressed as 
this policy goes into implementation. We discuss later 
how changes in technology towards more renewable 
decentralised forms of energy may necessitate a 
change in the structure of the industry. However, 
details on the electricity industry and opportunities for 
competition or new business models are outside the 
scope of the BNEP.
Solar Water Heaters
Starting in 1974, in the midst of the international oil 
crisis, Barbados invested in the area of solar water 
heating, and that industry now stands out like a beacon 
of success in the Caribbean. A series of government 
economic incentives and tax write-offs coupled with 
strong entrepreneurship shown by early developers, 
led to significant growth of the industry. There are 
local companies that now export to the rest of the 
Caribbean and even further afield. Indeed, Barbados 
is one of the leading countries for solar water heaters 
per capita, both in the western hemisphere and 
the world.
Barbados, having established itself as a regional leader 
in renewable energy through its success in solar water 
heating, seeks to build on that reputation by achieving 
similar success in developing other renewable energy 
technologies. However, while there have been some 
successes, there is still much more that can be done on 
the island to achieve the desired level of sustainability.
Solar PV
Recent efforts in securing a more sustainable energy 
mix provide reason for optimism. The establishment of 
photovoltaic projects throughout the island in the last 
five years has led to many new players either getting 
involved or expanding in the market. The local utility 
has also played its part by establishing a 10 MW solar 
farm. The government has set a distributed generation 
target of having at least 35,000 buildings with rooftop 
or ground-mounted solar PV systems that are resilient 
to extreme wind events (e.g. Category 4 Hurricanes).
Wind Energy
While wind energy has not taken off significantly, 
there are plans to develop this technology to 
complement existing solar installations. BL&P 
continues to investigate the possibility of establishing 
a wind farm in Lambert’s, St. Lucy alongside the 
existing PV farm there.
Bio-energy
Also, in light of a declining sugar cane industry on the 
island, there is increasing confidence in the agricultural 
sector that there can be greater use of biomass and 
biogas in the energy sector. Bagasse has, at times, 
been used to generate energy in the sugar cane 
industry and there is considerable interest in building 
on this experience, with some farmers considering 
switching to high fibre canes to produce biomass 
rather than sugar.
Natural Gas for Domestic Cooking and Industry
The National Petroleum Corporation (NPC) currently 
has approximately 22,000 customers of which 
approximately 1,000 are commercial entities. There is 
continued demand for piped natural gas for cooking 
as an alternative to liquified petroleum gas (LPG) 
influenced by the current pricing mechanism for 
natural gas and convenience. Similarly, industries use 
natural gas as the fuel source for their boilers. Current 
demand for natural gas is approximately 1.7 million 
cubic feet per day (approximately half of which is now 
imported as domestic supply has declined). It is noted
 that the NPC plans to expand the natural gas distribution 
network. To achieve the 2030 Vision of zero fossil fuel 
consumption domestically, it will be necessary to switch 
from piped natural gas to a piped biogas if the distribution 
network is not to become a stranded asset.
In the new energy scenario, with a significant 
amount of distributed rooftop solar PV and battery 
storage, widespread use of electric vehicles and 
the discontinuation of the use of natural gas, it is 
anticipated that consumers (households currently 
using natural gas or LPG) may switch to energy 
efficient, modern electric stoves.While the use of solar water heaters for hot water only 
contribute a small percentage of energy in the overall 
energy mix, there is no doubt that this industry has 
made a significant social impact at a household level. 
This signals to consumers that it is possible to achieve 
environmental sustainability in energy use, while at the 
same time achieving economic benefits.
Transportation
Barbados is already a leader in the region with over 
300 electric vehicles on the road. However, this is 
a small percentage of the approximately 100,000 
vehicles on the island. The 2030 Vision calls for the 
elimination of the use of diesel and gasoline for local 
transport over the next decade. This will require either 
retrofitting of the existing fleet and/or restricting the 
importation of conventional vehicles and incentivising 
the importation of electric and alternative renewable 
fuel vehicles. Additionally, a much more efficient mass 
transit system will be required. A reliable charging 
station infrastructure will need to be rapidly developed 
to provide consumer confidence along with training of 
a cadre of technicians to install, operate and maintain 
the new green transportation technologies.
While there is still a lot to be done to establish 
suitable infrastructure for increased use of EVs and 
other vehicles powered by alternative fuels, the local 
petroleum companies appear open to facilitating the 
change as long as the costs for such transitions can be 
done in the most equitable manner feasible.
Energy Efficiency
Efforts in Barbados have not been limited to energy 
production. In the area of energy conservation and 
energy efficiency, there have also been projects 
designed to retrofit incandescent and fluorescent 
lights with LEDs. Moreover, efforts are ongoing to 
establish and implement efficiency standards for 
buildings, refrigeration and air conditioners.
BREA
Interest in pursuing renewable energy development 
further has been such that a NGO, the Barbados 
Renewable Energy Association (BREA), was 
established within the last eight years. BREA was 
created to advocate for the use of renewable energy, 
and facilitate the continued growth of the industry. The 
advocacy and research roles of NGOs will be critical to 
achieving the 2030 Vision.
Energy Consumers
Apart from efforts made at the domestic and the 
individual entrepreneurship levels, large consumers of 
electricity have also begun to address sustainability 
through self-generation or developing large-scale 
renewable energy projects for themselves. The 
Barbados Water Authority (BWA) is one such entity 
that has been exploring that option.Petroleum
Meanwhile, even as there are considerable efforts 
to develop renewable energy projects and improve 
energy efficiency in the sector, there are continued 
efforts to gain more fossil fuel resources through 
government’s drilling and exploration exercises 
offshore. The possibility of a significant oil or gas 
find could potentially lead to considerable economic 
benefits for Barbados when used for export. Any such 
fossil fuel resource should be developed in a way 
that it does not affect the overall trajectory to the 
sustainability of the entire energy sector.
Barbados Energy Roadmap - Produced by IRENA
During the development of the BNEP, the Ministry of 
Energy and Water Resources (MEWR) also engaged 
the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) 
to develop a daft Renewable Energy Roadmap 
for Barbados.
IRENA’s study focused largely on the electricity sector 
and the possibilities for greater efficiency, as well as an 
increased use of renewable energy. That draft roadmap 
identified the following goals as part of the Barbados 
Government’s vision.
An energy sector that:
• Enhances economic growth by reducing 
energy costs.
• Improves energy security by reducing 
dependency on imported fossil fuels.
• Reduces cost of energy service for consumers.
• Reduces investments needed for power 
generation by promoting energy efficiency 
and conservation.
• Reduces the emission of greenhouse gases 
and local pollutants from fossil fuels.
The economic, environmental and social goals 
identified in their study are in keeping with the goals 
identified through the analysis of the Barbados energy 
sector in developing this policy. The BNEP’s goals are 
consistent with many of the goals presented in the 
roadmap and provide a framework for further actions 
that can be developed from it.
The draft roadmap considers future scenarios with 
increased energy efficiency on the demand customer 
side, a low oil price scenario, and a scenario where a 
greater number of electric vehicles are imported. All of 
this is considered within the context of the government’s 
intended Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) 
emerging from the Paris Agreement in 2015. This NDC 
sets a goal of 65% of electricity generation to be produced 
from renewable sources by 2030. The NDC will be revised 
to reflect the new 100% RE, economy wide, goal.
Although the BNEP attempts to give direction for 
the Implementation Plan and activities in the various 
sectors, there was need for a level of flexibility to allow 
for the assessment and evaluation of technologies 
not yet considered viable, but that may become major 
players in the future.
The BNEP therefore is designed to focus on the ‘how’ 
rather than the ‘what’ with respect to energy sector 
development.
In addition to the focus on flexibility, it is recognised 
that the BNEP will need to be considered in the 
context of broader economic policy documents in 
other sub-sectors of the Barbados Government. This 
will include policies such as the industrial policy, the 
trade policy, the transport policy and the disaster 
management policy.
It is also expected that the BNEP will help in giving 
further guidance and streamline existing processes.fossil fuels 
account for 
80%
of the primary energy 
supply. Other major 
resources of energy 
within the region are 
hydro, solar, wind, 
biomass and geothermal
1.4 Regional Energy Context and its 
Influence on Barbados
The Caribbean Community (CARICOM) encompasses 
twenty countries in the Caribbean region focusing on 
“economic integration; foreign policy coordination; 
human and social development; and security” 
(CARICOM, 2016). CARICOM seeks to safeguard 
each member’s access to clean, reliable, affordable 
and stable energy and also aids the progression of 
comparable regional industries.
Within the Caribbean, the energy context is dictated 
by the international energy market, as fossil fuels 
account for 80% of the primary energy supply. Other 
major resources of energy within the region are hydro, 
solar, wind, biomass and geothermal. The Caribbean 
Community has established targets of 47% reduction in 
fossil fuel use by 2027 (C-SERMS).
The CARICOM Energy Policy (2013) is a wide-ranging 
framework document that considers issues of energy 
production and consumption (both renewable and 
non-renewable programmes) from a regional perspective. 
The issue of trade between territories and the impacts 
of programmes such as Petro Caribe are discussed in this 
policy. However, it should be noted that Barbados was 
not a signatory to the Petro Caribe agreement. The main 
goals of the CARICOM Energy Policy are:
(a) provision of sustainable and secure supplies of 
energy, accessible to all CARICOM citizens;
(b) fundamental transformation of the energy 
sectors of the Member States of the Community 
so that they can contribute to the sustainable 
development of the Community;
(c)optimisation of domestic production of energy 
in an environmentally sound manner; and
(d)facilitation of the growth of internationally 
competitive regional industries.
These goals are similar to some of the core values of the 
BNEP that are discussed in the next section.
Regional integration with other Caribbean countries 
is an option for meeting future energy supply needs 
(regional projects, sharing of research and development, 
harmonisation of policies, laws etc.). However, there are 
distinct challenges in the coordination of relevant policies, 
strategies and plans. There are also issues pertaining to 
the unavailability of timely and relevant data, pricing and 
the increasing international demand for petroleum, rising 
petroleum prices, and the security of supplies for regional 
trade (CARICOM Energy Policy, 2013).
“1.5. International Energy Context and 
its Influence on Barbados
1.5.1 Economy
The state of the international or global economy 
can impact the economic performance of Barbados 
and affect attitudes to spending and investments. 
Over the last eight years, the international economy 
experienced contraction and low growth in some major 
industrialised countries. The global economy, according 
to the United Nations, grew at a slower pace of 1.8% 
over the period 2008 to 2015. During the last 8 to 10 
years, the global economy was characterised by:
• A financial debt crisis.
• High and escalating oil prices.
• Declining and low interest rates.
• High liquidity in the banking sector.
• Weak demand for goods and services.
• Fluctuating employment.
The global economy is comprised of countries and 
trading blocs that are recovering, as well as those that 
continue to grapple with economic uncertainty. The 
USA, for example, employed monetary policies such as 
quantitative easing to address its debt problem, while 
the European Union (EU) initially used austerity but 
with limited success. However, the EU has engaged its 
own brand of quantitative easing, which has resulted 
in some stabilization in employment, inflation, and 
GDP. Other countries whose economies are based 
on commodities, especially those based on oil, 
experienced economic contraction beginning in 2014.
China, which operates a planned (not market driven) 
economy, has engaged in a controlled decline of 
economic output of 7%. This controlled decline has 
resulted in decline in other markets, and in commodity 
based economies in particular. It is expected that global 
economic growth will continue to be uneven over the 
next decade.
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) such as 
Barbados are especially vulnerable to international 
factors, mainly because of their remoteness, lack 
of economic diversification and high reliance on 
international imports.
International oil prices have an impact on short and 
medium term renewable energy development. Higher 
oil prices often result in greater local interest in 
renewable energy development to offset the high cost 
of energy from fossil fuels.
For example, as oil prices soared to $147 per barrel 
in 2008 (far above the long-run average of $45 
per barrel), there was considerable interest in the 
development of renewable energy technologies 
throughout the Caribbean, to mitigate the impact of 
the higher cost of energy from fossil fuels. In 2010, 
the Renewable Energy Rider (RER) was introduced 
and this led to a substantial increase in the number 
of solar photovoltaic (PV) installations. During the 
period 2013 to 2015, PV installations expanded
 five-fold, moving capacity from 1.6 megawatts to 9MW 
(Investigation of Likely Reactions to the Removal of 
Green Energy Incentives – Antilles Economics 2016).
The expansion of PV installations benefited in large 
measure from the facilitation of the RER, and the fiscal 
incentives implemented in 2013 to support the use 
of renewable energy in electricity supply by homes 
and businesses (Investigation of Likely Reactions to 
the Removal of Green Energy Incentives – Antilles 
Economics 2016). This proved to be a good incentive 
for the development and installation of PV and other 
renewable energy technologies. However, as oil prices 
have fallen, the BL&P’s Fuel Clause Adjustment (FCA) 
has also been reduced, resulting in considerably less 
incentive for new individuals to start generating 
electricity to sell to the grid through renewable 
energy technologies. Meanwhile, higher oil prices 
internationally also increased the incentive to explore 
and extract petroleum resources that may be more 
costly to produce.
One of the main aspects of the BNEP and the 
Implementation Plan that will follow, is to ensure 
that the incentives for renewable energy generation 
remains high at times when oil prices are both high and 
low. There will also be a need to ensure that Barbados 
is able to take advantage of onshore and offshore 
petroleum resources when prices on the international 
kt fbltthidltExpected Future International Energy Market
Given that Barbados currently remains a net 
importer of petroleum products, it is a price taker. 
Therefore an understanding of oil price forecasts 
in the short-term and the long-term can help to 
inform appropriate courses of action by policy 
makers. According to the U.S. Energy Information 
Administration (EIA), it is expected that global energy 
consumption will continue on its upward trend over 
the next thirty years. This view of future demand 
is driven by the conclusion that economies such as 
China and India will account for more than half of 
the world’s total increase in energy by 2040. The 
International Energy Outlook 2016 as presented by the 
EIA, projects that by 2040 global energy consumption 
will increase by 48% from 549 quadrillion BTUs (99.2 
billion barrels of oil) to 815 quadrillion BTUs (147.2 
billion barrels of oil). It is further anticipated that much 
of the increased consumption of global energy will be 
derived from the developing and emerging economies, 
which are expected to register an increase in energy 
consumption of 71% by 2040
The increased consumption in global energy is 
expected to be driven by increased economic growth 
in the developing and emerging economies. Indeed, 
the International Energy Outlook 2016 has projected 
that the world’s GDP, adjusted for purchasing power, 
will increase at an annual rate of 3.3%. Furthermore, 
the Outlook projects that economic growth in the 
developing and emerging economies will expand on 
average by 4.2% per annum.
The International Energy Outlook 2016 further 
indicates that its expectation is for increased 
consumption across all the major energy sources. 
Interestingly, the Outlook points to renewable energy 
sources being the fastest growing energy source 
for the period up to 2040, with consumption of this 
resource growing at an annual rate of 2.6%. The view 
of the International Energy Outlook 2016 is that 
nuclear power will be the second- fastest growing 
energy source by 2040, expanding at an annual rate 
of 2.3%. The long term international consumption of 
natural gas is expected to increase at a rate of 19% per year where annual consumption is forecasted to 
be approximately 203 TCF by 2040. According to the 
US Energy Information Administration – International 
Energy Outlook 2016, natural gas is an important 
fuel in the production of electricity. This is the case, 
as natural gas is viewed as an attractive fuel source 
because of its fuel efficiency. Consequently, several 
governments worldwide, as a means of reducing CO2 
emissions, promoted the use of natural gas to displace 
the more carbon-intensive fuels. To meet the expected 
growing demand, world producers are projected to 
increase natural gas supplies by an estimated 69% 
by 2040. Although consumption of non-fossil fuels is 
expected to grow at a faster rate than fossil fuel, the 
Outlook projects that fossil fuel will account for 78% 
of energy use by 2040.
Volatility in oil prices is expected to continue, thereby 
contributing to uncertainty within the energy sector 
in the future. If expectations for future consumption 
within the developing and emerging economies hold 
true, the follow-on would be significant increases in 
oil prices. However, a countervailing factor to this 
view is that renewable energy is projected to hold 
more prominence within the energy market and 
will be a constraining factor on energy prices. The 
International Energy Outlook 2016 proffers a reference 
oil price forecast of US$141.00 per barrel for the 
period up to 2040. Of course, this forecast may vary 
and, consequently, the Outlook points to a minimum 
price of US$76.00 per barrel and a maximum oil price 
of US$252.00 per barrel in the long-run. However, 
international oil prices are expected to fluctuate 
between US$20.00 to US$52.00 in the short to 
medium terms, with some occasions where 
there may be breaches of these support and 
resistance boundaries.
Over the last ten years, Barbados faced significant 
constraints, which led to weak economic performance 
where average Gross Domestic Product registered 
flat growth (Barbados Economic Report, 2015). 
Additionally, Barbados has been grappling with high 
fiscal deficits. For example, the fiscal deficit as a 
percentage of GDP was 11.8% in 2013. Rising debt has 
also presented a significant challenge to Barbados over 
the last ten (10) years in terms of its unemployment 
rate. This unemployment rate has hovered between 
10% and 12%. The economic challenges that Barbados 
faced over the last ten years have been observed 
through several credit downgrades by international 
iThddhhd i
The increased 
consumption in global 
energy is expected to 
be driven by increased 
economic growth in 
the developing and 
emerging economies. 
“
The previous target for renewable energy consumption 
was that 29% of its electricity consumption was to be 
supplied by renewable energy by 2029 (Draft Energy 
Policy, 2013). The long-term energy price outlook 
for Barbados will be influenced by the global price 
of energy on the one hand, and its ability to move 
away significantly from fossil-based consumption on 
the other hand. One of the fundamental constraints 
to moving towards more renewable energy sources 
is government’s heavy reliance on the revenue 
derived from fossil fuel consumption. Indeed, this is a 
paradox because fossil fuel consumption contributes 
significantly to the loss of the national resource. 
Therefore, as Barbados moves towards elimination of 
fossil fuel use by 2030, the Government of Barbados 
must overcome its dependence on such sources 
for revenue. This will be one of the key issues to be 
addressed in determining the measures and strategies 
in the Implementation Plan which follows the 
BNEP and for the long-term energy development 
of Barbados.1.5.2 Climate Change
In seeking to develop the BNEP, it was important to 
examine Barbados in the regional and international 
context, including its position as one of the group of 
countries known as Small Island Developing States (SIDS).
Barbados, as a SIDS, is vulnerable to international 
and regional trends and momentary shocks that can 
affect technology, resource availability and the pricing 
of energy products. Barbados and other Caribbean 
Community (CARICOM) members face challenges with 
regard to climate change. These impacts can be felt 
through effects such as higher frequency of extreme 
weather events, rising sea levels, destruction of 
coastlines and inundation of ground water. Generally, 
small islands lack the natural and financial resources 
to alleviate these ongoing challenges (UN 2015).
“Due to their size and location, Caribbean SIDS 
are particularly susceptible to the impacts of 
climate change. As developing economies relying 
on sectors vulnerable to climate patterns such 
as tourism, agriculture and fishing, Caribbean 
nations would be greatly affected by the ongoing 
rise in sea levels, changes in rain patterns and 
temperatures, and increasing intensity of natural 
disasters identified by the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC).” (IADB, 2016)
These types of impacts can have a profound effect on 
the economy, and are caused largely by carbon dioxide 
emissions related to the combustion of fossil fuels. 
The economic consequence of fossil fuel consumption 
in Barbados is that there is a loss of resources through 
foreign exchange, efficiency and environmental costs. 
Analysis indicates that under a business-as–usual 
scenario, the Barbados economy is likely to lose 
on average $0.64 for every dollar of benefit it 
receives from the supply and consumption of 
fossil fuel (MEWR).
Barbados is energy import-dependent and relies 
on trade to meet its energy needs. Consequently, a 
momentary disruption or trade imbalance can lead to 
uncertainty in access to energy as prices fluctuate on 
the world market.
A way of mitigating these impacts is to reduce the 
volume of carbon dioxide emissions by increasing the 
use of renewable energy technologies or investing 
develop schemes to reduce carbon dioxide emissions 
worldwide. Carbon trading schemes such as the 
Clean Development Mechanism, have provided some 
funding opportunities for Caribbean islands to develop 
renewable energy and energy efficiency projects.
1.5.3 Technology
The development of technology to more easily extract 
petroleum resources or to use renewable resources 
more efficiently and at a lower cost, can increase the 
economic viability of activities in the energy sector. 
This can result in more attractive costs to investors 
with lower payback times. Additionally, improvements 
effects such as higher 
frequency of extreme 
weather events, rising 
sea levels, destruction 
of coastlines and 
inundation of ground 
water. Generally, small 
islands lack the natural 
and financial resources 
to alleviate these ongoing 
challenges (UN 2015)
“There have been developments in technology 
worldwide that have affected energy development 
within Barbados and the Caribbean. For example, the 
development of fracking as a means of extracting 
natural gas reserves has increased the availability of 
this particular commodity worldwide, and costs have 
been reduced as a result. Therefore, some traditional 
natural gas producers, such as Trinidad and Tobago, 
have lost market share in locations such as the 
US. Also, there has been greater incentive to look for 
markets in the Caribbean, including Barbados, 
to purchase this natural gas.
Developments in renewable energy technologies 
such as wind and solar have also led to reduction 
in prices per kilowatt hour in recent years. This 
increased economic viability of many renewable energy 
technologies, has led to growth in the industries 
worldwide, as investors and IPPs can now have lower 
payback times and higher rates of return for their 
investments. Barbados and Caribbean islands, with 
their high resource availability of wind and solar 
energy, and comparatively high cost of conventional 
fossil fuels, have become more attractive to investors 
in renewable energy technologies in various parts of 
the world. In Barbados, solar electricity from PVs is the 
renewable energy technology that is growing to the 
greatest extent, with prices per kilowatt hour steadily 
declining. The BNEP promotes a practical approach 
that engages solar electricity technologies that result 
in an overall benefit for Barbados. The policy advances 
an energy mix that considers both intermittent and 
base load renewable energy technologies.
For further development of renewable energy 
technologies, there will also need to be improvements 
in energy storage technologies. This will reduce the 
variability of grid tied renewable energy technologies 
which, due to their intermittent nature, affect the 
stability of the grid.
The opportunity for energy storage is particularly 
relevant to a small island such as Barbados, as the 
grid is isolated, with no provision to interconnect to 
other islands. This means that in many cases, the 
installed capacity for renewable energy sources is 
far greater than that which would be needed for a 
conventional fossil fuel generator to produce the same 
amount of energy in GWh. This is discussed later when 
considering specific challenges to renewable energy 
development and associated targets.
1.6 Regulatory and Legislative Context
In developing the BNEP, it was important to take into 
consideration the current regulatory and legislative 
framework within Barbados. In 2007, the Government 
of Barbados produced an Energy Policy to give 
direction to the development of the overall sector. 
This wide-ranging policy addressed issues relevant to 
the fossil fuel sector and renewable energy resources. 
At that time, the Barbados Government was seeking 
to explore new potential offshore petroleum wells 
while taking advantage of emerging renewable energy 
technologies and markets.
In keeping with the interest in developing offshore 
petroleum, the government established the Offshore 
Petroleum Act and the Offshore Petroleum Taxation 
Act in 2007. These Acts contain the rules governing 
the exploration and production of offshore oil in 
Barbados and consider the limits and optimum levels 
of production to ensure the long-term sustainability of 
the petroleum sector.
BARBADOS
New tecnologies
In Pvs Solar Energy
INTERNATIONAL
Tecnologies 
FrackingRecognising the changes and recent advances in 
energy technologies, a number of legislative and 
regulatory provisions have been introduced or 
updated in anticipation of the development of 
new energy markets in Barbados.
Many of these changes in regulation and legislation 
have been in the area of the electricity sector. In 
January 2001, the Fair Trading Commission (FTC) was 
established, taking over from the Public Utilities Board 
(PUB) in ensuring that rates and standards of service 
for The Barbados Light & Power Company Ltd (BL&P) 
were maintained at a reasonable level. The provisions 
governing the regulation of the electric utility are 
contained in the Utilities Regulations Act Cap 282.
The electricity sector has changed significantly in 
recent years, with the company being now wholly 
owned by a Canadian company, Emera Inc. The 
introduction of more renewable energy sources has 
made it more likely that BL&P will face competition 
from other companies with the ability to generate 
electricity at a commercial level. In anticipation of 
such continuing developments, a new Electric Light & 
Power Act (ELPA) was produced in 2013, incorporating 
revisions for the first time since the early 1900s.
In view of the changing energy markets and 
technologies, there were also further energy policy 
documents produced in 2010 and 2013. In 2010, 
the Sustainable Energy Framework for Barbados
(SEFB) was executed through the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IADB). The programme was 
designed to establish areas of technical assistance 
and support for sustainable energy programmes in 
Barbados. One element of this technical assistance 
was the development of the Energy Smart Fund.
Below are the six facilities provided through the 
Energy Smart Fund provided by the IADB.
• Technical Assistance Facility (BDS $1 million):
Grants for pre-investment, economic and 
technical feasibility studies.
• Energy Efficiency Retrofit and Renewable 
Energy Finance Facility (BDS$12 million):
Provides subsidised loans for implementing 
renewable energy projects that have shown 
 to be financially viable.
• Pilot Consumer Finance Facility 
 (BDS $ 1 million): Provides interest rate rebates 
for commercial entities offering renewable 
energy or energy efficiency products.
• CFL Distribution Facility (BDS$2 million): 
Provides free compact fluorescent lamps to 
BL&P residential customers.
• A/C Rebate Trade in Facility (BDS$3 million):
A 50% rebate to residences and businesses, 
which replace older air conditioners with more 
energy efficient models.
• Discretionary Grant Facility (BDS$2 million):
Funds for institutional support to execute 
and implement the Smart Fund. This includes 
education and awareness programmes.
In 2013, a Draft National Sustainable Energy Policy was 
produced in an attempt to build on many aspects of 
the Draft Energy Policy developed in 2007. The 2013 
document emphasised the sustainable production 
and use of various energy resources. Efficient use of 
fossil fuel production and consumption, along with 
the development of renewable energy technologies, 
were the key areas of focus of this draft policy.
Further incentive for developing renewable energy 
technologies, was given through the establishment of 
the Renewable Energy Rider (RER) proposed by BL&P 
and approved by the FTC in 2010. The RER allowed 
domestic customers to sell renewable energy back to the utility at the rate of 1.6 times the level of the 
Fuel Clause Adjustment (FCA). This was under a 
“sale of excess” or a “buy all, sell all” arrangement, 
depending on the metering configuration. In July 
2016, the RER credit changed, and the rate is now no 
longer tied to the FCA but rather is calculated using 
a resource cost approach. The temporary RER credit 
is now $0.416/ kWh for PV and $0.315/kWh for wind 
energy, for systems up to 500 kW of installed capacity.
A list of the energy projects and programmes 
undertaken by the Ministry of Energy and Water 
Resources during the period 2009 to 2017 is attached 
to this document.
The BNEP further facilitates economic and 
environmental sustainability through development of 
regulatory and legislative mechanisms to build on and 
support those that currently exist.
1.7 Barbados Energy Consumption and 
Demand - Summary Charts and Tables
1.7.1 National Energy Use
The demand for energy in Barbados over the last 
ten years is characterised by a declining trend. The 
average demand of primary and secondary energy was 
estimated at 11,297 BOE per day. Energy demand over 
the period declined, reflecting the economic challenges 
that Barbados has been facing. Barbados’ demand for 
energy peaked in 2008 at an estimated 12,056 barrels 
of oil per day (BOPD), while the lowest level of demand 
was observed in 2014, estimated at 10,132 BOPD.
Figure 1: Total Barrels of Oil Demand per Day
TOTAL BARRELS OF OIL DEMAND PER DAYCurrently, fossil fuels, predominantly heavy fuel oil, 
dominate Barbados’s energy mix:
• Heavy Fuel Oil – 37%
• Diesel - 18%
• Gasoline – 17%
• Kerosene – 7%
• LPG – 2%
• Sugar Cane Bagasse – 3%
• Natural Gas – 2%
• Other (electricity produced within utility) – 14%
• Solar water heaters - < 1%
The heavy fuel oil is mainly used in the generation 
of electricity.
Natural gas is not a significant contributor in the 
energy sector, adding only 2% to the energy mix. 
However, its widespread use in Barbados for 
(domestic) cooking, and various activities in the 
tourism and industrial sectors, has had a considerable 
social impact. The benefit of this fuel source is that it is 
less carbon intensive than other fossil fuels. However, 
it is still a fossil fuel, and its use without carbon capture 
and storage is unsustainable in the context of 
climate change.
The use of solar water heaters for domestic water 
heating has also risen significantly since 1974. However, 
its effect on the overall energy mix is still under 1%.
Figure 2: Demand by Energy Source 2006 to 2015
DEMAND BY ENERGY SOURCEOil was discovered in Barbados as far back as the 18th 
century. Currently, oil that is produced on the island is 
sent to Trinidad for refining. The Barbados National Oil 
Company (BNOC) is a government-owned company that 
produces oil and gas onshore, and imports fossil fuels. 
Onshore oil production is mainly from the Scotland Sand 
Formation located in the Woodbourne Development 
Area (WDA) field; Barbados produces approximately 
700 BOPD. Regarding natural gas, the equivalent of 500 
BOPD are produced by the BNOC under the operation 
of the National Petroleum Corporation (NPC). The BNOC 
and the NPC are being merged into one entity.
1.7.2 Electricity Generation
Fuel Feed Stock for Electricity Production:
Over the last 11 years, the fuel feedstock used in 
Barbados for the production of electricity consisted in 
large measure of fossil fuels. The main fuels included 
heavy fuel oil, kerosene, diesel and natural gas. Within 
the sugar industry, electricity production was mainly 
fuelled by bagasse. In recent times, solar energy has 
become a small but growing contributor to electricity 
production. In 2015, the fuel input sources for 
electricity production was registered as follows:
• Heavy Fuel Oil – 74%
• Kerosene – 17.4%
• Bagasse – 5.6%
• Diesel – 2.2%
• Natural Gas – 0.2%
• Solar – 0.6%
The configuration above demonstrates the high trade 
dependence required for Barbados to produce its 
electricity. However, in 2016, Barbados’ production 
capacity for solar electricity increased from 10MW 
to over 22 MW, contributing an estimated 2.4% of 
the total electricity distributed. The table and chart 
on the following page demonstrate the current fuel 
contribution to the total amount of electricity producedFigure 3: Fuel Inputs for Electricity Production 2015 Barbados
Table 2: Total Fuel Consumption for Electricity Production 2015
* Accounts for use of natural gas to produce electricity in the manufacturing sector.
FUEL INPUTS FOR ELECTRICITY PRODUCTION 2015 BARBADOS
Fuels Fuel Feedstock
MMBTUs
Diesel 230,426.80
HFO 7,830,143.87
Kerosene 1,841,808.78
Bagasse 592,962.40
Solar 59,022.04
Natural Gas* 24,522.80
Total MMBTUS 10,578,886.69Electricity consumption over the last ten years was 
distributed as follows:
• Domestic – 33%
• Commercial – 21%
• Public – 16%
• Tourism/Hotel – 15%
• Industrial – 9%
• Other – 6%
Figure 4: Electricity Sales by Demand Group
ELECTRICITY SALES BY DEMAND GROUPThe average consumption for electricity in Barbados 
during the period under consideration is 926.8 MWh. 
Electricity is central to economic output in Barbados 
and brings significant value to the country from a 
social perspective. The social cost of the production 
of electricity was estimated to be $0.06 for every 
dollar earned from the production and distribution of 
electricity, and the Barbados economy produced on 
average, BDS$8.00 from every KWh produced and 
distributed. The BNEP seeks to build on the value that 
the electricity sector brings to Barbados by introducing 
the appropriate energy sources and ensuring that the 
highest level of efficiency in electricity generation 
from these sources is achieved and maintained. This 
focus and the resulting activities will be important in 
improving the sustainability of the electricity supply. 
Additionally, the policy will attempt to provide a 
balance between the interest of the society and that 
of the electricity producers.
Barbados intends to steadily increase its share of 
renewable energy in the local market, widening the 
diversification of energy resources, promoting energy 
security and eliminating the reliance on imported 
fossil fuels, which is now based on about 90% 
imported resources. However, an analysis conducted 
by the MEWR suggests that this target could lead 
to high electricity prices if only solar PV installation 
is undertaken. There may be a more sustainable 
mix of renewable energy resources which will lead 
to a reduced long-term cost. Possible ways for 
achieving this target were identified as increased use 
of renewable energy technologies such as waste to 
energy, biomass, cogeneration, wind energy, solar 
photovoltaic and solar thermal.
The Government has increased its efforts to achieve 
increased energy efficiency and sustainability by 
promoting energy efficient technologies and its vision 
of “green economics,” which provides incentives 
to the public to be energy efficient. Barriers to this 
sustainability effort have been identified as limited 
access to capital, lack of detailed regulations, limited 
access to technology and lack of grid connection rules.
The BNEP further considers these issues as it seeks 
to provide strategies for overcoming some of the 
limitations to sustainable development in Barbados.
1.8 Multi-Criteria Approach (MCA)
Given the previous discussions in this section, it is 
clear that there is a need to consider the broad factors 
that influence energy availability, cost, and global 
environmental impacts in Barbados. It is recognised 
that policies which consider energy in terms of its 
overall impact on economic, environmental and social 
systems, will allow the country to become more energy 
independent (UNEP, 2014). 
The BNEP attempts to achieve sustainability in the 
energy sector by using a Multi-Criteria Approach that 
is consistent with the overall mandate to have zero
fossil fuel consumption domestically.
In seeking to determine the ideal option or path 
of renewable energy development, this policy will 
consider the broad economic, environmental and 
social impacts. This means that an option with a 
higher per kilowatt-hour cost may still be chosen 
if it is deemed to have a lower environmental impact 
or can provide wider social gains.
In all of the sub-sectors, various stakeholders are 
encouraged to consider energy, economic and social 
factors in determining the best energy options. This 
approach is consistent with more recent international 
approaches to global sustainability, where issues of 
social equity and global environmental impact of issues 
such as climate change are strongly considered before 
any change or expansion of energy production 
or development.
This Multi-Criteria Approach was the basis on which 
the preliminary targets presented in the next section 
were chosen. See Section 2 for further details on the 
specific model used to determine the targets.
Consideration was given to the use of rankings and 
weights for the model. However, at this stage, given 
the number of stakeholders to be considered, and the 
contextual precedence allotted to value or objective, 
these aspects were omitted. Nevertheless, it is possible 
that they will be considered while the Implementation 
Plan is being developed.It is the policy position of 
the Government to phase 
out local consumption of 
natural gas and liquefied 
petroleum gas by 2030.”
“PRELIMINARY ENERGY 
MIX TARGETS
SECTION 2Energy Source Potential Installed 
Capacity (MW)
Solar Centralised 205
Solar Distributed 105
Wind onshore 150
Wind offshore 150
Biomass and Waste-To-Energy 15
Energy Storage (Centralised 
and Distributed) 200
Total (Excluding storage) 635
2. Preliminary Energy Mix Targets 
Using the MCA to determine the energy mix targets 
discussed below, some key factors were considered, 
including:
• The market cost of energy.
• The socio-economic and environmental cost 
of energy.
• The maturity of energy technologies.
• The financial and economic benefits of applying 
various energy sources and technologies.
• The economic and fiscal context of Barbados.
The market and economic costs of energy dictated 
the rate at which fuel switching could occur given the 
need to ensure that Barbados’ competitiveness was 
not negatively impacted over the eleven-year planning 
horizon of the BNEP. This factor had to be balanced 
against the fact that fossil fuel represents a significant 
drain on the economic resources of the country. From 
the outset, it was recognised that a move towards 
greater use of renewable energy was attractive for 
both economic and environmental reasons.
The major constraint in moving from an economy 
based on fossil fuels to one based on renewable 
energy, is the fact that many of the renewable energy 
sources are intermittent in nature. This means that 
they are unable to be dispatched on demand. This 
is in contrast to traditional fossil fuels, which are 
available whenever needed. Renewable energy sources 
therefore operate at less than full capacity much of the 
time, and this increases the cost of generation from a 
utility’s perspective.
Another significant challenge is that the benefits, 
i.e. savings in foreign exchange from renewable 
energy sources, are not immediately transferred to 
government’s revenues. The concern is that in order 
for the country to make substantial progress towards 
a more sustainable energy mix, government will likely 
be required to provide further incentives.
The energy mix target in the BNEP consists of 
renewable energy, variable and intermittent 
technologies. The target proposed in the BNEP 
requires 100% reduction in fossil fuel (heavy fuel 
oil, diesel, gasoline, kerosene, natural gas and LPG) 
consumption; one possible replacement scenario is 
depicted below:
PRELIMINARY ENERGY 
MIX TARGETS
Table 3: Estimations of Installed Capacity by Technology
However, to compensate for the intermittency of wind 
and solar highlighted in the energy mix, investment in 
storage is needed to provide stability to the operation 
of the grid. It is anticipated that approximately 150MW 
of storage is required.Energy Source Potential Installed 
Capacity
Energy storage centralised 132
Energy storage distributed 68
Total 200
This installed capacity of renewable energy 
technologies is expected to generate approximately 
1400GWh and this will result in savings of
approximately $400BDS to $800BDS million annually 
in fuel savings with an estimated capital cost of 
$4.4 billion. Additionally this scenario is anticipated 
to displace approximately 2 million tonnes of 
CO2 equivalent. 
Impact of modern battery storage technology
The percentages in the energy mix above reflect only 
one possible future scenario. Battery storage and 
smart grid technologies are likely to play a key role in 
the future energy mix, reducing the need for baseload 
energy. More detail on the future renewable energy 
mix will emerge as the Implementation Plan and 
Integrated Resource and Resilience Plan are developed 
in consultation with the major stakeholders.
Energy Efficiency Target
The implementation of the BNEP is expected to reduce 
domestic fossil fuel consumption from 11000 BOE/
day to 0 BOE/day. This represents an estimated fossil 
fuel reduction of 100%. Further, energy efficiency 
policy measures for electricity consumption and 
transportation are expected to result in a reduction in 
energy consumption of 20% below Business as Usual 
(BAU) over the planning period. The total expected 
generation is contingent on the energy efficiency 
target being met on an annual basis.
Table 4: Estimations of Installed StorageThe Natural Gas Factor
It is the policy position of the Government to phase 
out local consumption of natural gas and liquefied 
petroleum gas by 2030.
In Barbados, despite our best efforts, there may 
be some economic activities that prove difficult 
to transition to renewable energy sources such 
as cruise tourism, and air transport. However, 
the GHG emissions from these sectors may not 
be wholly attributable to the host country under 
It is anticipated that some of the natural gas will 
be replaced by bio-methane, as specified within 
the energy mix, produced from renewable biogas 
sources. Indeed, the potential of bio-methane 
makes it likely to become a viable source of 
domestic gas. The organic component of 
municipal solid waste (MSW) can also be 
converted to bio-methane.
Not withstanding the government’s policy position 
to phase out natural gas in the long-term, it is 
expected that natural gas production for domestic 
cooking will expand in the near term as well, 
and that there may be also greater uptake of 
natural gas as a fuel for commercial and 
industrial consumers.
Currently, the National Petroleum Corporation 
(NPC) supplies 1 million cubic feet (mmcf) per day 
to 22,000 customers of which approximately 750 
are commercial customers and, it is expected to 
increase due to expansion. There is potential to 
produce biogas from municipal solid waste, organic 
waste streams, growth of biofuels et al which could 
potentially replace natural gas. The residential 
customers are expected to phase out their use of 
natural gas to an alternative product.
Similarly, to meet the government’s target of being 
a 100% renewable energy and carbon neutral 
island state by 2030, customers who use liquefied 
petroleum gas will also have to use electric stoves 
or an alternative product.
In order to achieve the benefits discussed above, a 
reduction in the volume of fossil fuels currently used in 
energy generation will have to occur by the following 
increments over the eleven-year planning horizon:
• 49% fossil fuel reduction by 2023.
• 100% fossil fuel reduction by 2030.
The above fossil fuel reduction targets can be stated 
as increased production of energy from renewable 
energy targets for electricity generation. Economy 
wide targets are expressed below in terms of 
renewable energy.
• 50% renewable energy by 2023.
• 100% renewable energy by 2030.
Currently, the National 
Petroleum Corporation 
(NPC) supplies 1 million 
cubic feet (mmcf) per day 
to 22,000 customers of 
which approximately 750 
are commercial customers
and, it is expected to 
increase due to expansion.
“
.
There is potential to produce 
biogas from municipal 
solid waste, organic waste 
streams, growth of biofuels 
et al which could potentially 
replace natural gas.…there is cohesion between 
activities within the 
sector, the objectives 
and the overarching 
Vision Statements.”
“VISION, GOALS AND 
OVERALL OBJECTIVES
SECTION 3First 
Level
3.1 Structure 
The BNEP provides a broad policy framework, which 
has a Vision Statement, Visionary Goals, Overall 
Objectives, and Specific Objectives that are presented 
at different levels of abstraction. Higher levels of 
abstractions present statements that are more general 
and over-arching whereas lower levels of abstraction 
provide statements that are more specific.
The Overall Objectives are seen as appropriate for the 
policy makers in the energy sector, and are not viewed 
as critical to communicate to the general public. They, 
however, set the tone for the Specific Objectives, and 
are the basis for moving towards results and activities 
that are more tangible. These Overall Objectives can 
be modified over the planning horizon of the BNEP as 
the economic and social circumstances change 
and as new technologies emerge to become 
commercially viable.
VISION, GOALS AND 
OVERALL OBJECTIVES
Figure 5: Policy Inverted Pyramid
The Specific Objectives are expected to be developed 
by members working within those specific sectors, 
and can be modified as priorities change and new 
industries develop. Although these will be modified, it 
is important to make sure that each level of abstraction 
flows directly from the one above it
(Highest Level of Abstraction) - 
Vision Statement 
Visionary Goals
Overall Objectives 
Specific Objectives
(Lowest Level of Abstraction) - 
Measures
Second 
Level
Third 
Level
Fourth 
Level
Fifth 
Level
The Vision Statement and Visionary Goals are given 
with the general public and overall government policy 
makers in mind. For this reason, Visionary Goals are 
limited to eight, making them easier to memorise or 
integrate into shorter presentations. It is not expected 
that these will be changed over the time of the 
BNEP planning horizon, as they represent broad 
wide-ranging goals.This relationship is illustrated in Fig 5, which 
presents the Policy Inverted Pyramid.
In the BNEP, the overarching statement is the Vision 
Statement. This statement flows into the Visionary 
Goals, which then give rise to the Overall Objectives. 
These Overall Objectives inform the Specific 
Objectives which relate to individual sub-sectors of 
the energy economy. The measures chosen for each 
sector will feed into those Specific Objectives.
Structuring the BNEP in this way ensures that there is 
coordination and cohesion between activities within 
the sector, the objectives and the overarching 
Vision Statement.
Below is an example showing how the Vision 
Statement can be traced all the way to a measure, 
through different levels of abstraction.
• Vision Statement: Energy security and 
affordability through diversity and collaboration: 
establishing and maintaining a sustainable 
energy sector.
• Visionary Goal: An energy sector that offers 
diversity of sustainable energy options with 
a trajectory towards 100%.
• Overall Objective: Increasing diversity in 
the types of energy sources used in both the 
renewable and fossil fuels sectors.
• Specific Objective: A renewable energy sector 
that has a greater involvement of smaller 
investors in the system.
• Measure: Establish a system to ensure 
protection of intellectual property and patents.
The Vision Statement and all of the emerging goals 
and objectives were structured around a number of 
Core Values that were obtained from interviews and 
consultations with local stakeholders, as well as the 
assessment of issues identified in previous policy 
documents prepared for Barbados and members 
of CARICOM. The CARICOM Energy Policy and the
Jamaica National Energy Policy were referred to in this 
regard. Recent research conducted by the consultant 
into factors affecting the development of renewable 
energy in the Caribbean was also considered 
(Ince, Vredenburg, Liu, 2016).In general, stakeholders believed that the policy should 
aim to provide a level playing field to support anyone 
with an interest in participating in renewable and 
sustainable energy activities in the energy markets. 
The view was that with the size of the Barbados 
market, a collaborative approach was likely to be more 
effective than a competitive one.
With respect to the electricity sector in particular, 
it was thought that the most important aspect was 
to maintain standards and reliability of production 
and supply for all customers in Barbados at a 
reasonable price, regardless of the eventual structure 
of the market and the regulatory environment. 
It was considered essential that those standards 
of production and service should be safeguarded 
throughout the sector.
3.2 Core Values
Below is a list of some of the general core values 
identified:
• Stability - price, regulatory, technical.
• Reliability - including continued access 
to energy.
• Efficiency in the production and consumption 
of all energy resources.
• Diversity - reduction of vulnerability through 
use of multiple sources.
• Ownership of business - opportunities for
local investment.
• Maximum use of indigenous energy resources
• Entrepreneurship development.
• Maximum level of collaboration.
• Multidisciplinary cross-cutting approach.
• Systematic development of the energy sector 
based on renewable energy.
• Education, awareness and capacity building.
• Environmental protection and ecology, 
especially in connection with public health.
• Innovation - developing Barbados as a centre
of excellence for research and development 
in renewable energy.
Based on the Core Values identified above,
the following Vision Statement was developed.
Vision Statement: “Energy security and affordability 
through diversity and collaboration: Establishing 
and maintaining a sustainable energy sector 
for Barbados.”The following are potential visionary goals for 
Barbados emerging from the Vision Statement and 
are supporting statements that reflect the general 
direction where stakeholders wished the sector to 
go and what they wanted to see the sector achieve. 
These are also consistent with previous policy 
documents produced in Barbados and the 
wider Caribbean.
3.3 Visionary Goals
Visionary Goal 4: An energy sector that offers 
continuous and reliable supply of energy 
(core value - reliability).
Visionary Goal 5: An energy sector that offers 
opportunities for development of human capacity and 
collaboration (core value - capacity and collaboration).
Visionary Goal 6: An energy sector that offers 
significant opportunities for local entrepreneurship 
and international investment (core value - 
entrepreneurship).
Visionary Goal 7: An energy sector that minimises 
the environmental impacts and contribution to global 
climate change (core value - environment).
Visionary Goal 8: An energy sector that is governed 
by sound management and clear legal regulatory 
frameworks. (core value - regulation).
Visionary Goal 9: An energy sector that positions 
Barbados as a centre of excellence for innovation, 
research and development in renewable energy 
(core value - innovation).
Visionary Goal 10: An energy sector that provides 
opportunities for all Barbadians (including the most 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change) to 
participate in and benefit from the transformation 
to 100% RE (core value – equity).
The following Overall Objectives were developed from 
the Visionary Goals. These objectives are not specific 
to any sector within the industry but are relevant to 
the general energy sector:
Overall Objective 1: Achieving stability and 
predictability in energy product prices over the long 
term (related to Visionary Goal 3).
Overall Objective 2: Achieving affordability and access 
to all classes of consumers in energy products and 
services (related to Visionary Goal 3).
Overall Objective 3: Establishing a consistent 
and comprehensive regulatory framework to 
govern activities in various energy sub-sectors 
(related to Visionary Goal 8).
Visionary Goal 1: An energy sector that offers 
a diversity of sustainable energy options, with a 
trajectory to achieve 100% Renewable Energy 
by 2030 (core value - diversity).
Visionary Goal 2: An energy sector where 
consumption and production of energy resources 
occur with the maximum level of efficiency feasible 
(core value - efficiency).
Visionary Goal 3: An energy sector that offers basic 
energy products and services that are affordable to 
local citizens (core value - affordability).BNEP VISION STATEMENT:
“Energy security and affordability through diversity and collaboration: Establishing and maintaining a 
sustainable energy sector for Barbados.”
Figure 6: Summary Table of Vision Statement and Visionary Goals3.4 Overall Objectives
Overall Objective 4: Increasing the amount of 
renewable energy sources used in the energy mix to 
the extent that it can be accommodated from 
a technical and socio-economic perspective
 (related to Visionary Goal 1).
Overall Objective 5: Increasing diversity in the types of 
energy sources used within the energy sector (related 
to Visionary Goal 1).
Overall Objective 6: Increasing the extent of energy 
resources used in Barbados that are obtained from 
indigenous sources (related to Visionary Goal 6).
Overall Objective 7: Encouraging local investment 
in energy projects and programmes in Barbados, 
with a view to increasing the number of shareholders 
and players in the various energy subsectors 
(related to Visionary Goal 6).
Overall Objective 8: Promoting more local 
entrepreneurial activities in renewable energy and 
increasing fossil fuel energy development throughout 
the energy sub-sectors (related to Visionary Goal 6).
Overall Objective 9: Increasing collaboration within 
the energy sub-sectors and among the cross-cutting 
sectors that have an impact on energy supply or 
consumption (related to Visionary Goal 5).
Overall Objective 10: Improving the efficiency 
in the production and consumption of energy 
products within the various subsectors (related 
to Visionary Goal 2).
Overall Objective 11: Improving the awareness 
and understanding of energy production and 
consumption, its impacts and the associated 
environmental and socio-economic consequences 
within all sections of the public (related to Visionary 
Goal 5).
Overall Objective 12: Increasing the number of 
persons locally with qualifications and skills relating to 
energy production and management of renewable and 
fossil fuel sources (related to Visionary Goal 5).
Overall Objective 13: Reducing the environmental 
impacts associated with the production and 
consumption of energy resources locally (related to 
Visionary Goal 7).
Overall Objective 14: Ensuring reliability and continuity 
of energy supply in the various local energy subsectors 
(related to Visionary Goal 4).
Overall Objective 15: Attaining the lowest price 
sustainable by the local economy for various energy 
sources consumed in Barbados, while maintaining 
environmental efficiency (related to Visionary Goal 3).
Overall Objective 16: Establishing effective 
partnerships between national and international 
entities for local energy projects 
(related to Visionary Goal 6).
Overall Objective 17: Establishing effective systems 
to support a hub for research and development in 
renewable energy (related to Visionary Goal 9).
Overall Objective 18: Maximising the use of small 
scale distributed generation within the energy mix. 
(related to Visionary Goal 10).A critical part of the 
policy sets a path to the 
one based entirely on 
renewable energy.”
“SECTOR SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVES & 
MEASURES
SECTION 44.1 Introduction
The following Sector Specific Objectives emerged 
from the Overall Objectives in Section 3. They also 
reflect specific objectives that were suggested during 
the interviews with members of the various sectors 
identified. Based on the Sector Specific Objectives, 
possible measures under the various themes were 
identified. The categorisation of the themes and the 
sectors were based in part on those suggested by the 
Energy Task Force in the document Policy Outline and 
Thematic Areas (2016).
4.2 Energy Supply
The theme of Energy Supply focuses on both the 
renewable and fossil fuel energy sectors. A critical part 
of the policy sets a path for the necessary transition 
from a fossil fuel economy to one based entirely on 
renewable energy. Cognisant that the transition will 
be rapid, Barbados has also turned its attention to 
exploring for hydrocarbon resources in its Exclusive 
Economic Zone. Indeed, the BNEP recognises that if 
Barbados locates significant quantities of natural gas, 
this resource could play a role in assisting the country 
in its transition to renewable energy and in reducing its 
overall carbon footprint, by choosing what some refer 
to as the Norwegian model and exporting all exploited 
hydrocarbons (on land or offshore).
The objectives identified in this section relate to the 
following important energy supply issues, and are 
separated into Oil and Gas, and Renewable Energy 
supply sectors:
• Production - renewable energy and the 
exploration and production of oil and gas.
• Distribution and sale of energy output.
• Fuel and energy diversification.
• Energy pricing and affordability.
• Energy security.
• Cross-border trade in energy.
• Energy integration.
• Storage – energy and fuel.
SECTOR SPECIFIC 
OBJECTIVES & MEASURESif Barbados locates significant 
quantities of natural gas, this 
resource could play a role in 
assisting the country in its 
transition to renewable energy 
and in reducing its overall 
carbon footprint.
“4.2.1 Oil and Gas Supply Sector Objectives
The importance of optimising the use of fossil fuel 
resources relates to the Overall Objectives discussed 
in Section 3. These objectives relate to the stability 
of supply, efficiency of operation, development of 
indigenous and human resources in the potential 
new oil and gas industry, and the establishment of 
appropriate regulatory and legislative frameworks.
Recently, there have also been significant technological 
advancements in deep water oil and gas exploration, 
drilling and production. These advances have made 
deep water basins more economic to explore. 
Developments that improved efficiency have 
occurred in areas such as compression systems, 
pipeline technology and drilling equipment, making it 
advantageous for Barbados to continue to develop its 
oil and gas resource to the greatest extent possible, 
while maintaining the quality of the terrestrial and 
marine environment.
The Specific Objectives listed below will be important 
in helping the overall energy sector in attaining the 
Overall Objectives. The importance of sustainability 
in the oil and gas sector relates to the following 
Visionary Goal.
Visionary Goal 6: An energy sector that offers 
significant opportunities for local entrepreneurship 
and international investment.
The Specific Objectives will result in a sector that:
• Ensures the security of supply of oil and 
gas products where economically and 
financially viable.
• Ensures a suitable legal and administrative 
regime to promote the successful exploration 
and development of commercial discoveries of 
oil and gas.
• Clearly identifies agencies such as the 
National Petroleum Corporation (NPC) and 
Barbados National Oil Company (BNOC) as the 
implementing agencies for government policies 
in various energy areas.
• Maximises exploration, production and export 
of petroleum products
,,• Clearly defines rules surrounding allocation 
of economic rent payable to government 
and developers.
• Has a system to allow for a fraction of the 
revenues generated in petroleum resources 
to be used in advancing a renewable energybased economy that is self-sustaining.
• Has a ‘zero harm’ health, safety and 
environment protocol that governs activities 
in the oil and gas sector.
• Includes a clear retirement strategy for 
generation plants owned by the utility and 
other regulated energy producing entities.
• Has stability in as many components of energy 
pricing as possible.
• Has well understood links between upstream 
and downstream processes in the energy 
systems by energy providers and consumers.
Policy Measures - Oil and Gas Supply
In order to achieve sustainable production of oil and 
gas in Barbados’ Exclusive Economic Zone, all relevant 
entities in Barbados shall work together to:
• Establish regularly held investor conferences 
to inform potential developers about the 
rules and requirements needed to undertake 
activities in the oil and gas sector.
• Increase the cultivation of data relating 
to the geological and geophysical 
conditions in the offshore oil and gas sector 
to aid the government in setting licence fees 
and determining levels of royalties.
• Develop a licensing system with clear criteria 
on the ranking of various factors critical to 
the decision on bids. This system should be 
made available widely to potential bidders as 
well as the general public.
• Formulate clear legislation governing 
environmental management in offshore oil 
and gas activities, with provisions for removal 
of licences if stipulations are not met.• Develop a capacity-building program locally 
to prepare the workforce for employment in 
the emerging oil and gas offshore sector.
• Create an enabling environment that 
will empower local businesses to 
participate effectively in the supply of goods 
and services to the offshore oil and gas sector.
• Offer fiscal incentives for developers, which are 
tied to factors such as the expected internal 
rate of return.
• Establish a wealth management programme to 
ensure that revenues from the offshore oil and 
gas sector are used effectively.
• Export all commercially produced oil andgas
where it is financially and economically feasible.
• Produce legislation that identifies limits on 
the amount of oil and gas resources that can 
be exploited in the short term.
• Build a defence and security framework to 
protect the Exclusive Economic Zone.
4.2.2 Renewable Energy Supply
The development of renewable energy resources 
available in Barbados will be essential to maintaining 
and improving the overall sustainability of the sector. 
Barbados is proud to be seen as one of the leaders in 
renewable energy in the Caribbean, particularly in the 
area of solar water heaters.
The success in solar water heaters was one of the 
spurs for the solar PV industry, which has expanded 
exponentially over the last five years, due in part to 
the introduction of BL&P’s Renewable Energy Rider. 
Despite these successes, there is still a lot that can be 
done to expand solar thermal and PV technologies to 
their full potential, and extend the use of renewable 
energy resources to include more energy generated 
from wind, biomass and biogas.
In the area of solar thermal, there is an interest in 
increasing the use of solar water heaters as far as it is 
financially and economically feasible. The development 
of solar water heaters for low income residents could 
be pursued under a suitable regulatory framework.
Development of solar thermal technology for air 
conditioning systems, distillation and electricity using 
concentrated solar, are all areas where solar thermal 
could be part of long-term sustainability solutions 
for Barbados. The potential for these and other 
innovations in renewable energy to be exported to 
other Caribbean markets, offering the opportunity for 
further entrepreneurship in Barbados, should also be 
considered. If such markets were developed, Barbados 
could establish a goal in the medium and long term to 
be a renewable energy hub for the Caribbean.
Similarly, there is also potential for research into 
improving efficiencies and designs of some of the 
existing solar and renewable energy technologies.
There is a need to identify overall strategies to increase 
the penetration of renewable energy technologies 
in the energy generation mix, while at the same time 
identifying the appropriate level of development of 
specific renewable energy technologies for Barbados. 
Proposed targets for renewable energy are outlined 
in Section 2.
It is expected that solar 
PV, solar thermal, wind, 
biofuels and biogas will 
all form part of the mix of 
renewable energy
“While discussing the opportunities for further use of 
renewable energy within Barbados, there is a need to 
also explore the potential for exporting technologies 
to other countries in the Caribbean and further afield. 
This is especially so in the area of solar thermal and 
solar photovoltaic technologies.
It is expected that solar PV, solar thermal, wind, 
biofuels and biogas will all form part of the mix of 
renewable energy as described above. There will also 
need to be development in storage technology to 
increase possible off-grid applications and to improve 
the capacity factor for grid-tied technologies.
It is important to determine the activities that will be 
needed to ensure that each of these technologies 
is developed to their full potential. As a result, some 
of the objectives identified will relate to renewable 
energy as a whole, while others will speak to a specific 
technology or a subset of technologies.
In addition to the existing renewable energy 
technologies that are currently viable in the Caribbean, 
there are emerging renewable energy technologies 
that may become more feasible for development over 
the planning horizon of the BNEP.
Technologies such as ocean thermal, tidal, geothermal 
or ground source heat are a few that are not factored 
in at the moment, but that may play a part in the 
energy portfolio before 2030.
Renewable Energy Supply Sector Objectives
The importance of the renewable energy sector is high 
in the context of all sectors, especially as the transition 
towards the aspirational goal of 100% renewable 
energy is one of the key aspects of the energy policy, 
which is encapsulated in Visionary Goal 1, Overall 
Objective 4 and Overall Objective 17.
Visionary Goal 1: An energy sector that offers 
a diversity of sustainable energy options, with a 
trajectory to achieve 100% Renewable Energy 
by 2030.
Visionary Goal 9: An energy sector that positions 
Barbados as a centre of excellence for innovation, 
research and development in renewable energy 
(core value - innovation).
Overall Objective 4: Increasing the amount of 
renewable energy sources used in the energy mix 
to the extent that it can be accommodated from a 
technical and socio-economic perspective.
Overall Objective 17: Establishing effective 
systems to support a hub for research and 
development in renewable energy (related to 
Visionary Goal 9).
Sustainability within the renewable energy supply side 
is also important for objectives relating to stability 
of supply, costs and affordability of energy, efficiency 
of operation, development of indigenous resources, 
development of human capacity, and the establishment 
of appropriate regulatory and legislative frameworks.
The needs which will be addressed by the transition 
to an economy powered significantly by renewable 
energy are:
• Reduced importation and consumption of fossil 
fuels, which result in loss of foreign exchange.
• More efficient energy producing technologies.
• Reduced dependence on fossil fuel. 100% • Preservation of Barbados’ natural environment. Renewable Energy by 
2030In order to increase the consumption of renewable 
energy, the Specific Objectives below will ensure a 
renewable energy sector that:
• Takes into context the need for retooling the 
workforce to work with newer renewable 
energy technologies.
• Allows for the greatest viable number of 
competing players in the market, and provides 
significant opportunities to generate wealth.
• Includes a fair, transparent and stable tariff 
regime to facilitate greater integration of 
renewables in the electricity grid.
• Shows greater involvement of smaller investors 
in the system, playing an important role in 
sector decision making.
• Exhibits a strong relationship between local 
renewable energy projects and regional and 
international renewable energy initiatives.
• Demonstrates clarity in determining the 
long-term strategies that would be needed 
in order to get to 100% energy from renewable 
energy sources in the long-term and support 
economic growth and competitiveness in 
the process.
• Facilitates investments in storage technologies 
to make renewable energy technologies more 
technically and environmentally viable.
• Provides for greater access to studies 
conducted on the renewable energy sector.
• Has optimum account separation of generation 
from transmission and distribution assets.
• Establishes a clear direction for optimum 
diversification of energy resources in the 
renewable energy sub-sector.
• Provides clarity for the electric utility on the 
direction regarding the type of energy market 
that is desired.
• Engenders an effective system to enable a 
hub for research and development in 
bl
• Encourages ongoing research into newer, less 
mature renewable energy technologies to allow 
for effective development in the long-term.
• Demonstrates a clear understanding of roles 
and accountability for installation and 
maintenance of new renewable energy systems.
• Provides strong NGO representation, 
with the capacity to promote awareness 
and understanding of issues in the 
general community.
• Establishes clear measurements of indicators 
and standards for various renewable 
energy technologies.
• Maximises the amount of manufacturing or 
assembly of renewable energy products 
within the country that is financially and 
economically viable.
• Optimises training opportunities in the 
application of established and emerging 
renewable energy technologies.
• Offers appropriate tax incentives to motivate 
investment in new renewable energy 
technologies that are adjusted with the 
maturity of technology.
• Operates within a regulatory regime that 
incentivises investment.
• Shows an increased use of renewable energy in 
vehicles (e.g. biofuels and electric vehicles).
• Promotes greater use of renewable resources 
produced in a business for manufacture of 
energy within that business (e.g. use of biogas 
rather than PV for farms).
• Offers a programme that allows for low income 
households to benefit from renewable energy 
installations such as solar water heaters, 
PV and wind.
• Shows a high level of transparency in the 
granting of licenses to players within the 
renewable energy sector.• Encourages technicians highly skilled in the 
maintenance of EVs.
• Contains an optimum level of diversity in 
energy resources used in the renewable energy 
sub-sector (cost to be balanced against the 
level of diversity).
• Provides equity for customers unable to pay for 
renewable energy installations.
• Allows effective collaboration and coordination 
of players in the renewable energy industry.
• Incorporates a programme to stimulate job 
creation within the renewable energy sector.
• Includes a clear system for end-of-life disposal 
of renewable energy equipment and associated 
technologies such as batteries.
• Provides a special arrangement to establish 
community and household involvement in 
renewable energy.
• Places greater emphasis on the development 
of renewable energy technologies ideally suited 
to Barbados or Caribbean conditions
Sector Objectives Specific to Solar Energy
A sector that:
• Encourages greater penetration of solar water 
heaters as far as is financially and economically 
feasible for residential customers.
• Supports greater use of solar water 
heaters in other commercial and industrial 
sectors including the hotel sector.
• Offers improved economic incentives for 
installation of both solar thermal and solar 
PV technologies.
• Carves out a niche for distributed generation 
(e.g. householders with rooftop solar PV and 
small community wind or solar systems).
• Demonstrates significant use of solar thermal 
applications beyond the use of domestic 
solar water heaters (e.g. solar cooling, 
distillation, parabolic solar for power production).
• Shows greater integration of electric 
installation companies into the solar PV and 
other renewable energy grid connected 
technology industries• Makes use of economies of scale that can be 
gained through utility scale solar installations, 
to ensure viability and sustainability.
Sector Objectives Specific to Bio-energy
A sector that:
• Shows increased use of liquid fuels prepared 
from local crops on unused land (e.g. bio-diesel) 
to replace imported fossil fuel where feasible.
• Requires larger farms to install capacity on site 
for producing biogas for electricity production 
or to replace natural gas in the NPC 
distribution network.
• Uses streamlined systems for waste 
management/separation to facilitate waste 
to energy projects.
• Allocates an adequate amount of agricultural 
land for development of bio-energy.
• Includes the production of bio-diesel 
for transportation.
• Optimises land used in the production of energy 
from bio-fuels.
• Supports a bio-methane industry based on 
fermentation technologies, and with clearly 
defined markets.
• Articulates clearly established standards for 
methane production from biogas.
• Provides several options to promote flexibility 
in energy supply.
• Provides specific regulations for the storage of 
bio-methane.
• Clearly regulates health, safety and 
the environment.
• Provides appropriate fiscal and financial support 
framework for the bio-methane industry.
• Accommodates strong systems to support 
research and development.
Sector Objectives Specific to Wind Energy
A sector that:
• Provides specific, clearly defined wind 
energy zones.
• Includes planning standards and a system for 
public engagement.
• Establishes an environment conducive to joint 
ventures for wind energy.
• Promotes the removal of barriers to 
investment for wind energy.
• Establishes a system of investment to facilitate 
transportation, cranes and construction 
equipment to support large-scale 
wind development.
• Encourages understanding and awareness 
of issues surrounding wind energy in the 
general public.
• Provides economic incentives for setting up 
small wind installations for domestic/residential 
and commercial purposes.
Energy Storage - Renewable Energy
Given the fact that many of the renewable energy 
technologies are intermittent in nature, development 
of technologies that enable the storage of energy from 
sources such as wind, solar and tidal energy will be 
important. This is especially so if the establishment 
of off-grid renewable energy technologies is expected 
to become more prominent.
Even with grid-connected renewable energy, there are 
limits for renewable energy penetration. The Barbados 
Solar and Wind Integration Study (2015) discusses this 
in more detail. The larger the amount of renewable 
energy in the energy mix, the greater the need for 
spinning reserves at the electric utility.
It is clear that without investment in energy storage, 
the capacity factors for renewable energy technologies 
will remain low, with a far greater investment of 
installed capacity needed to produce similar amounts 
of energy to that provided by traditional, conventional 
energy sources.Technologies using batteries, compressed air and 
pumped storage have all been discussed as possibilities 
for energy storage in Barbados. Significant investment 
in research and development of energy storage 
technology will be required to help satisfy the 
long-term vision of attaining 100% of energy 
produced from renewable energy.
In determining the final targets for intermittent 
renewable energy technologies, there will need to 
be concomitant increases and investment in energy 
storage technologies.
Below are specific objectives in energy storage to 
ensure a sector that:
• Commands access to research detailing 
the potential for use of various energy storage 
technologies such as batteries, pumped 
storage, and compressed air.
• Articulates standards for energy storage 
technologies that are used in combination with 
renewable energy technologies.
• Provides concessions and economic incentives 
to promote the development of energy storage 
technologies that work in conjunction with 
renewable energy technologies to improve 
stability and reliability. The establishment of 
an industry in Barbados for the manufacture 
and maintenance of batteries for energy 
storage will be facilitated.
• Liberalises the energy storage market to allow 
for others besides the main electric utility and 
grid operator to provide energy storage 
services (distributed and centralised).
Policy Measures - Renewable Energy Sector 
and Storage
In order to achieve a sustainable transition to a sector 
more strongly based on renewable energy, all relevant 
entities in Barbados shall work together to:
• Diversify and optimise the renewable energy 
mix that results in the maximisation of 
socio-economic and financial benefits 
to Barbados.
• Establish a capacity building program locally
to prepare the workforce for employment in 
the renewable energy sector.
• Develop a central database containing details 
on the extent of renewable energy resources 
available at various locations in Barbados 
(solar, wind and bioenergy potential).
• Establish legislation and regulations that 
provide for a transparent process in acquiring 
licences for supplying electricity from 
renewable energy sources.
• Provide an enabling environment that 
encourages collaborative approaches 
to producing renewable energy that is 
technically sound, and is financially, 
economically and environmentally viable.
• Establish a program of international financing 
and ‘in kind’ assistance that effectively supports 
the supply of renewable energy, and 
promotes Barbados’ economic growth 
and competitiveness.
• Increase staffing (secretariat) and human 
capacity to support local NGOs such as BREA.
• Develop a clear protocol for clients to follow 
for investigating and trouble-shooting in 
new renewable energy systems with a method 
of recourse for clients in case of unsatisfactory 
company performance.
• Provide regular and clear communication 
to the public on developments within the 
renewable energy industry.
• Institute efficiency standards for 
manufacturing local renewable energy 
products such as solar water heaters.
• Establish appropriate fiscal incentives 
for emerging renewable energy and 
storage technologies.
• Promote an enabling environment that 
encourages local involvement in renewable 
energy projects.• Establish a hub for innovation, research and 
development in renewable energy.
• Create a system to ensure the protection of 
intellectual property and patents for renewable 
energy technologies.
• Define land areas for bio-energy and 
wind production in Barbados’ Physical 
Development Plan.
• Establish and support infrastructure for the 
collection, handling, and processing of organic 
material to produce energy.
• Establish a renewable energy spatial 
licensing regime for residential and 
commercial producers.
• Provide fiscal and financial support for 
research and development in renewable 
energy and storage technologies and methods.
• Develop standards of production for 
bio-methane from biogas.
• Create standards for electricity generation 
efficiency in the bio-energy, wind energy and 
other renewable energy sub sectors.
• Produce a legislative and regulatory framework 
for bio-energy production, distribution, 
storage, and plant decommissioning.
• Devise a strategy for expanding Barbados’ 
renewable energy markets into the Caribbean.
• Establish a transparent decision protocol for 
choosing between energy storage measures.
• Create clear guidelines for integration of 
battery technology in PV systems.
• Implement proven storage technologies 
and systems that promote renewable 
energy and are economically, environmentally 
and financially viable.
• Establish a system for recycling and disposing 
of batteries at end of use (cradle to cradle).
4.3 Energy Efficiency and Energy 
Conservation
Energy efficiency and conservation are critical to 
achieving the national desire to contain the foreign 
exchange expenditure relating to the fuel import bill. 
Changing energy use to provide more output for less 
input improves both the economic and environmental 
performance of any technology. Looking across the 
planning horizon of the BNEP, it is expected that 
the economy will experience growth, and potentially 
increase the demand for energy. In promoting energy 
efficiency and conservation, growth across sectors 
such as manufacturing and construction should not 
be compromised. The indicators developed and the 
measures pursued should lead to improvements in the 
way that energy is produced, even if there is long-term 
growth in overall use.
One of the main strategies for attaining a sustainable 
energy production and consumption sector is to attain 
maximum efficiency. A focus on energy efficiency 
can improve the performance in both the renewable 
energy and fossil fuel sectors.
The importance of energy efficiency is stated in 
Visionary Goal 2.
Visionary Goal 2: An energy sector where 
consumption and production of energy resources 
occur with the maximum level of efficiency that is 
feasible.
The importance of energy efficiency is further 
emphasised in Overall Objective 10.
Overall Objective 10: Improving the efficiency 
in the production and consumption of energy 
products within the various sub-sectors.
The importance of energy efficiency and its 
overarching role in improving sustainability throughout 
the sectors, make it sufficiently significant to merit its 
own policy or plan emerging from the BNEP. For this 
reason the development of an Energy Efficiency Plan 
is included among the recommended measures below. 
The Energy Efficiency Plan would have sub-sections to 
consider areas of energy management and planning, 
lighting and exterior energy efficiency activities.The BNEP seeks to address and promote energy 
efficiency activities through the following:
• Retrofitting.
• Energy efficiency management.
• Energy efficiency and electricity.
• Incentive development for energy 
efficiency and energy conservation.
• Standards for energy efficiency and 
energy conservation.
• Regulatory development.
• Promotion of public awareness.
• Human resources development.
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Sector
Specific Objectives
The efficient consumption of energy in Barbados will 
result in a sector that:
• Establishes efficiency standards for 
manufacturing of local renewable 
energy products.
• Provides energy efficiency standards for 
importation of electrical and electronic 
equipment into Barbados.
• Creates an energy efficiency labelling protocol 
for electric and electronic equipment.
• Integrates energy efficiency activities with 
renewable energy, and views renewable energy 
as energy efficiency with zero cost.
• Establishes retrofits or energy efficiency where 
feasible; e.g. replacing florescent bulbs with 
LED lights.
• Considers energy efficiency alongside 
renewable energy development in an integrated 
approach to sustainability throughout 
the sector.
Policy Measures - Energy Efficiency 
and Conservation
To improve the efficiency of energy use in 
the country, all relevant entities in Barbados 
shall work together to:
• Establish efficiency standards governing 
electricity production for utility and 
distribution-scale operations.
• Develop a maximum useful life and cost/ 
performance ratio of operations for 
generation equipment.
• Create legislation and regulations to govern 
movement towards greater energy efficiency in 
businesses and residences in Barbados.
• Craft an energy efficiency plan as a policy 
guideline document.
• Develop an energy conservation education 
and awareness programme that will promote 
lifestyle changes among Barbadians with regard 
to energy consumption.
• Promote energy efficiency in the productive and 
trading sectors.
• Develop sectoral energy efficiency and 
consumption standards for buildings, and 
encode them in the Town and Country 
Planning Act.
• Establish or adopt business standards for the 
design of energy efficient homes and offices.
• Create energy efficiency standards for 
appliances and equipment used for residential, 
commercial and industrial purposes.
• Provide equity for households that are unable 
to pay for energy efficiency retrofits 
and products.
• Develop a set of regulations in tandem with 
all government ministries involved in the 
energy sector, which identifies a clear and 
defined process for new applicants in energy 
efficiency projects.• Produce a system of duties, taxes and 
economic incentives to promote greater use 
of high-efficiency energy technologies.
• Implement standards for insulation in buildings.
• Use Life Cycle Analysis to determine the best 
materials to be used for buildings and other 
construction projects
4.4 Electricity Sector
The electricity sector is a critical sector to be 
addressed in the movement towards a sustainable 
energy sector and the goal of 100% renewable energy. 
In order to obtain the maximum benefit of renewable 
energy technologies, there will need to be integration 
of these technologies into the existing grid.
Given that 50% of energy used in Barbados is provided by the electricity 
utility, more renewable sources in the generation of electricity will go a 
long way towards reaching long-term targets.The resulting agreements between the electric utility 
and renewable energy developers should share the 
risks and opportunities appropriately. The involvement 
of the utility is also important in promoting demandside management and energy efficiency within various 
customer classes.
Given that 50% of energy used in Barbados is provided 
by the electricity utility, more renewable sources 
in the generation of electricity will go a long way 
towards reaching long-term targets. It is important 
that the electric utility is clear on government’s longterm strategy to ensure that decisions regarding 
technological investments are made in support of the 
targets. The utility should also play a part in setting 
the targets and establishing plans for the transition 
towards a grid using more renewable energy and 
sustainable fossil fuels. One of the ways in which 
transitions to renewable energy and energy efficiency 
technology will be included is through the use of 
SMART grids, which will need to be integrated into the 
existing distribution system.
One other significant aspect relating policy to consider 
is the degree to which liberalisation of the market is 
possible. This can be viewed in terms of generation, 
transmission and distribution, but there may be other 
specific services that the utility is currently responsible 
for that might involve a third party. These could include 
aspects of energy storage to facilitate greater use of 
renewable energy technologies.
Electricity Sector Specific Objectives
As Barbados transitions towards a renewable energybased economy, the production and distribution of 
affordable electricity to all citizens in Barbados will be 
maintained, as stated in Overall Objective 1.
Overall Objective 1: Achieving stability and 
predictability in energy product prices over the 
long term.
Other Objectives and Visionary goals related to 
efficiency and environmental quality also speak 
directly to the electric utility’s ability to achieve 
the objectives within the sector.
Important in considering the electricity sector, 
are issues related to regulation and licensing. 
This is because the extent to which investments 
can be undertaken by the utility is determined to 
bhlh
A utility in a single buyer market such as Barbados 
requires a licence to operate. A degree of certainty 
with regards to licensing is important if the utility is to 
invest in technologies and programmes in the long-run.
There may also be an opening up of the electricity 
market for competition or other participation, in order 
to facilitate Overall Objective 7.
Overall Objective 7: Encouraging local investment 
in energy projects and programmes in Barbados, 
with a view to increasing the number of 
shareholders and players in the various 
energy subsectors.
The sustainability of the energy sector will be achieved 
through an electricity sector that:
• Provides a reliable service, minimising 
brownouts and blackouts.
• Offers an affordable service to customers in 
all categories.
• Establishes a greater percentage of renewable 
energy in the fuel mix for electricity generation
(Aspirational goal of 100%).
• Expresses clear rules governing the 
participation of Independent Power Producers 
(IPPs) in the sector.
• Has specific pricing for each renewable energy 
source in any pricing agreement.
• Establishes clear rules governing the writeoff of sunken assets by BL&P, NPC, BNOC and 
other electricity producing entities that may 
be regulated.
• Provides clear rules defining investments for 
firm capacity and intermittent capacity.
• Demarcates obligations for provision of 
universal service between the incumbent utility 
and potential new renewable energy players.
• Defines an optimum mix of technologies 
in renewable energy, i.e. percentage to be 
provided by wind, solar, biomass etc.• Provides guidance on optimising the size of 
components of the renewable energy system 
(utility scale vs. distributed renewable energy).
• Establishes a transparent system for 
determining when to include newer renewable 
technologies into long-term utility planning 
(OTEC, wave, etc.).
• Maximises the potential in using storage 
technologies to improve the dispatch of supply.
• Articulates clear rules on how utility planning 
should be undertaken; moving away from a
least cost model to an MCA sustainable model.
• Demonstrates transparency in the roles of 
the utility, the government ministry and the 
regulator in establishing long-term planning 
and integration of IPPs in the new 
competitive market.
• Prioritises reduction of carbon emissions in 
line with climate change, and national and 
global targets.
• Increases the involvement of the electricity 
utility in other sectors such as transport (e.g. 
supply of energy for EVs; vehicle to home and 
vehicle to grid technologies).
• Determines the optimum level of competition 
and collaboration in the sector, while 
maintaining reliability of supply.
• Provides clear and transparent rules for 
dispatch of generation, with assigned roles 
and responsibilities.
• Offers streamlined and transparent rules 
determining the issue of licenses for IPPs 
(could be an auctioning or RFP process by 
an independent body).
• Establishes a market with the maximum 
participation of local entrepreneurs 
and international partners that can 
be accommodated.• Develops an equitable and stable pricing 
regime that is consistent with social and 
environmental values.
• Provides financial incentives for investors 
 that promote renewable or more sustainable 
 energy sources.
• Creates tariff and pricing regimes for the
utility that include consideration of the cost 
of storage technologies.
• Includes the integration of SMART 
grid technologies.
• Improves efficiency of electricity generation.
• Establishes efficiency in consumption practices, 
including the use of demand-side management.
Policy Measures Electricity Supply
In order to establish an electricity sector that is 
powered by affordable renewable energy, all relevant 
entities in Barbados shall work together to:
• Establish electric market structures that reduce 
the effects of monopolistic operations where 
financially and economically feasible.
• Create a pricing mechanism for electricity from 
renewable energy suppliers.
• Devise protocols for interconnectivity between 
IPPs and the utility to supply electricity.
• Expand electricity regulation to include the 
wide ranging aspects of the market, generation, 
distribution, supply, dispatch, transmission, and 
electricity use within the electricity sector.
• Produce standards and specifications for 
generation, supply, dispatch, transmission, 
distribution, storage and consumption that
allow the electricity sector to operate in a 
financially, economically, environmentally, 
and technically viable manner.
• Institute targets for limits on CO2 emissions in 
the electricity sector.
• Promote the use of renewable and other clean 
sources of energy to produce electricity.
• Develop clear rules for determining roles 
and timelines for updating the Integrated 
Resource Plan.
• Use SMART meters as part of an advanced 
communication infrastructure for distribution 
management, to facilitate the use of more 
intermittent technologies and aid in 
demand-side management.
4.5 Energy and Transportation
The transportation sector is a large consumer of 
fossil fuel and, therefore, a significant contributor to 
greenhouse gas emissions in Barbados. Transportation 
is responsible for about 33% of energy consumed 
on the local energy sector. Given the ever expanding 
fleet of vehicles on the roads, management within the 
transport sector will be vital in charting a sustainable 
path for energy development.
In addressing the transport sector, it is crucial to 
consider both the technological development and 
issues of management and organisation within the 
sector. There is also a need for focus on infrastructure 
such as roads and refuelling systems.
The expansion of the local fleet of electric vehicles was 
identified as a principal area of development alongside 
other changes to alternative fuels or improvements in 
overall efficiency.
Enhancements in the transport sector will play a 
significant role in achieving the Visionary Goals and 
Overall Objectives, including the following:
Visionary Goal 1: An energy sector that offers 
a diversity of sustainable energy options with a 
trajectory to achieve 100% Renewable Energy.
Overall Objective 4: Increasing the amount of 
renewable energy sources used in the energy mix 
to the extent that it can be accommodated from a 
technical and socio-economic perspective.Consequently, the BNEP seeks to provide measures to 
address the following issues:
• Energy consumption and efficiency within the 
transportation sector.
• Conversion from fossil fuel use to electricity.
• Transportation management.
• Fuel switching within the transportation sector.
• Clean energy use and emissions control within
the transportation sector.
Transport Sector Specific Objectives
The transformation of the type of energy consumption 
within the transportation sector will be achieved, 
thereby giving rise to a sector that:
• Operates with a greater percentage of electric 
vehicles (EVs) and hybrid vehicles in the 
local fleet.
• Utilises a skilled workforce available to 
provide effective maintenance on EVs.
• Provides more information to customers on 
comparative operating costs of running diesel, 
gasoline and EVs.
• Has a greater number of renewable energy 
systems installed that can be used as 
charging stations for EVs (carports and 
charging stations).
• Reduces the duties on the importation of EVs.
• Uses more batteries and other storage 
technology to facilitate the charging of 
vehicles 24 hours per day.
• Offers greater concessions in infrastructural 
cost to encourage more local automobile 
dealers to be involved in the EV market.
• Collects more detailed information on the 
number of EVs, hybrids and other alternative 
fuel vehicles in the country.
• Includes the use of EVs, biofuels, and other 
liflibli
• Uses fewer vehicles per capita to reduce the 
level of traffic congestion in the country.
• Provides more convenient and attractive public 
transport options to consumers.
• Sensitises the public to the benefits of using 
mass public transit rather than private cars.
• Has created a disaggregated sector plan.
• Has defined a consistent transportation
policy that makes investment in new 
technologies worthwhile.
• Supports a well maintained system of charging 
stations at strategic points in the country.
• Owns a fleet with a greater average 
performance efficiency of vehicles in Barbados.
Policy Measures Transport Sector
In order to achieve the significant change in the 
consumption of energy to more efficient, clean and 
renewable energy, all relevant entities in Barbados shall 
work together to:
• Create biofuel standards for wholesale and 
retail supply of vehicles.
• Establish a transportation information system 
to provide data for transportation and energy 
policies, strategic planning, tracking of CO2 
emissions, and environmental impacts.
• Introduce more renewable energy and clean 
energy into the public transportation system.
• Provide appropriate incentives to promote 
“green pumps” within service stations and on 
commercial properties.
• Remove MTBE from gasoline and diesel, and 
replace it with ethanol and bio-diesel.
• Promote linkages with the agriculture sector 
to encourage the production of agro-energy 
crops where financially and economically viable.
• Encourage energy efficiency in the 
transportation sector. • Provide tax incentives to vehicle dealerships 
that train their mechanics to maintain and 
repair EVs.
• Establish a programme for identifying 
appropriate international sources of funding 
to facilitate and assist the government in 
transitioning from fossil fuels to EVs.
• Remove duties and VAT from EVs and 
encourage a scheduled approach to increasing 
their use in the national transportation 
fleet, while at the same time, not harming 
government’s revenue stream.
• Develop a road network that promotes 
energy efficiency.
• Establish the use of management technology 
in public transit, e.g. using smartphone apps to 
• Create a system that includes mobile charging 
stations for vehicles.
• Introduce ethanol rather than MTBE as an 
anti-knock agent.
• Implement more stringent regulations on 
vehicles’ exhausts and emissions.
• Integrate charging stations with traditional
gas stations.
• Construct more charging stations for EVs.
• Control and maintain CO2 emissions at levels 
consistent with local and global climate 
change targets.
• Establish a system that facilitates the change 
from traditional vehicles to those powered 
by renewable energy, taking transition costs 
into consideration.
• Implement standards for streetlight efficiency.
• Provide cost incentives that encourage 
investment in required infrastructure with 
charging stations etc.
• Acquire more details on the number of vehicles 
using each fuel type.
• Establish standards in charging and other 
renewable energy infrastructure related 
to fuelling.
• Develop a regulatory framework for the 
implementation of vehicle to grid storage 
and supply technology.
4.6 Energy and the Environment
It has long been observed that the production of 
energy has had an impact on our natural environment 
through the emission of various pollutants,
and that such costs have, for many years, been 
externalised from the sector, and not seen as a 
cost to doing business.Given the focus on long-term health and environmental 
issues related to marine life, ground water and air 
quality, it is important to explore the impact of energy, 
the environment and associated costs. This pertains to 
the Visionary Goals and Overall Objectives below:
Visionary Goal 7: An energy sector that minimises 
the environmental impacts and contribution to 
global climate change (environment).
Overall Objective 13: Reducing the environmental 
impacts associated with the production and 
consumption of energy resources locally.
The BNEP will establish a course of action for the 
following issues:
• Energy’s impact on the environment, such 
as air and ground water quality.
• Oil spill management.
• Information management and education.
• Establishment and enforcement of 
environmental standards.
• Clean energy.
• Waste and energy.
Energy and Environment Sector Objectives
The achievement of a sustainable balance between 
energy production, transport and consumption, and 
protecting the environment will produce a sector that:
• Has a strong flow of information on the 
environmental effects of various types of 
energy production technologies in the energy 
sector and the wider society. 
• Provides infrastructure that allows the 
authorities responsible for environmental 
protection to assess and monitor environmental 
standards in the energy sector.
• Possesses the information infrastructure that 
would allow for the dissemination of 
environmental best practices on the production, 
transportation and consumption of energy.
• Requires (through legislation and regulation) all 
participants to adhere to the principle of zero 
harm to people and the environment in 
pursuit of energy production, transportation 
and distribution.
Policy Measures -Energy and the Environment
To ensure that environmental concerns and objectives 
are addressed fully, all relevant entities in Barbados 
shall work together to establish:
• Standards and protocols for the safe and 
effective disposal of equipment and devices 
in the energy sector.
• A sustainable environmental management 
framework for the upstream offshore 
petroleum sector.
• A decommissioning fund for the energy 
sector to facilitate the decommissioning
and abandonment of energy operations 
and facilities.
• Standards and protocols for energy production 
in the petroleum and renewable energy 
sub-sectors that promote and encourage 
the goal of zero harm to the people and 
the environment.
• Information systems and infrastructure 
that promote the flow of information 
requiring environmental standards, 
best practices and legislation.
• Studies within the sector that assess the 
correlation between carbon dioxide emissions 
and health risks (e.g. cancer and asthma).
Climate Change
The statement in Visionary Goal 7 emphasises 
the importance of climate change among the 
environmental factors. Barbados and all SIDS are 
particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts. 
Contamination of groundwater, damage to coral reefs, 
destruction of coastlines and more frequent extreme 
weather events are just a few of the occurrences that 
could severely impact Barbados’ economy and those
of other SIDS.It is therefore in Barbados’ and other small islands’ 
interest to lead the way internationally in promoting 
the mitigation of climate change.
BNEP speaks to the following:
• Climate change financing.
• Carbon pricing and trading.
• Moving the international energy sector towards 
a climate change neutrality.
• Information flow.
• Implementation of the nationally appropriate 
mitigation action.
Climate Change Sector Specific Objectives
Climate change mitigation will require a sector that:
• Contributes to the reduction of CO2 emissions 
by promoting the use of clean and 
renewable energy.
• Fosters collaboration and cooperation amongst 
all stakeholders to reduce CO2 emissions.
• Works with international investors and agencies 
to finance climate change mitigation initiatives.
• Establishes a baseline database for the level of 
greenhouse gases associated with economic 
and developmental activities in the 
various sectors.
Policy Measures for Climate Change
To achieve success in the reduction of CO2 emissions 
within the energy sector, all relevant entities in 
Barbados shall work together to:
• Create a mechanism and infrastructure to 
internationally transferred mitigation outcomes.
• Establish a clear international agenda 
for the acquisition of climate change 
mitigation funding.
Human Resources and Institutions: Capacity 
and Development
In order for the BNEP to be effective, the institutions 
and human resources which service the energy sector 
must be honed and applied in a meaningful way. The 
move of the energy industry towards a greater reliance 
on renewable energy represents a paradigm change 
in energy production and consumption. It will be 
necessary to ensure that the workforce is adequately 
prepared for the new skills that are needed, and for 
institutions to be restructured to regulate and manage 
activities within the new sector.
Of extreme importance in capacity building is the 
education system; especially the promotion of 
energy efficiency and renewable energy in the 
school curriculum at primary, secondary and 
tertiary institutions.
Visionary Goal 5 and Overall Objectives 11 and 12 
specifically identify these key issues related to 
human resource development.
Visionary Goal 5: An energy sector that offers 
opportunities for development of human capacity 
and collaboration.
Overall Objective 11: Improving the awareness 
and understanding of energy production and 
consumption, its impacts and the associated 
environmental and socio-economic consequences 
within all sections of the public.
Overall Objective 12: Increasing the number 
of persons locally with qualifications and skills 
relating to energy production and management 
of renewable and fossil fuel sources.
This section addresses and anticipates these changes 
and developments needed in the area of human 
resources and institutional capacity.
The Specific Objectives for human capacity will 
address issues relating to:
• Research and development.
• Education and skills development.
• Energy information management.• Knowledge development.
• Capacity development and institutional 
strengthening.
4.7 Human Resource and Institutions - 
Capacity Specific Objectives
The development of skills and knowledge in the energy 
sector will result in a sector that:
• Has a skilled workforce able to fulfil the 
requirements of the new renewable 
energy sectors.
• Maintains standards of qualification for 
all aspects of the energy sector, especially 
in renewable energy.
• Maximises information sharing between 
educational institutions and the energy sector 
in establishing school curricula, and degree and 
vocational programmes.
• Incorporates new skills relevant to emerging, 
conventional and renewable energy sectors 
into syllabi in tertiary institutions such as 
the Barbados Community College (BCC), the 
Samuel Jackman Prescod Polytechnic (SJPP), 
and the University of the West Indies (UWI).
• Offers an increased number of scholarships 
for persons interested in studying new areas 
related to renewable energy and aspects of 
sustainability in the oil and gas sector.
• Allows for the flow of energy information from 
regional institutions to the local environment, 
and from local industry to regional institutions.
• Uses more qualified persons in conducting 
energy audits.
• Emphasises the concept of ‘innovation’ in 
energy-related curricula at various levels 
of education.
• Regularly uses various media to communicate 
with the general public about issues relevant 
to energy policy and sustainable energy 
development in the country.
• Maximises the commercialisation of new and 
renewable energy technologies in the country.
• Offers significant internship opportunities in 
energy technology development in the
private sector.
• Provides significant opportunities for 
the private sector to sponsor local energy 
development projects.
• Facilitates financial contributions from the 
general public for the development of 
various projects.
a skilled workforce 
able to fulfil the 
requirements of 
the new renewable 
energy sector
“
Incorporates new skills relevant to emerging, conventional and renewable 
energy sectors into syllabi in tertiary institutions such as the Barbados 
Community College (BCC), the Samuel Jackman Prescod Polytechnic (SJPP), 
and the University of the West Indies (UWI).• Makes greater use of international standards 
and best practices in the development of the 
energy sector.
• Encourages the pursuit of vocational skills that 
are important in building an effective renewable 
energy sector through support of institutions 
such as the Technical Vocational and Education 
Training (TVET) Council.
• Creates an environment that motivates 
personal entrepreneurship in areas of small 
business development in energy-related fields.
• Provides a community teaching programme in 
renewable energy.
• Offers clear levels of acceptable standards 
of service for various energy products, with 
the possibility of recourse for consumers if 
standards are not met.
Policy Measures for Human Resources Institutions: - 
Capacity and Development
To achieve the objectives that will lead to a significant 
improvement in human resources and capacity 
development, all relevant entities in Barbados shall 
work together to:
• Develop energy studies curricula for secondary 
and tertiary institutions.
• Establish a knowledge base for the 
energy sector within an appropriate 
institutional framework.
• Develop an energy workbook that makes use 
of an integrated approach, including general 
concepts in math, science, etc.
• Formulate a partnership between stakeholders 
within the energy sector and the Ministry 
of Education.
• Create an information network between the 
energy and educational sectors to communicate 
requirements pertaining to skills and expertise.
• Mobilise funding for training and development 
of persons employed in the energy sector, and 
fields of disciplines that support it.
• Develop and promote institutional capabilities 
in the energy sector including:
• Energy policy formulation, 
management, assessment and audit.
• Legislative review and reform.
• Energy sector planning.
• Support, promote and maintain the timely 
supply of data and information to the Barbados 
National Energy Information System.
• Establish regional and international agendas to 
develop technical capacity.
• Implement guidelines for the adaptation, 
diffusion, and transfer of energy technologies.
• Promote cooperation in research and 
technological development within the 
energy sector.
• Support research and development into 
smart-grid technologies.
• Enable an effective system of knowledge 
transfer of higher order energy skills available in 
international institutions to local educational 
and vocational facilities.
• Establish an educational system that 
supports efforts for entrepreneurship 
in the energy sector.
• Introduce research programmes that illustrate 
the link between the development of the local 
energy sector and the economy.
• Create new jobs throughout the energy 
industry that increase overall employment 
opportunities in Barbados.
• Empower a working group, including members 
of educational institutions and the energy 
sector to ensure the on-going relevance of 
education in the changing energy environment.
• Institute demonstration projects that illustrate 
innovation and the commercialisation of 
energy projects.4.8 Energy and the Cross-Cutting Sectors
The energy sector has a significant impact on all 
aspects of Barbados’ socio- economic life, touching 
all the critical sectors of production and consumption. 
It is important that this policy harmonizes with 
identified goals and policy objectives of the other 
sectors stated below:
• Agriculture.
• Tourism.
• Industrial sector.
• Waste management.
• Water.
• Health and safety.
Using the Multi Criteria Approach (MCA) means that 
it will always be necessary to examine the impacts of 
any policy decision or strategy on the energy sector 
from as wide a perspective as possible. The sectors 
identified above emerged from various discussions 
within the sector. These sectors are expected to 
have a significant impact on energy production or 
consumption, and/or will be impacted by energy 
production or consumption practices.
It is possible that along the planning horizon of the 
BNEP, other sectors will be added as they become 
more significant in terms of their impacts on the 
overall energy sector. During this time, the BNEP 
should be modified as necessary to remain consistent 
with policies in other sectors such as transport, 
tourism, agriculture and small business. Considering 
thesepolicies in a consolidated manner will ensure 
synchronicity and harmony in all policies relating to 
the Barbados economy.
The importance of the cross-cutting approach is 
summarised in Overall Objective 9.
Overall Objective 9: Increasing collaboration 
within the energy subsectors and among the 
cross-cutting sectors that have an impact on 
energy supply or consumption.
Sustainability in agriculture 
will help safeguard the 
sustainability of the entire 
energy sector in the long term.
“Overview of Cross Cutting Sectors - 
Overview and Objectives
4.8.1 Agriculture
Agriculture is critical because there are potential uses 
of land for crops to produce bio-fuels. Animal waste 
from farms can also be used for production of biogas. 
In addition, the agricultural sector is a major consumer 
of energy in the process of food cultivation 
and production.
Traditionally, the sugar cane industry in Barbados was 
one of the pillars of its economy. However significant 
decline over the last twenty years has meant that 
much of the land, which was formerly used in this 
productive sector, now lies idle. There is considerable 
interest in developing crops, which can be used for 
energy production on this land. In recent years, there 
have been investigations into the viability of using river 
tamarind as a crop to complement bagasse production 
from sugar cane.
More activity and discussions in these areas are 
expected. Sustainability in agriculture will help 
safeguard the sustainability of the entire energy 
sector in the long term.
Agriculture Sector Specific Objectives
To achieve sustainability and the Visionary Goals, 
Barbados seeks to develop an agricultural sector that:
• Maximises the use of bagasse from the sugar 
cane industry and king grass to generate 
electricity that can be used within the industry 
and/or sold to the utility.
• Maintains efficient sugar production processes 
and supports products made from sugar cane.
• Optimises the use of waste heat produced in 
agriculture for cogeneration.
• Makes use of available land to maximise 
production using energy technologies to 
improve the yields and diversity of products.
• Has increased commercial viability of sugar 
cane and the overall agricultural industry 
hh ffiii
• Incorporates biomass (possibly river tamarind) 
as an off-season fuel to complement bagasse 
fuel production.
• Uses a higher percentage of bio-gas, bio-fuels, 
bagasse and other biomass, such as king grass, 
to produce greater price stability.
• Uses more electricity in services such 
as cooking, in order to create additional 
applications for renewable energy.
• Includes the use of ethanol from sugar cane in 
the transportation sector to replace MTBE.
• Establishes a virtual museum to demonstrate 
various aspects of the sugar industry and 
linkages relating to energy and sustainability.
• Increases the use of biomass, while reducing 
reliance on fossil fuel in the manufacture 
of plastics.
4.8.2 Tourism
The tourism sector is a major contributor to the 
Barbados economy. The success of the industry 
relies, in part, on maintaining the natural environment; 
specifically marine and coastal resources, and air 
and water quality. A programme that highlights the 
importance of protecting these resources for citizens 
and visitors to the island will be of great benefit. 
Energy conservation, efficiency and promotion of 
renewable energy are key elements in these activities 
relating to the Vision Statement and Visionary Goals 
of the BNEP.
Sustainable tourism is also a way for Barbados 
to market its tourism product more broadly, as a 
greater number of visitors are becoming aware 
of environmental issues, and are taking them into 
consideration when choosing a vacation destination.
Although hotels have become more aware of energy 
efficiency and renewable energy, there are areas where 
their actions can go further. For example, there is room 
for improvement in the area of solar water heaters, 
where growth in the domestic sector has not been 
mirrored within the hotel industry.Solar thermal energy for air conditioning is another 
potential area of growth if the appropriate incentives 
are implemented. International environmental 
standards, such as “Green Globe” or “EarthCheck,” 
could lead to a greater focus on renewable energy 
and energy efficiency standards across the sector.
Integrating hotel operations with activities in 
industries, such as the rental car business, can extend 
energy sustainability efforts in the area of transport, 
which is another key energy sector.
In addition, the expanding tourism sector is currently 
responsible for a considerable amount of the 
electricity demand on the island. Therefore, energy 
efficiency improvements in this sector, and the 
uptake of renewable energy, will enhance the energy 
sustainability potential of the country. In this regard, 
it would be useful to focus on areas such as 
refrigeration, air conditioning, lighting, industrial 
cleaning and cooking.
Tourism Sector Specific Objectives
A sector that:
• Integrates EVs and other renewable energy 
vehicles within into the rental car business 
and other tourism-related services.
• Develops an educational programme for hotel 
guests and tourists in Barbados, emphasising 
the importance of energy efficiency and 
environmental conservation.
• Allows the electric utility to invest in the 
hotel sector in a way that will reduce the hotels’ 
overall energy costs and help make them 
more competitive.
• Allows the hotel sector to take advantage of 
fuel hedging programmes offered by the utility 
to help stabilise energy costs and facilitate 
better cost-control planning and budgeting.
• Provides further incentives to promote the 
use of solar water heaters and solar cooling 
technology for air conditioning.
• Supports a programme to encourage hotels 
to achieve international energy efficiency and 
environmental standards such as “EarthCheck.”
Industry, Manufacturing and Construction
Over the last decade, the Barbados economy has 
expanded in the industrial sectors, with an increase 
in manufacturing. This expansion has resulted in 
a concomitant increase in both peak demand for 
energy and total energy consumption. The price of 
energy for the industrial sector has often been higher 
than the cost of service, as the electricity tariffs for 
domestic customers are kept at a lower level because 
of social considerations. The higher cost of energy 
for industrial users affects the cost of production for 
both manufactured goods and services. This means 
that the prices at which goods are sold in wholesale 
and retail outlets are also higher. At times, this high 
price affects the competitiveness of businesses 
from an international perspective; especially when 
compared to the neighbouring twin island state of 
Trinidad & Tobago, where the cost of fossil fuel based 
energy products is much lower. Energy policy and 
regulation will need to address the cost of such energy 
products for the industrial sectors, to ensure that 
businesses remain competitive, and costs of services 
to consumers remain reasonable.
Barbados has also expanded its activities in the areas 
of building and construction. This is one of the more 
energy intensive sub-sectors in the Barbados economy 
and, as such, areas of sustainability and energy 
efficiency are critical. The attainment of international 
energy efficiency standards, such as Leadership in 
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED), can play a 
major part in ensuring that standards are maintained 
in the long term.
4.8.3 Manufacturing, Construction and
Building Sector Specific ObjectiveS
A sector that:
• Maintains electricity tariffs at levels 
that encourage entrepreneurship and 
maintain competitiveness.
• Makes use of renewable energy technologies 
available to improve overall sustainability.
• Encourages and educates the sector on 
potential options with respect to renewable 
energy and self-generation.• Provides standards for buildings and 
construction that are in line with international 
standards such as LEED.
Key Policy Measures for the Waste 
Management Sector
In small island states such as Barbados, the issue of 
waste management is also one that will need to be 
addressed, especially because the availability of land 
for use in landfills is limited. The environmental impact 
of waste materials such as non-biodegradable plastics 
can also be significant and, with the development of an 
effective waste separation system, there is potential 
for more recycling efforts. Alternative ways of waste 
disposal, including incineration, have been considered 
in Barbados. Options such as these will have an impact 
on energy consumption, which will in turn affect the 
cost of waste management.
In addition to how waste management is impacted by 
consumption, there are opportunities for using various 
waste products as fuel sources. Bagasse obtained 
from the sugar cane industry is an example of a waste 
product that has been used to generate electricity. 
Various options using gasification of other organic 
waste have been considered in recent times. These 
waste- to-energy options could represent solutions for 
reducing the amount of garbage entering the landfill 
and increasing the use of indigenous energy resources 
in Barbados.
4.8.4 Waste Management Sector 
Specific ObjectiveS
A sector that:
• Maximises the use of waste resources 
in industrial processes for the generation 
of electricity within the industry and to the grid.
• Provides a clear assessment of the potential 
of identified waste products in generating 
electricity or producing biofuels based on 
availability and energy calorific content.
• Minimises the impacts of wastewater 
production in generating electricity and 
other manufacturing processes.
Water
Protection and maintenance of a good quality supply 
of water has also become a source of concern. 
Barbados is supplied entirely by ground water aquifers, 
although there have been efforts to develop additional 
desalination plants. The energy required to pump and 
distribute water across Barbados is significant, and 
the Barbados Water Authority (BWA) is the customer 
with the highest usage of electricity from BL&P in the 
country. As a result, the BWA has explored renewable 
energy options such as solar and wind energy for 
generating electricity on its premises.
It is important that within this policy, the link 
between water conservation and energy efficiency 
is emphasised. There is also a need to consider 
specific renewable energy technologies that could be 
developed for the water sector. It should be noted that 
there may be a regulatory impact if the BWA decides 
to pursue an energy source that is separate from the 
grid. The loss of the BWA as a customer to BL&P 
could result in increased tariffs for customers that 
stay on the grid. In this situation, BL&P would still be 
required to meet its cost-of-service obligations. Any 
future policy and regulatory measures should take this 
into account.
It could be beneficial for the BWA and BL&P to work 
together to develop energy efficiency, renewable 
energy and storage projects that reduce the overall 
energy burden of the water system, and utilises the 
BWA assets more effectively.
Water Sector Specific Objectives
A sector that:
• Uses an integrated management approach 
that promotes efficiency in the consumption 
and production of this resource to the greatest 
extent possible.
• Includes the use of renewable energy 
technology to reduce the overall demand and 
environmental impact of energy use.
4.8.5 Health and Safety
Apart from the environmental factors associated 
with emissions generated from fossil fuel energy 
dihihhiican have on health. Nitrous and sulphur oxides 
associated with burning fossil fuels for generating 
electricity are linked to respiratory ailments. In 
addition, emissions from gasoline and diesel vehicles 
can have a similar impact. MTBE that is used in 
unleaded gasoline vehicles as an anti-knock agent is 
also carcinogenic. It is partially for this reason that 
the replacement of MTBE by ethanol or gasohol has 
been explored as an alternative. There are also safety 
considerations when it comes to interconnection 
of renewable energy technologies to the grid. 
For example, there is danger of electrocution to 
technicians on lines for distributed renewable energy 
generation flowing back to the centralized grid. For 
stand-alone systems, batteries that are not properly 
maintained and stored can create risks of explosion.
There are also safety concerns related to the 
development of the new offshore oil and gas 
exploration industry. It is important that safety 
standards be in line with international best practices 
for all activities on the rig.
Related to the issue of health and safety in the energy 
sector is that of disaster management. Objectives and 
measures related to disaster management are also 
considered below.
Health and Safety and Environment Sector 
Specific Objectives
A sector that:
• Supports health and safety, with clear standards 
and protocols for establishing and maintaining 
new renewable energy systems.
• Establishes studies that quantify the link 
between energy use and various health ailments 
observed in Barbados.
• Has safety standards for oil and gas exploration 
that are in line with international best practices.
Disaster Management
Barbados, as an island state, is susceptible to natural 
and man-made disasters, especially related to 
hurricanes and other extreme weather- related events. 
Many of these are associated with climate change and 
other impacts that affect the environment.
Overall Objective 13: Reducing the environmental 
impacts associated with the production and 
consumption of energy resources locally.
Consequently, disaster management and mitigation is a 
very important component of any plan of action within 
the energy sector. The BNEP speaks to the following 
disaster management issues:
There are also safety 
concerns related to the 
development of the new 
offshore oil and gas 
exploration industry. 
It is important that 
safety standards be in 
line with international 
best practices for all 
activities on the rig
“• Energy and fuel reserves/stocks management.
• Renewable energy use as a mitigation tool
of disaster management.
• Oil spill management and mitigation planning.
• Electricity restoration management.
• Petroleum fuel transport disaster mitigation.
• Disaster management and natural 
gas distribution.
Sector Specific Objectives - Disaster Management
The development of a disaster management 
programme will create an energy sector that:
• Ensures the safety of renewable energy 
systems in the event of a natural disaster.
• Makes renewable energy resources available 
to contribute to relief in the wake of a 
natural disaster.
• Develops capabilities and resources for rapid 
disaster management.
• Requires (by law) that all participants adhere 
to the principle of zero harm to people 
and the environment in pursuit of energy 
production, transportation and distribution.
• Ensures that the regulations for the location 
of generation plant consider vulnerability to 
natural disasters such as hurricanes, 
earthquakes and tsunamis.
Key Policy Measures - Cross-Cutting Areas
In order to achieve these multi-sector objectives, as 
well as ensure safety and mitigate against disaster, all 
relevant entities in Barbados shall work together to:
• Promote balanced land use for energy and 
food production.
• Encourage energy efficiency for irrigation and 
animal production.
• Support the use of fisheries and agricultural 
waste for bio-energy production.
• Bolster the use of waste from the industrial, 
agricultural and tourism sectors, along with 
other municipal sources to produce energy 
where feasible.
• Establish legislation and regulations to 
encourage the safe disposal of waste from 
the energy sector.
• Implement time-of-use rates for the 
manufacturing sector in order to improve 
overall efficiency.
• Develop programmes to highlight possible 
uses for renewable energy technologies 
in the manufacturing and other industrial 
sectors (grid-tied and off-grid options). 
• Establish and implement standards of 
energy efficiency in manufacturing, 
building and construction;
• Formulate and implement a building code, 
focusing on aspects such as passive cooling, 
energy efficiency and general ‘green building’ 
solutions.
• Introduce standards to ensure the safety of 
renewable energy systems in the event of a 
natural disaster.
• Establish renewable energy resources 
that could provide relief in the wake of a 
natural disaster.
• Develop protocols for disaster management 
in service stations and charging stations with 
renewable energy infrastructure.
• Create an energy sector disaster response plan.
• Review legislation in the energy sector to 
enshrine the principle of zero harm.
• Offer economic incentives to give hotels the 
opportunity to provide more energy efficiency 
and renewable energy products.
• Introduce a pilot project to illustrate the 
impact of renewable energy and energy 
efficiency measures on the overall economy.4.9 Trade in Goods and Services within 
the Energy Sector
The continued development of the energy sector 
necessitates an enabling environment that promotes 
the capacity of Barbadian companies to provide 
goods and services competitively. Although maximum 
growth in renewable and sustainable energy will 
depend largely on the international funding available 
for the technology, there will also be a significant 
need for local investment and entrepreneurship. The 
importance of investment and entrepreneurship that 
relates to trade is encapsulated in Visionary Goal 6.
Visionary Goal 6: An energy sector that offers 
significant opportunities for local entrepreneurship 
and international investment.
Overall Objective 7: Encouraging local investment 
in energy projects and programmes in Barbados, 
with a view to increasing the number of 
shareholders and players in the various energy
sub-sectors.
Overall Objective 8: Promoting more local 
entrepreneurial activities in renewable energy 
and increasing fossil fuel energy development 
throughout the energy sub-sectors.
To this extent, the facilitation of business and trade 
within the local energy sector is a key component of 
the BNEP. Local trade is also important in making sure 
that the industry has long-term sustainability and that 
the economic benefits of development are shared in 
the local business community.
There are currently a number of local enterprises that 
are supplying renewable energy products and services 
in Barbados. The BNEP will provide for a course of 
action to promote the vigorous participation of local 
enterprises in all aspects of the energy sector. These 
include the development and implementation of an 
enabling environment that facilitates local content for:
• Exploration and production of oil and gas
offshore in Barbados.
• Renewable energy operations.
Trade in Energy Specific Objectives
The improvement of trade in energy goods and 
services requires a sector that:
• Addresses the barriers restricting 
participation in emerging renewable 
energy markets.
• Offers financial terms to encourage small
businesses to enter the renewable energy
market.
• Provides local investors with opportunities 
to be involved in local oil and gas exploration
projects.
• Allows the flow of information to empower
investment and the flow of financial resources.
• Maintains a strong local content supporting the
exploration and production of oil and gas.
Policy Measures - Energy Trade
To accomplish an enabling environment that will lead 
to a more desirable trade environment, all relevant 
entities in Barbados shall work together to:
• Strengthen networks between renewable energy 
businesses to foster greater collaboration.
• Develop a database of potential local projects in 
renewable and non- renewable energy, and the 
investment and skills needed.• Minimise all barriers to entering the 
renewable energy market.
• Promote the enabling infrastructure that 
will encourage the establishment of financial 
mechanisms to fund renewable energy.
• Determine the needs and readiness of local 
firms and suppliers of goods and services to 
meet the standards of supply for the offshore 
oil and gas sector.
• Review and adjust government’s regulatory 
and operational framework to allow an 
enabling environment for local companies to 
acquire the standards of supply.
• Establish legislation and regulations to govern 
the modes of supply for electricity from 
renewable energy sources.4.10 Energy Access and Infrastructure
Over the years, Barbados has successfully ensured 
that its population has access to energy. However, over 
the next twenty years, the challenge will be to provide 
affordable energy, as traditional sources will become 
more difficult and expensive to acquire. The policy will 
tackle the following:
• Affordable energy for all citizens.
• Access to clean and renewable energy.
The Visionary Goal and Overall Objective that speaks 
to this are as follows:
Visionary Goal 3: An energy sector that offers 
basic energy products and services that are 
affordable to local citizens.
Overall Objective 2: Achieving affordability and 
access to all classes of consumers in energy 
products and services.
Energy Access and infrastructure Specific 
Sector Objectives
Barbados will ensure that accessibility to energy is 
maintained and enhanced by creating a sector that:
• Guarantees that access to electricity is extended 
and maintained for all citizens of Barbados.
• Possesses a developed electricity and energy 
infrastructure that allows for a greater degree 
of distributed generation where financially and 
economically feasible.
Policy Measures for Energy Access and 
Infrastructure
To accomplish an enabling environment through 
improved energy access and infrastructure, all relevant 
entities in Barbados shall work together to:
• Establish an energy mix that promotes affordable 
energy prices.
• Formulate legislative and regulatory requirements 
within the energy sector to contain excessive 
pricing.
• Promote market structures that encourage 
• Introduce a lifeline rate for persons unable to 
afford the cost of basic energy services.
4.11 Energy Investment and Financing
Investment management will determine the success 
or failure achieved within the sector and its growth 
in the future. A policy that recognizes the magnitude 
of investment required will establish the enabling 
environment that allows investment to flow. The BNEP 
considers a course of action to address the following:
• Investment sources:
• Private sector investment
• Public sector investment
• Foreign direct investment
• Investment Structure:
• Debt
• Equity
• Grant
• Resource requirements for energy 
sector development.
• Information mobilization and investment.
• Investment scheduling.
Investment and Financing Sector Objectives
Sound energy investment and financing will see the 
emergence of an energy sector that:
• Maintains an optimum level of private and public 
sector investment for development of energy 
projects in Barbados.
• Operates with an optimum mix of foreign and local 
investment for development of energy projects 
in Barbados.
Policy Measures Energy Investment and Financing
To encourage sound, practical and timely investment in 
the energy sector, all relevant entities in Barbados shall 
work together to:
• Establish rules to guide local and overseas 
developers on requirements for investing in 
Barbados’ oil and gas sector.• Create a local content programme for the 
upstream petroleum sector.
• Develop local investment and ownership within the 
renewable energy sub-sector where feasible.
• Promote foreign/local partnerships for investment 
within the energy sector.
• Build a business enabling framework that allows 
for timely and easy establishment of operations.
• Improve the flow of information within the energy 
sector to ensure access to all available sources of 
financing (equity, debt and grant).
• Ensure that a process is in place for government 
to facilitate the acceptance of renewable energy 
proposals and the financing required to implement 
a project.
4.12 Implementation, Governance and 
Regulatory Framework
It is apparent that despite the technological 
developments and increase in business activities in 
new and traditional energy activities, there is a need 
for clearly defined regulatory frameworks.
Such certainty in regulation and decision making helps 
to give confidence to potential investors and reduce 
the risk for all the players involved.
In some cases, legislation and regulations are in 
place, but there are no clear rules or procedures 
to ensure implementation. In other cases, there 
are contradictions in the provisions of the existing 
legislation, and this creates a level of ambiguity 
in interpretation.
There are areas of current legislation which provide for 
changes to be made at the discretion of the minister 
responsible. While, it can be useful for the government 
and the person in charge to have the flexibility to 
change the direction of policy, it can lead to instability 
if such changes are made without consideration of the 
multi-criteria impact on the wider stakeholder group.
Moreover, when such powers of discretion exist 
for the Minister, there should be a system of 
considerations in place to inform the decisions to 
the extent that it is possible.In other instances, new legislation will be needed, but 
there are other situations where modifications might 
be required to facilitate the policy direction. Legislation 
exists in some areas, but additional legal instruments 
and procedural rules are needed to bring it to the point 
where it can be implemented.
The energy policy identifies the following priority 
geographical areas for renewable energy development. 
The following types of sites are suitable for wind and 
solar projects e.g. land to be reclassified as Zone A (see 
Figure 7) in the Draft Ground Water Protection Zone 
Policy, large waste management sites and large swaths 
of agricultural land. Potential wind sites are highlighted 
in Figure 8. The policy encourages mixed use of land.
Figure 7: Priority geographical areas for renewable energy deploymentWith respect to the setbacks for renewable energy 
development, the Town and Country Development 
Planning Office (TCDPO) is presently addressing 
this in the regulations in the new Planning and 
Development Act.
Visionary Goal 8 and Overall Objective 3 point to the 
key issues of focus in establishing an effective system 
of governance, regulation and legislation.
Visionary Goal 8: An energy sector that is 
governed by sound management of energy 
resources, and a clear regulatory framework.
Overall Objective 3: Establishing a consistent and 
comprehensive regulatory framework to govern 
activities in various energy sub-sectors.
Figure 8: Source: Dr. Thomas 
Rogers, A Desktop Study into the 
Wind Resource in Barbados, 2017
• Amend existing legislation and regulation or 
promulgate new ones where necessary to 
ensure responsible market behaviour and 
industrial harmonisation.
• Rationalise the number of existing acts governing 
the sector through the introduction of new 
industry legislation.
• Review, on an ongoing basis, the existing 
legal framework for performance, strengths, 
weaknesses and lessons learnt to formulate 
and implement programmes of legal reform.
• Develop regimes for the pricing of electricity 
and petroleum products that will balance 
requirements for competitiveness with the 
long-term viability of the sector.Governance and Regulatory Framework Sector 
Specific Objectives
The Government of Barbados will seek to establish a 
sector that:
• Establishes clarity in identifying the specific 
legislation governing business activities in both the 
renewable, and oil and gas sectors in Barbados.
• Develops and identifies the specific agencies 
responsible for the governance of business 
activities in the renewable energy, and oil and 
gas sectors.
• Promotes the use of multi-criteria analysis for 
decision makers responsible for establishing
policy measures.
Policy Measures - Governance and Regulatory 
Framework
To accomplish an enabling environment that will 
lead to a more desirable governance and regulatory 
framework, all relevant entities in Barbados shall work 
together to:
• Undertake a project to establish procedural rules 
to support all of the existing legislation governing 
the renewable energy, and oil and gas sectors.
• Conduct sensitisation and awareness programmes 
for all agencies involved in the enforcement of 
legislation and governance of activities within the 
energy sector.
• Identify priority geographical areas for renewable 
energy development.
all relevant entities 
in Barbados shall 
work together to 
identify priority 
geographical areas 
for renewable energy 
development.
“OUR approach TO designing the targets 
considered the overall impact of the measures 
on the economy, government and civil society.
“POLICY TARGETS 
& DEVELOPMENT OF 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PLAN
SECTION 5Given the objectives and measures identified in Section 
4 and the sector targets given in Section 2, a number 
of associated targets are provided here.
The approach in designing the targets considered 
the overall impact of the measures on the economy, 
government and civil society. This technique of 
assessment is consistent with the Multi-Criteria 
Approach (MCA) discussed earlier.
In this approach, natural gas scenarios and factors such 
as economic deficits, level of taxation, GDP, oil prices 
and costs of tradeable and non- tradeable goods are 
considered.
Policy Targets and 
Development of 
Implementation Plan
The results of this assessment will form the basis for 
the Implementation Plan, which will be developed 
based on the BNEP.
In the Implementation Plan, targets will be assigned 
in the sectors, wherever possible, for the measures 
outlined in Section 4.
These sector targets will then be discussed in order 
to determine the appropriate measures and strategies 
that will be required to achieve the targets. These will 
be broken down into smaller, five-year time horizons.
Below are the suggested Overall Energy Sector targets 
based on the MCA used. These will form the basis of 
the Sector Specific Targets.
Name of Indicator (Units) Baseline (2015) 2030
Aggregate Energy Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 324
Total Energy Consumption per Capita (BOE/Persons) 5.03
Percent Share of Renewable Energy of Total Energy (%) 2
CO2 Emissions/Final Consumption (kt/BOE) 0.0029
Total No. of Persons Employed in the Energy Sector (No.) N/A
Electricity Generation Efficiency (%) 37
Percent Share of Renewable Energy Investment of Total GDP (%) 0.6
Table 5: Main Indicators and Targets for BNEPAn important next step, following 
the development of Specific Sector 
Targets, will be the implementation of 
an appropriate monitoring system and 
suitable indicators.
“DEVELOPMENT 
OF INDICATORS & 
MONITORING 
SYSTEM
SECTION 6An important next step, following the development 
of Specific Sector Targets, will be the implementation 
of an appropriate monitoring system and 
suitable indicators.
The targets developed will need to be SMART.
Development of 
Indicators and 
Monitoring System
Establishing the appropriate indicators will be critical 
in determining an effective monitoring system that 
will allow timely policy updates and revisions to ensure 
continuous improvement. A full list of indicators is 
included at the end of the section.
It is important to note that the Implementation Plan 
will not only develop indicators and targets, but it will 
also identify more specific programmes, determine 
strategies, and assign roles and responsibilities to 
various groups, organisations and agencies. There will 
also be an assessment of resources needed for various 
actions, and some suggestions of funding options 
for consideration.
It is possible that the indicators identified will be 
used to establish targets for the sector. These may 
ultimately be mandatory or voluntary.
Decisions on whether to implement mandatory 
standards will be based on the resources needed to 
administer and enforce them, and whether they are 
likely to reduce innovation. The cultural issues related 
to the implementation of mandatory standards will 
also need to be assessed going forward.
The targets will also need to be considered when 
forming any legislation to support the policy and 
the Implementation Plan. Even if the targets are not 
mandatory, the Government of Barbados will need to 
outline a plan of action should targets not be achieved.
It is expected that these indicators and targets will 
include economic indicators that assess the cost 
related to various policy measures. Indicators that 
relate to aspects of energy efficiency will also be 
included. For example, changes in ‘energy intensity,’ 
overall and within individual consumption sectors, may 
be useful in assessing the success of current measures. 
Other indicators that relate to the natural environment 
and social development will also be considered in the 
short, medium and long term.
Specific
Measurable
Achievable
Relevant
Time boundENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Performance of Energy Sector
AGGREGATE ENERGY INTENSITY (BOE/MUS$) 
ENERGY INTENSITY BY ECONOMIC SECTOR
Energy Intensity Agriculture (BOE/MUS$) 
Energy Intensity Manufacturing/Industrial (BOE/MUS$) 
Energy Intensity Construction (BOE/MUS$) 
Energy Intensity Transportation (BOE/MUS$) 
Energy Intensity Commercial, Services, Public (BOE/MUS$) 
Percentage Of Energy From Indigenous Sources (Primary Energy) 
Ratio Of Energy Imports To Total Imports 
Energy Consumption Dependency On Energy Imports
Total Energy Consumption Per capita (BOE/Capita) 
Share Of Renewable Energy In The Total Energy Supply (BOE) 
Total Emissions Intensity With Respect To GDP (Ton/MUS$) 
RENEWABLE ENERGY
Percentage Share Of The Renewable Energy Supply In The Total Energy Supply For Given Period 
Percentage Share Of The Solar Supply In The Total Energy Supply For Given Period 
Percentage Share Of The Biomass Supply In The Total Energy Supply For Given Period 
Percentage Share Of The Bio-diesel Supply In The Total Energy Supply For Given Period
Percentage Share Of The Electricity Generated From Renewable Supply In 
The Total Electricity Generated For Given Period
Percentage Share Of The Electricity Generated For Solar Supply In The Total Electricity Generated For Given Period 
Percent Share Of The Electricity Generated For Biomass Supply In The Total Electricity Generated For Given Period Baseline 
2015
2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in
Policy Action
324.454
370.506
1169.034
181.683
2048.693
1299.875
2.40%
0.185
5.027
0.02
79.908
2.00%
0.30%
2.10%
14.00%
1.70%
12.30%ENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Performance of Energy Sector cont’d
Renewable Energy Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 
Bio-diesel Intensity (BOE/MUS$)
Solar Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 
Biomass Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 
ELECTRICITY
Total Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 
Agriculture Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 
Manufacturing/Industrial Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 
Construction Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 
Commercial, Services, Public Sector Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 
Transportation Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$)
Households/Residential Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Per Unit Of Electricity GeneratedBaseline 
2015
2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in
Policy Action
20.782
2.501
18.282
132.295
31.731
483.260
13.900
841.536
73.367ENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Performance of Energy Sector cont’d
ENERGY AND TRANSPORTATION
Percentage Share Of Biofuels Of The Total Energy Supply To The Transportation Sector
Percent Share Of Electricity Of The Total Energy Supply To The Transportation Sector
Percentage Share of Hydrocarbon Of The Total Energy Supply To The Transportation Sector
The Amount of Energy Consumed By Transportation (KBOE)
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Per Unit Of Energy Consumed By The Transportation Sector
ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND ENERGY CONSERVATION
Residential Sector
Total Energy Consumption (BOE) 
Total Fuel Consumption (BOE) 
Energy Consumption Per Household (BOE) 
Electricity Consumption Per Household (BOE) 
Fuel Consumption Per Household (BOE) 
Energy Consumption Per Capita (BOE) 
Electricity Consumption Per Capita (BOE) 
Energy Efficiency (Energy Consumed Per Unit of Fuel Input) 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Per Household
Electricity Generation Efficiency (%) 
ENERGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT
CO2 Emissions / Final Consumption (Kt/BOE) 
CO2 Emissions Intensity (Gg/MUS$) - CARBON DIOXIDE 
CO2 Industrial Emissions/Industrial Energy Consum. (Kt/BOE) - CARBON DIOXIDE 
CO2 Industrial Emissions/Industrial Energy Consum. (Kt/BOE) - HYDROCARBONS Baseline 
2015
2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in
Policy Action
271,297.35
499,491.12
3.44
2.53
6.33
0.98
0.72
0.38
0.37
0.0029
0.0009
2.094
0.0005ENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Performance of Energy Sector cont’d
CO2 Transport Emissions/Transport Energy Consum. (Kt/BOE) - HYDROCARBONS 
Per Capita total CO2 Emissions (Gg/khab) - CARBON DIOXIDE 
Per Capita Total CO2 Emissions (Gg/khab) - HYDROCARBONS 
Total Emissions Intensity With Respect To GDP (Ton/MUS$) - HYDROCARBONS 
Percentage Increase In The Use Of Cleaner Technologies
ENERGY INVESTMENT AND FINANCING
Percentage Share Of Energy Investment Of Total GDP (Current Prices)
Percentage Share Of Energy Investment Of Total Investment
Percentage Share Of Renewable Energy Investment Of Total Energy Investment
Percentage Share Of Renewable Energy Investment Of Total GDP (Current Prices)
Percentage Share Of Hydrcarbon Investment Of Total Energy Investment
Percentage Share Of Hydrcarbon Investment Of Total GDP (Current Prices)
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Total No. Of Persons Employed In The Energy Sector
Total No. Of Persons Employed In The Renewable Energy Sector
Total No. Of Persons Employed In The Energy Efficiency Sector
Total No. Of Persons With Certification In Renewable Energy
Total No. Of Institutions OfferIng Certified Training In Renewable Energy
Total No. Of Institutions OfferIng Certified Training In Energy EfficiencyBaseline 
2015
2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in
Policy Action
0.0001
29.4504
0.0063
0.4083ENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Performance of Energy Sector cont’d
CROSS-CUTTING SECTOR
AGRICULTURE
Total amount of Land Used To Produce Agro-energy Crops 
Total Amount Of Agricultural Land Used In The Production of Energy 
Total Energy Used In Agricultural Production (BOE) 
Percentage Of Energy From Renewables 
Percentage Of Energy From Bagasse
Percentage Of Energy From Bioenergy
Percentage Of Energy From Local Sources
MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL
Total Energy Used In The Manufacturing/Industrial Production (BOE) 
Percentage Of Renewable Energy Used In Manufacturing/Industrial Production
Percentage Of Cleaner Energy Technologies In Manufacturing/Industrial Production 
Percentage Increase Use Of Renewable Energy
Percentage Increase Use Of Cleaner Energy Technologies
WATER MANAGEMENT
Total Energy Used In Water Production and Distribution
Percentage Of Renewable Energy Used In Water Production and Distribution
Percentage Of Cleaner Energy Technologies
Percentage Increase Use Of Renewable Energy
Percentage Increase Use Of Cleaner Energy TechnologiesBaseline 
2015
2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in
Policy Action
0
0
22,928.57
0
182,865.80
2.27%ENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Performance of Energy Sector cont’d
TOURISM
Total Energy Used In Tourism
Percentage Of Cleaner Energy Technologies
Percentage Increase Use Of Renewable Energy
Percentage Increase Use Of Cleaner Energy Technologies
WASTE MANAGEMENT
Total Amount Of Waste Used In The Production Of Energy (MT)
ECONOMIC CONTRIBUTION AND COST
Energy Contribution Economic Output BDS$
Cost Of Energy BDS$ ($/BOE) 
Cost of Electricity BDS$ ($/kWh) 
Average Electricity Rate - Utility ($/kWh) 
AVERAGE UTILITY RATE - INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCER ($/kWh)
Wind 
Solar Electric 
Biomass
Biogas
Waste to Energy
OtherBaseline 
2015
2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in
Policy Action
$ 300.00
$ 0.37
$ 0.43
$ 0.315
$ 0.416REFERENCES• Alexander Ochs et al., (2015). Caribbean 
Sustainable Energy Roadmap and Strategy 
(C-SERMS): Baseline Report and Assessment 
(Washington, DC: Worldwatch Institute, presented 
to CARICOM)
• Antilles Economics. (2016). Investigations of Likely 
Reactions to Removal of Green Energy Incentives.
• The Barbados Light & Power Company Ltd. (2014). 
Integrated Resource Plan.
• CARICOM. (2013). Caricom Energy Policy
• CARICOM. (2016). Caribbean Sustainable Energy 
Roadmap and Strategy
• Department of Energy and Telecommunications. 
(2007). Draft National Energy Policy
• Department of Energy and Telecommunications. 
(2017). Barbados National Energy 
Information System
• GE Energy Management Energy Consulting. 
(2015). Barbados Wind and Solar Integration Study 
(Presented to Barbados Light & Power Co. Ltd)
• Government of Barbados. (2013). Barbados 
Medium Growth and Development Strategy 
2013-2020
• Government of Barbados. (2015). Barbados 
Economic Report – Energy Chapter 2011- 2015
• Government of Barbados. (2015). Barbados 
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 
(Presented to the UNFCC 2015)
• Hohmeyer. O. (2015). A 100% renewable Barbados 
and lower energy bills: A plan to change Barbados’ 
power supply to 100% renewables and its 
possible benefits. Centre for Sustainable Energy 
Systems. Flensburg. Retrieved from https://
www.uni- flensburg.de/fileadmin/content/
abteilungen/industrial/dokumente/dow nloads/
veroeffentlichungen/diskussionsbeitraege/znesdiscussionspapers-005-barbados.pdf
• Humpert. M. (2013). Barbados’ Energy Market.
IADB. Retrieved from http://blogs.iadb.org/
ibbdd////bbd
• IADB. (2010). Sustainable Energy Framework 
for Barbados
• IISD. (2014). Summary of the Third International 
Conference on SIDS. Retrieved from http://www.
iisd.ca/download/pdf/enb0857e.pdf
• Ince, Vredenburg & Liu. (2015). Drivers and 
Inhibitors of Renewable Energy: A qualitative and 
quantitative study of the Caribbean. Energy Policy, 
98, 700-712
• IRENA. (2017). Barbados Renewable 
Energy Roadmap
• Ministry of Energy and Mining Jamaica. (2009). 
Jamaica’s National Energy Policy 2009-2030
• Monke E. A. and Pearson S. (1989). The Policy
Analysis Matrix for Agricultural Development, 
Cornell University Press
• UNEP. (2014). Emerging Issues for Small Island 
Developing States. Retrieved from http://www.
unep.org/pdf/Emerging_issues_for_small_island_
developin g_states.pdf
• UNFCCC. (2015). COP ParisAgreement. Retrieved 
from http://unfccc.int/files/home/application/pdf/
decision1cp21.pdf
• U.S.E.I.A. (2016). International Energy 
Outlook 2016
Acts and Legislation
• Electric Light & Power Act 2013
• Electric Light & Power Act Amendment 2015
• Electric Light & Power Act Fees and Regulations 
Fair Trading Commission Act 2002
• Offshore Petroleum Act 2007
• Offshore Petroleum Act Amendment 2012
• Offshore Petroleum Regulations
• Offshore Petroleum Taxation Act (2007)
• Petroleum Winnings Operations Act Renewable 
Energy Rider Agreement
• Renewable Energy Rider- Requirements for Grid 
Connection Storage of Petroleum Act
• Sustainable Energy Framework for Barbados 2010
• Utility Regulation Act 2002Division of Energy
Trinity Business Complex
Country Road
ST. MICHAEL