File Name: BRB-NEP-2015-EN
Year: 2015
Country Name: Barbados
Country Code: BRB
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2015
Start Year: 2015
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Implementation
Plan FOR Barbados
National Energy
Policy
Presented to the Ministry of
Energy & Water Resources
By Lorenzo Harewood, BSM,
Development ConsultantACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION
METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH
OVERARCHING IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY
ENERGY TARGETS
IMPLEMENTATION TOOLKIT:
• List of Policy Measures
• Implementation Activities by Year and Thematic Area
• Results Framework
• Monitoring and Evaluation Framework
• Risk Analysis
• Management Arrangements
DEVELOPING COMMUNITIES THROUGH
RENEWABLE ENERGY – COMMUNITY INVOLVEMNT IN 
KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS 
OF IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
APPENDIX A - ALLOCATION OF ACTIVITIES 
BY RESPONSIBLE PARTY
APPENDIX B – ALLOCATION OF ACTIVITIES 
& RESPONSIBLE PARTIES
APPENDIX C – RISK REGISTER GUIDELINES
APPENDIX D – RISK REGISTER THREAT 
RATING DESCRIPTION
6
7
10
13
16
19
25
26
32
39
42
46
52
54
56
58
74
88
93
Table of ContentsTable 1A
Energy Mix Scenario 2030
Table 2A
Schedule of Installation of Renewable Energy Over 
the Next 5 years
 
Table 3A
Schedule of Electricity of Electricity Production 
(GWh) from Renewable Energy Over the Next 5 years
Table 4A
Schedule of Investment in Renewable Energy Over 
the Next 5 years ($)
Table 5A
Spatial Requirements for Electricity Generation 
Facilities (Acres)
Figure 1
Main Working Groups of Implementation Plan
Figure 2
2015 Electricity Consumption by Sector
Figure 3
2015 Energy Demand
Figure 4
2015 Energy Production
Figure 5: 
Project Implementation Management Structure
22
22
23
24
24
15
20
21
21
53
LIST OF TABLES
LIST OF FiguresAG Office of the Auditor General
BAPE Barbados Association of 
 Professional Engineers
BCC Barbados Community College
BCCI Barbados Chamber of 
 Commerce & Industry
BCIC Barbados Cane Industry Corporation
BDF Barbados Defense Force
BEG Bio Economy Group
BERT Barbados Economic Recovery and
 Transformation Programme
BL&P Barbados Light & Power Company Ltd. 
BNEP Barbados National Energy Policy
BNOCL Barbados National Oil Company Ltd.
BREA Barbados Renewable Energy Association
BSS Barbados Statistical Service
CAIPO Corporate Affairs and Intellectual
 Property Office
CCREEE Caribbean Center for Renewable
 Energy & Energy Efficiency
CPC Chief Parliamentary Counsel
EA Enabling Activity
EPD Environmental Protection Department
 in the Ministry of Environment and 
 National Beautification
EEL Energy Equivalency Licenses
ESCOs Energy Service Companies
EV Electrical Vehicle
FFF Fossil Fuel Free 
FIT Feed-In-Tariff
FTC Fair Trading Commission
GEED Government Electrical & 
 Engineering Department
GWh Gigawatt hours
IADB Inter-American Development Bank
IP Implementation Plan
IPP Independent Power Producers
IRP Integrated Resource Planning
MAFS Ministry of Agriculture & Food Security
MENB Ministry of Environment &
 National Beautification
METVT Ministry of Education, Technology and
 Vocational Training
MEWR Ministry of Energy & Water Resources
ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS
MFAFT Ministry of Foreign Affairs
 & Foreign Trade
MOFEI Ministry of Finance, Economic
 Affairs & Investment
MOH Ministry of Health and Wellness
MOL Ministry of Labor and Social
 Partnership Relations
MOU
MSBEC Ministry of Small Business,
 Entrepreneurship and Commerce
MTWM Ministry of Transport,
 Works and Maintenance
MWh Megawatt hours
NCCC National Climate Change Committee
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NPC National Petroleum Corporation
PAHO Pan American Health Organisation
PIU Public Implementation Unit in the
 Ministry of Finance, Economic
 Affairs & Investment
PM Policy Measures
PMCT Project Monitoring and
 Coordination Team
PS Private Sector
PSC Project Steering Committee
PSSEP Public Sector Smart Energy
PSVA Public Service Vehicles Association
PTF Project Task Force
RCT Resource Coordination Team
RE Renewable Energy
RELR Renewable Energy Licensing Regime
SJPI Samuel Jackman Prescod
 Institute of Technology
SMART Specific, Measurable, Achievable,
 Relevant, Time Bound
SSA Sanitation Service Authority in
 the Ministry of Environment
 & National Beautification
TBD to be determined
TCPD Town & Country Planning Department
TOR Terms of Reference
TVET Technical Vocational Educational
 Training Council
UWI University of the West Indies• Alliance of Public Transport Operators
• Barbados Cane Industry Corporation
• Barbados Chamber of Commerce and Industry
• Barbados Defense Force
• Barbados Light & Power Co. Ltd.
• Barbados National Oil Company Ltd.
• Barbados National Terminal Company Ltd.
• Barbados Renewable Energy Association
• Barbados Sugar Industries Ltd.
• Coastal Zone Management Unit
• Delegation of the European Union
• Innogen Technologies Inc.
• McEnearney Quality Inc.
• Megapower Ltd.
• Ministry of Energy and Water Resources
• Ministry of Environment and National Beautification
• Ministry of Transport, Works and Maintenance
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Substantial contributions are acknowledged from the wide cross-section of stakeholders, including nongovernmental organisations, public and private sector representative from the various thematic areas outlined in 
the Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP). This document reflects feedback from a number of partners who will 
collectively play a vital role in implementing and validating the various milestones outlined in this plan. The inputs 
provided by the following organisations are appreciated:
In addition, I wish to recognise the contributions of the associate consultants, Miss Kristin Qui and Mr. Ryan Als, in 
helping to structure the approach and finalise various aspects of this document.
• Nassco Ltd.
• National Petroleum Corporation
• Pavana Energy Inc.
• Petroleum Dealers Association
• RUBIS Caribbean
• Sanitation Service Authority
• Simpson Motors Ltd.
• Simpson Oil Ltd.
• The Fair Trading Commission
• Transport Board
• United Nations Development Programme 
for Barbados and the OECS
• Williams SolarTo assist the Government of Barbados with achieving its 
2030 vision of becoming 100% fossil fuel free (FFF) by 
2030, the Government of Barbados, with the Ministry of 
Energy and Water Resources (MEWR), commissioned 
the development of this implementation plan (IP) to 
supplement the Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP). 
This IP identifies output-level measures 
that will accelerate full integration of 
renewable energy (RE) into Barbados’ 
energy mix. 
The first section of the document explains the 
methodology and approach undertaken to develop 
the IP. Following the methodology section, is a 
projection of Barbados’ target renewable energy mix 
in 2030, including calculations for target numbers, 
details on costs and benefits and spatial requirements 
for the renewable energy technologies necessary 
to achieve the 2030 vision. The IP also includes a 
detailed implementation toolkit, which includes an 
implementation strategy by year and thematic area 
listing the required activities to achieve the 100% FFF 
target by 2030, a results framework, a monitoring and 
evaluation framework, and potential management 
arrangements. Key limitations and assumptions of this IP 
are included toward the end of the document, followed 
by three appendices. Appendix A lists the activities to 
be implemented by various entities and stakeholders, 
Appendix B and C describe the risk register guidelines 
and threat rating. 
The IP approach reflected a multi-sectoral stakeholder 
process. The methodology consisted of 5 working 
groups separated by thematic area:
1. Natural Environment and Climate Change;
2. Electricity Supply, Energy Efficiency and 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
3. Oil and Gas Supply; 
4. Transport; and 
5. Renewable Energy Supply and Storage. 
Working group seminars were held from November 
2018 to December 2018. During the Renewable Energy 
Stakeholders meeting, a survey was administered to 
identify critical factors relating to opportunities and 
threats to the implementation of the 100% FFF vision. 
35 interviews with persons from various organisations 
helped to flesh out specific activities for implementation 
to be carried out by those organisations. 
The working groups identified some concerns to be 
addressed in order to achieve the 100% FFF vision and 
proposed solutions to these concerns. Specifically, 
these concerns include resource identification and 
mobilisation, capacity building, communication and 
change management. For resource identification 
and mobilisation, the establishment of a Resource 
Coordination Team (RCT) will serve to identify 
sources of technical and financial resources and will be 
responsible for project concept and proposal writing 
and review and other related activities. This team 
will be cross-sectoral and comprise of experts from 
various Government Ministries. A detailed capacity 
assessment was listed as necessary during the initial 
stages of implementation in order to identify gaps in 
the various entities/organisations required to create an 
enabling environment for achieving the 2030 vision. The 
capacity assessment will focus on staffing, technology 
and training. For communication, the working groups 
identified the need for communication channels that 
facilitate constant dialogue across the working groups as 
necessary. This will include an online dialogue platform, 
quarterly stakeholders meetings with members of 
all working groups, allowing for updates on progress 
and inviting comments for consideration. Finally, a 
framework will be established to assist individuals and framework will focus on the principles of awareness, 
desire, knowledge, ability and reinforcement (ADKAR). 
The IP includes energy targets for 2030 based on 
various estimates and assumptions. Over the next 5 
years, 2019 to 2023, 295 MW of renewable energy 
is one possible scenario could be potentially be 
commissioned, consisting of a minimum of 160 MW of 
solar photovoltaics and a minimum of 120 MW of wind. 
This scenario also identifies 80 MW of energy storage. 
The scheduled implementation of technologies will 
result in 688 GWh of electricity from renewable energy 
sources in the first 5 years of implementation. The 
estimated cost of achieving 100% renewable energy by 
2030 is about $4 billion, while the estimated economic 
benefit from the sector on an annual basis is projected 
to average around $3.9 billion per year over the ten 
year implementation period, which can be attributed 
to a release of resources used to import fossil fuels. It 
was found that greater local investment might result 
in greater local benefits, whereas greater foreign 
investment means less benefits being retained locally. 
Spatial requirements for each of the renewable energy 
technologies vary by technology. The IP finds that 
solar photovoltaic facilities will need a minimum of 
317 acres while wind technology will need 50 acres. 
The estimated total spatial requirement for renewable 
energy generation facilities is 758 acres. Land 
requirements for biomass are based on requirements 
for feedstock. The IP estimates between 25 000 to 
28 000 acres necessary for biomass feedstock (sugar 
cane and king grass) and food. 
The implementation toolkit in this IP consists of: 
a) A list of Policy Measures;
b) Implementation activities by year and thematic area;
c) Results Frameworks;
d) Monitoring and Evaluation Framework;
e) Risk Analysis; and
f) Project Management Arrangements. 
Monitoring and evaluation of the IP will include a project 
inception workshop to determine roles, ownership, 
responsibilities, reporting, communication, decisionmaking structures, staffing and other key factors and 
requirements for successful start of the project. Several 
reports and logs, along with an annual project review 
and annual review report, will assist in monitoring of 
implementation. A mid-term review and final evaluation 
will focus on delivery of project results. 
A detailed risk register included in the IP reflects the 
concerns expressed in the working group sessions, 
as well as from the individual interviews with key 
stakeholders. These threats to implementation will guide 
the Project Implementation Team accordingly along with 
relevant remedial actions aimed at minimising and/or 
avoiding the occurrence of identified threats. 
In terms of management of implementation, a Project 
Management Team (PMCT) and Project Task Force 
(PTF) will be established. The PMCT will support the 
delivery of the outputs. The responsibilities of the PMCT 
include day-to-day management and coordination of 
the project and its respective activities, e.g. Monitoring 
and Evaluation, Procurement, Administrative Support, 
Technical Support and Finance and Awareness and 
Communication within the IP. 
The PTF, or Project Board will consist of representatives 
from various Government Ministries, including MEWR, 
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment, 
the National Climate Change Committee (NCCC), the 
Barbados Chamber of Commerce and a representative 
from a relevant Non-Governmental Organisation. Page 
48 of the IP includes a visual of the reporting structure 
for the various teams. 
It is important to note key assumptions and 
considerations related to the development of the 
IP. The first assumption is that supervision of this 
implementation plan will be done by the PMCT. 
Second, it is assumed that the thematic working 
groups outlined in the IP will continue to meet and provide oversight to the activities and that 
other stakeholders will be integrated into the IP 
as necessary. It is also expected that stakeholders 
will formally take ownership of various activities 
and can therefore be considered responsible for 
particular activities. The fourth assumption is that 
public communication of developments regarding 
progress and milestone achievements will occur and 
fifth, a resource mobilisation team will be established 
to identify financial and technical resources for the 
activities outlined in this IP. 
In terms of considerations/limitations, the first is that 
the narrow timeline for consultation in development of 
this IP resulted in the prioritisation of thematic areas 
based on input from a range of relevant documents. For 
this reason, some thematic areas are disproportionately 
represented. However, the IP will advance working 
group engagements to incorporate other critical 
sectors throughout the project cycle. Second, although 
the working group sessions were well attended and 
representative of the core drivers of the IP, input from 
other critical stakeholders will be needed to fully 
align activities to the existing operations of relevant 
institutions.
Recognising these limitations, the IP is 
designed as a ‘working document’ with 
sufficient flexibility and adaptability to 
rapidly incorporate inputs at any given 
time, without compromising the overall 
quality of the outputs identified.INTRODUCTIONThe purpose of the IP is to identify the necessary activities 
that will accelerate the paradigm shift across various 
sectors, towards the realisation of full integration of 
renewable energy (RE) into the energy mix of Barbados. 
The IP therefore promotes functional cooperation primarily 
amongst government agencies, private sector entities 
and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in an effort 
to ensure the most relevant participatory framework 
throughout the identification process and submission of 
key activities in the 100% FFF initiative. 
To that extent, the IP recognises 
the importance of the government 
institutions in facilitating regulatory, 
legislative and other policy-related 
measures to streamline existing 
processes and effectively adapt to the 
changing local and international realities 
in the renewable energy sector. 
In order to address long-term sustainability throughout 
the transition, the private sector has to be afforded 
opportunities to maximise on the economic benefits 
aligned to various technologies and aspects of 
renewable energy (i.e. generation, distribution and 
storage). The role of the private sector therefore 
develops within a model of economic sustainability, that 
further enables the transfers of capital and technology 
necessary to ensure that Barbados is in touch with 
developments in the international RE sector. 
NGOs have a key role to play in the rollout and overall 
success of the IP. The NGOs will ensure that the 
activities are executed in a manner that encompasses 
various developmental considerations such as gender 
mainstreaming and environmental and engineering 
INTRODUCTION
safeguards. Awareness, Communication and Knowledge 
Management are also vital areas in which NGOs can 
assist. The overarching focus of NGOs will be on the 
alignment of the outputs and outcomes of the IP, relative 
to generally accepted standards and targets such as the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
In the area of developing renewable energy sources, 
Barbados must achieve ambitious targets that will 
contribute to an increase in the reliability of the energy 
supply, reduce negative impacts on the environment, 
economic growth and the development of jobs and 
employment. As a result, the Government of Barbados 
has embarked on an agenda of becoming 100% Fossil 
Fuel Free (FFF) by 2030, while taking into consideration 
a number of exogenous constraints beyond the 
parameters of its regulatory and developmental 
jurisdiction. Worth noting within these constraints are 
considerations for the availability and costs of various 
renewable energy (RE) technologies, both of which are 
driven by external aggregate factors of demand, supply 
and rate of technological advancement. In line with the 
2030 vision, the Government of Barbados, through 
the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, has 
commissioned the development of this Implementation 
Plan (IP) to supplement the Barbados National Energy 
Policy (BNEP). 
The activities in this IP have evolved from key provisions 
in the BNEP, such as the overarching vision, associated 
goals, objectives and policy measures. The IP advances 
the BNEP framework by identifying activities, risks and 
measurable results. These features collectively define 
the enabling environment in the short-term (first 5 
years) that would allow for the long-term realisation 
of becoming 100% FFF in Barbados, within the given 
resource and time constraints.During the development of the IP, support from key 
stakeholders in the public, provided the necessary 
platform for initial targeted inputs. These stakeholders, 
throughout the consultation process, highlighted many 
determining factors that were crucial for success in the 
100% FFF initiative. Key among these were: 
• Government commitment to transitioning to RE –
The Government of Barbados has established the 
transition to RE as an item high on its priority list 
and “Mission Critical” agenda. This therefore allows 
for minimal or no disruption in seeking cooperation 
with relevant government agencies. 
• Exposure to external market volatility - 
Unpredictability of developments in external energy 
markets and subsequent impacts on fossil fuel 
prices.
• Prevailing economic conditions (foreign exchange) 
– A significant portion (approximately 5%) of 
Barbados revenue is utilised for importing fossil 
fuels. This consumption presents an inverse 
relationship to the overall levels of foreign exchange 
reserves.
• Geographical location – At 13.1939° N, 59.5432° 
W, Barbados can take advantage of ‘prime’ levels 
(exposure and duration) of RE such as solar. There 
are also some geographical advantages with respect 
to other types of RE; i.e. wind and wave energy.
• Environmental and health benefits – The transition 
to RE will allow decreases in the overall levels of CO₂ 
and other greenhouse gas emissions in Barbados. 
This development will add value to the sustainability 
and/or restoration of many aspects of the natural 
environment and may reduce the incidence of some 
health related matters.
• International Agenda – This endeavour of 100% FFF 
will signal that Barbados is establishing a serious and 
leading agenda not only regionally but also across 
the world, for other countries to observe and follow.
• Tourism – The international agenda will result in 
Barbados being able to exploit and capitalise on 
another niche markets in the international tourism 
sector (e.g. Eco-Tourism). This in turn may positively 
affect foreign exchange revenue generation. 
To assist in the overall management 
of critical activities, the IP has 
developed and incorporated an 
Implementation Toolkit, which is 
intended to add value to the pace of 
implementation and the quality of 
intended outputs.METHODOLOGY 
& APPROACHThe IP reflects a multi-sectoral engagement process, consistent with the approach used to create the Barbados National 
Energy Policy (2017-2030). The IP recognised the need for critical input from a wide variety of key stakeholders, as well 
as the various tools utilised in the collection, analysis and incorporation of information that validated the activities and 
timelines proposed. These tools were:Working Groups - Stakeholders categorised into five (5) main working groups, 
along with three (3) crosscutting thematic areas as depicted in Figure 1. Working Group seminars were held as follows:
Survey – A survey was conducted during the Renewable 
Energy Stakeholders meeting, hosted by the Ministry of 
Energy and Water Resources on Wednesday, November 
28 at the Sir Lloyd Erskine Sandiford Center. On the 
survey, respondents identified critical factors relating 
to opportunities and threats to the implementation of 
the 100% FFF vision. 12 respondents at the meeting also 
METHODOLOGY & APPROACH
indicated a suitable time and date to conduct follow-up 
interviews.
Interviews – 35 individual interviews were conducted with 
various organisations, identified as responsible parties, 
over the period November 21, 2018 - December 5, 2018 for 
discussions on specific activities.Figure 1 - Main Working Groups of Implementation Plan
Streetlighting signing ceremonyOVERARCHING 
IMPLEMENTATION 
STRATEGYIn order to achieve the intended results, outcomes and 
goal of the IP, it is essential to take preparatory steps 
that immediately address some concerns identified by 
stakeholders. These concerns are:
Resource Identification and Mobilisation
Resourcing the many activities within the IP will be 
a decisive factor in its overall success, as preliminary 
estimates suggest that BBD $4 billion will be required 
to achieve the 2030 vision. It is therefore important to 
develop a structured and adaptable framework to map 
all possible sources of technical and financial resources 
available to the executing agencies involved. This exercise 
will be undertaken by a Resource Coordination Team that 
will assist in:
1. RE Project Concept and Proposal Writing and 
Review (Technical and Administrative) as needed
2. Providing implementation support where applicable 
OVERARCHING 
IMPLEMENTATION 
STRATEGY
The RCT will comprise a cross section of relevant entities 
that regularly interact with funding agencies in the area of 
Energy, Environment, Climate Change and Disaster Risk 
Reduction. These may include, but not be limited to:
• The Ministry of Energy and Water Resources
• The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade
• The Ministry of Environment and National 
Beautification
• The Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and 
Investment
• A representation of local entities participating in 
the financial sector and international development 
space
The RCT will meet at least every quarterCapacity Building
Implementation efforts will initially focus on identifying 
capacity gaps in key organisations that have essential roles 
in creating an enabling environment for the IP to progress 
at a reasonable rate. These institutions include Town and 
Country Planning Department, Fair Trading Commission, 
Barbados Renewable Energy Association, Environmental 
Protection Department, Barbados National Oil Company 
Ltd., Barbados National Standards Institute, Government 
Electrical Engineering Department, Department of 
Energy, Sanitation Services Authority and the Ministry 
of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment. A detailed 
capacity assessment will focus on addressing the following 
questions:
• Staffing – Do these organisations possess the 
quantity and quality skillset needed to facilitate their 
roles in delivering results outlined in the IP?
• Technology – Do these organisations possess the 
requisite hardware and software apparatus, which 
will allow for uninterrupted service provision to 
various activities outlined in the IP?
• Training – What are key capacity building 
engagements that will allow these organisations 
reach or surpass an acceptable standard of delivery 
and continuously be aware of modern developments 
in their field of operations, in alignment to the 
activities outlined in the IP?
To advance this effort, ongoing initiatives such as the Public 
Sector Smart Energy Programme (PSSEP) will be utilised. 
PSSEP will be undertaking a cross-sectorial capacity 
assessment, which will help to identify critical gaps in the 
readiness and adaptability of public and private sector 
institutions to the paradigm shift. In addition, PSSEP will 
action the findings and address some of the capacity gaps 
directly, through the provision of training, equipment and 
other related and relevant resources.
Communication
The creation and maintenance of forums for constant 
dialogue is essential for success of the IP. Communication 
channels, which utilise the guidance and technical expertise 
of the established working groups, will allow for timely 
adaptation to any relevant developments in both the 
external and internal stakeholder environment. A quarterly 
stakeholder’s consultation, consisting of all members of 
established working groups, will communicate project 
progress and invite comments for further consideration. 
Communication on implementation progress, aided by the 
creation of a reliable online digital platform, will highlight 
the status of implementation of various activities, targets 
(outputs) and justifications for any shortfalls. This platform, 
although dedicated primarily to communicating progress, 
adds to the overall of accountability of responsible parties.
Change Management
As the evolution to 100% FFF implicates a rapid 
transition in a relatively short period, it is important to 
adopt an approach that supports individuals, teams and 
organisations in making the change. Therefore, a series 
of change management engagements to promote an 
ADKAR framework, where ADKAR reflects the principles 
of awareness, desire, knowledge, ability and reinforcement 
is needed to capitalise on sustainable support from 
all stakeholders. These are all critical areas to change 
management.
It is important to adopt an approach 
that supports individuals, teams and 
organisations in making the change.ENERGY 
TARGETSThe Government of Barbados stated its commitment to 
transition the island to 100% renewable energy by 2030. In 
order to achieve this target by the stated period, there needs 
to be a clear energy mix that can be implemented at feasible 
investment and operation costs. The planned energy mix 
will also include technologies that can operate under the 
following constraints over the planning period of 2030:
ENERGY TARGETS
• The target demand for energy
• The spatial requirements for generation
• Emission of CO2 for energy produced 
and consumed
• Capital and operation expenditure to
• commission and operate IP
Electricity is heavily consumed by all the major economic 
sectors. The consumption of these sectors is depicted and 
listed as follows for the base year 2015:The demand for energy during 
the base year is depicted and 
listed as follows:
In 2018 electricity production from solar stood at 4.6%.Table 1A – Energy Mix 2030 Scenario
Table 2A - Schedule of Installation of Renewable Energy Over the Next 5 Years (MW)
Energy Source Installed Capacity (MW)
Solar (centralised) 205
Solar (distributed) 105
Wind onshore 150
Wind offshore 150
Biomass & Waste-To-Energy 15
Energy storage (centralised) 132
Energy storage (distributed) 68
Total (Excluding Storage) 625
1 2 3 4 5 Total
PV 32 32 32 32 32 160
Wind 120 120
Bio-Energy 15 15
Total forecasted renewable energy requirement (MW) 295
Energy Storage (MW) 20 20 20 20 80
The current demand for electricity is recorded to be 
944 Gwh per for the period 2017. Given the above, the 
estimated demand used to determine the above mix was 
1400 Gwh (See Table 1A). 
It is important to note that the energy mix will also be 
constrained by technology. Hence, the fishing industry 
and the cruise industry will be impacted, as many of these 
vessels utilise diesel and heavy fuel oil. The challenge 
here is that over the planning horizon and the initial 
implementation period the technology may most likely not 
allow for the complete removal of fossil fuel, but may allow 
the reduction of the carbon emissions via fuel switching 
to natural gas. Additionally, it is foreseeable that the airline 
industry will also most likely continue to use aviation fuel 
over the planning horizon (i.e. 10 years). 
With regards to energy savings, it has been acknowledged 
that emphasis must be placed on a strategic investment in 
renewable infrastructure, in order to capitalise on annual 
energy savings of $400 – $800 million1
. Table 3A - Schedule Electricity Production (Gwh) From Renewable Energy Over the Next 5 Years 
1 2 3 4 5 Total
PV 52.48 52.48 52.48 52.48 52.48 262.4
Wind 0 0 0 315.6 0 315.6
Bio-Energy 0 0 0 0 109.65 109.65
Total 52.48 52.48 52.48 368.08 162.13 687.65
During the first five years of the implementation period of 
2019 to 2023, 295 MW of renewable energy and 80 MW 
of energy storage is forecasted to be commissioned. Solar 
photovoltaics will require a minimum of 160 MW to be 
installed while a minimum of 120 MW of wind will need to 
be installed to achieve the target of 100% renewable energy 
by 2030. 
The 295 MW in the first 5 years will represent 46% of 
the total capacity energy mix. The baseload technologies 
which accounts for 15 MW of the total capacity, given their 
nature, will require more planning and construction time and 
consequently are scheduled to be commissioned in year 5 
of the implementation period. The scheduling of the energy 
The investment required by the renewable energy sector to 
advance the agenda of 100% renewable energy by the year 
2030 is estimated to be about $4 billion. The majority of the 
resources expected to be expended are $875 million and $270 
million, in years 4 and 5 respectively as the larger projects are 
scheduled to be completed in these two periods (See Table 
4A). Of course, the rate of investment will be impacted by the 
enabling environment that is required to be established within 
the renewable sector. For instance, a clear and stable price is 
the foundation on which the sector will rest.
The economic benefit that is anticipated to accrue from the 
sector on an annual basis is projected to average around 
$3.9 billion per year over the ten (10) year implementation 
period. This benefit is expected to be derived from the 
release of resources that would have been used on imported 
mix is impacted by the technical limits of the electrical 
grid, the environment impact assessment, construction 
and installation time needed. Additionally, the regulatory 
and permitting processes will have to be accelerated by a 
significant margin. It must be noted that Waste-to-Energy is 
not scheduled within the first 5 years of implementation, as 
the planning and construction time required would place this 
technology in year 6 of the schedule.
The successful implementation of the technologies 
identified in Table 2A will result in 688 GWh of electricity 
being produced from renewable energy sources as is 
observed in Table 3A.
energy, as Barbados will no longer be incurring an 
economic loss of 70 cents on every dollar to consume 
fossil fuel. Additionally, the support to the renewable 
energy sector in terms of financial services, installation, 
construction, plant operation, and professional services 
are other sources of economic activity anticipated to 
emerge. However, this is dependent on the level of local 
investment that will become involved in the sector. There 
will also be an opportunity for Barbadians to become 
exporters of energy once the cost of batteries become 
economically feasible, as energy will becomes more 
portable. Hence, with greater local investment will come 
greater benefits being retained in Barbados, while a heavy 
infiltration of foreign investment will result in an inverse 
outcome; less benefit being retained locally.Table 4A - Schedule of Investment In Renewable Over the Next 5 Years ($M)
Table 5A - Spatial Requirements for Electricity Generation (Acres)
1 2 3 4 5 Total
PV $160.00 $160.00 $160.00 $160.00 $160.00 $800.00 
Wind $- $- $- $715.48 $- $715.48 
Biomas $- $- $- $- $110.25 $110.25 
Sub-Total $1,625.73 
Energy Storage (MW) $162.60 $162.60 $162.60 $162.60 $650.40 
Total $160.00 $322.60 $322.60 $1,038.08 $432.85 $2,276.13 
1 2 3 4 5 Total
PV 63.36 63.36 63.36 63.36 63.36 316.80
Wind 0 0 0 33 0 33
Bio-Energy 0 0 0 0 0.92 0.92
Total 63.36 63.36 63.36 96.36 64.28 350.72
NB: It is assumed that wind developments are set back by the international distance rules 
i.e. impact distance from the base of the Turbine
The spatial requirements for electricity generation vary 
between the different technologies. For example, the 
spatial footprint for ground mounted solar photovoltaics 
can range between 2 to 4 acres per megawatt depending 
on the configuration of the system. In the case of roof 
mounted system, the availability of space will be impacted 
by how much of the roof is south facing, shaded and size 
of the roof. Solar photovoltaic has a large spatial footprint 
and consequently there are not too many complimentary 
economic activities that can operate once a solar farm is 
installed. Wind technology has a lower spatial footprint for 
electricity generation relative to solar photovoltaics and can 
co-exist with other economic activities such as agriculture. 
During the first five years of implementation, solar 
photovoltaic generation facilities will need a minimum of 
317 acres of space while wind technology will need 50 acres 
of space (See Table 5A). It is estimated that the sector will 
require approximately a minimum of 367 acres of space 
during the first five (5) years of implementation. The total 
spatial requirement for renewable energy is estimated to be 
758 acres of space by 2030. Baseload technologies’ spatial 
requirements for generation can be considered low, relative 
to the requirement for wind and solar technologies. The 
bulk of the land requirement for biomass (sugar cane and 
king grass) relates to the feedstock. The amount of land 
that will be used to produce the feedstock is estimated to 
be between 25 000 to 28 000 acres. In the case of biomethane, farm waste, manure, food waste, and gasses are 
expected to be the principle feedstocks. The production of 
feedstock for energy can be rotated with food crops in very 
much the cycle as that of sugar cane. Hence, biomass offers 
significant synergies with agriculture and can be seen as an 
opportunity for income stabilisation.IMPLEMENTATION 
TOOLKITThe implementation toolkit provides essential and resultsoriented support to the project management team (PMCT) 
in its regular oversight of the IP, by highlighting specialized 
areas from which it can ascertain progress and make timely 
decisions. The toolkit consists of:
a. List of Policy Measures - provides a comprehensive 
list of all Tier 3 derivatives (Policy Measures) from 
which the PMCT and/or Quality Assurance can 
reference completed, ongoing or forthcoming 
activities.
b. Implementation activities by year and thematic area 
- provides an annualized schedule of activities across 
thematic areas using Gantt charts.
c. Results Frameworks - identifies the intended results, 
outputs annual deliverables in the form of SMART 
indicators.
d. Monitoring and Evaluation Framework - outlines the 
key components and tools for providing periodic 
inspections of progress.
e. Risk Analysis - identifies risks to implementation 
and appropriate response. Components of the 
risk register include risk number, category of 
risk (financial, political, reputational etc.), Risk 
name, Risk description, probability of occurrence, 
consequences, Severity (probability times 
consequence) and response category (transfer, 
mitigate, share, accept).
f. Project Management Arrangements - defines the 
relationship between key project proponents and 
identifies reporting lines and scope of oversight 
accordingly.
IMPLEMENTATION TOOLKIT
Oil and Gas Supply
List of Policy Measures
All aspects of the IP, its thematic work plans and responsible 
parties, are guided by the overarching policy measures 
outlined in the BNEP. These are: 
1. Establish regularly held investor conferences to 
inform potential developers about the rules and 
requirements needed to undertake activities in the 
Oil and Gas sector.
2. Increase the cultivation of data relating to the 
geological and geophysical conditions in the 
offshore Oil and Gas sector to aid the government 
in setting license fees and determining levels of 
royalties.
3. Develop a licensing system with clear criteria on the 
ranking of various factors critical to the decision on 
bids. This system should be made available widely to 
potential bidders as well as the public.
4. Formulate clear legislation governing environmental 
management in offshore Oil and Gas activities, with 
provisions for removal of licenses if stipulations are 
not met.
5. Develop a capacity-building programme locally 
to prepare the workforce for employment in the 
emerging Oil and Gas offshore sector.Transportation
Sector
6. Create an enabling environment that will empower 
local businesses to participate effectively in the 
supply of goods and services to the offshore Oil and 
Gas sector.
7. Offer fiscal incentives for developers, which are 
tied to factors such as the expected internal rate of 
return.
8. Establish a wealth management programme to 
ensure that revenues from the offshore Oil and Gas 
sector are used effectively.
9. Develop an unambiguous system for determining 
whether a future gas find should be used for export 
or included as part of the domestic market.
10. Produce legislation that identifies limits on the 
amount of Oil and Gas resources that can be 
exploited in the short term.
11. Build a defence and security framework to protect 
the Exclusive Economic Zone.
12. Create biofuel standards for wholesale and retail 
supply of vehicles.
13. Establish a transportation information system to 
provide data for transportation and energy policies, 
strategic planning, tracking of CO2 emissions, and 
environmental impacts.
14. Introduce more renewable energy and clean energy 
into the public transportation system.
15. Provide appropriate incentives to promote “green 
pumps” within service stations and on commercial 
16. Remove MTBE from gasoline and diesel, and replace 
it with ethanol and bio-diesel.
17. Promote linkages with the agriculture sector to 
encourage the production of agro-energy crops 
where financially and economically viable.
18. Encourage energy efficiency in the transportation 
sector.
19. Provide tax incentives to vehicle dealerships that 
train their mechanics to maintain and repair EVs.
20. Establish a programme for identifying appropriate 
international sources of funding to facilitate and 
assist the government in transitioning from fossil 
fuels to EVs.
21. Remove duties and VAT from EVs and encourage a 
scheduled approach to increasing their use in the 
national transportation fleet, while at the same time, 
not harming government’s revenue stream.
22. Develop a road network that promotes energy 
efficiency.
23. Establish the use of management technology in 
public transit, e.g. using smartphone apps to verify 
arrival times of buses.
24. Create a system that includes mobile charging 
stations for vehicles.
25. Introduce ethanol rather than MTBE as an antiknock agent.
26. Implement more stringent regulations on vehicles’ 
exhausts and emissions.
27. Integrate charging stations with traditional gas 
stations.
28. Construct more charging stations for EVs.29. Control and maintain CO2 emissions at levels 
consistent with local and global climate change 
targets.
30. Establish a system that facilitates the change from 
traditional vehicles to those powered by renewable 
energy, taking transition costs into consideration.
31. Implement standards for streetlight efficiency.
32. Provide cost incentives that encourage investment 
in required infrastructure with charging stations etc.
33. Acquire more details on the number of vehicles 
using each fuel type.
34. Establish standards in charging and other renewable 
energy infrastructure related to fuelling.
35. Develop a regulatory framework for the 
implementation of vehicle to grid storage and supply 
technology.
Electricity 
Supply
Energy Efficiency 
and Conservation
36. Establish electric market structures that reduce the 
effects of monopolistic operations where financially 
and economically feasible.
37. Create a pricing mechanism for electricity from 
renewable energy suppliers.
38. Devise protocols for interconnectivity between IPPs 
and the utility to supply electricity.
39. Expand electricity regulation to include the 
wide-ranging aspects of the market, generation, 
distribution, supply, dispatch, transmission, and 
electricity use within the electricity sector.
40. Produce standards and specifications for generation, 
supply, dispatch, transmission, distribution, 
storage and consumption that allow the electricity 
sector to operate in a financially, economically, 
environmentally, and technically viable manner.
41. Institute targets for limits on CO2 emissions in the 
electricity sector.
42. Promote the use of renewable and other clean 
sources of energy to produce electricity.
43. Develop clear rules for determining roles and 
timelines for updating the Integrated Resource Plan.
44. Use SMART meters as part of an advanced 
communication infrastructure for distribution 
management, to facilitate the use of more 
intermittent technologies and aid in demand-side 
management.
45. Establish efficiency standards governing electricity 
production for utility and distribution-scale 
operations.
46. Develop a maximum useful life and cost/
performance ratio of operations for generation 
equipment.
47. Create legislation and regulations to govern 
movement towards greater energy efficiency in 
businesses and residences in Barbados.
48. Create an energy efficiency plan as a policy guideline 
document.Energy and the 
Environment and 
Climate Change
49. Develop an energy conservation education and 
awareness programme that will promote lifestyle 
changes among Barbadians with regard to energy 
consumption.
50. Promote energy efficiency in the productive and 
trading sectors.
51. Develop sectoral energy efficiency and consumption 
standards for buildings, and encode them in the 
Town and Country Planning Act.
52. Establish or adopt business standards for the design 
of energy efficient homes and offices.
53. Create energy efficiency standards for appliances 
and equipment used for residential, commercial and 
industrial purposes.
54. Provide equity for households that are unable to pay 
for energy efficiency retrofits and products.
55. Develop a set of regulations in tandem with all 
government ministries involved in the energy sector, 
which identifies a clear and defined process for new 
applicants in energy efficiency projects.
56. Produce a system of duties, taxes and economic 
incentives to promote greater use of high-efficiency 
energy technologies.
57. Implement standards for insulation in buildings.
58. Use Life Cycle Analysis to determine the best 
materials to be used for buildings and other 
construction projects.
Provide equity for households that 
are unable to pay for energy efficiency 
retrofits and products.
59. Standards and protocols for the safe and effective 
disposal of equipment and devices in the energy 
sector.
60. A sustainable environmental management 
framework for the upstream offshore petroleum 
sector.
61. A decommissioning fund for the energy sector to 
facilitate the decommissioning and abandonment of 
energy operations and facilities.
62. Standards and protocols for energy production in 
the petroleum and renewable energy subsectors 
that promote and encourage the goal of zero harm 
to the people and the environment.
63. Information systems and infrastructure that 
promote the flow of information requiring 
environmental standards, best practices and 
legislation.
64. Studies within the sector that assess the correlation 
between carbon dioxide emissions and health risks 
(e.g. cancer and asthma).
65. Create a mechanism to cap and trade CO2 emissions 
within the Barbados energy sector.
66. Provide a trade facility that allows holders of CO2
emissions permits to trade with other emitters of 
CO2.
67. Develop strong rules for capping CO2 emissions.
68. Establish a clear international agenda for the 
acquisition of climate change funding.69. Diversify and optimize the renewable energy mix 
that results in the maximisation of socio-economic 
and financial benefits to Barbados.
70. Establish a capacity-building programme locally 
to prepare the workforce for employment in the 
renewable energy sector.
71. Develop a central database containing details on 
the extent of renewable energy resource available 
at various locations in Barbados (solar, wind and 
bioenergy potential).
72. Establish legislation and regulations that provide 
for a transparent process in acquiring licences for 
supplying electricity from renewable energy sources.
73. Provide an enabling environment that encourages 
collaborative approaches to producing renewable 
energy that is technically sound, and is financially, 
economically and environmentally viable.
74. Establish a programme of international financing 
and ‘in kind’ assistance that effectively supports 
the supply of renewable energy, and promotes 
Barbados’ economic growth and competitiveness.
75. Increase staffing (secretariat) and human capacity to 
support local NGOs such as BREA.
76. Develop a clear protocol for clients to follow for 
investigating and trouble-shooting in new renewable 
energy systems with a method of recourse 
for clients in case of unsatisfactory company 
performance.
Renewable 
Energy 
Supply and 
Storage
77. Provide regular and clear communication to the 
public on developments within the renewable 
energy industry.
78. Institute efficiency standards for manufacturing 
local renewable energy products such as solar water 
heaters.
79. Establish appropriate fiscal incentives for emerging 
renewable energy and storage technologies.
80. Promote an enabling environment that encourages 
local involvement in renewable energy projects.
81. Create a system to ensure the protection of 
intellectual property and patents for renewable 
energy technologies.
82. Define land areas for bio-energy and wind 
production in Barbados’ Physical Development Plan.
83. Establish and support infrastructure for the 
collection, handling, and processing of organic 
material to produce energy.
84. Provide fiscal and financial support for research 
and development in bio-energy technologies and 
methods.
85. Develop standards of production for bio-methane 
from biogas.
86. Create standards for electricity generation efficiency 
in the bio-energy, wind energy and other renewable 
energy subsectors.
Promote an enabling environment 
that encourages local involvement in 
renewable energy projects87. Produce a legislative and regulatory framework for 
bio-energy production, distribution, storage, and 
plant decommissioning.
88. Devise a strategy for expanding Barbados’ 
renewable energy markets into the Caribbean.
89. Establish a transparent decision protocol for 
choosing between energy storage measures.
90. Create clear guidelines for integration of battery 
technology in PV systems.
91. Implement proven storage technologies and 
systems that promote renewable energy and are 
economically, environmentally and financially viable.
92. Establish a system for recycling and disposing of 
batteries at end of use (cradle to cradle).
Site tour GAIAplementation Activities by Year and Thematic Area
l and Gas Supply
following schedules depict enabling activities, their associated policy measures (PM), proposed durations and responsible parties (abbreviated) across 
5 thematic areas. Please refer to Acronyms and Abbreviations for guidance on Responsible Parties listed in each activity grid.ansportansport Cont’d 
ectricity Supply, Energy Efficiency and Conservationnergy and the Environment and Climate Changenergy and the Environment and Climate Change Cont’denewable Energy Supply and Storageenewable Energy Supply and Storage Cont’dResults Framework
Outputs Thematic Area
Year 1
• 1 Report on current data management systems for geological and 
geophysical data collection completed
• 3 Oil and Gas Committee Meetings held
• Report on recommendations to enhance Auditor General’s role in 
Wealth Management Fund submitted
• 1 Post-Discover Framework for Offshore Oil and Gas sector completed
• 1 Comprehensive Security Response Strategy for Offshore Oil and Gas 
sector developed
• Operational Standards for Offshore Oil and Gas sector developed
• Environmental Guidelines for licensing consideration for offshore 
Oil and Gas sector developed
• 1 Communication Strategy Offshore Oil and Gas sector developed
• 1 Investors/Developers Conference for offshore Oil and Gas sector held
• 1 General Framework for Wealth Management Fund developed
Oil and Gas
• 2 Review Reports on adjusting duties on EVs completed
• 1 Framework to address emission levels of vehicles developed
• 1 Vehicle Fuel Consumption Study completed
• 1 Review Report on integrating charging stations in all new major developments 
completed
• 1 Awareness and Communication Strategy for Energy Efficiency in the 
Transportation Sector developed
• 1 National Transportation Network Strategy developed
• 1 Regulatory Framework for Vehicle to Grid Storage developed
• Biofuel Standards for wholesale and retail supply of vehicles developed
• 1 Pilot Project to test data collection methods for vehicle exhaust and emissions 
completed
• 1 Framework for Emissions Data Collection in private and public sector developed
• 1 Pilot Project for EV usage on major routes completed
Transportation
• Standard Framework for Asset Management Plan for IPPs developed
• Standards for the design of energy efficient homes and offices developed
• Standards for appliances and equipment used for residential, commercial and 
industrial purposes developed
• List of targeted technologies from each RE subsector identified
• Standards for the insulation of buildings 
Electricity Supply, 
Energy Efficiency 
and Conservation• Standards for equipment and devices used in disposal of equipment and devices 
in the energy sector developed
• Protocols for disposal of equipment and devices established 
• 1 Framework for standardised measurement of CO2 equivalent emissions across 
the energy sector developed
Natural Environment 
and Climate Change
• 1 Revised Energy Mix completed
• 1 Capacity Assessment to identify critical skillset gaps in the RE Sector completed
• 1 Capacity Building Programme commenced
• 1 Database for analysing specific and aggregated RE resources across Barbados 
developed
• Legislation governing the acquisition of licences for supplying electricity from RE 
sources developed
• 5 RE subsector working groups established
• 4 meetings of Multi-stakeholder Group on communication held
• 2 public engagements of Multi-stakeholder Group on Communication held
• Standards for manufacturing local renewable energy products developed
• 1 Framework for protection of IP patents for RE technologies developed
• Lands for bio-energy and wind production identified
• Standards for production of bio-methane from biogas developed
• Standards for electricity generation efficiency in bio-energy, wind and other RE 
subsectors developed
• Legislation and regulatory framework for bio-energy production, distribution 
storage and plant decommissioning completed
• 1 Regional RE Expansion Strategy for Barbados developed
• Decision protocols for selecting from amongst energy storage measures 
developed
• Guidelines for integration of batter technology in PV systems developed
• 1 Battery disposal strategy and guidelines developed
Renewable Energy 
Supply and Storage
Outputs Thematic Area
Year 2
• 1 Data management system for geological and geophysical analysis developed
• 1 skill and capacity assessment for offshore Oil and Gas sector conducted 
• 1 training programme with key overseas and local institutions established
• 1 Resource Mobilisation Unit Established
• Awareness and communication programme communicating opportunities for 
enterprises (e.g. laundry service, food supply, waste management) developed
• 1 Report on review of Corporate Tax Rate completed
• 1 Mechanism for external/independent performance review of Wealth 
Management Fund identified
Oil and Gas• 1 Pilot for digitised Air Emissions Monitoring System Completed
• 5 Data Sharing Agreements between relevant entities completed
• Legislation and regulations to govern movement towards greater energy 
efficiency in businesses and residences in Barbados created
• 1 Targeted school engagement programme developed
• 1 Toolkit for basic, DIY household energy audits developed
• 1 Terms of reference for requirement of private sector to designate energy 
efficiency officers developed
• Incentives for ESCOs whose activities are aligned to that of suggestions of 
relevant energy audits identified
• 1 Digital platform/extension for easy referencing of standards for various 
equipment and appliances developed
• 1 Digital Platform to facilitate simultaneous input from key multiple agencies in 
project approval process identified
• 1 Project review committee in (TCPD) to expedite review of projects over a 
certain size formed
Electricity Supply, 
Energy Efficiency 
and Conservation
• 1 Framework to support private waste reuse/recycling developed
• Legislation to govern effective waste disposal developed
• 1 Training programme in environmental management for offshore upstream Oil 
and Gas provided
• Legislation for decommissioning and abandonment of energy operations 
developed
• Joint information system that promotes the flow of information requiring 
environmental standards, best practices and legislation established
• Study to assess correlation between CO2 emissions and health risks conducted
Natural Environment 
and Climate Change
• Infrastructure for the collection, handling, and processing of organic material to 
produce energy provided
• Fiscal and financial support for research and development in bio-energy 
technologies and methods provided
• Legislative and regulatory framework for bio-energy production, distribution, 
storage, and plant decommissioning provided
Renewable Energy 
Supply and StorageMonitoring and Evaluation Framework
In accordance with the accepted project management 
standards, policies and procedures within the Executing 
Agency (MEWR), implementation will be monitored 
through the following:
Inception Workshop
The project will be officially launched no later than 
three months after the project start with a Project 
Inception Workshop for those with assigned roles and 
responsibilities in the project's organisational structure, 
and where appropriate/feasible, technical policy advisors 
as well as other stakeholders.
The Inception Workshop will address a number of key 
issues including: (a) Assist all key stakeholders to fully 
understand and take ownership of the project. (b) 
Detail the roles, support services and complementary 
responsibilities of MEWR staff vis à vis the project team. 
(c) Discuss the roles, functions, and responsibilities 
within the project’s decision-making structures, including 
reporting and communication lines, and conflict resolution 
mechanisms. (d) The Terms of Reference (TOR) for 
project staff is reviewed as needed. (e) Provide a detailed 
overview of reporting, M&E requirements. The M&E work 
plan and budget should be agreed and scheduled. (f) 
Discuss financial reporting procedures and obligations, 
and arrangements for annual audit. (g) Plan and 
schedule Project Task Force (PTF) meetings. Roles and 
responsibilities of all project organisation structures should 
be clarified and meetings planned. The first PTF meeting 
should be held within the first 2 months following the 
inception workshop.
Within the annual implementation cycle 
• On a quarterly basis, a quality assessment shall 
record progress towards the completion of key 
milestones, based on the criteria and methods 
captured in an approved Quality Assurance 
Assessment Form.
• An Issue Log shall be created and updated by 
the Project Coordinator to facilitate tracking and 
resolution of potential problems and/or requests 
for changes.
• Based on the initial risk analysis submitted (see Risk 
Analysis), a risk log shall be developed and regularly 
updated by reviewing the external environment that 
may affect implementation.
• Based on the above information, to be recorded in 
a location suitable to the PTF, a Project Progress 
Reports (PPR) shall be submitted by the Project 
Coordinator to the Programme Steering Committee 
through Project Assurance (MEWR), using a 
standard report format agreed to by the PTF
• A project Lesson-learned log shall be activated and 
regularly updated to ensure on-going learning and 
adaptation within the MEWR, and to facilitate the 
preparation of the Lessons-learned Report at the 
end of the project.
• A Monitoring Schedule Plan shall be developed to 
track key management actions/events.
Annually
• Annual Review Report. An Annual Review Report 
shall be prepared by the Project Coordinator and 
shared with the Project Board.
• Annual Project Review. Based on the above report, 
an annual project review shall be conducted during 
the fourth quarter of the year or soon after, to 
assess the performance of the project and appraise 
the Annual Work Plan (AWP) for the following year. 
In the last year, this review will be a final assessment. 
This review, commissioned by the Project Board, 
may involve other stakeholders as required. It shall 
focus on the extent to which progress is made 
towards outputs, and that these remain aligned to 
appropriate outcomes.
Project Evaluation
Due to the complexity of this project and the myriad of 
inter-related components being implemented by multiple 
responsible parties, mid-term and final evaluations are 
proposed. These are to occur during the fourth quarter of 
2024 and 2029 respectively. Monitoring and Evaluation Work Plan
The Mid-Term Review will determine progress being 
made toward the achievement of outcomes and will 
identify course correction if needed. It will focus on 
the effectiveness, efficiency and timeliness of project 
implementation; will highlight issues requiring decisions 
and actions; and will present initial lessons learned about 
project design, implementation and management. Findings 
of this review will be incorporated as recommendations 
for enhanced implementation during the final half of the 
project’s term. The organisation and terms of reference 
of the mid-term review will be decided after consultation 
between the parties to the IP. The Terms of Reference 
(TOR) for this Mid-term review will be prepared by the 
MEWR based on guidance from the Public Implementation 
Unit (PIU) in the Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and 
Investment. This independent expert will be recruited at 
least six months prior to the planned commencement of 
the mid-term review. The management response and the 
review will be uploaded to a location as designated by the 
MEWR and accessible to the PSC.
The final evaluation will focus on the delivery of the 
project’s results as initially planned (and as corrected after 
the mid-term review, if any such correction took place). 
The final evaluation will look at impact and sustainability of 
results, including the contribution to capacity development 
and the achievement of global environmental benefits/
goals. The TOR for this evaluation will be prepared by the 
MEWR based on guidance from the PIU.
The Final Evaluation should provide recommendations for 
follow-up activities and requires management responses.
Type of M&E activity Responsible Parties Budget US$
Excluding project 
team staff time
Time frame
Inception Workshop 
and Report
• Project Coordinator
• MEWR
4,000 Within first two 
months of project 
start up 
Quality Assessment • UNDP/CONANP/PCU 
• Oversight by Project 
Coordinator
• PMCT
None Quarterly
PPR • PMCT None Annually 
Periodic status/ 
progress reports
• PMCT None Quarterly
Project Steering 
Committee Meetings
• Project Coordinator
• MEWR
None Following Project 
"Inception Workshop" 
and subsequently at 
least Quarterly Mid-term Review • PMCT
• MEWR
• PIU
• External Consultants 
(i.e. review team)
30,000 At the midpoint of project 
implementation
Final Evaluation • PMCT
• MEWR
• PIU
• External Consultants 
(i.e. evaluation team)
30,000 At least three 
months before 
the end of project 
implementation
Audit • MEWR
• PMCT 
20,000 
(indicative cost 
per year: 5,000)
Annually
Visits to field sites • MEWR
• PMCT
As needed
TOTAL INDICATIVE COST
Excluding project team staff time and staff and travel 
expenses
84,000Risk Analysis
The risks reflect the concerns expressed in the working group sessions, as well as the individual interviews with key 
stakeholders. These threats to implementation will guide the Project Implementation Team accordingly, along with 
relevant remedial actions aimed at minimising and/or avoiding the occurrence of identified threats.Management Arrangements
The MEWR will establish a Project Team, referred to 
as the Project Management Team (PMCT), which will 
be entrusted to support the MEWR to deliver on the 
outputs outlined in this IP. The PMCT will assist with 
the coordination of multi-stakeholder deliverables and 
monitor the progression of the various established 
enabling activities. The MEWR will provide financial 
oversight and fiduciary and safeguard handling capacity.
Project Management Team
The PMCT will be responsible for the day-to-day 
management and coordination of the project and 
its respective activities. It will be responsible for the 
general management actions, such as the preparation of 
consolidated annual work plans and technical and financial 
reports to be presented to the Project Task Force. 
The PMCT will provide services of Project Management, 
Monitoring and Evaluation, Procurement, Administrative 
Support, Technical Support and Finance and Awareness 
and Communication within the IP. The organisation of 
the PMCT will reflect a focus on these services, as well 
as coordination of activities across responsible parties 
and thematic areas identified. The PMCT of the MEWRoverseen project will report to the Project Steering 
Committee. The PMCT will be recruited by the MEWR and 
will be given the authority to manage the implementation 
components on a daily basis as per the boundaries 
established by this IP. 
Project Task Force
The Project Task Force (PTF) – is constituted of MEWR, 
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment, a 
representative of the National Climate Change Committee 
(NCCC), a representative from the Barbados Chamber 
of Commerce and a representative from a relevant NonGovernmental Organisation. The roles of the following 
specific members of the PSC are as follows:
• Executive representing the Project ownership to 
chair the group (MEWR)
• Senior Beneficiary representing the interests of 
those who will ultimately benefit from the project 
tthlitif bfitfth
• Other Project Board Member 
The Project Steering Committee will liaise with the 
Barbados Cabinet Sub-Committee on Energy for its 
members to participate actively during meetings and to 
propose agenda items to be discussed.
The PTF will provide guidance, in accordance with 
overarching policy direction, to the PMCT on specific 
components project as outlined in this IP document and 
in alignment with the policy measures of the BNEP. The 
PTF is responsible for making, on a consensus basis, 
management decisions for the project, in particular 
when guidance is required by the PMCT, including 
recommendation for approval of IP revisions. IP reviews 
by this group are made at designated decision points 
(including at least annually) during the running of the IP, or 
as necessary when raised by the PMCT.
The responsibilities of the PTF shall include, but not be 
limited to:
1. Review, approve and amend this IP, including the 
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) framework
2. Monitor compliance with the IP’s objectives
3. Discuss progress and identify solutions to problems 
facing any of the IP's partners
4. Review and approve the Annual Work Plan (AWP) 
and the consolidated financial and progress reports
5. During the life of the IP, review proposals for major 
budget re-allocation such as major savings or 
cost increases, or for use of funds for significantly 
different activities
6. Review evaluation findings related to impact, 
effectiveness and the sustainability of the IP
7. Monitor both the budget and the prompt delivery of 
financial, human and technical inputs to comply with 
the work plan8. Ensure the participation and ownership of 
stakeholders in achieving the objectives of the IP
9. Ensure communication of the project and its 
objectives to stakeholders and the public
10. Approve the project communication strategy and 
public information plans prepared by the PTF
11. Facilitate linkages with high-level decision-making
12. Convene ordinary meetings to consider the 
proposals and recommendations, as well as the 
progress made by the IP
13. Convene, if necessary, extraordinary meetings.
The project team, for decisions, consults the PTF when 
their tolerances (i.e. constraints normally in terms of time 
and budget) are exceeded. The project team acts as the 
secretary to the PTF and is responsible for organising 
meetings, preparing meeting documents and follow up 
on PTF recommendations. The PTF will convene four 
times a year and can meet extraordinarily whenever 
circumstances require.
In order to ensure MEWR ultimate accountability for 
the project results, PTF decisions will be made in 
accordance to standards that shall ensure management 
for development results, best value money, fairness, 
integrity, transparency and effective international 
competition. On occasion when there is no consensus on 
any particular matter within the PSC, the final decision 
shall rest with the MEWR.
Management Committee
The Management Committee (MC) will meet at least 
once a month, led by the Project Coordinator of the 
PMCT. The MC will be comprised of MEWR and other 
stakeholders invited on an as-needed basis (e.g. other 
ministries). The MC will discuss and agree work plans, 
provide for information exchange and synergies between 
IP components and agree on TORs, recruitment of 
experts and other related managerial activities.
Project Assurance 
The Project Assurance role is the responsibility of MEWR.
Reporting Structure
The PMCT provides quarterly reports to the PTF on 
progress and other relevant associated developments 
of the project. The PTF reports to the Cabinet SubCommittee on Energy, which provides oversight to the 
IP and filters comments and directives through the PTF 
to the PMU.DEVELOPING 
COMMUNITIES 
THROUGH 
RENEWABLE 
ENERGY 
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN 
ESTABLISHING RE SYSTEMS IN 
HOUSEHOLDSManagement Arrangements
One critical measure of success in the IP will be how 
well it promotes the involvement, development and 
empowerment of residents at the community level. 
Traditionally, measuring this indicator implicated a heavy 
reliance on outputs of awareness and communication. 
However, this IP embarks on an ambitious proposition to 
create a more formal, robust and sustainable engagement 
with all communities across Barbados, by establishing a 
Renewable Energy Licensing Regime (RELR), which when 
launched, would automatically monetize all property 
interests in Barbados, with respect to the prospects of 
renewable energy generation at their respective locations.
The study identified in Activity 93, under Renewable 
Energy Supply and Storage will serve as a major 
catalyst for this engagement. The study aims to validate 
and define the framework for establishing an RE 
market of tradable instruments (e.g. licences) for all 
residential, commercial and agricultural properties. The 
establishment of the RELR will enable small (8000sq ft. 
or less), medium (8001 sq. ft – 43559 sq. ft.) and large 
(1 acre and above) property owners across Barbados, 
including government, to trade energy equivalency 
licenses (EEL) at their discretion, subject to any 
accompanying relevant trade regulations and national 
development plans. The study will also explore and 
make recommendations addressing situations in which 
individuals reside in a structure that they own, while 
not being the actual owners of the land on which the 
structure is stationed. This consideration centres on the 
IP’s commitment to creating the largest possible base of 
local involvement in the transition to 100% FFF. With this 
approach, every property owner in Barbados will have a 
calculated stake in the paradigm shift to becoming 
100% FFF. 
The EEL can therefore create many avenues for small, 
medium and large-scale economic activity across 
Barbados, thereby favourably affecting employment and 
foreign exchange generation. Tailoring the instrument to 
accommodate an approach of ‘one licence per property’ 
also adds value to the prospects of entrepreneurship and 
the ability to generate new small businesses in the RE 
sector, with the creation of a new and broader base of 
clients. The feasibility of collateralising the instrument 
will be a focus of the study, with a view to exploring 
opportunities where economically disenfranchised and 
vulnerable persons with property holding rights can utilise 
their EELs to offset a variety of financial burdens such 
as the inability to service some forms of debt (e.g. taxes 
owed and loans).
The EEL can therefore create 
many avenues for small, 
medium and large-scale 
economic activity across 
Barbados, thereby favourably 
affecting employment and 
foreign exchange generation. KEY ASSUMPTIONS 
AND LIMITATIONS OF 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PLANManagement Arrangements
Throughout the development of the IP, there were a 
number of factors taken into consideration, to which 
timely adjustments were made with a view to preserving 
the integrity and quality of the IP. These considerations 
include:
1. Consultation Time frame - The IP, which involved the 
assessment of 92 policy measures via 5 workshops and 
35 individual interviews, resulted in the identification 
of 145 enabling activities over the period November 19, 
2018 through December 14, 2018. This narrow timeline 
resulted in the prioritisation of thematic areas based 
on input from a wide range of relevant documents 
(e.g. Barbados Second National Communication, 
2015). Therefore, within this IP some thematic areas 
engagements to incorporate other critical sectors 
throughout the project cycle.
2. Broad Stakeholder Participation – Although the 
working group sessions were well attended and 
representative of the core drivers of the IP, input from 
other critical stakeholders will be needed to fully 
align activities to the existing operations of relevant 
institutions. While this omission would normally 
implicate a less-than favourable progression towards 
reaching the outlined objectives, the IP is designed 
as a ‘working document’ with sufficient flexibility and 
adaptability to rapidly incorporate inputs at any given 
time, without compromising the overall quality of the 
outputs identified. To address this possible dilemma, 
the IP may receive additional inputs in the period 
between the establishment of the Project Steering 
Committee and the Inception Workshop. This will 
allow sufficient time to include considerations from 
other key agencies in advance of the PSC, outlining 
the scope of the IP during its kick-off workshop.
These agencies include: 
• The Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs 
and Investment
• Ministry of Education, Technological and 
Vocational Training
• Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade
• Ministry of Housing, Lands and Rural Development
• Ministry of Tourism and International Transportation
• Ministry of Maritime Affairs and the Blue Economy
• Ministry of the Public Service
• Ministry of Youth and Community Empowerment 
With regards to the energy targets, at this stage the IP 
presents preliminary forecasts of requirements for key 
variables. These values are to be likely revised following 
the completion of the Integrated Resource Plan by the 
Barbados Light and Power Company Ltd. Therefore, the 
IP acknowledges in advance that possible amendments 
may impact the predictions for:
• Schedule of Installation of Renewable Energy Over 
the Next 5 Years (MWh)
• Schedule Electricity Production (GWh) from 
Renewable Energy Over the Next 5 Years
• Schedule of Investment in Renewable Energy Over 
This IP will operate effectively under specific conditions 
that are assumed to be in operational alignment with 
the approach of the Ministry of Energy and Water 
Resources, as party responsible for overall quality 
assurance. These assumptions are: 
1. Management Arrangements – Implementation will 
be supervised by a team of officers, collectively a 
project management team, who will be tasked with 
delivering on the results outlined in the IP.
2. Working Groups – Thematic Working Groups will 
continue to meet and provide additional oversight to 
activities.
3. Working Groups – Additional stakeholders from 
under and/or non-represented thematic areas will 
be integrated into the IP
4. Responsible Parties - Stakeholders (MOU etc.) 
will formally commit to being champions of the 
various activities to which they are identified as 
Responsible Parties.
5. Public Communication - Developments regarding 
progress and milestone achievements will be 
communicated to the general public.
6. Resource Coordination Team (RCT) - An RCT, 
dedicated to identifying financing opportunities for 
the activities in the IP, will be established. APPENDIX APM# EA# Enabling Activity
58 a Review building codes to include best materials to be used for building and construction 
projects
86 a Create, adapt and adopt standards for electricity generation efficiency in the bio-energy, wind 
energy and other renewable energy subsectors.
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
76 a Create standardised framework (processes, contractual arrangements, M&E, maintenance 
standards) governing RE installations
77 a Establish multi-stakeholder group on communication
77 b Establish schedule of public engagements forums (e.g. town hall meetings, press releases etc.)
88 a Devise a strategy for expanding Barbados’ renewable energy markets into the Caribbean.
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
84 a Provide fiscal and financial support for research and development in bio-energy technologies 
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
70 b Establish capacity-building programme based on capacity assessment
Barbados Association of Professional Engineers Sector
Barbados Chamber of Commerce and Industry
Barbados Cane Industry Corporation
Barbados Community College
APPENDIX A
ALLOCATION OF ACTIVITIES BY RESPONSIBLE PARTY
• Numbers under column heading ‘PM’ relate to Policy 
Measures identified on pages 16 to 20. 
• Letters under column heading ‘EA’ relate to the 
sequence of Enabling Activities. In some instances, 
you may find that enabling activities are the same as 
the policy measure. This reflects the detailed level of 
some policy measures relative to others. 
• Enabling activities with more than one associated 
responsible party are in Red text while activities 
with one responsible party are in Black text. 
• The following Responsible Parties are listed in 
alphabetical order.
For ease of reference in the below table, please note that PM# EA# Enabling Activity
75 a Identify and/or develop a sustainable financial framework to enable organisations to actively 
participate in RE activities
80 b Revise incentive categories to Intermittent, Firm and Storage to allow for measurement 
consistency and comparability across RE technologies, then apply relevant incentives
82 b Define land areas for bio-energy and wind production in Barbados’ Physical Development Plan 
85 a Develop standards of production for bio-methane from biogas
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
36 a Develop an Integrated Resource Planning tool to determine energy mix
41 a Undertake Pilot for digitised Air Emissions Monitoring System
41 b Develop framework for more frequent collection of data and CO2 emissions and targets
44 b Establish Data Sharing Agreements between relevant entities
46 a Develop Asset Management plan
49 b Develop media campaign (social media, television, radio, GIS)
69 b Allow for adjustments to mix via comprehensive IRP
76 a create standardised framework (processes, contractual arrangements, M&E, Maintenance 
standards) governing RE installations
89 a Establish a transparent decision protocol for choosing between energy storage measures
90 a Create clear guidelines for integration of battery technology in PV systems
91 a Implement proven storage technologies and systems that promote renewable energy and are 
economically, environmentally and financially viable
Bio-Economy Group
Barbados Light and Power Company Ltd.
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
5 c Build marine security and response capacity
11 a Conduct Risk Assessment 
11 b Conduct GAP analysis
Barbados Defence ForcePM# EA# Enabling Activity
2 c Review existing framework 
1 a Establish a Petroleum Authority
2 a Conduct a review of current data management systems 
2 b Develop a data management system 
9 a Develop a post-discovery framework
10 a Conduct evaluation on methodology and approach to determining appropriate/optimum 
extraction rates 
60 a Provide training in environmental management for offshore upstream Oil and Gas 
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
1 c Develop standards for companies to operate in the Oil and Gas sector
12 a Create biofuel standards for wholesale and retail supply of vehicles
27 a Review building codes to integrate charging stations into new developments (residential, 
commercial and open public spaces)
34 a Review building codes to integrate charging stations into new developments (residential, 
commercial and open public spaces)
45 a BL&P already covered in Standards of Services Agreement
45 a Develop energy efficiency standards for IPPs
53 a Create energy efficiency standards for appliances and equipment used for residential, 
commercial and industrial purposes
57 a Implement standards for insulation in buildings
59 b Identify standards for equipment and devices
62 a Develop standards and protocols for energy production in the petroleum and renewable energy 
subsectors 
76 a Create standardised framework (processes, contractual arrangements, M&E, Maintenance 
standards) governing RE installations
78 a Institute efficiency standards for manufacturing local renewable energy products such as solar 
water heaters
Barbados National Oil Company Ltd.
Barbados National Standards Institute85 a Develop standards of production for bio-methane from biogas
86 a Create, adapt and adopt standards for electricity generation efficiency in the bio-energy, wind 
energy and other renewable energy subsectors
90 26 Create clear guidelines for integration of battery technology in PV systems
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
42 a Develop Awareness and Communication Programme
49 b Develop media campaign (Social media, television, radio, GIS)
63 14 Establish joint information system 
73 a Establish sector and subsector working group forums to facilitate dialogue and collaboration 
on a regular basis
75 a Identify and/or develop a sustainable financial framework to enable organisations to actively 
participate in RE activities
76 a Create a standardised framework (processes, contractual arrangements, M&E, maintenance 
standards) governing RE installation’s
77 a Establish multi-stakeholder group on communication
77 b Establish schedule of public engagements forums (e.g. town hall meetings, press releases etc.)
80 b Revise incentive categories to Intermittent, Firm and Storage to allow for measurement 
consistency and comparability across RE technologies, then apply relevant incentives
91 a Implement proven storage technologies and systems that promote renewable energy and are 
economically, environmentally and financially viable
Barbados Renewable Energy Association
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
13 a Establish a transportation information and management system 
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
44 b Establish Data Sharing Agreements between relevant entities
Barbados Statistical Service
Barbados Water AuthorityPM# EA# Enabling Activity
81 a Create a system to ensure the protection of intellectual property and patents for renewable 
energy technologies
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
3 b Formulate environmental and other guidelines
4 a Formulate clear legislation governing environmental management in offshore Oil and Gas 
activities, with provisions for removal of licenses if stipulations are not met
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
88 a Devise a strategy for expanding Barbados’ renewable energy markets into the Caribbean
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
4 a Formulate clear legislation governing environmental management in offshore Oil and Gas 
activities, with provisions for removal of licenses if stipulations are not met
8 b Review and enhance relevant policies and guidelines related to Auditor General
10 b Develop appropriate legislation 
12 c Review and/or establish appropriate legislation, policies and response mechanisms 
47 b Create legislation and regulations to govern movement towards greater energy efficiency in 
businesses and residences in Barbados
59 e Develop legislation to govern effective waste disposal 
72 a Establish legislation and regulations that provide for a transparent process in acquiring licenses 
for supplying electricity from renewable energy sources
73 a Establish Sector and subsector working group forums to facilitate dialogue and collaboration on 
a regular basis
87 a Produce a legislative and regulatory framework for bio-energy production, distribution, storage, 
and plant decommissioning
Corporate Affairs and Intellectual Property Office
Environmental Protection Department
Caribbean Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
Chief Parliamentary Counsel11 c Review and/or establish appropriate legislation, policies and response mechanisms 
13 a Establish a transportation information and management system 
26 a Develop framework based on quantitative variables to incentivise and penalise below average 
and excessive emission levels respectively
26 b Conduct pilot project to test framework
29 a Develop framework for more robust emission data collection in private and public sector
29 b Develop Air Emission/Transport Management Systems
41 a Undertake Pilot for digitised Air Emissions Monitoring System
41 b Develop framework for more frequent collection of data and CO2 emissions and targets
44 b Establish Data Sharing Agreements between relevant entities
51 a Review building codes to ensure energy efficiency (RE) is incorporated
52 a Establish or adopt business standards for the design of energy efficient homes and offices.
55 a Develop platform with application template to facilitate simultaneous input and tracking on 
applications from multiple relevant entities 
58 a Review building codes to include best materials to be used for building and construction 
projects
59 a Identify waste streams and characterise lifespans
59 b Identify standards for equipment and devices
59 c Develop protocols for disposal of equipment and devices
59 d Develop framework to support private waste reuse / recycling
60 b Examine existing Environmental Act and Marine Pollution Control Act and inform legislation
60 c Examine options for waste treatment and identify best practices for dealing with industrial 
waste.
60 a Provide training in environmental management for offshore upstream Oil and Gas 
62 a Develop standards and protocols for energy production in the petroleum and renewable energy 
subsectors 
63 14 Establish joint information system 
63 15 Develop public awareness programme
64 a Conduct study to assess correlation between carbon dioxide emissions and health risks65 a Determine and mandate standardised methodology to measure CO2 equivalent emissions 
across the energy sector
65 b Identify volumes of emissions and markets for trading
92 a Establish a system for recycling and disposing of batteries at end of use (cradle to cradle).
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
35 a Develop a regulatory framework for the implementation of vehicle to grid storage and supply 
technology
37 a Create a pricing mechanism for electricity from renewable energy suppliers
39 a Expand electricity regulation to include the wide-ranging aspects of the market, generation, 
distribution, supply, dispatch, transmission, and electricity use within the electricity sector
73 a Establish sector and subsector working group forums to facilitate dialogue and collaboration on 
a regular basis
77 a Establish multi-stakeholder group on communication
77 b Establish schedule of public engagements forums (e.g. town hall meetings, press releases etc.)
79 a Develop framework for ongoing review of VAT, NSRL, Import Duties etc. on RE and associated 
apparatus (e.g. storage)
80 a Provide stability and confidence amongst RE investors by making a determination on price and 
mechanism for RE (e.g. FIT)
80 b Revise incentive categories to Intermittent, Firm and Storage to allow for measurement 
consistency and comparability across RE technologies, then apply relevant incentives
90 26 Create clear guidelines for integration of battery technology in PV systems
91 a Implement proven storage technologies and systems that promote renewable energy and are 
economically, environmentally and financially viable
Fair Trading Commission
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
51 a Review building codes to ensure energy efficiency (RE) is incorporated
52 a Establish or adopt business standards for the design of energy efficient homes and offices
58 a Review building codes to include best materials to be used for building and construction 
projects
Government Electrical and Engineering Department76 a Create standardised framework (processes, contractual arrangements, M&E, maintenance 
standards) governing RE installations
86 a Create, adapt and adopt standards for electricity generation efficiency in the bio-energy, wind 
energy and other renewable energy subsectors
90 26 Create clear guidelines for integration of battery technology in PV systems
91 a Implement proven storage technologies and systems that promote renewable energy and are 
economically, environmentally and financially viable
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
55 a Develop platform with application template to facilitate simultaneous input and tracking on 
applications from multiple relevant entities 
87 a Produce a legislative and regulatory framework for bio-energy production, distribution, storage, 
and plant decommissioning
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
65 c Develop policy recommendation for cabinet decision
83 a Establish and support infrastructure for the collection, handling, and processing of organic 
material to produce energy
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
5 a Establish training programmemes with key overseas institutions 
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
1 a Establish Oil and Gas stakeholder committee 
1 a Establish a Petroleum Authority
1 b Host conferences and inform potential developers
2 a Conduct a review of current data management systems 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Ministry of Environment and National Beautification
Ministry of Education, Technology and Vocational Training
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources3 a Develop awareness and communication strategy 
3 b Formulate environmental and other guidelines
4 a Formulate clear legislation governing environmental management in offshore Oil and Gas 
activities, with provisions for removal of licenses if stipulations are not met
5 c Build marine security and response capacity
5 d Establish a Resource Mobilisation Unit 
6 c Develop a berthing facility for offshore Oil and Gas 
8 a Establish Wealth Management Fund
8 c Develop mechanism for external/independent performance reviews of strategic plans
9 a Develop a post-discovery framework
10 a Conduct evaluation on methodology and approach to determining appropriate/ optimum 
extraction rates
13 a Establish a transportation information and management system 
14 a Incentivise projects focused on generating Biodiesel for public transport vehicles
19 b Government will cover the cost of training for first 2 mechanics
30 a Develop Awareness and communication Strategy
31 a
This activity is a continuation of an ongoing Energy Smart Fund Programme in the Division of 
Energy, in collaboration with the Enterprise Growth Fund, Caribbean LED Lighting Inc. and the 
Barbados Light and Power Company Ltd.
33 a Conduct study to establish benchmark and facilitate future comparisons
36 a Develop Integrated Resource Planning tool to determine energy mix
39 a Expand electricity regulation to include the wide-ranging aspects of the market, generation, 
distribution, supply, dispatch, transmission, and electricity use within the electricity sector
42 a Develop Awareness and Communication Programme
43 a Develop clear rules for determining roles and timelines for updating the Integrated 
Resource Plan
44 b Establish Data Sharing Agreements between relevant entities
48 a Develop an energy efficiency plan as a policy guideline document
48 b Develop a public sector energy conservation programme 
49 a Develop toolkit for basic, DIY household energy audits50 a Develop terms of reference for requirement of private sector to designate energy 
efficiency officers
50 b Provide incentives for ESCOs whose activities are aligned to that of suggestions of relevant 
energy audits
50 c Conduct Pilots and case studies showing the costs benefits
54 b Provide equity for households that are unable to pay for energy efficiency retrofits 
and products
55 a Develop platform with application template to facilitate simultaneous input and tracking on 
applications from multiple relevant entities 
56 a Identify key technologies to be targeted
56 b Develop framework and criteria for incentives to promote greater use of energy efficiency 
technologies
56 c Implement pilot project to assess impact of incentive
60 a Provide training in environmental management for offshore upstream Oil and Gas 
61 a Develop legislation for decommissioning and abandonment of energy operations
61 b Establish decommissioning fund
62 a Develop standards and protocols for energy production in the petroleum and renewable energy 
subsectors 
63 a establish joint information system 
68 a Establish a clear international agenda for the acquisition of climate change funding
69 a Establish preliminary/baseline mix
69 b Allow for adjustments to mix via comprehensive IRP
70 a Conduct capacity assessment to identify critical skillsets in the RE sector
71 a Develop a central database containing details on the extent of renewable energy resource 
available at various locations in Barbados (solar, wind and bioenergy potential).
73 a Establish Sector and subsector working group forums to facilitate dialogue and collaboration on 
a regular basis
74 a Replicate and expand on existing approaches such as GCF to facilitate future financing 
engagements
75 a Identify and/or develop a sustainable financial framework to enable organisations to actively 
participate in RE activities
77 a Establish multi-stakeholder group on communication84 a Provide fiscal and financial support for research and development in bio-energy technologies 
and methods.
87 a Produce a legislative and regulatory framework for bio-energy production, distribution, storage, 
and plant decommissioning
88 a Devise a strategy for expanding Barbados’ renewable energy markets into the Caribbean.
93 a Conduct feasibility study into the creation of RELR
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
5 a Establish training programmemes with key overseas institutions 
5 d Establish a Resource Mobilisation Unit 
68 a Establish a clear international agenda for the acquisition of climate change funding
81 a Create a system to ensure the protection of intellectual property and patents for renewable 
energy technologies
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
5 d Establish a Resource Mobilisation Unit 
6 b Provide tax incentives to businesses that directly engage the offshore sector
8 a Establish Wealth Management Fund
8 c Develop mechanism for external/independent performance reviews of strategic plans
14 c Review duties on EVs
19 a Review duties on EVs
20 a Establish Resource Mobilisation Unit 
21 a Quarterly simultaneous review of Duties, VAT, Excise Tax in line with BERT programme
30 a Provide incentives to buffer costs (import, sales and operations)
32 a Provide cost incentives that encourage investment in required infrastructure with charging 
stations etc.
33 a Conduct study to establish benchmark and facilitate future comparisons
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment50 a Develop terms of reference for requirement of private sector to designate energy 
efficiency officers
54 a Develop assessment tool to determine household income levels
56 b Develop framework and criteria for incentives to promote greater use of energy efficiency 
technologies
56 c Implement pilot project to assess impact of incentives
66 a Establish a Resource Mobilisation Unit
74 a Replicate and expand on existing approaches such as GCF to facilitate future 
financing engagements
79 a Develop framework for ongoing review of VAT, NSRL, Import Duties etc. on RE and associated 
apparatus (e.g. storage)
81 a Create a system to ensure the protection of intellectual property and patents for renewable 
energy technologies
84 a Provide fiscal and financial support for research and development in bio-energy technologies 
and methods
7 a Review Corporate Tax Rate
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
55 a Develop platform with application template to facilitate simultaneous input and tracking on 
applications from multiple relevant entities 
64 a Conduct study to assess correlation between carbon dioxide emissions and health risks
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
5 b Advanced and/or develop relevant courses at local institutions 
Ministry of Health and Wellness
Ministry of Labor and Social Partnership RelationsPM# EA# Enabling Activity
9 a Develop a post-discovery framework
10 a Conduct evaluation on methodology and approach to determining appropriate/optimum 
extraction rates 
44 b Establish Data Sharing Agreements between relevant entities
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
6 a Develop awareness and communication strategy. Communicate opportunities for enterprise.
E.g. laundry service, food supply, waste management
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
13 a Establish a transportation information and management system 
14 b Undertake pilot projects for electric vehicle usage along major routes to determine efficiency
18 a Stricken penalties pertaining to offloading/onboarding points 
18 b Develop awareness and communication strategy
22 a Develop National Transportation Network Strategy
23 a Develop transportation information and management system 
26 a Develop framework based on quantitative variables to incentivise and penalise below average 
and excessive emission levels respectively
26 b Conduct pilot project to test framework
29 b Develop Air Emission/Transport Management Systems
33 a Conduct study to establish benchmark and facilitate future comparisons
44 b Establish Data Sharing Agreements between relevant entities
National Petroleum Corporation
Ministry of Small Business, Entrepreneurship and Commerce
Ministry of Transport, Works and MaintenancePM# EA# Enabling Activity
14 d Explore retrofitting options for existing fleet
24 a Create system to incorporate mobile maintenance and support for EVs
28 a Construct more charging stations for EVs.
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
70 b Establish capacity-building programme based on capacity assessment
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
60 a Identify waste streams and characterise lifespans
59 b Identify standards for equipment and devices
60 c Develop protocols for disposal of equipment and devices
59 d Develop framework to support private waste reuse/recycling
59 e Develop legislation to govern effective waste disposal 
59 f Develop education and awareness programme for public dissemination
60 a Identify and adopt international best practice and international framework
60 a Identify and adopt international best practice and international framework
60 b Examine existing Environmental Act and Marine Pollution Control Act and inform legislation
60 c Examine options for waste treatment and identify best practices for dealing with 
industrial waste.
92 a Establish a system for recycling and disposing of batteries at end of use (cradle to grave)
Private Sector Road Transportation Sector
Samuel Jackman Prescod Institute of Technology
Sanitation Service AuthorityPM# EA# Enabling Activity
27 a Review building codes to integrate charging stations into new developments (residential, 
commercial and open public spaces)
34 a Review building codes to integrate charging stations into new developments (residential, 
commercial and open public spaces)
47 b Create legislation and regulations to govern movement towards greater energy efficiency in 
businesses and residences in Barbados.
51 a Review building codes to ensure energy efficiency (RE) is incorporated
52 a Establish or adopt business standards for the design of energy efficient homes and offices.
55 a Develop platform with application template to facilitate simultaneous input and tracking on 
applications from multiple relevant entities 
55 b Form project review committee to expedite review of projects over a certain size
57 a Implement standards for insulation in buildings
58 a Review Building codes to include best materials to be used for building and construction 
projects
82 b Define land areas for bio-energy and wind production in Barbados’ Physical Development Plan 
PM# EA# Enabling Activity
5 a Establish training programmers with key overseas institutions 
70 b Establish capacity-building programme based on capacity assessment
Town and Country Planning Department
University of the West IndiesAPPENDIX BPM# Policy Measure EA# Enabling Activity Responsible 
Party
1
Establish regularly held investor 
conferences to inform potential 
developers about the rules and 
requirements needed to undertake 
activities in the Oil and Gas sector.
a
Establish Oil and Gas stakeholder 
committee 
BNOCL - 
MEWR
b Host conferences and inform 
potential developers MEWR 
c
Develop standards for companies 
to operate in the Oil and Gas 
sector
BNSI
2
Increase the cultivation of data relating 
to the geological and geophysical 
conditions in the offshore Oil and Gas 
sector to aid the government in setting 
license fees and determining levels of 
royalties.
a
Conduct a review of current data 
management systems 
BNOCL - 
MEWR
b Develop a data management 
system BNOCL
c Review existing framework BNOCL
d Review existing framework MEWR
3
Develop a licensing system with clear 
criteria on the ranking of various 
factors critical to the decision on bids. 
This system should be made available 
widely to potential bidders as well as 
the public.
a Develop awareness and 
communication strategy MEWR
b Formulate enviornmental and 
other guidelines EPD - MEWR
4
Formulate clear legislation governing 
environmental management in 
offshore Oil and Gas activities, with 
provisions for removal of licenses if 
stipulations are not met.
a
Formulate clear legislation 
governing environmental 
management in offshore Oil and 
Gas activities, with provisions for 
removal of licenses if stipulations 
are not met
CPC - EPD - 
MEWR
b Develop Awareness and 
Communication Strategy EPD
APPENDIX B
ALLOCATION OF ACTIVITIES & RESPONSIBLE PARTIES5
Develop a capacity-building 
programme locally to prepare the 
workforce for employment in the 
emerging Oil and Gas offshore sector.
a Establish training programmemes 
with key overseas institutions 
METVC - 
MFAFT - UWI
b Advancde and/or develop relevant 
courses at local institutions METVT - MOL
c Build marine security and 
response capacity BDF - MEWR
d Establish a Resource Mobilisation 
Unit 
MEWR 
- MFAFT - 
MOFEI
6
Create an enabling environment that 
will empower local businesses to 
participate effectively in the supply of 
goods and services to the offshore Oil 
and Gas sector.
a
Develop awareness and 
communication Strategy. 
Communicate oppurtunities for 
enterprise-e.g laundry service, 
food supply, waste management
MSBEC
b
Provide tax incentives to 
businesses that directly engage 
the offshore sector
MOFEI
c Develop a berthing faciity for 
offshore Oil and Gas sector MEWR
7
Offer fiscal incentives for developers, 
which are tied to factors such as the 
expected internal rate of return.
a Review Corporate Tax Rate MOFEI 
8
Establish a wealth management 
programme to ensure that revenues 
from the offshore Oil and Gas sector 
are used effectively.
a Establish Wealth Management 
Fund
MEWR - 
MOFEI
b
Review and enhance relevant 
policies and guidelines related to 
Auditor General
CPC
c
Develop mechanism for external/ 
independent performance reviews 
of strategic plans
MEWR - 
MOFEI
9
Develop an unambiguous system for 
determining whether a future gas find 
should be used for export or included 
as part of the domestic market.
a Develop a post-discovery 
framework
BNOCL - 
MEWR - NPC10
Produce legislation that identifies 
limits on the amount of Oil and Gas 
resources that can be exploited in the 
short term.
a
Conduct evaluation on 
methdology and approach 
to determining appropriate/ 
optimum extraction rates
BNOCL - 
MEWR - NPC
b Develop appropriate legislation CPC
11
Build a defence and security 
framework to protect the Exclusive 
Economic Zone.
a Conduct Risk Assessment BDF
b Conduct GAP analysis BDF
c
Review and/or establish 
appropriate legislation, policies 
and response mechanisms 
EPD
12
Create biofuel standards for wholesale 
and retail supply of vehicles. a
Create biofuel standards for 
wholesale and retail supply of 
vehicles.
BNSI
13
Establish a transportation information 
system to provide data for 
transportation and energy policies, 
strategic planning, tracking of CO2
emissions, and environmental impacts.
a
Establish a transportation 
information and management 
system 
BSS - EPD 
- MEWR - 
MTWM
14
Introduce more renewable energy 
and clean energy into the public 
transportation system.
a
Incentivise projects focused on 
generating Biodiesel for public 
transport vehicles
MEWR
b
Undertake pilot projects for EV 
usage along major routes to 
determine efficiency
MTWM
c Review duties on EVs MOFEI
d Explore retrofitting options for 
existing fleet PS
18 Encourage energy efficiency in the 
transportation sector.
a Stricken penalties pertainimg to 
offloading/onboarding points MTWM
b Develop awareness and 
communication strategy MTWM - PSVA19
Provide tax incentives to vehicle 
dealerships that train their mechanics 
to maintain and repair EVs.
a Review duties on EVs MOFEI
b Government will cover the cost of 
training for first 2 mechanics MEWR
20
Establish a programme for identifying 
appropriate international sources of 
funding to facilitate and assist the 
government in transitioning from fossil 
fuels to EVs.
a
Establish Resource Mobilisation 
Unit MOFEI
21
Remove duties and VAT from EVs and 
encourage a scheduled approach to 
increasing their use in the national 
transportation fleet, while at the 
same time, not harming government’s 
revenue stream.
a
Quarterly simultaneous review of 
Duties, VAT, Excise Tax in line with 
BERT programme
MOFEI
22 Develop a road network that promotes 
energy efficiency. a Develop National Transportation 
Network Strategy MTWM
23
Establish the use of management 
technology in public transit, e.g. using 
smartphone apps to verify arrival 
times of buses.
a
Develop transportation 
information and management 
system 
MTWM
24 Create a system that includes mobile 
charging stations for vehicles a
Create system to incorporate 
mobile maintenance and support 
for EVs
PS
25
Introduce ethanol rather than MTBE as 
an anti-knock agent. a N/A
26 Implement more stringent regulations 
on vehicles’ exhausts and emissions.
a
Develop framework based 
on quantitative variables to 
incentivise and penalise belowaverage and excessive emission 
levels respectively.
EPD - MTWM
b Conduct pilot project to test 
framework EPD - MTWM27 Integrate charging stations with 
traditional gas stations.
a
Review building codes to 
integrate charging stations into 
new developments (residential, 
commercial and open public 
spaces)
BNSI
a
Review building codes to 
integrate charging stations into 
new developments (residential, 
commercial and open public 
spaces)
TCPD
28 Construct more charging stations for 
EVs. a Construct more charging stations 
for EVs PS
29
Control and maintain CO2 emissions at 
levels consistent with local and global 
climate change targets.
a
Develop framework for more 
robust emission data collection in 
private and public sector
EPD
b Develop Air Emission/Transport 
Management Systems EPD - MTWM
30
Establish a system that facilitates 
the change from traditional vehicles 
to those powered by renewable 
energy, taking transition costs into 
consideration.
a Develop Awareness and 
communication Strategy MEWR
b Provide incentives to buffer costs 
(import, sales and operations) MOFEI
31 Implement standards for streetlight 
efficiency. a Already in progress MEWR
32
Provide cost incentives that encourage 
investment in required infrastructure 
with charging stations etc.
a
Provide cost incentives that 
encourage investment in required 
infrastructure with charging 
stations etc.
MOFEI
33 Acquire more details on the number of 
vehicles using each fuel type. a
Conduct study to establish 
benchmark and facilitate future 
comparisons
MEWR 
- MOFEI - 
MTWM
34
Establish standards in charging and 
other renewable energy infrastructure 
related to fuelling. 
a
Review building codes to 
integrate charging stations into 
new developments (residential, 
commercial and open public 
spaces)
BNSI - TCPD
Develop a regulatory framework for 
Develop a regulatory framework 
for the implementation of vehicle 36
Establish electric market structures 
that reduce the effects of monopolistic 
operations where financially and 
economically feasible.
a
Develop Integrated Resouce 
Planning tool to determine energy 
mix
BL&P - MEWR
37
Create a pricing mechanism for 
electricity from renewable energy 
suppliers.
a
Create a pricing mechanism for 
electricity from renewable energy 
suppliers
FTC
38
Devise protocols for interconnectivity 
between IPPs and the utility to supply 
electricity.
a N/A - Already addressed in the 
Grid Code
39
Expand electricity regulation to 
include the wide ranging aspects of 
the market, generation, distribution, 
supply, dispatch, transmission, and 
electricity use within the electricity 
sector.
a
Expand electricity regulation to 
include the wide ranging aspects 
of the market, generation, 
distribution, supply, dispatch, 
transmission, and electricity use 
within the electricity sector
FTC - GEED - 
MEWR - CPC
40
Produce standards and specifications 
for generation, supply, dispatch, 
transmission, distribution, storage and 
consumption that allow the electricity 
sector to operate in a financially, 
economically, environmentally, and 
technically viable manner.
a
Produce standards and 
specifications for generation, 
supply, dispatch, transmission, 
distribution, storage and 
consumption that allow the 
electricity sector to operate 
in a financially, economically, 
environmentally, and technically 
viable manner
BNSI
41 Institute targets for limits on CO2
emissions in the electricity sector.
a Undertake Pilot for digitised Air 
Emissions Moniotoring System
BL&P - IPPs - 
EPD
b
Develop framework for more 
frequent cllection of data and CO2
emissions and targets
BL&P - IPPs - 
EPD
42
Promote the use of renewable and 
other clean sources of energy to 
produce electricity.
a Develop Awareness and 
Communication Programme BREA - MEWR
43
Develop clear rules for determining 
roles and timelines for updating the 
Integrated Resource Plan.
a
Develop clear rules for 
determining roles and timelines 
for updating the Integrated 
Resource Plan
MEWR44
Use SMART meters as part of 
an advanced communication 
infrastructure for distribution 
management, to facilitate the use of 
more intermittent technologies and 
aid in demand-side management.
a
Establish Data Sharing 
Agreements between relevant 
entities
BL&P - BWA - 
EPD - MEWR - 
MTWM - NPC
45
Establish efficiency standards 
governing electricity production 
for utility and distribution-scale 
operations.
a Develop energy efficiency 
standards for IPPs BNSI
46
Develop a maximum useful life and 
cost/performance ratio of operations 
for generation equipment.
a Develop Asset Management Plan BL&P - IPPs
47
Create legislation and regulations to 
govern movement towards greater 
energy efficiency in businesses and 
residences in Barbados.
a
Create legislation and regulations 
to govern movement towards 
greater energy efficiency in 
businesses and residences in 
Barbados
CPC - TCPD
48 Craft an energy efficiency plan as a 
policy guideline document a Develop an energy efficiency plan 
as a policy guideline document MEWR
49
Develop an energy conservation 
education and awareness programme 
that will promote lifestyle changes 
among Barbadians with regard to 
energy consumption.
a Develop toolkit for basic, DIY 
household energy audits BREA - MEWR
b Develop media campaign (Social 
media, television, radio, GIS)
BL&P - BREA - 
IPPs - MEWR
50 Promote energy efficiency in the 
productive and trading sectors.
a
Develop terms of reference for 
requirement of private sector 
to designate energy efficiency 
officers
MEWR - 
MOFEI
b
Provide incentives for ESCOs 
whose activities are aligned to 
that of suggestions of relevant 
energy audits
MEWR
c Conduct pilots and case studies 
showing the costs benefits MEWR
51
Develop sectoral energy efficiency and 
consumption standards for buildings, 
and encode them in the Town and 
Country Planning Act
a
Review building codes to 
ensure energy efficiency (RE) is 
incorporated
EPD - GEED - 
TCPD52
Establish or adopt business standards 
for the design of energy efficient 
homes and offices.
a
Establish or adopt business 
standards for the design of energy 
efficient homes and offices
EPD - GEED - 
TCPD
53
Create energy efficiency standards for 
appliances and equipment used for 
residential, commercial and industrial 
purposes.
a
Create energy efficiency 
standards for appliances and 
equipment used for residential, 
commercial and industrial 
purposes.
BNSI 
54
Provide equity for households that 
are unable to pay for energy efficiency 
retrofits and products.
a
Develop assessment tool to 
determine household income 
levels
MOFEI
b
Provide equity for households 
that are unable to pay for energy 
efficiency retrofits and products
MEWR
55
Develop a set of regulations in tandem 
with all government ministries 
involved in the energy sector, which 
identifies a clear and defined process 
for new applicants in energy efficiency 
projects.
a
Develop platform with 
aplication template to facilitate 
simultaneous input and tracking 
on applications from multiple 
relevant entities 
EPD - MAFS 
MEWR - MOH 
- TCPD
b
Form project review committee to 
expedite review of projects over a 
certain size
TCPD
56
Produce a system of duties, taxes 
and economic incentives to promote 
greater use of high-efficiency energy 
technologies.
a Identify key technologies to be 
targeted MEWR
b
Develop framework and criteria 
for incentives to promote 
greater use of energy efficiency 
technologies
MEWR - 
MOFEI
c Implement pilot project to assess 
impact of incentived
MEWR - 
MOFEI
57 Implement standards for insulation in 
buildings. a Implement standards for 
insulation in buildings BNSI - TCPD
58
Use life cycle analysis to determine the 
best materials to be used for building 
and other construction projects
a
Review Building codes to include 
best materials to be used for 
building and construction projects
BAPE - EPD - 
GEED - TCPD 
- EPD59
Standards and protocols for the safe 
and effective disposal of equipment 
and devices in the energy sector.
a Identify standards for equipment 
and devices
BNSI - EPD - 
SSA 
b Develop protocols for disposal of 
equipment and devices EPD
c Develop framework to support 
private waste reuse/recycling EPD -SSA
d Develop legislation to govern 
effective waste disposal CPC - SSA
e
Develop education and 
awareness programme for public 
dissemination
SSA
60
A sustainable environmental 
management framework for the 
upstream offshore petroleum sector.
a
Provide training in environmental 
management for offshore 
upstream Oil and Gas 
BNOCL - EPD 
- MEWR
b Identify waste streams and 
characterise lifespans SSA
c
Identify and adopt international 
best practice and international 
frameword
SSA
d
Examine existing environmental 
act and Marine Pollution Control 
Act and inform legislation
EPD - SSA
e
Examine options for waste 
treatment and identify best 
practices for dealing with 
industrial waste 
EPD - SSA
61
A decommissioning fund for the 
energy sector to facilitate the 
decommissioning and abandonment of 
energy operations and facilities.
a
Develop legislation for 
decommissioning and 
abandonment of energy 
operations
MEWR
b Establish decomissioning fund MEWR62
Standards and protocols for energy 
production in the petroleum and 
renewable energy subsectors that 
promote and encourage the goal 
of zero harm to the people and the 
environment
a
Develop Standards and protocols 
for energy production in the 
petroleum and renewable energy 
subsectors 
BNSI - EPD - 
MEWR
Standards and protocols for the safe 
and effective disposal of equipment 
and devices in the energy sector.
b Develop protocols for disposal of 
equipment and devices SSA
63
Information systems and 
infrastructure that promote the flow 
of information requiring environmental 
standards, best practices and 
legislation.
a Establish joint information system BREA - EPD - 
MEWR
b Develop public awareness 
programme
EPD
64
 Studies within the sector that assess 
the correlation between carbon 
dioxide emissions and health risks (e.g. 
cancer and asthma).
a
Conduct study to assess correlatin 
between carbon dioxide emissions 
and health risks
EPD - MOH - 
PAHO
65
Create a mechanism to cap and trade 
CO2 emissions within the Barbados 
energy sector.
a
Determine and mandate 
standardised methodology to 
measure CO2 equivalent emissions 
across the energy sector
EPD
b Identify volumes of emissions and 
markets for trading EPD
c Develop policy recommendation 
for cabinet decision MENB
66
Establish a clear international agenda 
for the acquisition of climate change 
funding.
a
Establish a Resource Mobilisation 
Unit MOFEI
68
Establish a clear international agenda 
for the acquisition of climate change 
funding
a
Establish a clear international 
agenda for the acquisition of 
climate change funding
MFAFT - 
MEWR
69
Diversify and optimize the renewable 
energy mix that results in the 
maximisation of socio-economic and 
financial benefits to Barbados.
a Establish preliminary/ baseline 
mix MEWR 
b Allow for adjustments to mix via 
comprehensive IRP BL&P - MEWR70
Establish a capacity-building 
programme locally to prepare the 
workforce for employment in the 
renewable energy sector.
a
Conduct capacity assessment to 
identify critical skillsets in the RE 
sector
MEWR
b
Establish Capacity-building 
programme based on capacity 
assessment
BCC - SJPIT - 
TEVT - UWI
71
Develop a central database containing 
details on the extent of renewable 
energy resource available at various 
locations in Barbados (solar, wind and 
bioenergy potential).
a
Develop a central database 
containing details on the extent 
of renewable energy resource 
available at various locations 
in Barbados (solar, wind and 
bioenergy potential).
MEWR
72
Establish legislation and regulations 
that provide for a transparent process 
in acquiring licences for supplying 
electricity from renewable energy 
sources.
a
Establish legislation and 
regulations that provide for a 
transparent process in acquiring 
licences for supplying electricity 
from renewable energy sources.
CPC
73
Provide an enabling environment that 
encourages collaborative approaches 
to producing renewable energy that 
is technically sound, and is financially, 
economically and environmentally 
viable.
a
Establish Sector and subsector 
working group forums to facilitate 
dialogue and collaboration on a 
regular basis
BREA - CPC - 
FTC - MEWR
74
Establish a programme of international 
financing and ‘in kind’ assistance 
that effectively supports the supply 
of renewable energy, and promotes 
Barbados’ economic growth and 
competitiveness.
a
Replicate and expand on existing 
approaches such as GCF to 
facilitate future financing 
engagements
MEWR - 
MOFEI
75
Increase staffing (secretariat) and 
human capacity to support local NGOs 
such as BREA.
a
Identify and/or develop a 
sustainable financial framework to 
enable organisations to actively 
participate in RE activities
BEG - BREA - 
MEWR
76
Develop a clear protocol for clients to 
follow for investigating and troubleshooting in new renewable energy 
systems with a method of recourse 
for clients in case of unsatisfactory 
company performance.
a
Create standardised framework 
(processes, contractual 
arrangements, M&E, maintenance 
standards) governing RE 
installations
BCCI - BL&P76
Develop a clear protocol for clients to 
follow for investigating and troubleshooting in new renewable energy 
systems with a method of recourse 
for clients in case of unsatisfactory 
company performance.
a
Create standardised framework 
(processes, contractual 
arrangements, M&E, maintenance 
standards) governing RE 
installations
BNSI - BREA - 
FTC - GEED
77
Provide regular and clear 
communication to the public on 
developments within the renewable 
energy industry.
a Establish multi-stakeholder group 
on communication
BCCI - BREA - 
FTC - MEWR
b
Establish schedule of public 
engagements forums (e.g. 
townhall meetings, press releases 
etc.)
BCCI - BREA - 
FTC - MEWR
78
Institute efficiency standards for 
manufacturing local renewable energy 
products such as solar water heaters.
a
Institute efficiency standards for 
manufacturing local renewable 
energy products such as solar 
water heaters
BNSI
79
Establish appropriate fiscal incentives 
for emerging renewable energy and 
storage technologies.
a
Develop framework for ongoing 
review of VAT, NSRL, Import 
Duties etc. on RE and associated 
apparatus (e.g. storage)
FTC - MOFEI
80
Promote an enabling environment 
that encourages local involvement in 
renewable energy projects. 
a
Provide stability and confidence 
amogst RE investors by making 
a determination on price and 
mechanism for RE (e.g. FIT)
FTC
b
Revise incentive categories to 
intermittent, firm and storage 
to allow for measurement 
consistency and comparability 
across RE technologies, then 
apply relevant incentives
BEG - BREA - 
FTC
81
Create a system to ensure the 
protection of intellectual property 
and patents for renewable energy 
technologies.
a
Create a system to ensure the 
protection of intellectual property 
and patents for renewable energy 
technologies
CAIPO - 
MFAFT - 
MOFEI
82
Define land areas for bio-energy and 
wind production in Barbados’ Physical 
Development Plan. 
b
Define land areas for bio-energy 
and wind production in Barbados’ 
Physical Development Plan 
BEG - TCPD83
Establish and support infrastructure 
for the collection, handling, and 
processing of organic material to 
produce energy.
a
Establish and support 
infrastructure for the collection, 
handling, and processing of 
organic material to produce 
energy
MENB
84
Provide fiscal and financial support 
for research and development in bioenergy technologies and methods.a
Provide fiscal and financial 
support for research and 
development in bio-energy 
technologies and methods
BCIC - MEWR 
- MOFEI
85 Develop standards of production for 
bio-methane from biogas. a Develop standards of production 
for bio-methane from biogas. BEG - BNSI
86
Create standards for electricity 
generation efficiency in the bio-energy, 
wind energy and other renewable 
energy subsectors.
a
Create standards for electricity 
generation efficiency in the bioenergy, wind energy and other 
renewable energy subsectors
BAPE - BNSI - 
GEED
87
Produce a legislative and regulatory 
framework for bio-energy production, 
distribution, storage, and plant 
decommissioning.
a
Produce a legislative and 
regulatory framework for 
bio-energy production, 
distribution, storage, and plant 
decommissioning
CPC - MAFS - 
MEWR
88
Devise a strategy for expanding 
Barbados’ renewable energy markets 
into the Caribbean.
a
Devise a strategy for expanding 
Barbados’ renewable energy 
markets into the Caribbean
BCCI - 
CCREEE - 
MEWR
89
Establish a transparent decision 
protocol for choosing between energy 
storage measures.
a
Establish a transparent decision 
protocol for choosing between 
energy storage measures
BL&P
90 Create clear guidelines for integration 
of battery technology in PV systems. a
Create clear guidelines for 
integration of battery technology 
in PV systems
BL&P - BNSI - 
FTC - GEED
91
Implement proven storage 
technologies and systems that 
promote renewable energy and are 
economically, environmentally and 
financially viable.
a
Implement proven storage 
technologies and systems that 
promote renewable energy and 
are economically, environmentally 
and financially viable
BL&P - BREA - 
FTC - GEED
92
Establish a system for recycling and 
disposing of batteries at end of use 
(cradle to grave).
a
Establish a system for recycling 
and disposing of batteries at end 
of use (cradle to grave)
EPD - SSAAPPENDIX CDescription of Risk Register Column Helpful Hints for Risk Assessment
No.: Identification number of each risk. 
Once risks are identified, 
they should be given a unique 
identification number, beginning 
with 1.
Project: The name of the project. The name used should be 
consistent for each focal area
Category: The primary category or functional 
area that the risk pertains to. 
Generally, the risk breakdown 
structure is a way of categorising 
or grouping risks by the potential 
cause of the risk.
Opportunity/Threat:
Opportunity
Risk identified as an opportunity in 
the assessment section of the risk 
register.
Threat
Risk identified as a threat in the 
assessment section of the risk 
register.
Opportunity/Threat:
Risk identified as an opportunity and 
a threat in the assessment section of 
the risk register.
Summary Description: Brief, generally unique, description of 
the risk specific to the Project.
In the identification process, 
think about risks relevant to the 
project scope, schedule, or cost. 
Additionally think of risks that may 
affect the agency's reputation.
Detailed Description:
Detailed description of the risk, 
generally including a "cause", possible 
"risk event", and "effects".
The goal is to ensure that other 
users of the register can interpret 
the risk identified. Try to be 
specific and not overly vague. 
Sample risk statement templates 
are "If <uncertain event> -> then 
<effect on objectives>." or "Due 
to <definite cause>, <uncertain 
event> may occur, resulting in 
APPENDIX C
RISK REGISTER GUIDELINESProbability:
The estimated likelihood in percent 
(%) of the risk occurring based 
on current state of the risk. For 
subsequent risk assessments as 
response plans are implemented, the 
value should reflect the estimated 
probability at the time of assessment.
Most Likely (Cost):
The estimated most likely cost 
impact of the risk if it were to 
occur (in millions of dollars). For 
subsequent risk assessments as 
response plans are implemented, the 
value should reflect the estimated 
impact at the time of assessment.
Response Category:
Threat Response - Pick One
Accept
Indicates that the project team has 
decided not to change the project 
plan to deal with a risk, or is unable 
to identify any other suitable 
response strategy. It should be noted, 
that mitigation or transference is 
not necessary for all risk threats, 
particularly those with a small 
severity rating. Judgment must be 
used as to whether a more rigorous 
(and potentially costly) response 
should be implemented.
If "accept" is chosen as the 
response, generally the pre-and 
post-response assessment ratings 
remain the same.
Share
Allocates a portion of ownership of 
a risk threat to another party who is 
best able to minimise the impact and/
or probability of the risks.
Allocates all or a portion of 
ownership of a risk opportunity 
to another party who is best able 
to maximise its probability of 
occurrence and increase the potential 
benefits if it does occur.Mitigate
Seeks to reduce the probability and/
or impact of a risk threat to below an 
acceptable threshold.
If "mitigate" is chosen as the 
response, generally the 
pos-response assessment is 
lower than the pre-response 
assessment.
Transfer
Allocates all ownership of a risk 
threat to another party who is best 
able to minimise the impact and/or 
probability of the risk.
If "transfer" is chosen as the 
response, generally the post 
response assessment is lower than 
the pre-response assessment. If 
the risk were fully transferred with 
no residual risk, the post-response 
assessment would equal zero. 
Avoid
Involves changing the project plan 
to eliminate the risk threat or to 
protect the project objectives from 
its impact. 
If "avoid" is chosen as the 
response, generally the risk is 
totally eliminated in the post 
response assessment.
Response: Primary plan to address the risk.
Response plans should be specific 
enough to implement. It is okay to 
include steps to implementation. 
For example, further study may 
be needed (prior to implementing 
a response plan) to determine 
whether it would be effective; or 
options may need to be evaluated 
and decided upon by the project 
team prior to implementation. 
Owners assigned are those who are 
best able to monitor the risk and 
implement the response. More than 
one owner can be assigned, but it 
should be clear what each owner is 
responsible for.
Risk Owner:
Person or people assigned to 
implement the response plan and 
monitor the risk. 
If multiple people are assigned as 
owners, it should be clear what each 
of their roles are and what they are 
individually responsible for.Status:
Active (Not Started)
Risk is being actively monitored and 
controlled, but the response plan has 
not been initiated.
Active (Ongoing)
Risk is being actively monitored and 
controlled, and the response plan is 
currently being implemented.
Active (Complete)
The risk is still being actively 
monitored and controlled; however 
all work on the response plan is 
complete.
Dormant (Not Started) Risk is not currently a high priority, 
but may become active in the future. This status is not often used.
Retired (Complete) Risk is no longer a threat to project 
objectives.
Risks that are no longer applicable 
should be listed as "retired" and 
not deleted from the register.
Tracking Comments:
Include any comments associated 
with the risk and the update to the 
risk in this box.
Utilise the comments section 
to provide updates on actions 
or owners, or to note changes 
associated with the response 
plans.APPENDIX DImpact Rating
Context Project Impacts 
1 2 3 4 5
Low Medium-Low Medium Medium-High High
Quality
“Negligible 
impacts to 
design quality
Negligible 
impacts to 
long-term 
maintenance 
Barely 
noticeable”
“Requires 
Design 
Variance
Minor impacts 
to long-term 
maintenance
Minor scope 
reduction”
“Requires 
Design waiver
Significant 
impacts to 
long-term 
maintenance
Major scope 
reduction”
“Does not meet 
acceptable 
standards and 
requires Design 
Exception
Major impacts 
to long-term 
maintenance
Changes 
unacceptable 
to TxDOT or 
stakeholders”
“Does not meet 
acceptable 
standards 
and Design 
Exception not 
likely
Unacceptable 
impacts to 
long-term 
maintenance
Project does 
not meet need 
and purpose”
“ Cost
(% of project 
cost) “
 cost increase 
= 1% 
 cost increase 
= 2% 
 cost increase 
= 3% 
 cost increase 
= 4% 
 cost increase 
> 5% 
“Schedule
(% of project 
schedule, 
subject to 
schedule 
analysis)”
 delay = 1% delay = 2% delay = 3% delay = 4% delay > 5% 
 Probability Rating
1 2 3 4 5
Low Medium-Low Medium Medium-High High
 Probability of 
occurrence 1-15% 16-30% 31-65% 66-80% 81-100% 
Note: probability scale for threats and opportunities are color coded the same to ensure conditional formatting of 
cells is consistent and severity rankings are calculated correctly
1 2 3 4 5
Low Medium-Low Medium Medium-High High Total
Needed 
to 
reach 
100
Scale modifier 15 15 35 15 20 100 0
APPENDIX D
RISK REGISTER THREAT RATING DESCRIPTIONRisk Register: Severity MatrixDivision of Energy
Trinity Business Complex
Country Road
ST. MICHAEL
T: 535-2501/5
F: 429-7489
E: info@energy.gov.bb
W: www.energy.gov.bb