File Name: BTN-NEEP-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Bhutan
Country Code: BTN
Category: NEEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2019
Start Year: nan
End Year: nan
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

National Energy Efficiency & Conservation PolicyABI
BCCI
BEA
BSB
Association of Bhutanese Industries
Bhutan Chamber of Commerce & Industry
Bhutan Electricity Authority
Bhutan Standards Bureau
COP Conference of Parties
DES Department of Engineering Services
DoI Department of Industry
DoT Department of Trade
DRC Department of Revenue and Customs
DRE Department of Renewable Energy
DCSI Department of Cottage and Small Industries
EDP Economic Development Policy
EE Energy Efficiency
EE&C Energy Efficiency and Conservation
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GHG
GNH
Greenhouse Gas
Gross National Happiness
GNHC Gross National Happiness Commission
HV High Voltage
LEDS Low Emission Development Strategy
LV Low Voltage
MEPS Minimum Energy Performance Standards
MoEA Ministry of Economic Affairs
MoF Ministry of Finance
MoIC Ministry of Information and Communications
MoWHS Ministry of Works and Human Settlements
MV
NDC
Medium Voltage
Nationally Determined ContributionsNEC National Environment Commission
NA Nodal Agency
PM Particulate Matter
REDTF Renewable Energy Development Trust Fund
RGoB Royal Government of Bhutan
RSTA Road Safety and Transport Authority
RTIO Regional Trade & Industry Office
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention for Climate 
Change
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
CO2 Carbon dioxide
NOx Nitrogen oxides
SOx Sulfur oxides
LIST OF UNITS
‘000 Thousand
GWh Gigawatt hour
kW Kilowatt
kWh Kilowatt hour
MW Megawatt
Nu Ngultrum
TOE Tonnes of Oil EquivalentTABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………….1
2. RATIONALE…………………………………………………………….3
3. TITLE, OPERATIVE PERIOD AND ENFORCEMENT…………….6
4. OBJECTIVES……………………………………………………………6
5. BUILDING SECTOR……………………………………………………7
6. APPLIANCE SECTOR………………………………………………….8
7. INDUSTRY SECTOR……………………………………………………9
8. TRANSPORT SECTOR………………………………………………...10
9. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT………………………………....11
10. ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION ACTION PLAN……18
11. MONITORING ANDEVALUATION………………………………….19
12. AMENDMENTS…………………………………………………………19
13. INTERPRETATION OF THE POLICY……………………………….19
14. DEFINITIONS…………………………………………………………...191.1. The Royal Government of Bhutan (hereinafter, “the 
Government”) has implemented national development 
plans with consideration not only for economic or physical 
prosperity, but also for preservation of cultural heritage and 
environment, guided by the development philosophy of 
Gross National Happiness (GNH). At institutional level, 
the government broadly follows two national policies viz. 
Bhutan 2020-A Vision for Peace, Prosperity and Happiness 
and the Economic Development Policy (EDP) 2016.
1.2. The Country’s GDP growth has been impressive over the 
last ten years. Despite the landlocked and mountainous 
terrain, the GDP growth rate in constant (2000) price has 
averaged around 7.36% between 2005 and 2017 and the 
annual growth of GDP per capita has averaged around 
9.043% from 2006 to 20171. Economic development has 
brought increased urbanization in Bhutan and poverty rate 
has also dropped significantly with the national poverty 
rate at 8.2% in 20172as compared to 23% in 2007.
1.3. The EDP 2016 emphasizes that the Energy Efficiency and 
Conservation (EE&C) measures shall be promoted for 
sustainable use of energy across all sections of the 
consumers through the adoption of a National Energy 
Efficiency and Conservation Policy by 2017. The Royal 
Government shall encourage general improvements in the 
energy performance standards of four major sectors
namely building, appliance, industry and transport.
1.4. The EDP 2016 also emphasizes a green and self-reliant 
economy of Bhutan by 2020 through promotion of activities. The sustained pursuit of green growth entails a 
systematic focus on energy efficient productive activities 
across different sectors of the economy such as building, 
appliance, industry and transport. The overall economy of 
the country will be improved by EE&C measures through 
reduced energy intensity, avoided GHG emissions and 
higher revenue earning due to additional export of
electricity.
1.5. In the 15th Conference of Parties (COP), UNFCCC (2009), 
the Country committed to remain carbon neutral where 
emissions of GHG will not exceed carbon sequestration 
capacity of the Country’s forests, which is estimated at 6.3 
million tons of CO2. In the COP21 (2015), the Country reemphasized this commitment.
1.6. The Country’s Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDC) further pledges to promote energy demand side 
management through efficiency in buildings, appliances 
and industrial processes and technologies3.
1.7. The potential of EE&C measures in the Country is based 
on the findings of technical studies and energy audits 
conducted across the economy in energy consuming sectors 
such as building, appliance, industry and transport. These 
studies have revealed realizable and implementable 
interventions that may be pursued in a systematic way to 
achieve not only the EE&C goals but also further the 
economic development of the Country.2.1. EE&C measures also contribute to the country’s global 
commitment on the climate change front to UNFCCC, 
LEDS and other international forums. Increasing economic 
prosperity is expected to drive up the country’s demand for 
energy, including fossil fuels like petroleum products. 
EE&C measures are likely to lower the intensity of energy 
use through improved efficiency in the usage of all forms 
of energy, thereby decoupling economic growth from 
consumption of energy resources and carbon emissions.
2.2. In addition, the pursuit of EE&C measures will also align 
the Country with United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals. Reduced energy intensity will 
contribute to climate action through reduction in GHG 
emissions, while promoting sustainable environment 
through lesser environmental pollution. Poverty will also 
be positively affected; as reduced energy intensity will 
increase the economic security.
2.3. In 2017, the Country exported around 5,700.994 million 
kWh of surplus electricity; the contribution was around Nu 
12,371.15 million at Nu 2.17 per kWh of average
electricity tariff. In the same year, the Country imported Nu 
8,974.835 million worth of petroleum products. Clearly, 
EE&C measures can directly benefit the economy by 
freeing up energy resources, generating additional revenue 
through export of saved electricity and reduced imports of 
petroleum products. This can also relieve government’s 
fiscal burden on energy subsidies and reallocate resources 
4 2.4. The annual savings potential in electricity consumption, 
averaged over the 15 years projected period, in the 
building, appliances and industry sectors is about 155 
million kWh annually, which at the present average export 
tariff of electricity of Nu 2.17 per kWh, amounts to an 
additional government revenue of about Nu. 336.00 million 
per annum. Moreover, it also has potential to reduce crossborder GHG emission.
2.5. In the transport sector, there is a significant increase in 
vehicular traffic due to economic development in the 
Country. Consequently, the import of petroleum products 
has increased from Nu 1.1 billion in 2002 to Nu 8.97 billion 
in 20176and is projected to rise further. Sustainable 
transportation that focuses on efficient fuel usage and 
promotion of public modes of travel presents significant 
energy saving potential for the Country. Energy efficient 
transportation systems, like fuel efficient vehicles, electric/ 
hybrid vehicles and non-motorized transportation 
mechanisms, can lead to savings in fuel consumption in the 
transport sector. This can significantly reduce the 
petroleum import bill, reduce traffic congestion and 
mitigate vehicular pollution (SOx, NOx, totalhydrocarbon
and PM emissions). It is estimated that use of clean and 
fuel-efficient transportation can lead to an annual savings 
of import bill to the tune of Nu. 467.00 million.
2.6. Additionally, as significant fuelwood is being used for 
space heating and cooking purposes in the building sector,
the EE&C measures in the building sector will reduce 
fuelwood consumption, which will reduce the pressure on 
forest resources and the use of cleaner and efficient carbon sequestration. Adherence to climate change 
commitments will also help the Country to access 
international/multilateral/bilateral funds and technical 
assistances from development partners in the future.
2.7. Energy savings in any form will also enhance disposable 
income for households. This will in turn positively affect 
gender equity, as most households are operated by women. 
The increased disposable income will contribute to 
employment creation in energy and other sectors, making 
the EE&C measures as an important contribution to the 
Government’s green growth strategy.
2.8. Adopting energy efficient production processes and 
technologies will improve productivity, profitability and 
competitiveness of industries by lowering operating costs, 
and disseminating knowledge and best practices. EE&C 
measures in industries will help in enhancing national 
economy, transferring technologies from abroad and 
establishing value chains for energy-efficient goods and 
services.3. TITLE, OPERATIVE PERIOD AND 
ENFORCEMENT
3.1. This Policy shall be known as “National Energy Efficiency 
& Conservation Policy of Bhutan 2019”.
3.2. This Policy shall come into effect from November 2019 
and will remain in force until superseded or modified. All 
EE&C measures in the Country shall be governed by this 
Policy.
4. OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the Policy are to:
4.1. Improve energy security by reducing energy intensity in 
the country through adoption of EE&C measures.
4.2. Create enabling environment for adoption of EE&C 
measures by various actors in the economy for building, 
appliance, industry and transport sectors.
4.3. Reduce energy consumption from fossil fuels through 
efficient utilization and contribute towards achieving the 
Country’s global commitment to remain carbon neutral.
4.4. Provide long-term direction for a systematic approach to 
implementation of EE&C action plan by soliciting 
coordination among relevant stakeholders.
4.5. Create enabling environment for the private sector 
participation in adopting EE&C measures in the Country.5. BUILDING SECTOR
The building sector in the Country contributed to 42% of the total
energy consumption in 2014. Energy performance of buildings can 
be improved through a systematic effort focusing on retrofits of 
existing buildings and promoting/mandating energy efficient 
design for new building construction. To improve the energy
performance of the building sectors, among others, the following
actions shall be pursued:
5.1. The MoWHS shall develop and implement energy 
efficiency building codes of practice for both new building 
constructions and retrofits in existing buildings. These 
codes shall be aligned with the existing legal framework of 
building construction sector in Bhutan. The MoWHS shall 
develop the codes of practice in coordination with the NA 
and carry out research on the applicability in the Country, 
specify energy efficient construction materials, facilitate 
market mechanism, and explore fiscal incentives in 
consultation with MoF.
5.2. The Energy Audit and Reporting Guidelines shallmandate 
periodic energy audits and reporting of energy performance 
of energy intensive buildings, as defined in the energy 
efficiency building codes of practice.
5.3. The Government shall actively encourage hotel industryto 
adopt EE&C measures and retrofits through sensitization, 
awareness creation and recognizing good performers. The 
NA shall assist the MoWHS to explore options for 
identifying and publicly recognizing the good performers.5.4. The MoWHS, in coordination with the NA and other 
relevant agencies, shall develop the capacity of relevant 
stakeholders of the building sector (architects, engineers, 
planners, developers, artisans, masons, retailers, 
manufacturers, etc.) on the implementation of the energy 
efficiency building codes of practice through trainings, 
workshops and seminars.
6. APPLIANCE SECTOR
Energy performance of appliances can be improved through a
systematic effort of lowering the average wattage of appliances by 
replacing the current stock of appliances with more energy 
efficient products. To optimize the energy performance of the 
appliances, among others, the following actions shall be pursued:
6.1. The NA shall develop the Technical Specifications 
(MEPS) for select set of appliances and the BSB shall 
develop and adopt the Standards and Certification Scheme 
to promote consumer access to energy efficient appliances. 
The NA shall conduct periodic review of such standards 
where appropriate.
6.2. Under the Standards and Certification Scheme, the Bhutan 
Trade Classifications will include the protocol for 
monitoring of appliances, which will be carried out by 
Regional Trade and Industry Office (RTIO), or any 
successor designated under the MoEA.
6.3. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) shall incorporate the 
EE&C aspects into the Public Procurement system.6.4. The Government shall provide fiscal incentives, based on 
viability, shall be explored to offset the higher prices of the 
labeled appliances and accelerate penetration of energyefficient appliances in the market. The NA in consultation
with MoF shall explore such incentives and seek approval 
from the Parliament.
7. INDUSTRY SECTOR
The Industry sector of Bhutan contributed to 37% of the total
energy consumption in 2014.Variousstudiesrevealed that majority 
of the EE&C interventions in the industry sector have a negative 
abatement cost and can be achieved in short term. At the unit level,
around 10% of an industry’s energy consumption may be avoided. 
To optimize the productivity in the industry sector, among others, 
the following actions shall be pursued:
7.1. Energy efficiency up-gradation measures shall be 
promoted in industrial processes through retrofit, 
refurbishment, technology transfer and/or process 
modifications. The NA shall coordinate and work with the 
relevant stakeholder agencies (DoI, DCSI, ABI, BCCI, 
etc.) to implement the Policy through public-private 
partnerships, knowledge sharing through energy efficiency 
quality circle and development of energy efficiency codes 
of practice for industry.
7.2. The NA shall develop and implement the Energy Audit and 
Reporting Guidelines within three to five years from the 
date of adoption of this Policy. The Energy Audit and 
Reporting Guidelines shall encourage periodic energyy gy p
industries. The template for reporting of such energy 
performance shall be developed by the NA.
7.3. The NA will carry out capacity building activities to 
promote the uptake of EE&C measures in the Industry 
sector, which will include trainings; pilot/demonstration 
projects/ programs; workshops or campaigns to improve 
energy efficiency and conserve energy in industries. The 
NA shall build/ facilitate appropriate institutional linkages 
to achieve this.
8. TRANSPORT SECTOR
The Transport sector of Bhutan contributed to 19% of the total 
energy consumption in 2014. Energy performance of the transport 
sector can be improved through systematic adoption ofsustainable
transportation modalities including use of electric vehicles, use of 
public transportation, promotion of non-motorized transportation, 
efficienturban planning, etc. To improve energy performance of 
the transport sector, among others, the following actions shall be 
pursued:
8.1. The MoIC in collaboration with relevant agencies shall be 
responsible for promotion of energy efficient transport 
systems in the Country. Promotion of energy efficient 
transportation shall include mass transportation systems, 
electric and hybrid vehicles and non-motorized 
transportation like walking and cycling.activities for applicability of alternative fuels in vehicles, 
including hybrid and electric, and other emerging energy 
efficient vehicle technologies in the Country.
8.3. The Government in collaboration with MoF and relevant 
agencies shall adopt appropriate measures to promote the 
penetration of fuel-efficient vehicles in the Country based 
on the proposals submitted by NA.
8.4. The MoWHS in collaboration with the Thromdes, and in 
consultation with MoIC shall give due consideration to 
EE&C aspects in city/town planning to enable userfriendly non-motorized transportation such as cycling and 
walking, shorten travel distances and avoid traffic 
congestion. The NA shall provide technical assistance, 
where necessary.
9. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT
The institutional arrangement outlines the roles and 
responsibilities of relevant agencies in the promotion of EE&C 
measures and emphasizes the need for organizational 
strengthening in implementing the EE&C and related activities.
Department of Renewable Energy (DRE) MoEA
9.1. The Department of Renewable Energy (DRE) under the 
Ministry of Economic Affairs (MoEA) shall be the “Nodal 
Agency” (NA) for implementation of this Policy. The NA 
shall promote, facilitate and coordinate EE&C measures iny
9.2. Review and update the Policy at least once every five years, 
if deemed appropriate.
9.3. Draw up a comprehensive time bound Policy Action Plan 
for every five years to realize the objectives of the Policy.
9.4. Restructure the Research and Development Division 
within the Department to spearhead implementation of 
EE&C measures in the Country.
9.5. Take lead role in developing/updating national 
targets/goals/action plans and implementing/ facilitating 
the EE&C measures in collaboration with relevant 
stakeholders.
9.6. Advise the Ministry of Finance to develop appropriate 
fiscal and non-fiscal instruments for implementation of 
EE&C measures.
9.7. Advice relevant agencies to develop appropriate guidelines 
and standards related for implementation of the Policy.
9.8. Carry out nation-wide public awareness campaigns to 
propagate the benefits of EE&C measures through multiple 
communication instruments including television, mass 
media and schools.
9.9. Develop an interactive web-based platform, a knowledge 
hub, which shall act as a one-stop shop regarding EE&C 
measures. The NA shall disseminate best practices and 
other information. The webpage shall further providey , 
practices, findings of the latest research and projects, casestudies, ready-to-use tools for energy management, list of 
approved vendors/suppliers of EE technologies/equipment 
and information on pilot projects implemented, among 
others.
9.10. Advice the relevant institutions to incorporate EE&C 
measures in academic curricula to equip the students with 
state-of-the-art, industry ready concepts, tools and 
techniques related to practical application of EE&C 
measures.
9.11. Develop technical specifications for energy efficiency 
standards for appliances and equipment in collaboration 
with relevant institutes and/or agencies.
9.12. Facilitate and encourage private sector participation in 
implementation of EE&C measures.
Department of Trade (DoT), MoEA
9.13. The DoT in collaboration with the Department ofRevenue 
& Customs (DRC), MoF and other relevant agencies,shall 
monitor the import and sale of energy efficient appliances 
and equipment including sub-standard energy efficient 
appliances and equipment in the Country.
Ministry of Finance (MoF)
9.14. The MoF shall give due consideration to the proposals for 
EE&C financing instruments recommended by the NA and 
seek approvals for fiscal incentives from the Parliament.9.15. The MoF shall incorporate EE&C aspects in the Public 
Procurement system.
9.16. The DRC in collaboration with the DoT, MoEA and other 
relevant agencies, shall strive to monitor the import and 
sale of energy efficient appliances and equipment 
including sub-standard energy efficient appliances and 
equipment in the Country.
Gross National Happiness Commission (GNHC)
9.17. The GNHC shall periodically review the implementation 
status and effectiveness of this policy at a national level to 
ensure its alignment with the overall national development 
objectives based on the progress report of action plan 
submitted by NA.
Ministry of Information and Communication (MoIC)
9.18. As the lead agency for sustainable transport systems in the 
Country, the MoIC shall design and/or facilitate 
implementation of EE&C measures in transport systems in 
coordination with the NA.
9.19. The RSTA shall collaborate with the NA to organize 
nation-wide eco-driving awareness and education 
campaigns to positively influence the adoption of energy 
efficiency measures in the road transport sector.
Ministry of Works and Human Settlement (MoWHS)
9.20. The DES under the MoWHS shall develop the energyy g p
with NA for both new building constructions and retrofits 
in existing buildings.
9.21. The DES, under the MoWHS, shall coordinate with the NA 
to conduct targeted outreach and awareness on EE&C 
measures for building sectors to promote uptake of energy 
efficient construction technologies and practices.
9.22. The DoHS, under the MoWHS, shall use the provision of 
this Policy as an input for integrated and green urban 
planning.
9.23. The DES along with Thromdes and Dzongkhag 
Administrations shall implement and enforce the energy 
efficiency building codes of practice developed under the 
Policy.
Bhutan Standards Bureau
9.24. The BSB shall certify the energy performance of energy 
efficient appliances as well as other sectors included in this 
policy wherever appropriate as per relevant national 
standards or such other directives issued by a competent 
authority.
Thromdes
9.25. The Thromdes, in collaboration with MoWHS and other 
relevant agencies, shall implement and enforce the energy 
efficiency building codes of practice developed under the 
Policy.gg 
9.26. The Dzongkhag Engineering sector in collaboration with
MoWHS and other relevant agencies shall implement and 
enforce the energy efficiency building codes of practice 
developed under the Policy.
Bhutan Electricity Authority (BEA)
9.27. The BEA shall explore to re-categorize HV, MV and LV 
industries, from time to time, based on actual power 
consumption/connected load. BEA in consultation with 
NA may design a price signal, as appropriate, for 
facilitating EE&C measures in industries.
9.28. The BEA will study in consultation with the NA and other 
stakeholders, applicable tariff instruments, which can 
incentivize EE&C, demand response or demand side 
management, as and when appropriate. This policy shall be 
used as an input for design and/or amendment of the 
Domestic Electricity Tariff Policy.
9.29. The BEA, in collaboration with the Bhutan Power 
Corporation Limited, shall ensure that the transformer 
sizing and distribution system design is optimum for 
consumers for energy efficient operation.
National Environment Commission (NEC)
9.30. The NEC shall collaborate with NA for consolidating all 
relevant information to prepare the Country’s position on 
climate change mitigation related to EE&C measures and 
facilitate the flow of climate finance through NAMA,, gg 
Department of Industry (DoI), MoEA
9.31. The DoI shall work in close coordination with the NA, 
Bhutan Chamber of Commerce and Industries (BCCI) and 
Association of Bhutanese Industries (ABI) to promote and 
implement EE&C measures in the industry sector.
Department of Cottage and Small Industries (DCSI), 
MoEA
9.32. The DCSI shall work in close coordination with the NA, 
BCCI and ABI to promote and implement EE&C measures 
in the small and cottage industries.
Bhutan Chamber of Commerce and Industries (BCCI) and 
Association of Bhutanese Industries (ABI)
9.33. The BCCI and ABI will provide periodic inputs and 
industry insights to the Government on industrial EE&C 
measures.
Private Sector
9.34. The private sector will adopt EE&C measures as prescribed 
by the competent authority.ACTIONPLAN
10.1. The major energy consuming sectors in the country are 
building and appliances sector with 270,356 TOE, industry 
sector with 241,972 TOE and transport sector with 121,218 
TOE of energy consumption reported in the year 2014. The 
detailed energy audits and technical studies carried out in 
2014 by the NA showed substantial techno- commercially 
achievable energy savings potential that will be carried out 
through implementation of EE&C action plan.
10.2. For the promotion of EE&C measures, the NA shall utilize 
the Renewable Energy Development Trust Fund (REDTF) 
established under the Alternative Renewable Energy Policy 
(AREP) 2013 and amendment thereof or any other 
innovative funding mechanism established by the 
Government.
10.3. The RMA shall classify bank lending for EE&C projects, 
which lead to increased energy efficiency in production 
processes or in technologies, as “Priority Sector Lending”. 
Concessional interest rates shall be applicable for priority 
sector lending. The NA shall collaborate with RMA in 
identifying the category of EE&C projects eligible for 
priority sector lending.
10.4. The GNHC and the MoF shall explore access to 
international funds, in the form of climate finance and/or 
other development finance assistance. Based on the 
proposal submitted by the NA, the MoF and GNHC shall 
review EE&C proposals and provide funding support to 
EE&C measures wherever deemed necessaryidentification of funding options from international 
development partners to support EE&C projects.
11. MONITORING ANDEVALUATION
11.1. The NA shall develop a monitoring, reporting and 
verification mechanism to periodically assess the 
effectiveness and relevance of EE&C programs. The NA 
will update concerned stakeholders regarding policy 
formulation and implementation status.
12. AMENDMENTS
12.1. The Government may amend this Policy, as and when 
required, with at least one update in every five years. 
However, the terms and conditions of agreements, which 
are in effect for the existing projects, shall not be subjected 
to these amendments.
13. INTERPRETATION OF THE POLICY
13.1. In the event of conflict of interpretation, the Ministry of 
Economic Affairs shall on behalf of the Government, be the 
authority to interpret various provisions of this Policy, 
which shall be final and binding.
14. DEFINITIONS
14.1. Abatement cost: It is defined as the difference between the 
cost of implementing the measure and the savings 14.2. ‘Appliance’ is an electrical/mechanical machine that 
consumes energy. Major appliances include: air
conditioners, refrigerators, printer, water heaters, washing 
machines, scanners, copier machines, projectors, 
microwave ovens, convection heaters, mobile phone, 
motor, laptops, tube-lights, bulbs, television, fans, room 
heaters, halogen heaters, vacuum cleaner, electric cookers, 
boilers, juicers, electric mixers, etc.
14.3. Bhutan Schedule of Rates: It is published by the 
Department of Engineering Services under the Ministry of 
Works and Human Settlement and prescribes rates for 
works by individual component, quality and quantity. Its 
scope is governed by the Specifications for Building and 
Road Works (SBRW). It is designed primarily as a tool for 
estimation of construction project costs.
14.4. Bhutan Trade Classification: It is a national government 
publication which classifies types of goods. It is used to 
assess the annual exports and imports of the Country with 
other Countries overtime.
14.5. Energy Audit means verification, monitoring and analysis 
of machinery, appliances and the processes of utilization of 
energy entity and determination of its efficiency.
14.6. Energy Audit and Reporting Guidelines: It refers to the 
guidelines to carry out energy audits for Buildings and 
Industries in Bhutan.
14.7. Energy Conservation means reducing energy consumption 
through using less energy services. Energy conservation 14.8. Energy Efficiency is a way of managing and restraining the 
growth in energy consumption such that less energy can be 
used to provide the same service /output.
14.9. Energy Efficiency Building Code of Practice is minimum 
criteria and minimum standards for Energy Efficiency in 
design and/or retrofits in energy intensive buildings. It 
provides criteria for determining compliance.
14.10. Energy Intensive Buildings are buildings or industries that 
consume huge amount of energy, the magnitude of which 
will be determined by the Energy Efficiency Codes of 
Practice.
14.11. Equipment: The set of articles or physical resources that 
consume energy to serve or equip a person or thing.
14.12. Hybrid Vehicle: A hybrid vehicle uses two or more distinct 
types of power, such as internal combustion engine and 
electric motor.
14.13. HV and MV Industries: Industries that are connected to 
high voltage and medium voltage power supply 
respectively.
14.14. Industry: Industry is the production of goods or services 
within an economy. The major source of revenue of a group 
or company is the indicator of its relevant industry.
14.15. Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS): MEPS 
is a specification containing levels of performance 14.16. Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action NAMA: NAMA 
refers to a set of policies and actions that Countries 
undertake as part of a commitment to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions.
14.17. Nodal Agency (NA): Nodal Agency has the overall 
responsibility for implementation in the State/project. The 
Nodal agency coordinates the overall execution of the 
project.
14.18. Priority Sector Lending: Priority Sector Lending is an 
important role given by the RMA to the national banks for 
providing a specified portion of the bank lending to few 
specific sectors with some incentive.
14.19. Public transport: Public transport is a shared passenger 
transport service which is available for use by the general 
public. Public transport modes include buses,trolleybuses, 
trams (or light rail, rapid transit 
(metro/subways/underground etc) and taxis. 
14.20. REDTF: Renewable Energy Development Trust Fund is a 
funding mechanism established under AREP 2013 to 
support RE and Energy Efficiency initiatives.
14.21. Thromde: A thromde means a large urban area or a 
municipality with a minimum population of 5,000 people 
in which more than 50% of the population is dependent on 
non - primary activities and having the potential to sustain 
its services through its revenue such as taxes and fees.14.22. Tonnes of Oil Equivalent: It is a unit of energy defined as 
the amount of energy released by burning one tonnes of 
crude oil.