File Name: BTN-CPD-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Bhutan
Country Code: BTN
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 4 - 7 September 2018
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2023
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
29 June 2018
Original: English
1810793X (E) 110718
Second regular session 2018
4 - 7 September 2018, New York
Item 4 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Bhutan (2019-2023)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Bhutan (2019-2023) ……………………………………… 10I. Programme rationale
1. The small Himalayan Kingdom of Bhutan has transformed into a rapidly growing low 
middle-income country by managing its natural resource endowment and unlocking 
hydropower potential. Guided by the philosophy of ‘gross national happiness’, strong 
economic growth,
1
investments in health and education, and the peaceful transition to a 
democratic constitutional monarchy2in Bhutan saw poverty drop from 23.2 to 8.2 per cent in 
little over a decade.
3 Life expectancy increased remarkably from 32 years in 1960 to 69.0 years 
in 2016.
4 Ranked 132 out of 188 countries,5 Bhutan is in the medium human development 
index category. Its progress in tackling extreme poverty is among its most notable Millennium 
Development Goal achievements. The country is also recognized6for its commitment to 
remain carbon neutral, reinforced by its 2017 ratification of the Paris Climate Agreement.7
Seventy-one per cent of land area is under forest cover and more than half of the country’s 
landscape is protected.
8
2. Future progress in eradicating poverty – and preventing people from falling back into 
poverty – will depend in part on how successfully Bhutan manages the relationship between 
its people and the land. Nearly 60 per cent of the population relies on agriculture to make a 
living,
9 poverty is predominantly rural in nature,10 and – in a country driven by the pursuit of 
happiness – women farmers are the “least happy” group.
111213 Climate-related disasters have 
increased in number and magnitude. They have reversed the gains of farming communities
and are threatening the country’s poverty reduction efforts.
141516 Roads that give farmers 
access to markets and imported fuel, rice and medicine are increasingly vulnerable to 
landslides. Projected variability in rainfall due to climate change17 may jeopardize future 
hydropower revenues,
18 on which poverty eradication will depend. While the country’s 
conservation record is strong, adaptation and mitigation systems are not yet fully in place. 
3. Despite its rural roots, the population is increasingly urbanized, young,
19 online and 
educated.
20 With half the population below age 28 and two thirds of working age, now is the 
time for Bhutan to capitalize on its demographic dividend, respond to the changing needs of 
youth, and invest in jobs. Attractive opportunities for youth are limited, however. Public-sector 
led growth has contributed to a weak private sector,
21 hydropower produces few jobs,22 the 
civil service has passed absorption capacity,
23 and a culture of high productivity is yet to take 
hold.
24 Pulled to migrate by the prospect of opportunities and modernity, and pushed by the 
poverty, hardship and remoteness of rural agricultural life, the number of unemployed youth 
in cities is rising – from 13.5 per cent in 2012 to 28 per cent in 2015,
25 with unemployment 
 
1 The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2018.
2 United Nations common country analysis, 2017.
3 Bhutan living standards survey, 2017. The poverty rate was 23.2 per cent in 2017.
4 Human development index, Human Development Report, UNDP, 2016.
5 Ibid.
6 The intended nationally determined contribution for Bhutan is one of seven globally considered to be 2°C compatible or 
better: http://climateactiontracker.org/countries/bhutan.html.
21st Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
8 Bhutan State of the Environment Report, 2016.
9 Bhutan living standards survey, 2017.
10 Bhutan Poverty Analysis Report, 2017, World Bank.
11 Gross national happiness survey, Centre for Bhutan Studies, 2016.
12 Lessons from Gender Analysis, UNDP-Global Environment Facility, UNDP, 2017.
13 Gender Assessment and Action Plan for Supporting Climate Resilience and Transformational Change in the Agricultural 
Sector, UNDP, 2017.
14United Nations common country analysis, 2017.
15 Climate change vulnerability assessment, UNDP, 2017.
16 Ibid.
17 State of Climate Change Report for the Renewable Natural Resources Sector, Royal Government, 2016.
18Van Vliet, Wiberg, Leduc, Riahi, Power-generation system vulnerability and adaptation to changes in climate and water 
resources, 2016.
19 Population situation analysis, UNFPA, 2017.
20 State of the World’s Children, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 2017
21 Private Sector Review, United Nations, Bhutan, 2018.
22 Bhutan Development Report, World Bank, 2017.
23 United Nations common country analysis, 2017.
24 Doing Business 2018, World Bank.
25 LbFSRt2015DP/DCP/BTN/2
figures for young urban women twice those of young urban men.
26 Increased civic engagement 
by youth and a rise in social innovation and entrepreneurship are national priorities.27 Bhutan 
met the criteria to graduate from least developed country status by the end of its twelfth five 
year plan, dubbed ‘the last mile’ plan by the Royal Government,
28 but the economic 
vulnerability index remains a challenge. Economic reforms are underway to stimulate job 
creation across the country’s “five jewels”: hydropower, agriculture, tourism, cottage and 
small industries, and mining,
29 along with efforts to encourage the national private sector to 
invest in a green economy.
30
4. While the urban poor account for only 0.8 per cent of the population,31 urbanization has 
given rise to other vulnerabilities. An estimated 10 per cent32 of the population of the city of 
Thimphu live in informal settlements. Increased demands for safe water supply,
33 sanitation 
and solid waste management are not being met.
34 The rising air pollution, owing to the tripling 
of light vehicles since 2005, threatens the country’s carbon neutral promise, while public 
transport – the predominant mode of transport for women – is poor. The population of 
Thimphu is set to double by 2040.
35 As cities grow in size and influence, so too will 
subnational governments. Fifty per cent of the national budget is slated for decentralization by 
2023, while local capacities to deliver results are limited.
363738 Further analysis of the impact 
of urbanization and decentralization is needed to better understand opportunities and risks 
ahead.
39
5. In both rural and urban contexts, potential win-wins from eradicating poverty and wise 
environmental management are reflected in the national Twelfth Plan.
40 They are also reflected 
in the country’s approach to the Sustainable Development Goals. While each Goal is 
considered important, Bhutan has prioritized Goal 1 (No Poverty), Goal 13 (Climate Action)
and Goal 15 (Life on Land). The 2015 rapid integrated assessment of the current Eleventh 
Plan41 indicates that of 143 relevant global Goals targets, 134 are already included. The 
Twelfth Plan42 further mainstreams the Goals, and identifies data gaps, institutional challenges 
and capacity weaknesses.
43
6. Demonstrating progress against the Goals will be aided by the country’s growing attention 
to issues of inequality, and will help ensure national averages do not sideline those in danger 
of being left behind.
44
 In 2017, Bhutan established a national vulnerability baseline,
45
identifying 14 socioeconomic groups considered most vulnerable to risk, stigma, 
discrimination or to falling back into poverty. Together with the 2016 climate vulnerability 
assessment,
46 and 2018 national census data, the vulnerability baseline provides a strong basis 
for improved development targeting over the next five years. 
7. For people with disabilities, the development of the first national disability policy and 
efforts to explore ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disability are 
 
26 National Commission for Women and Children Strategy, 2014-2019.
27 His Majesty’s 110th National Day Address, 2017.
28 13th Round Table Meeting Report, 2017.
29 United Nations common country analysis, 2017.
30 Priority sector lending guidelines, Royal Monetary Authority, 2017.
31 World Bank, 2017.
32 Vulnerability baseline assessment, Gross National Happiness Commission, UNDP, 2017.
33 Preparation of a national adaptation plan, Gross National Happiness Commission, UNDP, 2018.
34 Nationally appropriate mitigation action in the waste sector, Royal Government, UNDP, 2017.
35 Sustainable low-emission urban transport systems, a proposal, UNDP 2017.
36Fiscal Decentralization, Dasho Lam Dorji, UNDP, 2017.
37 Local government support programme, Evaluation, UNDP, 2013.
38 Mainstreaming reference groups, Evaluation, UNDP, 2017
39 Independent Evaluation Office, 2017.
40 Impact assessment of least developed country graduation, Triennial Review, United Nations Department for Economic 
and Social Affairs (UNDESA), 2017.
41Rapid integrated assessment of mainstreaming the Sustainable Development Goals, UNDP, 2017.
42 12th five-year plan guidelines, Royal Government, 2017.
43 Out of 169 Sustainable Development Goal targets, 40 are fully aligned, 58 partially aligned, 71 not aligned. Out of 244 
Goal indicators, 62 are fully aligned, 54 partially aligned, 128 not aligned. Data Ecosystem Mapping Report, United 
Nations, 2017.
44 Human development index, Human Development Report 2016, UNDP. Adjusted for inequality, Bhutan drops from the 
medium to low human development category.
45 Vulnerability baseline assessment, Gross National Happiness Commission, UNDP, 2017.
46 Cli
thlbilittGlbl Eit Filit2016indicative of the country’s intent to advance human rights.
47 This is also true for people 
affected by HIV, where new research48 recommends steps to improve the policy and legal 
environment to reduce vulnerability and ensure access to treatment. Such progress on human 
rights by the Royal Government requires sustained capacity development and financial support 
up to and beyond the 2019 Universal Periodic Review, such that it translates into the further 
realization of people’s rights. 
8. The commitment of Bhutan to developing a national gender equality policy and a 
nationwide survey on violence against women and girls similarly illustrates its intent on 
inequality. While Bhutan has made progress on gender mainstreaming,
49
 traditional social 
norms, cultural beliefs and stereotypes weigh it down.50 Bhutan ranked 124 among 144 
countries on the 2017 global gender index.
51 Women’s participation in the workforce is 
dropping52; and only 8 per cent of Parliament are women – down from 13 per cent in 2008.
53
Women working in urban drayangs54 are vulnerable to exploitation, stigma and 
discrimination.
55 Trafficking in persons is a new concern, though data is very limited.5657
Women’s acceptance rate of domestic violence stands high at 74 per cent,
58 and gender-based 
violence is recognized in the country programme theory of change as an immediate 
impediment to women’s empowerment. 
9. The role of civil society in working with the Royal Government to advance a rights-based 
approach, improve services and encourage participation and accountability is increasingly 
recognized,
59 but its capacities, while promising and improving, are weak.60 In crossing the 
‘last mile’ towards least developed country graduation – which may influence the continued 
withdrawal of development partners – the role and effectiveness of civil society will be 
increasingly important as a bridge between vulnerable groups and the executive, legislative 
and judicial branches of government.
10. The national constitution marks its tenth anniversary in 2018, so concluding the country’s 
first decade of democracy. During that time, the institutional structures of the country’s 
democratic constitutional monarchy were established, but were accompanied by a decrease in 
people’s perception of good governance.
61 For Parliament, capacity gaps remain in the 
fulfilment of technical, representation, legislative, oversight, accountability and transparency 
functions and the quality of services delivered.
62 For the offices of the judiciary and the 
Attorney General, provisions for legal aid are in place but not yet implemented, while 
expectations of increasingly specialized legal services, such as on environmental law, are not 
yet met.
63 New strategic plans are in place for the National Assembly, National Council, Office 
of the Attorney General and the justice sector. However, they are not yet implemented. With 
access to justice as a new national priority in the Twelfth Plan, the focus on institutional 
capacity to deliver results will intensify. 
11. The interconnected challenges of addressing inequality through a weak civil society and 
young judicial and legislative institutions, while advancing a climate-resilient, green and jobrich economy to continue poverty reduction, speak to the UNDP comparative advantage in 
Bhutan.
64 Recognizing UNDP strengths vis-à-vis other partners on capacity development, 
policy advice, convening power and knowledge networks, the 2017 independent country 
 
47Independent Evaluation Office, 2017.
48 HIV and the Law, Ministry of Health, UNDP, 2017.
49 Independent Evaluation Office, 2017.
50 Bhutan Gender Equality Diagnostic, Asian Development Bank, 2014.
51 Global Gender Gap Report, 2017.
52 Bhutan Labour Force Survey Report, 2015.
53 National Assembly strategic plan, 2019-2023, UNDP, 2018.
54 Legal entertainment establishments where workers dance and sing karaoke.
55 Gross National Happiness Commission, UNDP, 2017.
56 Human Trafficking Situation in Bhutan, National Commission for Women and Children, 2011.
57 Legal and Policy Review of Human Trafficking in Bhutan, United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime, 2015.
58 National health survey 2012, Ministry of Health.
59 United Nations, 2017.
60 Civil society perception study, Bhutan Centre for Media and Democracy, 2017.
61 Centre for Bhutan Studies, 2016.
62 Parliament’s strategic plans, 2019-2023, UNDP, 2017.
63 Office of the Attorney General strategic plan, 2017.
64 C
tidtliUitd Nti2017DP/DCP/BTN/2
programme cites the UNDP contribution to the country’s sustainable, green, inclusive and 
climate-resilient growth and disaster preparedness as ‘highly relevant’ and ‘valuable’, and 
notes the ‘significant UNDP contribution’ to democracy and evidence-based decision-making. 
12. The independent country programme evaluation65 cited UNDP as ‘uniquely well
positioned’ to lead an integrated approach to the Sustainable Development Goals, illustrated 
by a 2017 impact assessment,
66 where UNDP interventions to improve access to piped water 
also led to the improved health of beneficiaries and better school attendance. The programme’s 
theory of change builds on the evaluation’s recommendations to increasingly consider the 
connection between rural and urban communities, to invest in the enabling environment for 
job creation, and – as bilateral partners pull out – to support its transition from being a least 
developed country with new and creative approaches to financing gross national happiness 
and the Goals.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
13. The UNDP country programme is a subset of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Partnership Framework (UNSDPF), 2019-2023. Based on wide-ranging 
consultations and a common United Nations country analysis, the framework will focus on: 
(a) timely evidence on people at risk; (b) social services; (c) inclusive governance and access 
to justice; and (d) resilience and livelihoods. The goal to leave no one behind, as Bhutan 
graduates from least developed country status, guides interventions across the four areas.
14. Based on a common comparative advantage analysis67 and institutional capacity 
assessment,
68 UNDP will offer a platform for ongoing Sustainable Development Goals
integration across the five ‘Ps’ of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development – people, 
partnership, planet, prosperity and peace. UNDP will directly contribute to outcome areas (c) 
and (d): addressing inequality with weak civil society and young judicial and legislative 
institutions, while advancing a climate-resilient, green and job-rich economy to continue 
poverty reduction. Through these lenses, UNDP will also address aspects of outcome area (a).
15. UNDP is committed69 to working with United Nations organizations in response to the 
2016 quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of 
the United Nations system, including by implementing the common chapter of the UNDP, 
UNFPA, United Nations Children's Fund, and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality 
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) 2018-2021 strategic plans. This will include
working jointly on data, gender-based violence, advancing the rights of people with 
disabilities, and disaster preparedness and response. 
16. Target groups for this programme include women – focused on economic empowerment, 
resilience and tackling violence against women and girls; youth – focused on 
entrepreneurialism and job creation, innovation and civic engagement; people with 
disabilities; and people affected by HIV. In addressing the poverty-environment nexus, the 
programme will target landscapes where low gross national happiness and climate 
vulnerability merge,
70 avoiding overlap and seeking collaboration with partners, including the 
World Bank and the World Wildlife Fund.
71 Support to other targeted landscapes, such as the 
highland landscapes, will also be prioritized where possible. 
17. Building on the theory of change, and in line with UNDP signature solutions two 
(governance), three (resilience) and six (gender) of the Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, outcome 1 
will focus on addressing inequality with a weak civil society and young judicial and 
legislative institutions. UNDP will support the executive, legislative and judicial branches of 
government in Bhutan in their efforts to provide equal opportunities for all, particularly those 
at most risk of being left behind, while strengthening the capacities of women and vulnerable 
 
65 Independent country programme evaluation of the UNDP country office in Bhutan, Independent Evaluation Office, 
2017.
66 Impact assessment, NAPA II, UNDP, 2017.
67 United Nations, 2017.
68 Institutional capacity assessment, United Nations, 2017.
69 UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021.groups. It will do so through three interlinked solution pathways combining technical support, 
capacity development, research and advocacy such that, by 2023:
(a) National and local government capacity to integrate, monitor and report on the 
Sustainable Development Goals and priority actions to meet international agreements is 
improved;
(b) The enabling environment for civil society is improved to help advance opportunities 
for and increase resilience of women as agents of change and of targeted vulnerable 
groups, while the capacities of vulnerable groups to have their voices heard and acted on 
also improves; 
(c) Parliament and justice sector capacities and approaches are strengthened with 
increased inclusion, transparency and accountability.
18. UNDP will help to strengthen central and decentralized capacities to mainstream the 2030 
Agenda, including – linked with outcome 2 – the integration of natural resources, climate and 
disaster management into local plans with stronger engagement of women and persons with 
disabilities. To better understand rural-urban migration and rapid urbanization, UNDP will 
help to analyse existing and new data from a human development perspective to inform policy 
approaches. UNDP will continue its support to Bhutan in preparing for international fora,
including the High Level Political Forum and other strategic meetings. 
19. UNDP will develop the capacities of civil society to influence change, particularly those 
working with the Royal Government on the needs of targeted vulnerable groups. At the same 
time, UNDP will advance upstream policy efforts to tackle inequality - especially with respect 
to women and girls – as articulated in the national key result area 10 of the twelfth five-year 
plan. 
20. For the Parliament and justice sector, UNDP will facilitate implementation of the new 
strategic plans of the Parliament, the Office of the Attorney General and the justice sector,
72
including induction support for new parliamentarians, capacity development on civic 
engagement, including public hearings, technical assistance in the harmonization and review 
of laws, the institutionalization of a legal aid system, and in meeting specialized needs in 
emerging areas such as contract and environmental law. UNDP will also support Bhutan in 
responding to Universal Periodic Review recommendations.
73
21. On South-South and triangular cooperation, Bhutan will collaborate with and benefit from 
the experiences of other countries as part of the multi-country pilot on gender-based violence. 
South Asian countries’ experiences of decentralization and urbanization will inform capacity 
development and research, while peer networks will be strengthened between regional 
parliaments, lawyers, judges and civil society.
22. UNDP will collaborate with United Nations organizations and national partners, including 
the Department for Local Governance, the Gross National Happiness Commission Secretariat, 
the Cabinet Secretariat, and the National Statistics Bureau to mainstream the 2030 Agenda,
the National Commission for Women and Children, the Royal Bhutan Police, the Parliament, 
the Anti-Corruption Commission, Office of the Attorney General, the judiciary, and the 
Bhutan National Legal Institute to support implementation of their strategic plans, and with 
academia, civil society and international partners to advance the resilience of and opportunities 
for vulnerable groups.
23. Drawing on UNDP signature solutions one (poverty), three (resilience), four (naturebased solutions), and six (gender), outcome 2 will focus on advancing a climate-resilient, 
green and job-rich economy to continue poverty reduction with four interlinked solutions 
pathways to help communities and the economy become more resilient to climate-induced and 
other disasters and biodiversity loss. UNDP will address this challenge through upstream 
technical assistance, capacity development, community engagement, innovative finance, and 
research such that, by 2030:
 DP/DCP/BTN/2
(a) More multi-hazard, risk-informed solutions are in place to tackle poverty through 
sustainable natural resource management;
(b) Green house gas emissions of identified sectors are well-managed;
(c) Data and evidence-based analysis and tools enable gender-sensitive, risk-informed 
disaster preparedness and response;
(d) Bhutan capitalizes on access to green finance; national policies increasingly foster 
innovative financing; and nature-based solutions lead to entrepreneurship and sustainable 
agricultural livelihoods.
24. Noting the vulnerability of Bhutan communities and economy to climate change, UNDP 
will help tackle poverty by reducing disruptions to market access and support integrated 
landscape management, including by operationalizing biological corridors, improving water 
and soil management, advancing sustainable forest management, and climate-proof critical 
infrastructures. UNDP will help improve the resilience and quality of life for farmers, 
particularly women, through smart agricultural approaches, with skills training to strengthen 
nature-based productive capacities, and support the climate resilience of health systems. 
Human-wildlife conflict solutions will be tested and scaled through a ‘safe systems’ approach. 
Women’s role in climate action will be supported with enhanced research and data, including 
on gender-based violence, while farmers’ use of climate data to improve crop cycles will 
advance. 
25. UNDP will help establish the country’s medium-to-long-term adaptation approach, 
including on water as a key rural and urban problem, while supporting the elaboration and 
implementation of the nationally determined contribution for the Paris Climate Agreement. 
UNDP will support the implementation of low-emission strategies and mitigation actions for 
industry, human settlements, energy efficiency, waste and transport – including by stimulating 
market mechanisms and regulatory frameworks to incentivize a behaviour shift towards 
greener vehicles and to improve the air quality of urban life. 
26. In keeping with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction,74 UNDP will 
strengthen coordination and capacities for effective, evidence-based disaster-risk 
management, including through improved zonation, seismic and climate risk assessments , and 
vulnerability mapping to risk-inform planning and investment decisions (see also outcome 1). 
In collaboration with partners, UNDP will support preparedness through contingency 
planning.
27. UNDP will assist the country’s smooth transition from least developed country status with 
graduation support measures, including on economic diversification, job creation, 
development finance, and national and subnational capacity development. With low gross 
national happiness levels among youth75 and youth unemployment a national priority, UNDP 
will enhance entrepreneurialism and civic engagement through innovative approaches and 
partnerships. UNDP will invest in job and livelihood prospects for youth in line with the 
national priority sector lending scheme, including in agriculture and ecotourism. 
28. UNDP will help maximize the timely access of Bhutan to technology and green financing, 
including through the Green Climate Fund, the Global Environment Facility, the Nationally 
Appropriate Mitigation Actions Facility and the Least Developed Country Fund. Once 
secured, UNDP will help leverage grants to de-risk additional private and public investment.
UNDP will support capacity development towards direct access, generating domestic finance,
and increasing the efficiency of investments. 
29. On South-South cooperation, Bhutan will benefit from and contribute to the experiences 
of other countries on ecotourism, green transport, and financing solutions for biodiversity and 
climate change, to encourage the broader uptake of innovative financing. Bhutan will share its 
climate adaptation experience – including in landslide mitigation and establishing early 
warning systems – with neighbours facing similar challenges, and draw on others’ experiences 
in using drone technology to monitor risks in remote locations. UNDP will facilitate 
relationship building on earthquake preparedness.
 30. The Gross National Happiness Commission Secretariat, the National Environment 
Commission Secretariat, the National Commission for Women and Children, the ministries of 
Agriculture and Forests, Works and Human Settlement, Economic Affairs, Information and 
Communications, Home and Cultural Affairs, as well as local governments, the Royal 
Monetary Authority, the Tourism Council, Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and other 
private and financial sector partners will be counterparts in this outcome. UNDP will work 
closely with the World Wildlife Fund as a partner of Bhutan for Life, ensure complementarity 
with international finance institutions, and collaborate with partners, including Germany,
Norway, the United States and the European Commission through multilateral windows. 
UNDP will work with the Royal University of Bhutan, the Information Technology Park, the 
media, and civil society, including on entrepreneurialism and climate data.
III. Programme and risk management 
31. The programme was prepared in consultation with the Royal Government, United Nations
organizations, development partners, the private sector and civil society organizations. It will 
be nationally executed. 
32. In consultation with UNDP, the Government will select an implementing partner for each 
project guided by an assessment of their capacity to manage funds and ensure the effective and 
efficient delivery of results. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in 
collaboration with other United Nations organizations to assess and manage financial risks. 
The implementation modality for each project – national implementation, national 
implementation with UNDP support, or direct implementation – will be guided by government
requirements and the harmonized approach to cash transfer assessment, and selected to 
maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of UNDP contributions to results. Direct 
implementation will be used where the Government requests access to UNDP systems, 
processes and technical expertise and will finance the intervention. In all cases, the 
implementation modality will be grounded in strong national ownership. In accordance with 
Executive Board decision 2013/9, all direct costs associated with project implementation will 
be charged to the concerned projects.
33. The programme outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary 
unit of accountability to the Executive Board. The accountabilities of managers are prescribed 
in UNDP programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control 
framework. In line with United Nations reform, UNDP76 will provide technical and advisory 
services to lead system-wide planning, risk management, financing for development, and 
integration of the Sustainable Development Goals. UNDP will lead common back-office 
support, as articulated in the business operations strategy of the UNSDPF, based on a fee-forservice model.
34. The programme is informed by recommendations of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of 
the Third International Conference on Financing for Development and the development 
finance assessment of Bhutan.
77 The Royal Government faces a sizeable funding gap to realize 
its Twelfth Plan objectives due to hydropower delays. However, Bhutan is already a middleincome country with a relatively low aid dependency ratio, notwithstanding its unique bilateral 
relationship with India, therefore negative impacts on aid inflow due to least developed 
country graduation may be limited.
78
35. The programme’s level of ambition will depend on resource mobilization efforts with the 
Royal Government, including on whether UNDP is identified to assist Bhutan in accessing 
Green Climate Fund and Global Environment Facility financing. As part of a support package 
on graduation, UNDP will explore an integrated approach to financing for development, 
leveraging green financing to deliver results for the Goals across outcome areas – such as on 
gender-based violence and environmental law – while exploring innovative financing 
opportunities to enhance domestic resources. As a contingency plan for outcome 1, UNDP 
will invest in civil society strengthening for vulnerable groups as part of an exit strategy in the 
 
76 United Nations document A/72/124-E/2018/3.DP/DCP/BTN/2
governance area.
36. The UNDP country programme is designed to de-risk current and future investments and 
enhance the sustainability of results. Risk from changes in policy direction, natural disasters 
and implementation capacity challenges will be monitored and mitigated. UNDP will enhance 
its harmonized approach to cast transfers and invest in strengthening institutional delivery and 
risk-management capacities. The theory of change will be monitored and adapted periodically. 
UNDP will work through a common business continuity plan for the uninterrupted delivery of 
critical programmes in an emergency.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
37. UNDP will follow a stringent monitoring and evaluation strategy, in line with the 2017 
evaluation and ‘satisfactory’ audit recommendations. As a delivering-as-one country, and in 
the context of United Nations reform, this will include an increasingly harmonized approach 
to planning, quality assurance, monitoring, evaluating and reporting. Common indicators are 
adopted where feasible, drawing on the national qualitative gross national happiness survey. 
Drawing on evaluation recommendations, the programme will retain a reduced number of 
indicators and improve the use of online monitoring systems. The UNDP gender marker will 
be used to ensure that 15 per cent of programme expenditures demonstrate substantive gender 
contributions. 
38. To help implement the national data ecosystem79 recommendations, the country 
programme will enhance data disaggregation in target areas, including on climate-gender and 
hydromet data,
80 develop national capacity for effective data use and monitoring of the Twelfth 
Plan and the Goals, including investing in a real-time monitoring dashboard, and establish 
systems to generation, document and share the climate adaptation story of Bhutan. UNDP will 
encourage innovative means of monitoring, capitalizing on the country’s high usage of smart 
phones and social media in designing participation and communication approaches. The cost 
of data collection, monitoring, assurance and communications will be met through an 
allocation of at least 3 per cent of the programme budget.
 Annex. Results and resources framework for Bhutan (2019-2023)
NATIONAL PRIORITIES: 13: Democracy and decentralization strengthened; 16: Justice services and institutions strengthened; 10: Gender equality promoted, women and girls 
empowered.
Outcome 1: (UNSDPF Outcome 3): By 2023, Government institutions provide equal opportunities for all, and women and vulnerable groups hold leaders accountable.
UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: (1) Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions; and (2) Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable 
development.
UNSDPF outcome 
indicators,
baselines and targets
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, 
baselines targets)
Major partners/
partnerships
Indicative resources 
by outcome (in 
thousands of United 
States dollars)
3.1. Gross national happiness 
index on good governance 
Baseline: (2015) 0.077
Target: at least maintain 
baseline
(IRRF 2.5; 2.6)
3.2. Gender inequality index 
Baseline: (2016) 0.477, rank 
110
Target: 0.300 to 0.400
(IRRF 2.2)
3.3. National integrity score
Baseline: (2017) 7.89
Target: 8.5
(IRRF 1.4)
3.4. Citizens’ confidence in 
judicial services
Baseline: (2017) 3.2
Target: at least maintain 
baseline 
(IRRF 2.6)
3.5. Percentage women 10-75 
who report experiencing 
violence in their lifetime, by 
partner and non-partner
Gross national 
happiness survey, 
five years
Human 
Development 
Report, UNDP,
Annually. 
National integrity 
assessment, AntiCorruption 
Commission, three 
to four years.
Bhutan living 
standards survey,
National Statistics 
Bureau, five years.
National health 
survey, Ministry of 
OUTPUT 3.1. National and local government capacity to 
integrate, monitor and report on the Sustainable Development 
Goals and other international agreements is improved.
3.1.1. Number of national, local governments plans and budgets 
with the Goals integrated, and disaggregated data in place for 
monitoring.
Baseline: 1 (national) 
Target: At least 3
Source: Gross National Happiness Commission Secretariat
(IRRF 1.1.1.1/ 3.1.2.1.1) 
3.1.2. Policies/strategies on decentralization and urbanization in 
place, including gender and disability analysis.
Baseline: 2 (no gender and disability analysis)
Target: At least 5 (3 with gender and disability analysis)
Source: GNHC 
(IRRF 1.2.1)
OUTPUT 3.2. The enabling environment for civil society to 
advance opportunities for, and increase resilience of, targeted 
vulnerable groups is improved.
3.2.1. Number of civil society organizations enabled to advance 
opportunities for target groups, and increase resilience of women, 
youth, vulnerable groups.
Baseline: 0
Target: 10
Source: UNDP projects
United Nations
organizations
Gross National 
Happiness 
Commission 
Secretariat, National 
Commission for 
Women and Children
(NCWC), 
justice sector, 
Parliament, 
National Statistics 
Bureau, 
Government 
Performance and 
Monitoring Division,
Department for Local 
Government,
civil society,
academia
Regular: 2.039 
Other: 1.287 DP/DCP/BTN/2
Baseline (2012)
Partner violence
Physical: 6.1%
Sexual: 2.1%
Psychological: 3.2%
Non-partner violence
Physical: 6.3%
Sexual: 0.9%
Psychological: 3.5%
Target: tbc
Partner violence
Physical: 
Sexual
Psychological
Non-partner violence
Physical: 
Sexual: 
Psychological: 
(IRRF1.8; 1.6.2)
Health (timeline 
TBC) 3.2.2. Evidence-based integrated framework in place to prevent and 
respond to gender-based violence.
Baseline: Some policy and legislation in place
Target: Integrated framework in place and being implemented
Source: NCWC
(IRRF 1.6.2.2/ 2.6.1.1)
OUTPUT 3.3. Parliament and justice sector capacities and 
approaches are strengthened with increased inclusion, 
transparency and accountability.
3.3.1. Parliament’s capacity to undertake inclusive, effective, 
accountable law-making, oversight and representation is improved.
Baseline: Basic capacities
Target: Improved capacities
Source: Parliament annual reports
(IRRF 2.2.2.3)
3.3.2. Rule of law and justice system strengthened supporting 
fulfilment of nationally and internationally ratified human rights 
obligations.
Baseline: Draft national key result area on access to justice in place
Target: National key result area implemented.
Source: OAG, GNHC 
(IRRF 2.2.2.3)
3.3.3. Number of laws reviewed and proposed for harmonization 
with new International. Conventions, covenants, treaties, protocols, 
agreements entered into by Bhutan.
Baseline: (2017) 9
Target: 13
Source: Parliament
(IRRF 2.2.3.1)
3.3.4. A policy/legal framework/strategy on legal aid in place and 
implemented.
Baseline: 0 (2017)
Target: 1
Source: OAGNATIONAL PRIORITIES: 2. Economic diversity and productivity enhanced; 3. Poverty eradicated and inequality reduced; 5. Healthy ecosystem services maintained; 6. Carbon 
neutral, climate and disaster resilient development enhanced.
Outcome 2: (UNSDPF Outcome 4): By 2023, Bhutan’s vulnerable communities and its economy are more resilient to climate-induced and other disasters and biodiversity loss.
UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: (1) Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions; and (2) Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable 
development.
4.1. Gross national happiness 
index on ecological diversity 
and resilience
Baseline: (2015) 0.094 
Target: at least maintain 
baseline
(IRRF 2.9)
4.2. Gross national happiness
index on living standards 
Baseline: (2015) 0.083 
Target: tbd
(IRRF1.2)
4.3. Proportion of population 
living below the national 
poverty line by sex, 
population group 
(rural/urban)
Baseline: (2017) 8.2%
Target: 5%
(IRRF 1.1.a)
4.4. Carbon sink capacity 
Baseline: (2016) total forest 
coverage 71 per cent
Target: maintained at/above 
60 per cent
(IRRF 2.10)
Gross national 
happiness survey, 
five years
Gross national 
happiness survey, 
five years
Bhutan living 
standards survey, 
five years
Communications to 
United Nations 
Framework 
Convention on 
Climate Change 
OUTPUT 4.1. Inclusive, multi-hazard and risk-informed 
systems and capacities in place to tackle poverty through the 
sustainable management of natural resources.
4.1.1. Number of climate-risk informed biological corridors 
operationalized.
Baseline: 0 
Target: 4
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests
(IRRF 1.4.1.2)
4.1.2. Number of hectares of forest area brought under participatory 
sustainable management regime.
Baseline: 357,915 
Target: 377,186
Source: UNDP projects
(IRRF 1.4.1.2)
4.1.3. Kilometres of physical assets made more resilient to climate 
variability and change. 
Baseline: Irrigation: 153
Target: Irrigation: 326 
Baseline: Access road: 0
Target: Access road: 51 
Source: UNDP projects 
4.1.4. Number of men and women benefiting from improved 
enabling environment for decent work/livelihoods based on natural 
resource management/climate resilience.
Baseline: 0
Target: 96,400 (50 per cent women) from sustainable natural 
resource management
Baseline: 0
Target: 25,826 (50 per cent women) from climate resilient 
infrastructure.
Source: UNDP 
United Nations
organizations
GNHC,
Ministry of (Agriculture 
and Forests, Foreign 
Affairs, Finance, Works 
and Human 
Settlements, Economic 
Affairs, Information 
and Communications),
NCWC, Royal 
Monetary Authority,
Information 
Technology Park, 
subnational 
governments, 
Tourism Council, 
Chamber of Industry 
and Commerce, Royal 
University, private 
sector, civil society, 
media.
Regular: 0.767 
Other: 52.071DP/DCP/BTN/2
(IRRF 1.1.2.2)
OUTPUT 4.2. National policies foster innovative financing, 
inclusive business, and improved livelihoods through climate 
resilient/nature-based solutions.
4.2.1. Number of financing solutions applied to leverage 
innovative, diversified sources of financing for development.
Baseline: 2
Target: 7
Source: UNDP 
(IRRF 1.2.2.1)
4.2.2. Number of enterprises created and/or owned by women and 
youth generating sustainable livelihoods.
Baseline: 1
Target: 8
Owned by women: 50 per cent
Owned by youth: 50 per cent
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, Tourism Council.
(IRRF 1.4.1.1.)
4.2.3. Improved enabling environment for decent work and 
livelihoods.
Baseline: 5 draft policies/mechanisms in place/introduced
Target: 5 under implementation.
Source: GNHC
(IRRF 1.1.2.1)
OUTPUT 4.3. Greenhouse gas emissions managed in select 
sectors. 
4.3.1. Acres of agriculture land brought under sustainable and 
climate resilient management practices 
Baseline: (2016)
a) Organic farming: 23,530
b) Sustainable land management: 7,231
Target:
a) 23,930
b) 12,351
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests
(IRRF 1.4.1.2)4.3.2. Number of facilities to safely manage solid waste to reduce 
emissions.
Baseline: 1
Target: 5
Source: UNDP 
(IRRF 2.1.1.1)
4.3.3. Zero/low emission vehicles uptake.
Baseline: 99
Target: 300
Source: Ministry of Information and Communications
(IRRF 2.1.1.1/2)
OUTPUT 4.4. Data-driven, evidence-based, gender-responsive 
tools, mechanisms and solutions applied for multi-hazard 
preparedness and risk reduction.
4.4.1. Sex and disability-disaggregated data and evidence on 
climate change and natural hazard risks generated, analysed, and 
applied.
Baseline: Not available 
Target: Available, applied
Source: UNDP 
(IRRF 1.3.1.1/2)
4.4.2. Evidence-based medium to long-term gender-responsive 
national adaptation plan for climate change available for 
implementation.
Baseline: Short-term adaptation options available and implemented 
Target: National adaptation plan available and financing options in 
place 
Source: National Environment Commission
(IRRF 2.3.1.1)
4.4.4. Proportion of farmers who have access to multi-hazard 
advisory services for agriculture planning/decision-making.
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1/3 of all farmers in target districts (50 per cent women)
Source: UNDP
4.4.5. Number of human-wildlife conflict management solutions 
tested and upscaled. 
Baseline: 2DP/DCP/BTN/2
Target: 4
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests 
4.4.6. United Nations–Government disaster preparedness and 
contingency plan in place and tested.
Baseline: Draft plan
Target: At least 1 simulation.
Source: United Nations
(IRRF 1.3.1.2)