File Name: BWA-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Botswana
Country Code: BWA
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 August to 2 September 2021
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
29 June 2021
Original: English
2108849X (E) 160721
Second regular session 2021
30 August to 2 September 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Botswana (2022–2026)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
Annex
Results and resources framework for Botswana (2022-2026)..................................................... 8I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Botswana has made impressive gains in its economic growth, in line with its ambition to 
become a high-income country with an export-led and knowledge-based economy, as espoused by 
its Vision 2036 and National Development Plan 11 (NDP11). Public expenditure, however, 
accounts for 35.7 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP)
1
and attempts to diversify the 
economy have shown moderate results. The private sector has yet to take its rightful place as the 
engine of growth.2 The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has presented a serious blow to the 
economy and induced a contraction in domestic output of 8.9 per cent in 2020.
3 The informal 
sector, primarily women-owned businesses, was particularly hard-hit, yet remains the ‘missing 
middle’ in the policy space.4
2. Botswana continues to struggle with high levels of poverty and inequality. The top 1 per cent 
of earners account for 22.6 per cent of gross national income (GNI),5 making Botswana the 
seventh most unequal country in the world according to the Human Development Report 2019.
6
Significant geographic variations are evident, with rural districts (Kweneng West, Ghanzi and 
Ngamiland West) left behind.7,8 Comprising 70 per cent of the population, youth offer a real 
opportunity. However, their lack of skills, experience and limited job opportunities contribute to 
high unemployment (32.4 per cent)
9
and further loss of potential.10
3. While Botswana has earned a reputation as a beacon of good governance, the global rankings 
mask underlying issues, with a year-on-year deterioration since 2012.11 The most significant 
warning signals relate to indicators of safety and rule of law, participation and human rights. 
Botswana lags on gender equality and ranks 163 out of 188 countries in Inter-Parliamentary
Union ratings, with only 10.8 per cent female parliamentarians.
12,13
4. The downward trend in safety and rule of law became apparent during the COVID-19 crisis 
as gender-based violence emerged as a second pandemic ravaging the nation with 272 women 
seeking refuge in emergency shelters during the three-month lockdown in 2020.14 Representing 
4.2 per cent of the population, people with disabilities are 50 per cent more likely to experience
violence (including gender-based violence).15 Inequalities in physical and legal security are driven 
mainly by differences in exposure to violence, inadequate protection, inequalities in access to 
justice, and lack of recognition and awareness of human rights.
5. While individuals are free to form civil society organizations, Botswana does not have a 
vibrant civic space. Access to data and information remains a significant challenge, with limited 
uptake of open data platforms or digital tools. Only 88 out of the country’s 209 national
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) indicators have baselines, making it impossible to monitor 
progress or uphold accountability.
1 Available at Statista (https://www.statista.com/statistics).
2
International Trade Centre, 2019.
3 Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, 2020.
4 Available at UNDP (bw.undp.org).
5 Available at United Nations University UNU-WIDER (www.wider.unu.edu).
6 Human Development Report 2019 (http://hdr.undp.org). 
7 Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, 2020.
8
Ibid. 
9 Statistics Botswana, 2020.
10 Nthomang, K., and Diraditsile, K., 2016.
11 Available at the Mo Ibrahim Foundation (https://mo.ibrahim.foundation).
12 Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis (available at https://media.africaportal.org).
13 Inter-Parliamentary Union (available at data.ipu.org).
14 Ministry of Defence, Justice and Security, 2021.
15 ALIGHT, 2018.DP/DCP/BWA/3
6. Climate change, drought, land degradation and habitat loss all pose a significant risk to the 
country’s resilience and have a compounding effect on inequality as rural populations and women
are harder hit. Heavily reliant on fuel and coal-based energy, the country is exploring options for
competitive and sustainable energy. By deploying solar technology, Botswana could meet its 
current electricity demand using less than 1 per cent of its land area.
16
7. Vision 2036 “Achieving Prosperity for All”, its NDP11 and now, COVID-19 economic 
recovery and transformation plan and digital transformation strategy, supported by UNDP, 
uniquely position the country office as a key partner to support the transformation agenda.
8. UNDP strategic engagement is an integral part of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), 2022-2026, developed in full alignment with 
the national development and transformation priorities. UNDP supported UNSDCF development
through the common country analysis and its lead role and strategic foresight in co-creating
outcomes in collaboration with a broad range of stakeholders. UNDP plays a leading role, in 
participation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the 
International Labour Organization (ILO), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the 
World Bank in transforming the national social protection system. Tackling gender-based 
violence and engaging youth and women in decision-making are cross-cutting priorities. UNDP 
will continue its leadership in this space and strengthen its collaboration with UNICEF and 
UNFPA, in particular. Similarly, UNDP leads engagement in the recovery and transformation of 
the informal and private sectors. With strengthened focus on climate change adaptation and 
mitigation, sustainable livelihoods and land management, FAO will continue to be a crucial 
partner. Therefore, given its strategic position and capacities in Botswana, UNDP will continue to 
deliver on its role as an integrator and convenor to facilitate joint programming and collaboration 
across the United Nations system and development partners. 
9. The guiding principle and intent of the country programme document (CPD) theory of change 
is to achieve transformational change for a green, just, prosperous Botswana. The impact of 
COVID-19 has shown that twenty-first century challenges are increasingly complex, 
interconnected and unpredictable. People are engaging with information, institutions and society
in new and increasingly digital ways, and institutions are having to adapt with increasing speed.
The CPD has identified key domains of change around climate change and sustainable resource 
management; inequality, corruption and accountability; and unemployment, economic 
diversification and digital innovation. These domains are addressed through levers of change,
such as women and youth as rights-holders; communities, the private sector and the informal 
sector as transformational agents; and institutions as duty-bearers, each leveraging UNDP 
capacity to deliver through innovative and agile partnerships for a green, just, prosperous 
Botswana. The causes and effects within the theory of change are understood from a complex 
systems perspective and the outcomes of internal sensemaking, root cause analysis, and a series of 
external strategic foresight consultations.
10. The theory of change is based on the principle of ‘punctuated equilibrium’,17 within which a 
number of capabilities are required: developing new anticipatory systems approaches, becoming 
designers and facilitators of system transformation, which involves expanding spheres of 
collaboration and partnership, and moving past siloed, linear problem-solving approaches. 
11. UNDP has strong comparative and collaborative advantages to complement United Nations 
development system efforts. First, its value proposition is anchored in its mandate as a lead 
development organization globally through its signature and innovative development solutions 
and through its repositioned offer for Africa. Second, UNDP builds on its achievements from the 
past CPD, notably strong leadership in economic diversification and inclusive growth, 
environment and climate change, and the protection of human rights, rule of law and 
empowerment of women and youth. Through the COVID-19 response, opportunities to expand 
16 Botswana’s Third National Communication to the United Nations Framework on Climate Change, October 2019.
17 Punctuated equilibrium in social theory.the support to the private sector and entrepreneurship, institutional transformation and digital 
solutions have come to the fore. Third, UNDP leverages its corporate global policy network to 
provide technical and innovation expertise. Fourth, UNDP will continue to be the support
platform, convenor and integrator of partners across United Nations system, government, the 
private sector, academia and civil society in pursuit of the national transformation agenda.
12. UNDP will continue building on its support to the national digital strategy, the Ministry of 
Local Government and Rural Development transformation strategy and decentralization policy, 
the South-South and triangular cooperation strategy, the Supplier Development Programme, the 
revised economic diversification drive strategy, the climate change policy, the national human 
rights strategy, the national youth policy revision, the ongoing support to the COVID-19 private 
sector and informal sector recovery plans, the reform of the social protection system, and the 
empowerment of youth and citizens. 
13. Building on the recommendations of the midterm review and independent country 
programme review, the programme will emphasize more downstream engagement to strengthen 
development outcomes, bolster its gender and human rights responsiveness, and broaden its 
partnerships and innovation to achieve impact at scale. The country office will establish regular 
forums for stakeholders and influencers to solicit feedback on CPD implementation, approach and 
priorities to facilitate anticipatory and agile decision-making, ensuring its investments are directed 
at core development challenges with transformational outcomes as envisaged. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
14. Building on the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, and partnership strategy of the Regional 
Bureau for Africa, UNDP will establish a vibrant network of influencers to shape programming
and apply human rights-based approaches, digitalization, innovation, anticipatory decisionmaking, and flexible risk management. UNDP will leverage three key enablers: (a) the UNDP 
Global Policy Network and the Strategy and Innovation (SIU) to build capacities for innovative 
solutions; (b) the UNDP Digital Team to support digitalization and the digital strategy; and (c)
establishment of collaborative platforms across government, the private sector and civil society to 
deploy portfolio approaches, including leveraging the Joint SDG Fund and programme to support 
the national monitoring and evaluation system. In this way it becomes possible to deliver and 
leverage innovative and agile partnerships, and to implement the overall vision for Botswana to be 
a green, just and prosperous country.
A green Botswana
15. The success of Vision 2036 and the 2030 Agenda is largely dependent on natural resources,
and thereby robust environmental governance and management and enabling equal participation 
by women and men, young and old. Botswana is endowed with expansive wetlands, unspoilt 
wildernesses and an abundance of wildlife, all at risk if intentional efforts are not made to protect 
and sustainably utilize them.
16. To deliver on UNSDCF outcome 3, therefore, UNDP will strengthen collaborative 
partnerships with other United Nations organizations such as the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) and FAO as well as civil society to invest in sustainable management and 
effective utilization of ecosystems and biodiversity with integrated management plans for 
protected areas and cross-border river basins that can leverage innovative financing and reduce 
human-wildlife conflicts. Improvements in the management of natural capital and communal 
lands will in turn increase their value and have a positive impact on the quality of life and 
resilience of affected communities. 
17. UNDP will support local communities’ capabilities to integrate permaculture and 
agroecology principles and practices as well as other research-based innovations to increase 
resilience and reverse trends in poor natural resource use, restoring ecosystem goods and services. 
UNDP will also partner with local communities, research institutions, government and civil DP/DCP/BWA/3
society to develop early warning systems, leveraging digital solutions and enabling real-time open 
access to information for improved risk management planning and adaptation.
18. UNDP will build on its current initiatives through several innovative strategies to restore and 
sustainably manage agricultural landscapes and rangelands to expand and scale up the diversity 
and volume of food production. Across its portfolios, UNDP will identify opportunities for 
climate finance and invest in a green economy, leveraging businesses and value chains with the 
potential to create jobs for women and youth and capitalizing on new technologies and 
opportunities for renewable energy, reduction in waste, greenhouse gas emissions and 
wastewater/effluent discharges. Working across the country office’s portfolios will not only 
support a greener economy and job creation but also substantially improve quality of life and 
overall prosperity of the country and its people.
A just Botswana
19. Recognizing the complexity of the interconnected society that has emerged, the country’s 
formal, procedural and linear mechanisms and governance institutions do not function well 
enough to support accountability, inclusion and responsiveness. To deliver on UNSDCF outcomes 
1 and 5, UNDP will engage across the complexity of governance systems and support the actors 
and levers within those systems that can ultimately deliver on the future vision of Botswana in 
which tolerance, inclusion, equality, and accountability are at the core. 
20. Access to information and a strong, independent civil society and media enable an educated 
and informed public as rights holders. An educated and informed public can participate civically 
and politically and hold those they voted for accountable. Therefore, UNDP will expand its 
current initiatives and focus on advocacy and building capacity to increase the participation of 
women, young people, people with disabilities and members of rural communities in decision
making at all levels and ensure transparent and accountable leadership. UNDP will prioritize 
investing in digital platforms for women and youth to ideate, design and scale local solutions and 
enable access to finance for development, political and civic engagement.
18
21. A particular focus will be on strengthening institutions to be more efficient and effective as 
duty bearers. Checks and balances of power are needed to reduce corruption and increase trust and 
confidence in public institutions. UNDP will support the state to build capacity, accountability and 
responsive leadership across integrity institutions, including the National Human Rights 
Institution, and will support the decentralization and public reform processes.
22. UNDP will also work to strengthen equal access to justice for all, building on gains made 
during the COVID-19 response. This work will include building the institutional capacity of 
courts and the justice sector and the human resource capacity of judicial officers. Leveraging 
digital solutions to enhance case management and enable virtual court hearings will be key. Legal 
rights and protections, especially of the most vulnerable members of society and victims of 
gender-based violence will be strengthened through legal reforms, outreach and access to 
information and strengthened enforcement.
23. Diverse partnerships, beyond government institutions, with civil society, media, research and 
development institutions, the Office for the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(OHCHR), UNFPA, UNICEF, the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the 
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) will 
be critical to the success of a rights-based portfolio approach to strengthening state-society 
relations in delivering on UNSDCF outcomes 1 and 5 and the Vision 2036 goal to achieve
prosperity for all based on a tolerant, inclusive society led by progressive governance.
18 Particularly the scaling up of #YouthConnekt.A prosperous Botswana
24. Across its portfolios, UNDP will accompany the national vision of economic recovery and 
transformation with a focus on promoting a strengthened, dynamic private sector composed of 
micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs). To achieve UNSDCF outcome 4, active 
leadership and participation of youth, women, people with disabilities and other marginalized 
groups will be key in creating socially inclusive, digitally enabled and environmentally 
sustainable MSMEs. Becoming drivers of the economy, the private sector, mainly in labourintensive and green sectors, will increase domestically produced goods and services and diversify 
export products and services through expanded markets. Leveraging international trade 
agreements and opportunities for South-South and triangular cooperation, UNDP will continue 
supporting institutions to enhance the business, investment and trade-enabling environment.
Youth and gender-responsive actions focused on skills through technical and vocational training, 
digital solutions and knowledge creation will further support the private sector, transforming
Botswana into a diversified, export-led knowledge economy. 
25. Building on its COVID-19 response, UNDP will expand its partnerships with private and 
informal sector actors, national and international banks and relevant state and regional institutions 
to deliver on the collective vision. Furthermore, UNDP will deepen partnerships with ILO, the 
International Trade Centre (ITC), the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD), the World Economic Forum (WEF) and the World Trade Organization (WTO) to 
articulate robust frameworks for the entire ecosystem. Furthermore, principles of green growth, 
employment and decent work, gender equality and empowerment, digital economy and access to 
finance will inform the design of UNDP strategic interventions to address current risks of rising 
inequality, economic marginalization and environmental degradation that reduce the country’s 
resilience to future shocks. 
III. Programme and risk management
26. This CPD outlines UNDP contributions to national results and is the primary unit of 
accountability to the Executive Board for alignment of results and resources. The accountabilities 
of managers at the country office are prescribed in the UNDP programme and operations policies 
and procedures and the internal control framework.
27. The programme will be nationally executed and implemented through mutually agreed 
modalities based on the most efficient and cost-effective manner. High-level national ownership 
and participation in governance and coordination mechanisms will be ensured from the 
programme’s inception. In cases where national execution is not possible, the modality may be 
replaced by direct execution to enable effective delivery of results and in response to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with 
other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications 
for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
28. The country programme will be coordinated and guided by the UNSDCF steering committee. 
Furthermore, programme steering committees will be established within UNDP with the 
participation of key government, civil society, private sector and other relevant partners. 
29. The ‘punctuated equilibrium’ theory of change posits that slow or continuous change (such as 
climate change impacts) alternates in cycles with rapid, discontinuous or disruptive change (such 
as a pandemic and its outfall). To identify such risks and shocks and be better placed to address 
them, UNDP will invest in building capabilities for systems thinking and portfolio approaches, 
abstraction and ambiguity management, real-time qualitative and quantitative data analysis, 
horizon-scanning and pattern detection to anticipate shocks and address trends. 
30. The following risks and mitigation measures are identified.DP/DCP/BWA/3
31. Corruption. UNDP will support digitalizing systems and processes to improve efficiency, 
transparency and accountability. Furthermore, UNDP will support public access to data and public 
education on the belief that empowered citizens can make informed decisions. 
32. Inequalities. UNDP must apply an inequality lens to its analysis, design and interventions to 
reduce the risk of investments in transformational change inadvertently widening these 
inequalities. UNDP will draw on regional experts and its Global Policy Network for strategic and 
technical guidance. Consistent application of the UNDP gender marker and the social and 
environmental standards and accountability mechanism will be important.
33. Mindset shift and cultural change sensitivities. The transformative change outlined in this 
CPD is bold. UNDP must be sensitive and cognizant of this in its design and roll-out of its 
portfolio, ensuring the participation of all through co-creation, providing a platform for dialogue 
and local leadership and identifying and enabling the signals and levers of change. 
34. Complexity of system transformation. To stay relevant, UNDP needs to build capabilities for 
system transformations, disruptions and institutional renewals, investing in partnerships and 
platforms that can yield data and insights which enable actors to explore the nature of future
challenges and deliver collective solutions.
35. COVID-19 pandemic. UNDP has adopted a flexible and agile approach, leveraging digital 
solutions, ways of working and systems to deliver results. Anticipatory decision-making, regular 
reviews and broadened partnerships accompanied by capacity development will strengthen 
resilience within the programme and minimize negative shocks. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
36. Results and value for money are key aspects of UNDP support to the Government and other 
national partners. UNDP will pay particular attention to the monitoring and evaluation of this 
programme, in line with the UNSDCF, Vision 2036, NDP11 and the SDGs. High-level 
consultations and dialogues will be organized biannually as part of the UNSDCF process to 
review programme effectiveness and efficiency. The UNSDCF and UNDP results frameworks
will serve as key measuring instruments to facilitate continuous tracking, assessment and 
reporting of results.
37. The country office will pursue a research agenda to ensure that information collected in the 
field is packaged into accessible, disaggregated and actionable data and knowledge resources. 
This includes conducting baseline studies to close data gaps and supporting open data portals and 
real-time data collection tools to strengthen accountability and transparency in the public domain.
Jointly with other United Nations organizations, UNDP will support Statistics Botswana to 
establish a national, digital monitoring and evaluation system and at least three ministries with 
ministerial monitoring and evaluation systems to address identified weaknesses in the 
implementation of national policies and plans. 
38. Performance indicators have been derived from the national performance measurement 
frameworks and SDG domesticated indicator framework to promote national ownership, 
coherence and synergies in reporting results. UNDP will use its gender marker to track 
programme contributions to specific gender and women’s empowerment achievements. 
39. At least 5 per cent of the programme budget will be allocated to the evaluation plan. At 
outcome level, monitoring and evaluation and joint reviews will be undertaken with other United 
Nations organizations and the Government through agreed accountability and coordination 
platforms. More frequent reviews will be done at programme level. As part of the evaluation plan, 
UNDP will conduct a midterm evaluation and a final review following the latest evaluation 
guidelines. Annex. Results and resources framework for Botswana (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2036 Pillar 2– Human and social development and Governance, peace and security.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: By 2026, gender inequality is reduced, and women and girls are empowered to access their human rights and 
participate and benefit from inclusive development.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
(including indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS/PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME 
(United States 
dollars)
PEOPLE
Indicator 1.1. Whether or 
not legal frameworks are in 
place to promote, enforce 
and monitor equality and 
non-discrimination on the 
basis of sex.
Baseline: No 
Target: Yes
Indicator 1.2. Proportion of 
women in managerial 
positions (public sector).
Baseline (2016): 34%
Target: 50%
Data source: Ombudsman Office, 
Land Tribunal, Gender Affairs 
reports
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Courts of law, 
UNDP
Data source: Labour Force 
Survey reports
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Directorate of 
Public Service Management 
Reports, Stats Botswana
Output 1.2. More responsive, inclusive, participatory, and 
representative decision-making enabled at all levels (Goal 16.7)
Indicator 1.2.1. (IRRF 2.2): Proportion of seats held by women and 
youth in (a) national parliament; (b) local government
(a)
Baseline (2021): 11% (women), 1.6% (youth)
Target (2026): (a) 30% (women), 10% (youth)
Data source: Parliament, IEC 
Frequency: Every 5 years
(b)
Baseline (2021): 19% (women), 9.5% (youth)
Target (2026): (b) 30% (women), 20% (youth)
Data source: MLGRD, IEC 
Frequency: Every 5 years
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of incumbent and aspirant women, youth
and persons-with-disabilities public office holders with the 
requisite knowledge and skills to effectively participate in political
decision-making at national parliament and local government 
levels.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 12,500 (women), 12,500 (youth) 750 (persons with 
disabilities)
Data source: UNDP, MNIGA, MYSC, IEC 
Frequency: Annual 
Indicator 1.2.3. Number of public sector/ministries with genderresponsive budgeting systems in place
Baseline (2021): 0
Government: Ministry of Presidential Affairs, 
Governance and Public Administration (MOPAGPA), 
Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development 
(MLGRD), Ministry of Youth (MYSC), Ministry of 
National Immigration and Gender Affairs (MNIGA), 
Independent Election Commission (IEC), #SmartBots
Civil society organizations (CSOs): BOCONGO, 
BOCOBONET
Private sector: Business Botswana
United Nations and others: Resident Coordinator 
Office, OHCHR, UNICEF, UN-Women
Regular:
$73,000
Other:
$1,927,000DP/DCP/BWA/3
Target (2026): 10
Data source: Line ministries 
Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2036 Pillar 3 – Sustainable environment.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 3: By 2026, Botswana sustainably uses and actively manages its diverse natural resources, improves food security 
and effectively addresses climate change vulnerability/
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
PLANET
Indicator 3.1. Percentage of 
contribution of renewable 
energy to total energy 
consumption 
Baseline (2016): 0.7%
Target: 12%
Indicator 2.1.1. Level of 
emissions from greenhouse 
gases
Baseline (2010): 81307 Gg 
of CO2eq
Target: 7346 Gg of CO2eq
Data source: Department of 
Energy progress reports, Statistics
Botswana reports
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Department of 
Energy 
Data source: MENT reports
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: Department of 
Meteorology
Output 2.1. National capacities to implement appropriate climate 
change adaptation and mitigation strategies strengthened.
Indicator 2.1.1. National disaster risk reduction and mitigation 
strategies in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction, 2015-2030 adopted.
Baseline: Yes (not fully)
Target: Yes (fully)
Data source: National and district disaster coordination and 
preparedness reports
Frequency: Annual 
Indicator 2.1.2 (IRRF 1.7.b): Percentage of population with 
primary reliance on clean fuels and technology.
Baseline (2021): <10%
Target (2026): off grid >50%, on grid >30%
Data source: MMGE 
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.1.3: The extent to which ecosystem-based adaptation 
(EBA) criterion are included in planning legislation and land use 
master planning guidelines. 
Baseline (2021): 1
19
Target (2026): 3
Data source: MENT
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.1.4 (IRRF 2.7): Existence of data that incorporate the 
contribution of climate change adaptation and mitigation solutions 
and contribute to national reporting requirements.
Baseline (2021): No
Target (2026): Yes 
Data source: National Communication Reports, NDC Report
Government: 
Ministry of Mineral Resources, Green Technology and 
Energy Security (MMGE), Ministry of Environment 
Natural Resources Conservation and Tourism (MENT), 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MOAFS), 
#SmartBots
CSOs: National CSOs
United Nations and others: FAO, World Bank, 
European Union, United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID)
Regular:
$581,000
Other:
$15,419,000
19 1=Low, 3=high Frequency: Annual
Output 2.2. Capacities of departments and communities 
strengthened to develop and implement innovative and sustainable 
rangeland and agricultural management strategies.
Indicator 2.2.1. Percentage of livestock management associations 
implementing the range management strategies at district level.
Baseline (2021): 3
Target (2026): 5 
Data source: UNDP, MOAFS
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.2.2. Percentage increase of farmers implementing 
climate smart agricultural principles and techniques in non-irrigated 
crop production (disaggregated by sex).
Baseline (2021): <20% (male: 10%, female: 5%)
Target (2026): 50% (male: 20%, female: 30%)
Data source: MOAFS, BITRI 
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.2.3. Existence of a functional and integrated national 
climate information and disaster early warning system (contributing
to IRRF 3.1).
Baseline (2021): No
Target (2026): Yes
Data source: MENT
Frequency: Annual
Government:
MENT, MOAFS, BITRI
CSOs: National CSOs
United Nations and others: FAO
Output 2.3. National institutions and local communities have 
strengthened technical capacities to conserve and manage 
biodiversity and wildlife in line with international conventions.
Indicator 2.3.1: Protected Area management effectiveness scores 
show a persistent increase year-on-year 
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 67%20
Data source: MENT
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.3.2: Capacity of wildlife management institutions and 
law enforcement agencies to tackle Illegal Wildlife Trade
strengthened.
Baseline: 28%
Target (2026): 50%
Data source: MENT
Government:
MENT
CSOs: Local CSOs and community-based organizations 
(CBOs)
United Nations and others:
20 13% increase per year DP/DCP/BWA/3
Frequency: Annual 
Output 2.4. National capacities strengthened to develop and
implement gender-responsive, environmental and disaster
management policies and strategies.
Indicator 2.4.1: Number of gender-responsive legislative 
frameworks with costed action plans to address environmental 
management challenges.
Baseline (2021): 021
Target (2026): 3 
Data source: MENT
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.4.2: Percentage reduction in the volume of waste going 
to landfills.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 10%
Data source: MENT 
Frequency: Quarterly
Indicator 2.4.3: Number of district Social and Environmental 
Assessments which are integrated into relevant local government 
planning tools.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 5
Data source: MENT 
Frequency: Biannual
Government: 
MENT
CSOs: National CSOs
United Nations and others: FAO
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2036 Pillar 1- Sustainable economic development.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 4: By 2026, Botswana has strengthened resilience to shocks and emergencies and is on a sustainable, equitable 
economic trajectory, reducing levels of inequality, poverty and unemployment.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions.
PROSPERITY
Indicator 4.1. Annual 
growth rate of real GDP per 
capita.
Baseline: -4.1% (due to 
COVID-19)
Target: 5%
Indicator 4.2.
Data source: Quarterly economic 
bulletins, National Accounts 
reports
Frequency: Quarterly
Responsibility: Statistics 
Botswana 
Data source: Labour force 
Output 4.1. Strengthened, participatory and resilient private sector 
and MSMEs to create green jobs through inclusive strategies.
Indicator 4.1.1. Number of MSMEs with innovative technology 
solutions to enhance product value addition (disaggregated by 
urban and rural locations).
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 50
Government:
MOFED, Ministry of Investment Trade and Industry 
(MITI), MNIGA, Botswana Investment and Trade 
Centre (BITC), Local Enterprise Authority (LEA), 
Citizen Entrepreneurial Development Agency (CEDA), 
Botswana Innovation Hub (BIH), #SmartBots
CSOs: TBC
Regular:
$363,000
Other:
$9,637,000
21 1=low, 3=highUnemployment rate by sex, 
age and persons with 
disabilities.
Baseline: 24.5%
Target:15%
Indicator 4.3. Labour share 
of GDP comprising wages 
and social protection 
transfers.
Baseline (2016): 20.3%
Target: TBD
Indicator 4.4. Contribution 
of non-mining sector to GDP
Baseline: Fourth quarter 
2020 (88% non-mining, 12% 
mining) 
Target: 90% non-mining, 
10% mining)
survey, quarterly reports 
Frequency: Quarterly 
Responsibility: Statistics 
Botswana
Data source: Labour Force 
Survey - Quarterly report 
Frequency: Quarterly
Responsibility: Statistics 
Botswana
Data source: Quarterly economic 
bulletins, GDP quarterly reports
Frequency: Quarterly
Responsibility: Statistics 
Botswana, Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Development 
(MOFED)
Data source: MITI, CEDA, LEA, BITC, UNDP
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 4.1.2: Number of MSMEs with innovative financing 
solutions to improve access to finance (disaggregated by sex, age 
and persons with disabilities ownership)
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 50 
Data source: MITI, CEDA, LEA, BITC, UNDP
Indicator 4.1.3: Number of additional youth, women and persons 
with disabilities-led/owned MSMEs benefiting from business 
development support initiatives.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 75 (youth: 35, women: 30, persons with disabilities: 
10)
Data source: MITI, CEDA, LEA, BITC, UNDP
Frequency: Annual
Private sector: Business Botswana, business and labour 
associations
United Nations and others: FAO, WEF, European 
Union
Output 4.2. Robust research and development, innovation and 
digital approaches enabled at national and subnational levels for 
improved competitiveness and sustainable job creation.
Indicator 4.2.1: Number of new market-ready products and services 
developed through innovative solutions.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 10
Data source: LEA, BITC, BIH, BIUST, CEDA
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 4.2.2: Number of locally developed research and 
development-led, innovative and digital approaches tested towards 
improving products, competitiveness and service provision.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 5
Data source: BIH, University of Botswana, BIUST
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 4.2.3: Number of new partnerships with private sector 
associations in areas of research and development, innovation and 
digital solutions.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 5
Data source: LEA, BITC, BIH, University of Botswana, BIUST, 
technical and vocational education and training (TVET) institutions
Frequency: Annual
Government: MITI, Ministry of Tertiary Education 
(MOTE), BIH, BITC, LEA, CEDA, #SmartBots
CSOs: TBC
Private sector: Botswana Business, business and labour 
associations
United Nations and others: SADC, European Union, 
University of Botswana, Botswana International 
University of Science and Technology (BIUST)
Output 4.3. Economic diversification strategy implemented 
strengthening exports and green growth.
Government: MOFED, MITI, MIAC, BITC, SB,
SEZA, BURS DP/DCP/BWA/3
Indicator 4.3.1: Number of green jobs created (disaggregated by 
sex).
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 100 (male: 40, female: 60)
Data source: Business Botswana, MITI, UNDP
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 4.3.2: Number of new non-traditional export products 
developed to enhance export diversification.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 20 
Data source: Statistics Botswana, BITC, MITI, BOB, MOFED, 
SEZA, BURS
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 4.3.3: Number of new bilateral, regional and multilateral 
trade arrangements between Botswana and partners.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 5
Data source: MITI, BITC, BURS, MIAC
Frequency: Annual
CSOs: TBC
Private sector: Business Botswana, BEMA, Freight 
Forwarders’ Association
United Nations and others: UNCTAD, SADC
Output 4.4. Capacities developed for expansion of inclusive social 
protection systems and efficient local public service delivery.
Indicator 4.4.1: Number of locally developed innovations/solutions 
identified and tested for enhanced public services delivery.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 5
Data source: MLGRD, GICO, MOPAGPA
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 4.4.2: Number of decentralized services reaching men 
and women/citizens in peri-urban and rural areas.
Baseline (2021): 2
Target (2026): 7
Data source: MLGRD, GICO, MOPAGPA and other ministries
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 4.4.3: Extent to which gender-sensitive social protection 
systems and programmes have been consolidated and are being 
implemented around the life-cycle approach (contributing to IRRF 
2.1).
Government:
MOPAGPA, MLGRD, MTC, BIH, #SmartBots, other 
government ministries
CSOs: TBC
United Nations and others: UNICEF, ILO, UNFPABaseline (2021): 1
Target (2026): 3
22
Data source: MLGRD and other ministries
Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2036 Pillar 2– Human and social development, and 4- Governance, peace and security.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 5: By 2026, Botswana is a just society, where leaders are accountable, transparent and responsive, corruption 
reduced, and where people are empowered to access information, services and opportunities, and participate in decisions that affect their lives and livelihoods.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
PEACE AND PARTNERSHIPS
Indicator 5.3. Transparency 
index – corruption 
perception rankings.
Baseline: 3
Target: 20
Indicator 5.3. Level of 
confidence in delivery of 
basic public service.
Baseline: 1
23
Target: 3
Data source: Annual reports, 
internal bulletins
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: OHCHR, Human 
Rights Office, Ombudsman Office 
Data source: Corruption 
perception index website/reports, 
Mo Ibrahim Index
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Directorate on 
Corruption and Economic Crime
(DCEC)
Data source: SDG progress 
report, treaty body reports
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: MIAC, MOFED
Output 5.1. Enhanced public access to information and increased 
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in line with 
national legislation, plans and strategies, and international 
agreements and SDGs.
Indicator 5.1.1: Percentage of Government Gazettes, policies, 
legislation, judgements of the High Court and Court of Appeal and 
regulations freely available to the public from 1990 to 2020.
Baseline (2021): 0%
Target (2026): 100%
Data source: Botswana LII 
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 5.1.2: Number of policies, laws and tools that guarantee 
public access to information and statistics.
Baseline (2021): 224
Target (2026): 4
Data source: BGIS, Statistics Botswana
Frequency: Annually
Indicator 5.1.3: Number of magistrates and judges that effectively 
use virtual court for adjudication (contributing to IRRF 2.4).
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 32 (28 Magistrates Court, 4 High Courts)
Data source: AOJ, MNIGA, MTC, BGBVC, WAR 
Frequency: Annual
Government:
MOPAGPA, MLGRD, MDJS, Administration of 
Justice (AOJ), Attorney General’s Chambers (AGC), 
MNIGA, BIH, DCEC, MIAC, #SmartBots
CSOs: WAR, BGBVC
Private Sector: Business Botswana
United Nations and others: OHCHR, UN-Women, 
UNFPA, UNICEF
Regular:
$182,000
Other:
$4,818,000
Output 5.2. Increased effectiveness, accountability, and 
transparency amongst institutions at all levels.
Indicator 5.2.1: Number of additional anti-corruption measures for 
Government:
All
CSOs: All 
22 1-low, 3=high
231 – low, 3=high
24 National Statistical Act and Public Information Bill.DP/DCP/BWA/3
improved transparency and accountability implemented.
Baseline (2021): 2
25
Target (2026): 4
26
Data source: DCEC, parliamentary oversight committees 
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 5.2.2: Number of new platforms/mechanisms at national 
and subnational levels created to enable the population to express
their voice freely and confidently and to hold government and dutybearers accountable.
Baseline (2021): 0
27
Target (2026): 3
28
Data source: BGIS
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 5.2.3: Extent to which the Botswana Human Rights 
Institution is able to implement its human rights mandate.
Baseline (2021): 1
Target (2026): 3
Data source: Ombudsman, MOPAGPA
Frequency: Annual
United Nations and others: OHCHR, UNODC, 
UNICEF
Output 5.3. Capacity of justice and rule of law institutions enabled
at national and subnational levels for improved access and redress,
including for gender-based violence cases.
Indicator 5.3.1: Extent to which the use of digital courts improves 
case turnaround time (contributing to IRRF 2.4).
Baseline (2021): 0
29
Target (2026): 3
Data source: AOJ
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 5.3.2: Percentage increase of indigent people benefiting 
from legal aid services (disaggregated by sex) (contributing to 
IRRF 2.4).
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 50% 
Data source: Legal Aid Botswana
Frequency: Annually
Government:
MNIGA, MDJS, AOJ, MLGRD, Ministry of Transport 
and Communications (MTC), #SmartBots, Legal Aid 
Botswana 
CSOs: All 
United Nations and others: OHCHR, UN-Women, 
UNFPA, UNICEF
25 Corruption and Economic Crime Act (1994), Whistleblowing Act (2016). 
26 Revised CECA, Revised Whistleblowing Act
27 Consultative meetings, ministry websites and toll-free numbers already existing.
28 1= low, 3 = high.
29 0 = not started. Digital courts not yet rolled out.Indicator 5.3.3: Number of customary courts capacitated to deliver 
fair and uniform sentences for gender-based violence, including
conflict resolution.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 520
Data source: AOJ, MLGRD
Frequency: Annually