File Name: BWA-NREP-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Botswana
Country Code: BWA
Category: NREP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2040
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT
BOTSWANAUnless otherwise stated, material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that 
appropriate acknowledgement is given of IRENA as the source and copyright holder. Material in this publication that is attributed to third 
parties may be subject to separate terms of use and restrictions, and appropriate permissions from these third parties may need to be 
secured before any use of such material. 
About IRENA 
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that supports countries 
in their transition to a sustainable energy future. It serves as the principal platform for international co-operation, a 
centre of excellence and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge on renewable energy. 
IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy, 
geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access, 
energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity. 
ISBN: 978-92-9260-352-6
Citation: IRENA (2021), Renewables Readiness Assessment: Botswana, International Renewable Energy Agency,
Abu Dhabi
About the RRA
A Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) is a holistic evaluation of a country’s conditions that helps to identify 
the actions needed to overcome barriers to renewable energy deployment. This is a country-led process, with IRENA 
primarily providing technical support and expertise to facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders. 
While the RRA helps to shape appropriate policy and regulatory choices, each country determines the best mix of 
renewable energy sources and technologies to achieve national priorities. The RRA is a dynamic process that can 
be adapted to each country’s circumstances and needs. IRENA has continually refined its methodology for the RRA 
process based on experience in a growing range of countries and regions.
For more information: www.irena.org/rra
Acknowledgement
This report was prepared by IRENA in close collaboration with the Government of Botswana, represented by the Ministry 
of Mineral Resources, Green Technology and Energy Security. Special thanks are due to the numerous officials who 
contributed to its realisation, and in particular those from the Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) and the Botswana 
Energy Regulatory Authority (BERA). The report has benefited from the input of expert reviewers, including Kudakwashe 
Ndhlukula (SACREEE), Lauren Culver, Celine Ramstein and Yuri Handem (World Bank), James Jakoba Molenga, Lesego 
Molapisi, Mareledi Gina Maswabi and Tebogo Thakadu (Botswana). From IRENA, Paul Komor, Asami Miketa, Gayathri Nair, 
Francisco Boshell, Seung Kang, Mohammed Nababa, Costanza Strinati and Carlos Guadarrama provided valuable inputs. 
Report available for download: www.irena.org/publications
For further information or to provide feedback: publications@irena.org
Contributing authors
This report was developed under the guidance of Gürbüz Gönül and Binu Parthan (IRENA) and authored by Nopenyo 
Dabla, Benson Zeyi and Elizabeth Njoki Wanjiru from IRENA, as well as consultants Nicolas Fichaux and Boiki Mabowe.
Disclaimer
This publication and the material herein are provided “as is”. All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the material 
in this publication. However, neither IRENA nor any of its officials, agents, data or other third-party content contributors provide a warranty of any kind, 
either expressed or implied, and they accept no responsibility or liability for any consequence of use of the publication or material herein. 
The information contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of all Country Members of IRENA. The mention of specific companies or 
certain projects or products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by IRENA in preference to others of a similar nature that are 
not mentioned. The designations employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA 
concerning the legal status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries. BotswanaFOREWORD
by the Minister of 
Mineral Resources, 
Green Technology 
and Energy Security
The Ministry of Mineral Resources, Green Technology and Energy Security 
(MMGE) is delighted to have benefitted from the technical support provided 
by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) that has resulted 
in the development of this Renewable Readiness Assessment (RRA) for 
Botswana, despite the uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The release of this report coincides with the recent adoption by Parliament 
of the Botswana National Energy Policy – a key, strategic instrument for 
the successful and economic development of the local energy sector. A 
prominent objective of the Policy is to achieve a substantive penetration of 
new and renewable energy sources in the country’s energy mix; the goal is 
to attain adequate economic energy self-sufficiency and security, as well as 
positioning Botswana to fulfil its vision in becoming a regional net exporter, 
especially in the electricity sector. The Policy also recognises and supports 
increased energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy as key drivers 
for an inclusive transition to a clean energy future. 
Botswana has also issued an Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) for electricity 
generation over the next 20 years, covering renewable energy technologies 
such as solar photovoltaic, wind, concentrated solar thermal, and batteries 
for energy storage. Other related initiatives include the Biogas Pilot Project 
– currently in the implementation stage – that ultimately will be rolled 
out nation-wide; the Off Grid Solar Programme, also its early stages of 
development and implementation; and the Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic 
Programme, for which implementation is underway following the launch of 
the programme in November 2020. The RRA is expected to augment government initiatives and programmes 
designed to improve energy supply availability, reliability and access. The 
Government seeks to ensure renewables make up 15% of the national 
energy mix by 2030, and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as part of 
its commitments to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC). 
This RRA study provides an in-depth assessment, evaluation and analysis of 
the readiness of Botswana’s energy sector for the integration of renewable 
energy and recommends various actions to address the challenges and 
limitations to renewable energy uptake in the country. Key objectives for the 
government of Botswana include improvements in energy sector regulation; 
capacity building; and the development of effective implementation 
frameworks for energy projects and programmes such as the IRP, off-grid 
solar solutions and the on-going National Electrification Programme.
The implementation of these recommendations is key to ensuring an 
inclusive energy transition that balances environmental concerns with the
socio-economic needs of communities and industries. I would like to thank 
IRENA for its continued support and am hopeful that this collaboration will 
continue until we have attained both energy self-sufficiency and exports 
based on the deployment of renewable energy and energy efficiency 
technologies. 
Hon. Lefoko Maxwell Moagi
Minister for Mineral Resources, Green Technology and Energy SecurityFOREWORD
from the IRENA 
Director-General
The Government of Botswana has adopted an Economic Stimulus Programme 
to boost growth and promote economic diversification and job creation. 
ESP aims to deliver universal access to electricity in urban and rural areas, 
and achieve a national energy surplus, with a view to accessing regional 
electricity markets within the Southern African Power Pool. 
Botswana possesses considerable potential for renewable energy 
development. This Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) presents clear 
and practical steps to maximise the country’s use of renewables in driving 
sustainable economic growth. It identifies the need to adopt a broader range 
of renewable energy technologies to diversify Botswana’s power generation 
away from coal, generate socio-economic value and fulfil the country’s 
environmental and climate commitments. 
The report recommends various short-to-medium term actions for 
developing the basis for a transition to renewable energy, including in the 
areas of policy, regulation, risk, investment, skills development, electrification 
and generation, and end-use applications. These actions can contribute to 
creating a more conducive investment environment for renewable energy by 
addressing key challenges to the energy transition. Since 2011, nearly 40 countries from Africa, the Middle East, Latin America 
and the Caribbean, Asia, the Pacific and South East Europe have undertaken 
Renewable Readiness Assessments, exchanging knowledge and fostering 
co-operation among national and international partners to accelerate the 
deployment of renewables. Each of these assessments has been countryled, with IRENA providing technical expertise, sharing regional and global 
insights, and facilitating consultations among national stakeholders. 
IRENA is grateful to the Botswanan authorities – and particularly the Ministry 
of Mineral Resources, Green Technology and Energy Security – for their 
commitment to this study, as well as to the many other stakeholders whose 
positive engagements and valuable inputs contributed to its completion. I 
am confident that the recommendations in this report will strengthen efforts 
towards energy transition in Botswana and across the wider region.
Francesco La Camera
Director-General
International Renewable Energy Agency CONTENTS
COUNTRY OVERVIEW 17
1.1 The role of electricity in development in Botswana 19
ENERGY CONTEXT 22
2.1. Regional energy context 22
2.2. Energy supply and demand in Botswana 26
2.3. Electricity sector 30
2.4. Climate action 43
2.5. Energy efficiency 45
2.6. Renewable energy potential and use 47
2.7. Other relevant strategic renewable energy plans 53
2.8. Drivers for renewable energy deployment in Botswana 61
ENABLING FRAMEWORKS FOR
RENEWABLE ENERGY DEPLOYMENT 62
3.1. Policy and regulatory frameworks 62
3.2. Institutional framework 68
KEY CHALLENGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS 74
4.1. Institutional and policy frameworks 74
4.2. Regulatory frameworks and policy support mechanisms 77
4.3. Risk mitigation for renewable energy procurement 78
4.4. Rural electrification and decentralised generation 80
4.5. End-use applications 83
4.6. Local skills development 84
01
02
FIGURES
TABLES
ABBREVIATIONS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
03
04
VII
VII
IX
XIFigures
Figure 1 Evolution of real GDP growth for Botswana, 2010–2019. 17
Figure 2 Evolution of electricity consumption by customer category
(including exports to SAPP) 22
Figure 3 Average GDP growth rate in the SADC region 22
Figure 4 Yearly electricity consumption per capita for the SADC countries, 2018 23
Figure 5 Electricity access rates in Southern Africa, 2018 23
Figure 6 Total final energy consumption in Botswana, 2018 27
Figure 7 Total final energy consumption in Botswana by sector, 2018 28
Figure 8 Evolution of the total primary energy supply in Botswana, 2006-2016. 29
Figure 9 The power system of Botswana 33
Figure 10 BPC's renewable energy plan 39
Figure 11 National Energy Efficiency Strategy of Botswana 46
Figure 12 Global horizontal irradiation for Botswana 48
Figure 13 Wind Speed Map for Botswana 52
Figure 14 Photovoltaic solar power zones in Botswana. 54
Figure 15 Concentrated solar power zones in Botswana 55
Figure 16 Wind power zones in Botswana 56
Figure 17 Least-cost analysis, selected solar power (PV and CSP) sites 58
Figure 18 Least-cost analysis, selected wind power sites 58
Figure 19 Least-cost supply curve for Botswana in 2020 58
Figure 20 Projected energy mix, 2017 58
Figure 21 Power sector institutional stakeholders 58
TABLES
Table 1 Forecast supply–demand balance, 2019–2023. 26
Table 2 Centralised generation outlook in Botswana for 2018 (updated 2019) 28
Table 3 BPC cost recovery ratio and performance. 33
Table 4 Botswana electricity tariffs, 2020. 34
Table 5 Estimated biomass production and energy potential. 46
Table 6 Biofuels production potential 47
Table 7 Available land areas and potential yields (dry mass) 47
Table 8 Summary of the regulatory framework based on IRENA's classification. 63
Table 9 Status of operationalisation of BERA with regards to the mandate as set
by the BERA Act 71
FIGURES AND TABLESACEC Africa Clean Energy Corridor
AEP Annual energy production
AfDB African Development Bank
BCCN Botswana Climate Change 
Network
BERA Botswana Energy Regulatory 
Authority 
BEST Biomass Energy Strategy
BITC Botswana Investment and Trade 
Centre 
BITRI Botswana Institute for Technology 
Research and Innovation 
BIUST Botswana International University 
of Science and Technology 
BoB Bank of Botswana
BOCOBONET Botswana Community-Based 
Organisations Network
BOOT Build–own–operate–transfer 
BOSA Botswana–South Africa 
(interconnector)
BPC Botswana Power Corporation
BWP Botswana pula
CBM Coal Bed Methane
CDM Clean Development Mechanism
CEM Clean Energy Ministerial 
CERC Clean Energy Research Centre
CFL Compact Fluorescent Lamp
CIP Climate Investment Platform
CO2 Carbon Dioxide
CSP Concentrated Solar Power
DAR Department of Agricultural 
Research
DMS Department of Meteorological 
Services
DNI Direct Normal Irradiance 
DOE Department of Energy
DTU Danish Technology Institute
ECOWAS Economic Community of West 
African States
ECREEE ECOWAS Centre for Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency
EEP Energy and Environment 
Partnership Trust Fund 
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
EMP Environmental Management Plan
EPC Engineering, Procurement and 
Construction
ESMAP Energy Sector Management 
Assistance Program
ESP Economic Stimulus Programme
EU-TAF European Union Technical 
Assistance Facility 
FIT Feed-in Tariff
GCF Green Climate Fund
GESA Green Energy and Sustainability 
Association
GEF Global Environment Facility
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GHG GreenHouse Gas
GHI Global Horizonal Irradiance 
GIS Geographic Information System
GJ Gigajoule
GoB Government of Botswana 
HDI Human Development Index 
HVAC Heating, Ventilation and Air 
conditioning
HVDC High Voltage, Direct Current
IEA International Energy Agency
IEC International Electrotechnical 
Commission
IFC International Finance Corporation
IMF International Monetary Fund
INDC Individual Nationally Determined 
Contribution
IPP Independent power producer
IRENA International Renewable Energy 
Agency
IRP Integrated Resource Plan
JACSES Japan Centre for Sustainable 
Environment and Society
JICA Japan International Cooperation 
Agency
KEPCO Korea Electric Power Corporation
KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
(Sweden)
LBNL Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory (US) 
LCOE Levelised Cost of Electricity
LPG Liquified Petroleum Gas
MENRCT
Ministry of Environment, Natural 
Resources, Conservation and 
Tourism
ABBREVIATIONSMEPS Minimum Energy Performance 
Standards 
MEPS Minimum Energy Performance 
Standards
MMEWR Ministry of Minerals, Energy and 
Water Resources 
MMGE
Ministry of Mineral Resources, 
Green Technology and Energy 
Security
MoLG Ministry of Local Government
MSW Municipal Solid Waste
MW Megawatt
NDC Nationally Determined 
Contribution
NDP National Development Plan
NEED
Network of Excellence in 
Renewable Energy Technologies 
for Development
NEES National Energy Efficiency 
Strategy
NEF National Electrification Fund
NESC National Electricity Standard 
Connection 
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NREL National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory
NWTGC North–West Transmission Grid 
Connection
OSAP Off-grid Solar Action Plan
PJ Petajoule
PPA Power Purchase Agreement
PPAD Public Procurement and Asset 
Disposal Act
PPP Purchasing Power Parity 
PV Photovoltaic
REFIT Renewable Energy Feed-in Tariff
REAB Renewable Energy Association of 
Botswana 
REP Rural Electrification Program 
RERA Regional Electricity Regulators 
Association of Southern Africa
RERE Renewable Energy Rural 
Electrification programme
RRA Renewables Readiness 
Assessment 
RSP Rooftop Solar Programme
RIIC Rural Industries Innovation Centre
SACREEE
Southern African Development 
Community Centre for Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency
SADC Southern African Development 
Community 
SAIDI System Average Interruption 
Duration Index
SAIFI System Average Interruption 
Frequency Index
SAPP Southern African Power Pool 
SAPP-MTP SAPP Market Trading Platform 
SEA Strategy Environmental 
Assessment
SEIA Strategic Environmental Impact 
Assessment 
SHP Small Hydropower Potential
SHS Solar Home System
SIAB Solar Industries Association of 
Botswana
SIEEP SADC Industrial Energy Efficiency 
Program
SMW Solid Municipal Waste
SOLTRAIN Southern African Solar Thermal
TCF Trillion Cubic Feet 
TFEC Total Final Energy Consumption 
TOE Tonnes of Oil Equivalent 
TPES Total Primary Energy Supply
UN United Nations
UNECA United Nations Economic 
Commission for Africa
UNDP United Nations Development 
Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change
UNIDO United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization
USD US dollar
VAT Value-Added Tax
VRE Variable Renewable Energy
ZIACD Zambezi Integrated AgroCommercial Development 
ABBREVIATIONSEXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Botswana is an arid to semi-arid country of 582,000 square kilometres 
located in Southern Africa. It is a landlocked developing and upper-middleincome country with a population of 2.3 million inhabitants, of which 30% 
live in rural areas. Access to electricity stands at 65% (81% in urban areas 
and 28% in rural areas). The country’s total energy supply of 2.9 Mtoe in 2017 
consists of oil products (35%), coal (44%), (traditional) biofuels and waste 
(19%) and imported electricity (2%). Electricity is mainly produced from coal, 
or from petroleum products imported mainly from South Africa. 
Botswana’s gross domestic product (GDP) has almost tripled since 2000, 
whilst its total final energy consumption (TFEC) has increased by 45%. 
Botswana is gradually recovering from an economic downturn in 2015, 
during which the country suffered from a negative growth owing to a decline 
in diamond exports, severe drought and energy shortages. Subsequently, 
the Government of Botswana adopted an Economic Stimulus Programme 
in order to boost growth and promote both economic diversification and 
job creation. The recovery has been supported by the development of 
non-mining sectors such as communications, trade, transport and tourism. 
Although diamond mining remains the primary source of wealth and 
development, in recent years the tourism sector has expanded thanks to the 
country’s wildlife preservation practices and large game refuges (prior to the 
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020).
As is the case in most countries of the region, Botswana’s power system 
is characterised by unreliable power supply, lack of investment, poor 
maintenance and high service costs. To meet its peak power demand, 
Botswana imports power from the Southern Africa Power Pool (SAPP) – 
mainly from South Africa – and when imports are not available, resorts to 
the use of costly backup diesel power plants.
Botswana’s total primary energy supply (TPES) is fossil-based and largely 
reliant on oil products and coal, complemented by biomass and waste 
energy. A large proportion of TFEC comes from biomass energy in the form 
of traditional wood fuel (27.8%). Botswana relies heavily on fossil fuels for 
its electricity generation, depending on two major coal-fired power plants 
(Morupule A and B) and a number of diesel plants. Until recently, Botswana 
relied on electricity imports to meet up to 94% of its demand. With the 
ongoing recovery of the Morupule B plant, the share of electricity imports in 
total supply has decreased to about 15%.
The country possesses considerable renewable energy potential, most 
notably solar, wind and bioenergy; however, these remain largely unexploited, 
despite the country’s ambitious plans for integrating renewable energy 
into its energy system. In the Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) launched in 
December 2020, it was announced that renewable energy should account 
for at least 15% of the energy mix by 2030, whilst the country’s Vision 
2036 calls for a 50% renewable energy contribution to the energy mix by
March 2036.
otograph: ShutterstockWith a view to supporting progress toward these targets, and more generally to assist 
Botswana on its path towards the integration of a higher, more diversified share of renewable 
energy in its national energy mix, this Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) identifies the 
following critical actions that could significantly impact the energy transition in Botswana:
1. Promote and facilitate implementation of a clear long-term vision for renewable 
energy development
Steady renewable energy capacity increases require a clear vision, embodied in 
appropriate and implementable planning. In this regard, Botswana can succeed in 
its uptake of renewable energy by transforming vision and roadmaps into binding 
commitments that contain specific renewable energy technology targets. It is also 
important that the targets outlined across different policy and strategy documents are 
aligned to provide a consistent, long-term signal to potential investors.
2. Operationalise the regulatory authority
Botswana has embarked on the path to regulatory reform, embodied by the establishment 
of the Botswana Energy Regulatory Authority (BERA) in 2017; however, the Authority 
remains largely non-operational. Operationalising BERA will require a guaranteed, 
sustainable and independent budget, as well as sufficient political independence and 
capacity to hold utilities to account for their financial and operational performance.
3. Establish a grid code that is conducive to variable renewable power
Under the authority of the BERA, grid codes prioritising access to the grid for electricity 
generated from renewables, as well as its dispatch based on marginal cost, should be 
developed to govern all current and future electricity generators. These codes should 
replace the BPC operational manual that currently governs transmission and will serve 
to provide transparency concerning grid access by independent power producers (IPPs). 
The BPC is currently a vertically integrated utility, potentially transitioning towards a 
single buyer model. 
4. Revise the tariff-setting structure
The process of defining tariffs now falls under the supervision of BERA; they will be 
set based on a transparent methodology applied by its Electricity Committee that will 
include some level of performance management. The current price setting mechanism 
is apparently based on ‘rate of return’ rather than ‘incentive-based’ regulation, 
raising concerns regarding the pass-through of inefficiencies to end-consumers in 
Botswana. Now that the Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) has achieved full cost 
recovery, some incentives for performance management should be introduced to 
the methodology, reflecting aspects such as quality of service and new policy paths 
(concerning electrification, GHG emissions, security of supply, etc.). There is also scope 
for customising tariffs to match the spatial or temporal profile of consumption.
5. Define a clear regulatory framework to manage risks involved in private sector 
participation
Although improving, the recourse to BPC for the procurement and off-take relating to 
the national renewable energy strategy has limitations. In theory, IPPs could participate 
in adding new generation capacity; but in practice, power purchase agreements 
(PPAs) have yet to materialise. A key issue associated with IPP contracts is the need to 
balance risks against off-take, the absence of which may lead to windfall profits from 
unaffordable tariffs at one end of the spectrum, or the inability of the private sector 
to engage into the programme – and the stalling of the private sector development of 6. Perform a location-specific (pre-feasibility) study for renewable energy generation 
and streamline permitting processes
Experience has demonstrated that efficient investments will build on an integrated 
spatial master plan. Investments in renewable energy generation require the collection 
of 1–2 years of bankable resource data, and potentially investments in distribution or 
transmission assets. Timely investments therefore require careful strategic planning in 
future project locations to avoid uncertainties, and subsequent delays and higher costs 
in the procurement phase. The first step is to perform a detailed geospatial analysis 
(pre-feasibility), as proposed by IRENA and the World Bank. 
Also, the permitting process in Botswana must be made more transparent; for example, 
by establishing frameworks for environmental impact studies, grid connection studies 
and cost provisions for grid connections.
7. Conduct a study on the capability of the grid to absorb power from VRE sources
In addition to location-specific pre-feasibility studies, a comprehensive dynamic grid 
impact study is required, based on dynamic (time-dependent) simulations with detailed 
cost assumptions that consider new technologies and advanced dispatch strategies. A 
means to regularly update the IRP based on these findings is also needed, building on 
grid stability studies of the power system and realistic assessments of the penetration 
potential of renewable energy – including grid reinforcement and storage on a costefficiency basis. Potentially, the study could also help BERA develop grid codes and 
regulations for merit-order dispatch, accounting for the specific characteristics of 
variable renewable energy (VRE) sources.
8. Integrate rural electrification strategies into a single, comprehensive document and 
consolidate rural electrification activities
The need to add both small-scale distributed generation at scale, and a rural electrification 
programme to the IRP has also been suggested. During stakeholder consultations, the 
mini-grids, smart grids, waste-to-energy and solar home systems market segments were 
seen as potentially large, untapped market segments able to drive investment, jobs, 
entrepreneurship and gender equity. Limited private sector engagement and competition 
exists in this sector in Botswana, which sets it apart from current practices across
sub-Saharan Africa.
9. Support the growth of solar rooftop and home systems through strong incentives and 
policy instruments
Guidelines for rooftop solar installation are undergoing development and will provide 
an alternative mechanism to increase the uptake of solar energy as well as facilitate 
private sector participation. Attractive incentives should be put in place to support 
the adoption of this technology. Policy instruments such as net-metering and feed-in 
tariffs for roof-top solar projects would help facilitate market access for investors. The 
government also needs to finalise the feed-in tariffs. 
The growth in demand for solar home systems was highlighted during stakeholder 
workshops. Dedicated planning, business models and implementation mechanisms 
supporting private sector engagement should be developed to promote this market 
segment. Furthermore, the government should establish national quality standards 
aligned with international standards, enhance local certification capabilities, facilitate 
affordable payment schemes and consider gender equity in the energy sector. 10.Develop a strategy for renewable energy and agriculture
The agriculture sector in Botswana is predominantly subsistence based, mainly due to 
traditional farming methods, regular droughts and limited infrastructure. In this sector, 
solar water pumping, biogas for cooking and lighting, and bioenergy (biodiesel) for 
transport were identified as relevant areas to explore. To improve uptake of these 
energy services, financial resources should be mobilised; affordable, locally available 
technologies should be developed; and regulations and incentives established.
11. Develop a strategy for renewable energy in the transport sector
No incentives currently exist to encourage bioenergy in transport, despite the existence 
of biodiesel standards, given the absence of specific legislation to trigger enforcement. 
The local market is considered to be small and unable to achieve economies of scale due 
to limited use in the transport sector. The Department of Energy (DOE), with technical 
support from the University of Botswana (UB) and the Department of Agricultural 
Research (DAR) of the Ministry of Agricultural Development and Food Security, are 
engaged in a research project that seeks to stimulate the development of the local 
Biofuel industry.
In this sector, solar electric navigation was also mentioned in consultations, as a 
demonstration is ongoing for solar tourist boats. However, the potential for market scaleup is limited. Currently, no plans for electric road transportation have been identified, 
nor has an electric vehicle strategy been defined. Considering the strong dynamics of 
this market worldwide, it is suggested that Botswana develop an e-mobility strategy.
12. Promote the role of renewable energy for heating, cooling and cooking
The need for increased uptake of renewable based heating, cooling and cooking was 
highlighted in the RRA stakeholder workshops. This can be achieved by raising awareness 
of the technologies among residents, building local manufacturing and installation 
capacities, and introducing the skills needed to develop bankable proposals to increase 
access to finance by renewable energy companies. Local financial institutions should 
also be encouraged to provide finance to support private investments in renewable 
energy solutions. This can be facilitated by providing training to financial institutions 
on renewable energy project appraisals. Financial incentives can also be provided by 
government to ensure that citizens can afford renewable energy services. 
13.Develop local human capacities along the project value chain
There are also opportunities to develop competencies in the maintenance and repair 
of renewable energy equipment, particularly given the severe lack of training and 
availability of trained personnel in remote areas. Private sector engagement in the 
management of training facilities can be enabled through public–private partnerships 
(PPPs) for off-grid supply and mini-grids.
Also, building local capacity within BPC and BERA is important and will provide Botswana 
with the technical capacity to operate a power system with high shares of renewables. 
Capacity building should include capabilities in power system modelling, simulation 
studies, reserve sizing, flexibility analysis, economic dispatch and VRE forecasting, etc., 
so that Botswana can identify and address future challenges to the system.otograph: ShutterstockBotswana is a landlocked country located in central–southern Africa, 
with a mean altitude above sea level of 1 000 metres and a total area of
582 000 square kilometres (km2
). 
The official languages are English and Setswana, which are widely spoken in 
the country, and the pula (BWP) is the nation’s official currency. The country 
is divided into nine districts and five town councils. Botswana’s climate is 
arid to semi-arid and rainfall is highly erratic. Botswana has not been spared 
by climate change and continues to incur considerable environmental and 
economic costs in addressing the challenges of negative climatic impacts. 
Severe rainfall deficiencies occur periodically, and most parts of the country 
are affected by droughts. Since the early 1980s, extreme weather events – 
including droughts, storms and floods – have increased in frequency. In terms 
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, the World Bank’s latest data indicate 
that Botswana’s emissions per capita stand at 3.367 metric tonnes of carbon 
dioxide (CO2
) per year – its highest rate ever recorded. This emissions value 
is about half of the average figure (6.154 tCO2
) for upper middle-income 
countries in 2014 (World Bank, 2019 b).
When it gained political independence in 1966, Botswana was one of the 
world’s poorest countries. However, it swiftly became one of the world’s 
development success stories. Mineral wealth, fiscal discipline, uninterrupted 
civilian leadership, prudent economic management, progressive social 
policies, peace and tranquillity and a comparatively small population of a 
little more than two million, have helped to position Botswana as an upper 
middle-income country (Statistics Botswana, 2014).
The economy is dominated by extractive industries – predominantly diamond 
mining; nonetheless, tourism is an expanding sector due to the country’s 
nature preservation practices and large game reserves. Diamond mining has 
been an important source of wealth and development and accounted for 20% 
of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2017. Other key sectors are wholesale 
and retail trade; finance, real estate and business services; and agriculture, 
accounting for 21.6%, 15.3% and 2.2% of GDP, respectively, in 2018. The water 
and electricity sector accounts for 0.8% of GDP (AfDB, 2018). Although total 
energy consumption increased by 86% between 1994 and 2013, this was 
accompanied by an almost three-fold increase in GDP (at constant prices, 
see Figure 1). 
Real GDP grew by 5.1% in the year leading to September 2018, compared 
to around 2.5% in 2017 and 2019. GDP growth was buoyed by sustained 
improvement in the non-mining sector and the recovery in mining output 
growth, giving Botswana the best sovereign credit risk rating (A2) in 
Africa from S&P and Moody’s (BoB, 2019); GDP in 2019 corresponded to
USD 18.34 billion. Figure 1 gives a summary of real GDP growth between
2010 and 2019.
I. COUNTRY
OVERVIEW
tograph: ShutterstockThe Government of Botswana has adopted an Economic Stimulus Programme (ESP) in order 
to boost economic growth, promote economic diversification and job creation. Launched in 
2015, the ESP aims to expand the economy through a development agenda that includes 
energy (Government of Botswana, 2015 a). Specifically, the ESP seeks to accelerate the 
electrification of urban and rural areas, and intends for the country to become an energy 
surplus nation. Moreover, after a decade of efforts to diversify the economy the share of 
mining sector in the GDP has decreased from 25% to 20% (Ministry of Finance, 2018). 
Yet, despite a reduction in GDP share, diamonds alone are accounted for 90% of exports
(BoB, 2019).
With respect to human development, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
reported a Human Development Index (HDI) score of 0.735 for Botswana in 2020, placing 
the country in the high human development category and positioning it at 100 out of 189. 
Between 1990 and 2020, Botswana’s HDI has registered a 26% increase, rising from 0.581 
to 0.735 (UNDP, 2020). 
The latest census (in 2011) estimated a population of 2.024 million inhabitants, representing 
a growth rate of 1.86% in a decade (Statistics Botswana, 2014). More recent estimates 
suggest that Botswana was home to 2.303 million inhabitants in 2019 (World Bank, 2019a). 
In line with the 10-year interval pattern for national population censuses, another such 
exercise is planned for 2021 (Statistics Botswana, 2018 b). A large share of the population 
is concentrated in areas with natural water resources and arable land, mainly in the east. 
70.1% of the population is settled in urban areas. The census reveals steady growth in 
the working population, now estimated at 64.9% compared to 58.2% in 2001 (Statistics 
Botswana, 2014). According to estimates for 2018, unemployment affects 18.3% of this 
group (UN, 2018). 
The wholesale sector employs the largest proportion of the population, followed by 
manufacturing and construction. The agriculture, and electricity and water sectors account 
for 3% and 3.81%, respectively (Statistics Botswana, 2018 a). Overall social indicators have 
shown constant improvement, and as unemployment falls, the proportion of people living 
in poverty also declines.
Botswana is gradually recovering from its latest economic downturn; in 2015 the country 
suffered a negative growth rate of -1.7% (in real GDP), (World Bank, 2019 b) owing to 
the decline in diamond exports, severe drought and severe energy and water shortfalls. 
15
10
5
-5
-10
2010 2011 2012 2013
Real GDP Growth Rates
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
0
Growth Rates (%)
Figure 1 Evolution of real GDP growth for Botswana, 2010–2019
Source: Statistics Botswana (https://www.statsbots.org.bw/national-accounts).The recovery has been boosted by the development of non-mining sectors such as trade, 
tourism, transport and communications. The agricultural sector, which remains modest and 
subsistence-oriented, is mainly driven by beef exports (AfDB, 2018). The contribution to 
GDP of the electricity and water sector has improved in recent years, with a sector-specific 
growth of 79.7% in 2016–2017 and 27.3% in 2017–2018 (BoB, 2019).
Despite the recovery being felt, economic growth remains unequally distributed (Botswana 
ranks 100 out of 189 according to the Gini coefficient) and 17.2% of the population suffers 
from poverty (UNDP, 2020). Economic growth is precarious, as risks persist in key 
development sectors, and is currently being undermined by the COVID-19 crisis. Therefore, 
overall economic recovery – and the specific recovery of the diamond market – remains 
uncertain. 
Botswana ranks 87 out of 190 countries in the World Bank’s ease of doing business index 
(World Bank, 2020) with sub-rankings of 139 in ‘getting electricity’ (due to low scoring on 
the reliability of supply and transparency of tariff index); 137 in ‘enforcing contracts’; and 
159 in ‘starting a business’.
Delays and cancellations of projects in the electricity and water sector should be closely 
monitored, as they will have a direct impact on Botswana’s ability to achieve the desired 
level of economic development through the ESP. Agriculture and water availability are also 
at risk, as climatic conditions are likely to worsen with climate change. 
1.1 The role of electricity in development in Botswana 
An overview of national electricity consumption by customer type is presented in Figure 2. 
Consumption by the commercial and domestic sectors have been steadily increasing since 
2009 (Figure 2), and government usage remained steady, while mining consumption 
peaked in 2015 and fell rapidly following the closure of operations at the BCL and Tati 
nickel mines in 2016. 
1 200
1 000
800
600
400
200
0
Electricity consumption by sector (GWh)
Mining Commercial Domestic Governement SAPP 
2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2018 2019
Figure 2 Evolution of electricity consumption by customer category (including exports to SAPP)
Source: Adapted from BPC (2019).The peak demand stands at 596 MW (BPC, 2019). Botswana imported 70 GWh, 127 GWh 
and 200 GWh of electricity from the Southern African Power Pool in 2017, 2018 and 2019, 
respectively.
Energy is recognised globally as essential to the economic development of any country 
and is considered a key driver for economic growth in the most important sectors of the 
economy.
• Energy for services: in 2019, Botswana ranked 139 in the Ease of Doing Business Index
on the indicator ‘getting electricity’; costs and reliability are of concern (World Bank, 
n.d). The current account balance of Botswana for 2019 shows a service sector at deficit 
of – 0.7% of the national GDP. Although the situation has slightly improved since 2014 
(-1.5% GDP), the sector is only expected to reach a net balance in 2022. Renewable 
energies have a significant role to play in the development of the services sector by 
providing reliable and sustainable energy supply. 
The communications sector has been growing steadily and has relied on solar PV for 
many decades. Today, Botswana has one of the highest cell phone penetration rates in 
Africa. Other social services in remote areas – such as health, water access and education 
– already depend on solar PV. According to the participants of the validation workshop 
undertaken for this study, the main challenge that has been reported for many years is 
the inability to maintain or repair this solar PV equipment in case of failures, as in remote 
areas there is a severe lack of training and availability of trained personnel.
• Energy for tourism: according to the IMF (2019), disruptions caused by the coronavirus 
could depress growth in tourism activity. A major issue for a sector that represents more 
than 13% of national GDP. Botswana may develop eco-tourism, supported by reliable, 
affordable energy. The tourism sector has already invested in renewable energy – in 
particular solar in eco-lodges and camps. Solar thermal and PV systems are usually seen 
as the best solutions compared to the traditional stand-alone diesel systems. Among 
the benefits of solar systems are the absence of noise, a reduction in maintenance and 
operation costs, and a positive image in the context of sustainable tourism.
• Energy for agriculture: with 2% of its GDP derived from agriculture, this sector in 
Botswana is underdeveloped and is predominantly subsistence-based. This is mainly 
due to traditional farming methods, repeated droughts and limited infrastructure 
(AfDB, 2018), as well as the sector’s vulnerability to climate events. Water pumping 
with renewable energy could help to limit dependence on rainfall and contribute to 
increased production yields. Increased use of biofuels could also have a positive impact 
on farming.
• Energy for industry: in recent years, the industrial basis of the economy has gradually 
diversified away from mining. Diversification has taken place through the development 
of the trade sector, which is vulnerable to recurrent power outages. In 2010, during 
a survey carried out by the World Bank more than 90% of the companies surveyed 
in Botswana suffered from power cuts for an average of three hours per day (World 
Bank, 2010). Estimated losses due to these interruptions amounted to nearly 4% of 
annual sales. Similarly, more than a third of companies perceived power cuts as a major 
constraint. Despite the fact that the surveys are from 2010 and following the major 
shortfalls of 2015, the situation for enterprises has not considerably improved. 
• Regional energy integration: Botswana is interconnected with its neighbours and is 
a member of the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP). Several projects are ongoing 
to reinforce these (SAPP, 2018), including the Botswana–South Africa interconnector 
(BOSA) and the Zimbabwe–Zambia–Botswana–Namibia Interconnector (ZIZABONA). 
These projects are aligned with the ESP, which aims for Botswana to become an energy 
surplus nation. The fulfilment of this ambition will require the establishment of a SAPP 
electricity market in which trade will allow Botswana to leverage national synergiestograph: Shutterstock2. ENERGY CONTEXT
1 Defined here as the Southern African Development Community (SADC): Angola, 
Botswana, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eswatini, Lesotho, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, South Africa, 
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
2.1. Regional energy context
The southern Africa region1 presents great disparities in terms of economic 
development – both between countries and over time (Figure 3). For 
instance, South Africa’s per capita GDP in 2019 was USD 13 034 compared to 
Lesotho’s USD 2 824. Despite these great inequalities, the regional trend is 
towards economic growth, with an average annual GDP growth rate of 4.31% 
between 2007 and 2018 as depicted in Figure 3 below.
Yearly per capita electricity consumption is also very uneven in the region 
(Figure 4). For example, per capita consumption for South Africa in 2018 
stood at 4 002 kWh/cap., compared to the Seychelles (4 434 kWh/cap.), 
Mauritius (2 475 kWh/cap.) and Botswana (1 554 kWh/cap.), all of which 
demonstrate an electricity consumption 20 to 30 times higher than Comoros, 
Madagascar, Malawi, the Democratic Republic of Congo or the United 
Republic of Tanzania, which range between 60 and 150 kWh per capita. 
5.00
6.00
7.00
4.00
3.00
1.00
0.00
200720082009201020112012201320142015201620172018
2.00
Percentage GDP growth (%)
Figure 3 Average GDP growth rate in the SADC region
Source: World Bank, n.d
otograph: ShutterstockThe lowest rates of access to electricity are found in Malawi, where just 18% of the 
population has access to electricity (leaving 15.7 million people without access) and the 
Democratic Republic of Congo with 19% access (where 67.7 million people lack access). 
Nine out of the sixteen Southern African Development Community (SADC) countries have 
access rates lower than 50% (e.g., up to 37.1 million people lack access to electricity in the 
United Republic of Tanzania [Figure 5]). Mauritius, Seychelles, Eswatini, South Africa and 
Comoros have the highest rates of access to electricity in the region. On average, almost 
50% of the population does not have access to electricity across the SADC as a whole, 
which corresponds to a total of 210 million persons (World Bank, 2019 a).
As highlighted by SADC (2018), the region began to witness a structural energy deficit in 
2007. Pressured by strong economic growth, the region faced power outages and rolling 
blackouts across the SADC Member States. The supply gap was estimated at 8 GW in 2014, 
due to insufficient generation capacity, and high transmission and distributions losses 
estimated at 19% in 2015 (SADC, 2019). 
UNECA (2018) lists the multiple drivers of the SADC electricity system, which comprise a 
mix of challenges and opportunities, including: 
• An over dependence on coal, combined with coal supply challenges; 
• Water challenges affecting the performance of thermal power plants;
• A need for further grid extensions;
• Strong GDP growth, including new mining developments causing further constraints to 
the grid; and
• Ageing equipment, with the bulk of baseload generation coming from equipment 
reaching 40 years old, and ageing transmission and distribution assets. 
The impact of this energy crisis is significant, with effects on the manufacturing industry, 
company closures, cost of doing business, reduction in government revenues and an overall 
slowdown in economic growth and development (UNECA2018)
5 000
4 500
4 000
3 500
3 000
2 500
2 000
1 500
1 000
0
500
Electriciy consumption per capita (2018) (kWh/cap.)
60 70 104 121 126 256 356 363 486 578 654
973
1 554
2 475
4 002
4 434
Comoros
Madagascar
Malawi
Democratic Republic of Congo
United Republic of Tanzania
Lesotho
Angola
Eswatini
Mozambique
Namibia
Zimbabwe
Zambia
Botswana
Mauritius
South africa
Seychelles
Figure 4 Yearly electricity consumption per capita for the SADC countries, 2018
Based on IRENA Statistics and World Bank data compiled from UN and national sources.The Southern African Development Community (SADC)
The Southern African Development Community (SADC), established in 1992, includes 
sixteen countries covering the southern part of Africa. The partnership promotes economic 
development, growth, peace and security, poverty alleviation, and improving quality of life 
based on democratic principles, fairness and sustainable development. SADC addresses 
various regional integration themes related to energy via different subsidiaries, such as the 
Southern African Development Community Centre for Renewable Energy and Efficiency 
(SACREEE), Southern African Power Pool (SAPP), Regional Petroleum and Gas Association 
(REPGA), Coal Association and Regional Electricity Regulators Association (RERA) 
(SACREEE, 2019). 
SADC (2016) published the first Regional Strategy and Action Plan for Renewable Energy 
and Energy Efficiency (REEESAP) in 2016. The strategy emphasises the added value 
of a regional approach to leveraging economies of scale and synergies amongst SADC 
members. The Energy Division under the SADC Secretariat, with the support of SACREEE, 
is responsible for facilitating the adoption of REEESAP through the establishment of 
national action plans.
Comoros
Madagascar
Malawi
Democratic Republic of Congo
United Republic of Tanzania
Lesotho
Angola
Eswatini
Mozambique
Namibia
Zimbabwe
Zambia
Botswana
Mauritius
South africa
Seychelles
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 120%
41.0%
39.8%
35.6%
91.2%
100.0%
53.9%
31.1%
18.0%
25.9%
47.0%
19.0%
76.5%
81.9%
43.3%
64.9%
97.4%
Figure 5 Electricity access rates in Southern Africa, 2018
Source: adapted from the World Bank (n.d.)
Botswana commits to achieve 15% GHG
emission reduction by 2030SADC Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency 
(SACREEE)
Officially launched in October 2018, the Southern African Development Community Centre 
for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (SACREEE) aims to promote access to modern 
energy services and improve energy security through the promotion of renewable energy 
and energy efficiency. SACREEE, mandated by SADC members, seeks to participate in the 
region by developing and executing programmes related to sustainable energy policy, 
capacity building, knowledge management, and the promotion of investment, innovation 
and entrepreneurship.
SACREEE has ongoing programmes and projects with multiple international partners, 
including: IRENA for the Africa Clean Energy Corridor and SADC Renewable Energy 
Entrepreneurship Support Facility; the European Union Technical Assistance Facility 
(EU-TAF) for the SADC Industrial Energy Efficiency Program (SIEEP); and the National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) for the Gender Mainstreaming and Women 
in Sustainable Energy program and the SACREEE SADC Energy Efficiency Program
(World Bank, n.d.). 
Box: The Renewable Energy Entrepreneurship Support Facility
In partnership with the ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) and the International 
Institute for Water and Environmental Engineering (2ie), IRENA established the ECOWAS Renewable Energy 
Entrepreneurship Support Facility in 2015. The Facility aims to enhance and strengthen the capacity of small- to 
medium-sized entrepreneurs in the renewables sector.
Through capacity building, technical advisory and mentorship support, more than 80 enterprises from all 15 ECOWAS 
member countries have so far been assisted over three annual cohorts. Approximately USD 1 million in debt financing 
has been accessed through the project proposals submitted to local funding institutions. The Facility also contributed 
to the creation of the Regional Solar PV Professionals Association.
In conjunction with the SADC Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (SACREEE), IRENA replicated the 
initiative in southern Africa. Established in 2017, the Facility has attracted nine partners comprising funding institutions, 
business incubation centres and technical training centres. With a focus on gender and youth development, the first 
call for applications from entrepreneurs was issued in 2019 and received 70 applications, of which 32 were selected for 
participation in the entrepreneurship programme.
The Facility conducted commercial and technical training in November 2020 and February 2021, respectively, for its 
first cohort of 32 entrepreneurs. The mentorship programme, which provides guidance to entrepreneurs on business 
development and growth, and refines their proposals to reach bankable levels, commenced in April 2021 for the
1
st cohort. 
A virtual workshop on renewable energy finance was jointly organised by IRENA and the SADC Centre for Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency form 3rd to 28th May 2021 to increase the confidence of financial institutions in sustainable 
energy systems and ensure that SMEs obtain project funding on affordable terms. 
The Facility conducted a virtual advisory board meeting workshop on 10 May 2021, in which the advisory board 
members provided advice and recommendations to support the sustainability of the Facility. 
Thereafter, the Facility launched the second round of applications for training and mentorship at the beginning of 2021 
and selected 33 applicants for support in April 2021.
Source: IRENAThe Southern African Power Pool (SAPP)
The Southern African Power Pool (SAPP) was established in 1995 through a Memorandum 
of Understanding. The current membership comprises twelve national utilities from SADC, 
two independent transmission companies and three independent power producers (IPPs). 
SAPP’s mission is to increase energy accessibility to rural communities seeking least cost, 
environmentally friendly solutions. 
Since 1999, SAPP has faced the challenge of power demand that is increasing faster than 
generation capacity. As an energy-deficient region, load-shedding and unmet demand are 
common in most SADC countries; in 2015, the equivalent of 8000 MW was not supplied 
(SADC, 2016).
As reported by the SAPP (2018), the main ongoing activities are:
• Generation and transmission projects to strengthen the transmission network among 
the countries of the SAPP. Transmission priority projects are defined as:
› interconnecting the outstanding members, namely, Angola, Malawi and the United 
Republic of Tanzania, which are still not interconnected to the SAPP grid; 
› strengthening transmission corridors such as the Central Corridors; and 
› evacuating power from new generation projects, as listed below.
• As per the recently adopted 2017 SAPP Pool Plan (SAPP, 2017), SAPP has identified 
a list of committed generation projects expected between 2018 to 2039 and priority 
interconnection investments. 
• Key generation projects in the SAPP Pool Plan include:
› Batoka, Zambia and Zimbabwe – 2 400 MW in 2023;
› Mphanda Nkuwa, Mozambique – 1 500 MW in 2028;
› Devil’s Gorge, Zambia and Zimbabwe – 1 200 MW in 2032;
› Inga 3 and 4, Democratic Republic of Congo – 4 800 in 2030; 9 426 MW in 2032, 
rising yearly to 11 654 MW in 2034; and
› Stiegler’s Gorge, United Republic of Tanzania – 1 048 MW in 2036; 2 096 MW in 2039.
• Key transmission projects in the SAPP Pool Plan include:
› Inga-Angola, 3 x 400 kV HVAC – 1 100 MW in 2020 (2 lines); 1 600 MW in 2034 (with 
a third line);
› Inga-Luano (Zambia) 500 kV HVDC – 2 000 MW in 2029;
› Inga-Limpopo (Gauteng) (SA), 600 kV HVDC – 3 000 MW in 2032; and
› STE (Mozambique), 2 x 400 kV HVAC 500 kV HVDC – phased development over 
2023–2028.2.2. Energy supply and demand in Botswana
Figures 6 and 7 present the energy balance in Botswana for 2018, describing the flows from 
production and imports (Figure 6) to total final energy consumption (Figure 7). Botswana’s 
total primary energy supply (TPES) primarily comprises oil products (34.7%), coal (47.7%) 
as well as (traditional) biofuels and waste (19.1%), (Figure 6). A large fraction of total final 
energy consumption (TFEC) (Figure 7) comes from biomass energy in the form of wood 
fuel (27.8%).
Oil products are primarily used for transport and marginally in the industrial sector. 
Traditional biomass represents a significant share of primary energy supply (20%). 
Electricity is mainly produced from coal, with a large proportion of the flow representing 
power losses (centre). Botswana has high energy dependency, as the largest proportion of 
overall energy consumption is imported, and oil-based products are mainly imported from 
South Africa (ICA, 2017). 
As represented in Figure 6, the biofuels and waste category (traditional biomass) is 
directed towards the residential sector. Electricity is marginal, relative to the transport and 
residential sectors. The largest electricity consumers are the commerce and public services, 
residential and mining sectors.
According to the IEA’s Clean Coal Centre, Botswana has estimated coal resources of 40 Gt 
(IEA , 2013). In 2014, the only two measured coal reserves were Morupule and Mmamabula 
basins, with a capacity of 7.2 Gt (MMEWR, 2017b). This abundant resource is underexploited 
as only a single coal mine, Morupule, is currently operating. 
Abundant coal bed methane (CBM) resources have been estimated at 196 trillion cubic 
feet (tcf), of which 60 tcf is located in the Kalahari Karoo Basin and 136 tcf in associated 
carboniferous shales (MMEWR, 2017b). Some companies are currently in the initial 
development planning stage for its extraction. 
Oil products imp 1 039
1 307
571
1 307 1 306
Statistical dierences
Coal prod
Bio/waste prod
Electricity imp
Stock changes Exports Power plants input
Oil products
stat di
Electricty stat di
Statistical dierences
Production and imports
(2 989 ktoe)
Figure 6 Total final energy consumption in Botswana, 2018
Source: IEA (2018).Demand forecast
The Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) 2019 annual report provides power demand 
projections, showing peak demand increasing from 596 MW in 2018 to 633 MW in 2023 
(Table 1). BPC’s plans are to supply the demand primarily from coal, with diesel as backup 
power, and a zero-net balance of trade. Compared to earlier plans (BPC, 2017 a) this version 
does not include planned solar capacities presented later in this report. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Capacity (MW)
2019
160
200
260
0
596
Emergency (Diesel)
Imports
Morupule B
Morupule A
Peak Demand
2020
160
150
260
100
605
2021
160
150
260
100
614
2022
160
150
260
100
623
2023
160
0
520
100
633
Table 1 Forecast supply–demand balance, 2019–2023
Source: BPC (2019).
Oil products
Consumption by sector
Coal
Biofuels and waste
Electricity
Non-energy use
Iron and steel
Chemical and petrochemical
Non-ferrous metals
Non-metallic minerals
Mining and quarrying
Food and tobacco
Paper pulp and print
Wood and wood products
Construction
Textile and leather
Non-specified (industry)
Road
Domestic aviation
Rail
Residential
Agriculture/forestry
Non-specified (other)
Non-energy use industry
Non-energy in transport
Commerce and public services
Total final consumption
(2 050 ktoe) Industry
Other
1 059
571
276
887
571
147
Figure 7 Total final energy consumption in Botswana by sector, 2018
Source: IEA (2018).Energy intensity 
According to the latest available data presented by the World Bank data portal, the increase 
in energy consumption has been accompanied by an increase in GDP. Over nearly two 
decades, GDP almost tripled (in current international PPP, from USD 14.4 billion in 2000 to 
USD 42.7 billion in 2018) and TFEC increased by 45%, from 1 408 toe in 2000 to 2 050 toe in 
2018. The GDP created by a unit of energy (in PPP, million per toe of TFEC) increased from 
10.22 to 20.8 over the same the period.
The World Bank (2017) plea, in its detailed examination of the causes of reduced energy 
intensity in the economy, notes that a large portion of this is attributable to increased 
economic output and only a marginal amount to energy efficiency improvements.
The statistics indicate a sharp increase in CO2
 emissions (2 780 kilotons in 2000 to
6 340 kilotons in 2016), but a slight decrease in CO2
 emissions per GDP (from 0.201 kg 
in 2000 to 0.171 kg in 2017 per PPP$ of GDP), potentially related to the slowing down of 
mining activities and progressive diversification of the economy.2
1 400
1 200
1 000
0
800
600
400
200
Coal Wind, solar, etc. Biofuels and waste Oil
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2018
Figure 8 Evolution of the total primary energy supply in Botswana, 2006-2016.
Source: adapted from IEA (2016)
Photograph: Shutterstock2.3 Electricity sector
The Ministry of Mineral Resources, Green Technology and Energy Security (MMGE) leads 
the electricity sector through the Department of Energy, while the Botswana Energy 
Regulatory Authority (BERA) is tasked with regulating the sector by guaranteeing a 
competitive environment. 
Established in 1970, Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) is the state-owned utility 
company. BPC is responsible for electricity generation, transmission, distribution and retail. 
South African utility provider, ESKOM, has exported to Botswana since 2017 to complement 
national production, especially during peak periods. A number of renewable energy projects 
have been initiated, with the private sector involved in bidding. However, no projects in the 
form of IPPs have materialised in Botswana. 
Electricity supply
Botswana relies heavily on fossil fuels for its electricity generation. As shown in Table 2, 
the country’s installed generating capacity stands at 893.3 MW, comprising 600 MW from 
Morupule B (coal-fired), 132 MW from Morupule A (coal-fired), 90 MW from Orapa power 
plant (diesel peaking plant), 70 MW from Matshelagabedi power plant (diesel peaking 
plant), (MMEWR, 2017b) and 1.3 MW from Phakalane solar photovoltaic power plant. 
Although the installed capacity can cover peak demand – which is estimated at 610 MW – 
BPC’s interconnected system faces several challenges: 
• In 2017, Morupule A did not produce electricity and was closed down for refurbishment. 
It produced 25 GWh in 2018 but had to be shut down again to remedy defects identified 
during commissioning (BPC, 2019). 
• Morupule B has been running under capacity since its commissioning in 2013 due to 
plant breakdown and system failures. BPC is currently undertaking remediation, which 
is expected to be completed in 2023/24, with all units running at 100% production. 
• The diesel power plants of Orapa (90MW) and Matshelagabedi (70MW, rented to 
Alstom) were conceived to support peak load but are being used for regular electricity 
supply (BPC, 2017a). The Corporation’s two diesel power stations were not used during 
2018 and remained on standby, as it is cheaper to import power than it is to generate 
from a diesel-fuelled facility.
POWER GENERATION TECHNOLOGY INSTALLED 
CAPACITY (MW)
CAPACITY CONTRIBUTION 
(MW) 2019
GENERATION
(GWH) 2018
Morupule A Coal 132 0 25
Morupule B Coal 600 260 2 974
Orapa Diesel 90
160
0
Matshelagabedi Diesel 70 0
Phakalane Solar 1.3 N/C
Imports SAPP N/A 200 594
Table 2 Centralised generation outlook in Botswana for the year 2018 (updated 2019)
Source: adapted from BPC (2019 & 2020).The lack of capacity to satisfy electricity demand requires regular imports from surrounding 
countries. Until recently, Botswana relied on electricity imports to cover up to 94% of its 
demand. With the progressive recovery of the Morupule B plant, the share of electricity 
imports in total supply decreased to about 17%, or 594 GWh in 2018 (from 1 297 GWh
in 2017 due to lower demand from the mining sector). The regularity of imports led, in 2017, 
to an agreement between ESKOM and BPC for the firm sale of electricity for a three-year 
period (BPC, 2017b).3
In addition to installed capacity, there are many potential power generation projects in the 
pipeline. Other private initiatives for coal bed methane or underground coal gasification 
generation are at different stages of development through the Mamba, Lesedi and 
Lethlakeng projects.4 On the renewable energy side, numerous projects have been initiated 
over the past decade, including: 
• 2006: a 200 MW concentrated solar power (CSP) project billed for the mining town of 
Jwaneng was discussed. Due to high tariffs and recommendations from other studies, 
the CSP technology project was discontinued. It was replaced by 100 MW solar PV 
project, broken into to two 50 MW projects, one to be constructed in Jwaneng and the 
one in Selibe-Phikwe. 
• 2017: BPC issued an expression of interest for a joint venture covering the two 50 MW 
solar power plants. Although procurement was cancelled in May 2019, BPC received 166 
bids from local and international power producers. The decision to cancel the projects 
was later re-visited and bidders were re-invited to tender for the project. A bidders’ 
conference was held at the end of August 2020. The two 50 MW projects have since 
been delayed, because of changes to the project structure by the Ministry of Minerals, 
Green Technology and Energy Security (MMGE). The new tender will be 100% IPP as 
BPC and MMGE are trying to liberalise the market. Currently the 100 MW (2 x 50 MW) 
project is still under evaluation and is expected to be awarded in April/May 2021.
• In May 2017, BPC issued an expression of interest for a joint venture regarding the 
deployment of hybrid networks in 20 rural areas of Botswana and 12 on-grid solar 
photovoltaic projects to be connected on the distribution grid (1–4 MW projects with 
a total of 35 MW) at end of 2018. At the closure of the tender in June 2017, 111 offers 
were submitted (BPC, 2017 c), illustrating the appetite of the private sector to engage 
in the rural electrification programme with BPC. Two projects have been awarded and 
10 were marked for re-tendering. The two awarded in February 2020 are in Shakawe 
and Bobonong. They were exempted from the need to undertake full environmental 
impact assessments (EIAs) and are currently undergoing environmental management 
plan (EMP) development. The EMPs are expected to be completed in December 2020 
with the commencement of construction in January 2021 and an expected completion 
date of June 2022. With regards to the 10 projects that were re-tendered, adjudication 
is still ongoing, and is expected to be completed in the first half of 2021; the award is 
expected in late-2021. 
• A pilot on-grid solar project, for the Phakalane 1.3 MW plant, was commissioned in 2012. 
This project, developed with the support of the Japanese government, aimed to prove 
feasibility and encourage new foreign investment in the sector.
• A project initiated by the private sector identified a potential zone to implement 
100 MW of wind with a capacity factor of 24%, which will generate over 210 GWh 
per year. This project at a very early stage has been proposed to be designed on a 
build–own–operate–transfer (BOOT) basis after 20 years of service (CD4CDM, 2013).
The project is not moving forward.
3 Additional information on this bilateral agreement will be sought through interviews.• The University of Botswana installed a 20 kW experimental solar plant in Mokolodi 
village (Gaborone) with net metering and resell of excess power to the BPC grid.
• Other examples can be found (with limited details) of stand-alone applications, such 
as the 20 kW installed at Multi-waste building at Commerce Park in Gaborone; 200 kW 
installed at Botho University in Gaborone; and more than 32 kW installed at different 
residences in Gaborone.
Ongoing and short-term developments 
• The development of twelve grid-tied solar power plants by IPPs in pre-selected rural 
villages is being pursued by BPC and plans to for IPPs to establish 100 MW in gridconnected solar capacity (2 x 50 MW) (BPC, 2018 a, p. 12) in Jwaneng and Selebi Phikwe 
are ongoing. A review of renewable energy feed-in tariffs (REFIT) is also ongoing, based 
on those developed in 2011, to encourage greater and more effective private sector 
participation in power generation in Botswana. 
• A 20-village extension project for solar mini grids is underway, entailing rapid load 
assessments in villages where solar PV plants have been installed to power primary 
schools as well as associated teachers’ accommodation. The objective of the exercise is 
to consider extending the currently installed primary school solar PV systems to cover 
other government facilities within the same villages.
• A proposal to install 7 000 Solar Street Lights in 20 villages is being considered, 
supported by a Chinese grant that is already available.
• A national feasibility study is underway for the implementation of waste-to-energy 
projects and to advise on an associated road map.
• Through the Rooftop Solar Deployment Programme, policy, regulation, standards and 
administrative processes were developed and completed in 2020 with the support of 
Power Africa.
• Through its Biofuels Project, the Department of Energy (DOE) – with technical support 
from the University of Botswana (UB) and the Department of Agricultural Research 
(DAR) under the Ministry of Agricultural Development and Food Security – is engaged 
in a research project that seeks to stimulate the development of the local Biofuel 
industry. An extension of the Jatropha project completed in 2017, this research project 
focuses on indigenous plants for oil potential and aims to produce biofuel guidelines 
and blending ratios.
Grid infrastructure 
In the context of reducing energy dependence on neighbouring countries and enhancing 
the reliability of the national power system, BPC is pursuing a number of grid improvement 
projects, such as the North-West Transmission Grid Connection (NWTGC) and Rakola Grid 
Extension projects. The NWTGC aims to extend the transmission grid to the North-West, 
Chobe and Ghanzi districts to meet the demand from upcoming mining operations and 
the Zambezi Integrated Agro-Commercial Development (ZIACD) project (BPC, 2017a). 
The project began in January 2019 and was scheduled for completion in December of 
2020; however, due to COVID-19 constraints it was completed and officially launched by 
the President of the Republic of Botswana in April 2021. The construction of the Rakola 
substation, a new 220 kV bulk supply point, was completed and commissioned in 2017 
(BPC, 2017 a; BPC, 2018 a). According to BPC’s annual report, power losses were estimated 
at 15.3% in 2018.Costs and tariffs
BPC has been in a precarious financial state for many years due to high import costs, 
operational difficulties and inoperative assets, and has been kept afloat by government 
subsidies. The cash flow difficulties experienced by BPC were reflected by its net margin 
ratio of -5.1% in 2017. In 2018, for the first time since 2009, BPC posted an operating profit 
in excess of USD 27.4 million, before receiving a government grant of USD 133.4 million.
As reported by BPC (BPC, 2017a), the Government of Botswana has committed to provide 
fiscal support to the Corporation to: achieve cost-reflective tariffs; subsidise operations 
(through a medium-term plan of tariff subsidies to compensate for the unrealistic cost 
of electricity to consumers and operational subsidies to meet loan obligations and other 
operating costs); and provide an equity injection for infrastructure development.
To improve its financial position, BPC has launched its internal MASA 2020 strategy, 
through which the Corporation seeks to achieve profitability, efficiency and cost-reflective 
tariffs by 2020, as presented in Table 3. 
BPC’s cost recovery ratio rose from 64.1% in 2010 to 98.2% in 2019. The gap is compensated 
for by the government grant, which brought BPC to full capital cost recovery in 2019. The 
situation is beneficial to the electricity sector, as the financial position of BPC continues to 
improve over time.
The tariff structure (Table 4) shows that the first 200 kWh are incentivised for domestic 
consumers. Medium and large businesses benefit from preferential electricity prices, whilst 
the highest tariffs apply to governmentwater pumping and small businessesThis tariff 
Francistown
Maun
Selebi-Phikwe
SOUTH
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
NAMIBIA
Matimba P/S
Thamaga
2x215km
47km
51km
Tsabong
52km
Morupule A
Phokoje
Tati
Morupule B
Katima
Lobatse
Bulawayo
Spitzkop
Jwaneng
Sowa
Mowana
Pandamatenga
Hwange
ZAMBIA
To Auas
348km
25km
Kanye
Livingston
Molepolole
Heuningvlei
Omaere
Orapa-90MW
SHAKAWE Samochima
Substation
DML
Hana
BK11
AK6
Gantsi
Watershed
ZIZABONA
Proposed Existing
33kV
132kV
220kV
330kV
400kV
GABORONE
Victoria
Kasane
30km Orapa
Figure 9 The power system of Botswana
Source: Botswana Power Company
Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only. Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the 
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.The journey to cost recovery has been driven by sharp increases in electricity tariffs and 
revenue collection, increasing revenue per customer, and it is difficult to assess progress 
on operational performance. For instance, system losses have increased by five percentage 
points over the last decade. 
According to IRENA’s internal analysis, the cost recovery ratio is based on net operating 
expenses. The current price setting mechanism appears to be based on ‘rate of return’ more 
than ‘incentive-based’ regulation. The concerns associated with ‘rate of return’ regulation 
include the possibility for a pass-through of inefficiencies to end-consumers – which is 
potentially the case for Botswana at the moment. 
The definition of tariffs has been transferred to the Botswana Energy Regulation Agency 
(BERA), following its creation in September 2017. BERA will ensure that tariffs are fixed 
on the basis of a transparent tariff methodology – including some level of performance 
management – through its Electricity Committee. The tariff settings, power purchase 
agreements (PPA) and tariff definition benefits are also overseen by its Electricity 
Department, and tariff definition benefits from the advice of the Finance and Procurement 
Department.
2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010
(A) Total sales (GWh) 3 294 3 326 3 349 3 479 3 495 3 449 3 310 3 198 3 118 3 109
(B) Total revenues 
('000 USD) 302 683 270 860 249 196 257 144 228 022 203 418 178 578 163 404 136 101 102 193
(C) =
(B) / (A)
Average effective 
electricity tariff
(US cents/kWh)
9.2 8.1 7.4 7.4 6.5 5.9 5.4 5.1 4.4 3.3
(D)
Average cost / 
unit (2020 US 
cents/kWh)
9.4 8.9 11.6 12.5 11.6 9.4 9.8 7.7 6.1 5.1
(E) =
(C ) / (D)
Cost recovery 
ratio 98.2% 91.4% 64.1% 59.1% 56.2% 63.0% 55.0% 66.8% 71.3% 64.1%
(F)
Revenue grant 
from the 
government of 
Botswana
('000 USD)
72 000 131 130 150 075 208 922 209 412 133 920 78 390 45 720 40 860 0
(G) =
(F) / (A)
Grant contribution 
per kWh sold (US 
cents/kWh)
0.2 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.0
(H) =
(G) / (D)
Grant 
contribution to 
cost recovery 
2.3% 4.4% 3.9% 4.8% 5.2% 4.1% 2.4% 1.9% 2.1% 0.0%
(I) =
(H) + (E)
Overall cost 
recovery on 
net operating 
expenses 
100.5% 95.8% 68.0% 63.9% 61.4% 67.2% 57.4% 68.7% 73.5% 64.1%
(J) Total consumers 463 250 434 795 409 925 376 003 367 003 343 050 315 669 291 338 251 773 214 170
(K) =
(B) / (F)
Revenue / 
consumer
(USD / consumer)
653 623 608 684 621 593 566 561 541 477
(L) System losses 14.0% 15.3% 14.9% 15.1% 14.6% 7.5% 10.3% 12.3% 13.9% 10.7%
Table 3 BPC cost recovery ratio and performance.Rural electrification
According to the World Bank’s data portal (World Bank, 2017 a), the electrification rate in 
Botswana in 2017 was 62.8%, of which urban areas accounted for 80.4% and rural areas 
24.2%. Rural electrification in Botswana has been ongoing through various programmes 
since the 1980’s, and the Government of Botswana has set a national electricity access 
target of 100% by 2030, under the SEforAll Initiative. 
Grid expansion and mini-grids
Two programmes are currently dedicated to facilitating the population’s access to 
electricity: The Rural Electrification Program (REP), under the Revised National Policy for 
Rural Development, and the National Electricity Standard Connection (NESC) program.
The National Electricity Standard Connection (NESC) entails a uniform household electricity 
connection charge of BWP 5 000 (USD 461.504) in all recognised electrified settlements, 
villages, towns and cities. In order to effectively implement these connections, the 
Government approved the establishment of a National Electrification Fund (NEF), which 
generates revenue through a levy of 5 thebe (USD 0.0046) per kilowatt-hour on electricity 
sold by the Botswana Power Corporation. The NEF finances the difference between the 
actual market household electricity connection cost and the NESC cost.
As of 2017, more than 107,000 households have been connected under this scheme (SAPP, 
2018); in 2019, 11 759 households were connected to the electricity network through the 
NESC scheme (BPC, 2019).
In 2018, the Government of Botswana issued an off-grid solar action plan, supported 
by funding from the World Bank’s Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme
(GoB, 2018a, 2018b), that proposes the development of rural electrification projects.
In terms of households’ access, however, the study notes that 126 out of 493 villages might 
not be connected due to their remoteness from the grid. Considering the high costs of 
grid connection incurred by consumers, the estimated consumption of 175 kWh/month at
BWP 70 (USD 6.46) might bring isolated PV systems close to grid parity in such remote 
areas, considering the falling costs of PV and storage. 
• The action plan estimates that 60% of unelectrified households could be connected, 
increasing the access rate by 19% to 84% overall. This would require 200 000 households 
to be electrified through 145 000 installations
SECTOR
FIXED CHARGE (PER MONTH) ENERGY CHARGE (P/KWH) DEMAND CHARGE (P/KW)
Pula USD/kWh Pula/kWh USD/kWh Pula/kW USD/kW
Domestic (up to 200 kWh) 32.45 2.99 0.938 0.0867 - -
Domestic (above 200 kWh) 32.45 2.99 1.303 0.1199 - -
Small Business (up to 500 kWh) 100.89 9.31 1.136 0.1052 - -
Small Business (above 200 kWh) 100.89 9.31 1.684 0.1550 - -
Medium Business 100.89 9.31 0.858 0.7937 240.618 22.2094
Large Business 100.89 9.31 0.773 0.7107 226.491 20.9052
Government 100.89 9.31 2.412 0.2224 - -
Water Pumping 100.89 9.31 1.732 0.1596 - -
Table 4 Botswana electricity tariffs, 2020
Source: BPC, Tariffs, www.bpc.bw/customer-service/tariffs• For public facilities, the action plan foresees the electrification of 43 schools, one clinic, 
12 health centres and government facilities in 52 villages.
The action plan calls for further geospatial analysis to determine the final location of the 
installations that considers BPC’s network expansion plans. Provided there is limited risk for 
investors – i.e., that that the location would eventually be grid-connected – and if demand 
estimates and ‘willingness to pay’ assumptions can be validated, the implementation of the 
off-grid action plan could offer attractive investment opportunities for the private sector.
BPC actively participates in efforts to achieve the objectives set out by the initiative, and 
the 2019 budget speech declared that, by the end of 2018, the Rural Electrification Program 
had electrified around 402 villages out of the 493 villages targeted by the Government. 
According to BPC (2018), fifteen more villages were electrified during the year and network 
extensions were completed in another 45 villages that had outgrown their coverage, 
reducing the number of un-electrified villages from 107 to 92. In the coming financial year, 
41 villages will be electrified and network extensions will be carried out in 72 villages. The 
target is to electrify all villages in the next five years, with all households being connected 
to the national grid. 
To achieve this, BPC will work with the Government to address the costs of connection 
(currently subsidised through the NESC scheme) with internal household wiring.
A consolidation of assets is ongoing, with the transfer of mini-grid projects to the Energy 
Ministry. This involves 20 systems from a previous donation (50 kW) that currently power 
local schools and neighbouring facilities. The plants are operated by the local authorities, 
and electricity is supplied for free, including to the teachers’ facilities. 
In May 2017, BPC issued an expression of interest for a joint venture regarding the 
deployment of hybrid networks in 20 rural areas of Botswana. At the closure of the tender 
in June 2017, 111 offers had been submitted (BPC, 2017c) , demonstrating the appetite of the 
private sector to engage in the rural electrification programme with BPC. 
Today, the overall installed PV capacity in solar homes and small-scale systems is formally 
unknown, as no agency or institution keeps track of the deployment of such systems. A 
solar thermal and PV market exists, as numerous private companies provide sales and 
installation of solar home systems, and the creation of the Solar Industries Association 
of Botswana (SIAB) and the Renewable Energy Association of Botswana (REAB) has 
contributed to the expansion of this market.
Box: Togo Case Study
The Togolese Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Agency (AT2ER), supported by the European Union and the 
IFC, commissioned a full assessment of the viability of mini-grid business plans for 318 villages across the country. 
Based on ground-collected socio-economic data (household surveys), the study established the load profile, capacity 
and willingness to pay for each village, as well as productive uses. The study then performed a technical dimensioning 
and financial analysis of each potential system, based on the most recent investment cost estimates. This study, and the 
data collected, including GIS-based mini-grid designs, are shared with potential bidders, thus improving the chances 
of success of the national rural electrification programme. In the case of Botswana, such background information is not 
available to support the rural electrification scheme. This creates uncertainty on the dimensioning and risk pricing for 
these investments.
Source: TogoFirst (2019).Box: The BPC renewable energy roadmap
A company presentation from BPC (BPC, 2018b) asummarises its renewable energy strategy to diversify the company’s 
energy mix. The strategic document focuses on solar PV development, including the following:
· 100 MW of solar PV (2 x 50 MW): in 2017, BPC issued an expression of interest for a joint venture with BPC for a 
100 MW solar power plan. The procurement was cancelled in May 2019, but BPC had received 166 bids from local and 
international power producers. According to the BPC 2018 Annual Report, financial, legal and engineering advisers 
have been appointed to assist during the procurement phase of the project and to ensure that BPC achieves its goal 
of realising the design, procurement, construction, ownership and operation of a 100 MW solar power plant by 2021.
· 12 grid-connected PV plants (Figure 10): in May 2018, BPC initiated procurement for 12 solar plants with a total 
capacity of 35.4 MW (BPC, 2018c), and with BPC as the off-taker. Two projects have been awarded the tender, while 
10 were disqualified. The re-tendering process is now underway (BPC, 2018a). 
· 20 solar PV off-grid villages (Figure 10).
Green Energy Storage
Solar PV Plant
50 MW PV Solar Plant
Solar PV Hybrid O Grid (Remote Villages)
Grid Connected (1-5MW) Solar PV Plants
3. 20 Solar PV O Grid for Villages
At Inception Stage
2. 12 X Grid Connected PV
At Tender Stage - Developer 
Selection 
Commercial Operation 
2020/21
1. 100MW Solar PV (2X50MW)
Procurement of Developer In 
progress (Open Tender). 
Commercial Operation 2021
Figure 10 BPC’s renewable energy plan
Source: BPC (2018b).
Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only. Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the 
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundariesThe market has also been developed by NGOs promoting solar-powered pumps and lighting. 
One example is the Renewable Energy Rural Electrification Programme (RERE), launched 
by UNDP and GEF (UNDP, 2005; UNDP GEF, 2011), with the then Ministry of Minerals, 
Energy and Water Resources. The Department of Energy was the executing agency for the 
project, while the public–private partnership, BPC Lesedi, was the implementing agency. 
The RERE estimated 25–35% of the 140 000 to 160 000 of households could meet their 
basic electricity needs with small PV systems. By replacing fossil fuels, such as petrol 
and diesel, wood, paraffin and coal, with PV and LPG, the project sought to power rural 
homes and communities whilst also reducing national energy-related CO2
 emissions. The 
objectives were ambitious:
• Implement PV lantern/LPG systems for 5 152 households in 88 selected villages. 
• Install solar home systems (SHS) for 1 373 households in 88 selected villages (through 
cash sales, lay-by and credit models). 
• Install, operate and monitor a mobile PV mini-grid (one village). 
• Provide basic, PV-based electricity services to 6 500 households in five years, and a 
total of 45 000 households within 20 years.
However, the RERE reached a fraction of this potential before being liquidated
(UNDP, 2011). 
While several solar systems have been installed in recent years, many systems are no longer 
working. Most often, lack of maintenance and follow-up, combined with panel degradation, 
reduces the life expectancy of the systems to only 3–5 years. Deficiencies in user training 
and the unavailability of technical support are the main causes of these failures (Mooiman 
& Matlotse, 2016). 
The results of the programme were inconclusive and potentially even created a negative 
precedent for this market segment. The RERE final evaluation report (UNDP, 2011) concluded 
that the conditions for implementation, rather than market scale, was the main concern. 
It identified learnings from the programme and formulated recommendations moving 
forward. In particular, consistent with the outcomes of stakeholder workshops, it noted: 
• The need for an Electrification Master Plan. Such a plan, featuring both grid- and nongrid electrification, should include clear timeframes and connection rates. The absence 
of such a plan was identified as a bottleneck for private sector participation owing 
to the increased costs and perceived risk. The report recommended that the plan 
should feature strategies for grid expansion and mini grids (captured by the Integrated 
Resource Plan); 
• The need for technical standards, such as those endorsed by Lightning Global; and
• The need to clearly define the role of the private sector, available funding mechanisms, 
financing sources and effective procurement procedures, with appropriate timelines.
Currently, the Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) implements the Rural Electrification 
Programme, which had electrified 82% of 493 selected villages by 2018.5
 This electrification 
programme is complemented by the NESC programme, which offers a flat cost for connection 
to the grid in selected villages. For locations outside the scope of the NESC, since 2018, the 
government has also been implementing an Off-grid Solar Action Plan (OSAP) for public 
facilities. The plan provides clear objectives in terms of solar electrification: • To provide access to 43 remaining primary schools, most of which have existing nonfunctional PV systems;
• To provide access to one remaining unelectrified clinic with maternity facilities, and 
provide access to the 12 health posts with defunct PV systems that will not receive 
improved access under the Ministry of Local Government (MoLG) programme; and
• To provide access to government facilities in 52 additional villages, most of which do not 
have existing PV systems.
Through a consolidation of assets that will see the transfer of mini-grid projects to the 
Energy Department, including 20 system mini-grids of various capacities totalling 2 280 kW 
that currently power local schools and staff housing. 
Discussions are ongoing to expand these systems into a village mini-grid to electrify zones 
that did not benefit from the initial grant. This potential is sizeable but would require a 
deeper evaluation and a rural electrification plan. 
For the 20 villages currently within the scope of the expansion, these projects would 
involve investing in systems and grid expansion as well as addressing connection costs. 
This stage of the discussions foresees investment in the form of a government grant to BPC 
(pending) and the potential for connection costs to be subsidised through expanding the 
NESC programme to rural areas.6
Although little is known about the potential demand, willingness and capacity to pay, or 
adoption rates, grid-connected tariffs are foreseen for these rural areas, with the view that 
the systems would operate at a loss and put an additional burden on BPC’s balance sheet.7
Rooftop Solar Programme (RTS) 
The Government of Botswana is implementing its Rooftop Solar Programme to create an 
environment in which end-users can generate their own electricity and sell any excess to 
BPC. The Programme is a suitable alternative mechanism to increase the uptake of solar 
energy and facilitate private sector participation. It entails the development of rooftop 
solar guidelines, applicable rules, regulations, standards, tariffs and a review of processes.8
The guidelines define the framework and administrative process for the implementation 
of small-scale grid-tied solar photovoltaic (PV) systems, either roof or ground mounted. 
The system-wide aggregate capacity of the Programme in the first 12 months is capped 
at 10 MW. At the time of writing this report, applications are still being received by BPC.
The RTS program will provide access for domestic commercial and Industrial (C&I) 
consumers to produce solar-generated electricity for their own use, on a first-come-firstserved basis; it will allow net-metering for domestic customers with grid-tied ground or 
rooftop-mounted solar systems generating up to 35 kW and up to 1 MW for C&I customers. 
It will also track and credit excess kWh generated towards the next billing cycle; allow 
net-metering customers to sell excess generation back to BPC annually; and be capped at 
10 MW for the first 12 months, with annual re-evaluations.
6 Stakeholder workshop.Non-power uses
Owing to Botswana’s semi-arid climate, low soil fertility and erratic rainfall, only 0.65% of 
land is suitable for arable agriculture. Therefore, the agricultural sector (mainly comprising 
production of sorghum, maize, millet and cowpeas) accounts for only 3% of GDP. Wind 
energy has rarely been used in Botswana; few local farmers have adopted it for water 
pumping. Other than the aforementioned, no additional initiatives have been identified. 
Under the patronage of the Ministry of Mineral Resources, Green Technology and Energy 
Security, a feasibility study is ongoing regarding the development of waste-to-energy 
in Botswana. Current findings indicate gaps related to the absence of Integrated Waste 
Management Plans and challenges related to revenues and costs. 
The Government of Botswana, in partnership with UNDP, is implementing a GEF-financed 
biogas and agro-waste project in South-eastern Botswana, with a view to encouraging lowcarbon investments and public–private partnerships. The ultimate goals are to establish 
a sustainable biogas industry and a sustainable means of managing agricultural waste 
(primarily organic waste). The programme, which is expected to be completed in 2022, 
has trained masons for the construction of small-scale digesters and, so far, 34 units have 
been deployed.
2.4 Climate action
GHG emissions for Botswana are projected to increase from 26 386.6 Gg CO2 equivalent (eq.) 
in 2012 to 48 973.5 Gg CO2
 by 2030 (Government of Botswana, 2019). The energy sector 
is the main emitter; in 2015, it contributed 87% of total emissions excluding the landuse, land-use change and forestry sector (MENRCT, 2019). According to its first National 
Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement, Botswana aims to reduce 
overall emissions by 15% between 2010 and 2030 – mainly through energy sector initiatives 
involving stationary and mobile sources (Government of Botswana, 2015b). Botswana 
launched the National Energy Policy (Government of Botswana, 2020b) and is preparing 
draft policies on, climate change, waste management and integrated transport that set 
out measures to combat climate change and achieve the pledges articulated in the NDC 
document (Government of Botswana, 2019). 
According to Botswana’s NDC, approximately USD 18.4 billion is required to achieve the set 
target of a 15% GHG emission reduction by 2030. According to the initial NDC, Botswana 
must: 
• Identify funding sources for mitigation measures;
• Channel more contributions from government and international sources to support 
these measures;
• Assess related impacts on economic growth; and
• Develop a legal framework capable of supporting a 15% emissions reduction.
According to the country’s Third National Communication to UNFCCC, the Government of 
Botswana has been intensifying its efforts to reduce GHG emissions, with an emphasis on 
adopting renewable energy. The mitigation projects currently under implementation in the 
country include: • Biogas plants: there are a number of potential biogas projects in the pipeline for 
implementation; mainly the Botswana Meat Commission biogas plant (2.5 MW), 
Mmamashia Biogas plant (1 MW), Mabesekwa Bio plant (50 kW) and household biogas 
plants (6 m3
 x 1 500). The combined, estimated avoided GHG emissions from these 
projects is approximately 190 Gg CO2
 eq. by 2030. 
• Solar power stations: there are various mini on-grid to off-grid solar power stations, 
some of which are in operation and others that are undergoing feasibility studies. The 
capacities of these solar power stations range from 32 kW to 50 MW. Operational PV 
plants include Phakalane (1.3 MW), 60 kW mini plants installed in 21 primary schools 
and 32 kW mini power stations powering camp sites in the delta. At full operation, the 
solar power stations have the potential to reduce GHG emissions by 261 Gg CO2
 eq. by 
the year 2030.
• Street lighting: a solar street lighting project is currently underway, being implemented 
by government through the Botswana Institute for Technology Research and Innovation 
(BITRI) to reduce reliance on coal-based electricity generation. So far, 850 streetlights 
have been installed throughout the country, leading to an estimated GHG emissions 
reduction of 0.24 Gg CO2
 eq. Under a planning scenario to install 1 000 streetlights per 
year, they have the potential to reduce national GHG emissions by 3.87 Gg CO2
 eq. by 
2030.
• An efficient lighting programme was implemented by BPC in 2012 to improve electricity 
saving by giving households CFL bulbs for free and replacing their incandescent light 
bulbs. It is estimated that CFL can save up to 60% of electricity relative to incandescent 
light bulbs. This mitigation action contributed to a GHG emissions reduction of about 
145 Gg CO2
 eq. in 2012 and is projected to achieve 300 Gg CO2 eq. by 2030. Retrofitting 
CFLs with LEDs increases the mitigation potential.
• Solar-powered boreholes: farmers in the country are also voluntarily switching from 
diesel powered pumps to solar powered boreholes, influenced mainly by their costeffectiveness. Similar to other solar appliances, solar-powered boreholes remove 
the need to use fossil fuel and petroleum products and thus reduce GHG emissions. 
Currently, it is estimated that there are about 537 solar-powered boreholes, with a 
combined emission reduction potential of 0.55 Gg CO2
 eq., rising to 169 Gg of CO2 eq. 
by 2030.
• Solar geysers: although solar geysers have been in existence for over 50 years in the 
country, their adoption is extremely low. According to a household survey, only 0.2% 
of households were using solar power for heating in 2015/16 (BPC, 2018 a), while 
BPC estimated that only 3% of high-income households were using solar geysers.
At 0.14%, it is estimated that only around 750 households use solar energy for heating. 
This translates into 0.07 Gg CO2
 emission reduction, which is projected to increase to
8 Gg CO2
emissions reduction by 2030. 
One example of an active solar geyser initiative is SOLTRAIN, the Southern African Solar 
Thermal project, running from 2019 to 2023. The aim of the project is to provide framework 
development to support uptake of solar thermal technologies to meet national Energy 
Efficiency targets through policy engagement, capacity building, grant for demonstration 
of technologies. It includes activities such as quality training, cooperation support with 
the GoB, dissemination of information and awareness raising; and
• Methane capture and usage as an energy source: this is another mitigation project that 
is currently being undertaken at the Glen Valley wastewater treatment plant, where 
methane is captured and flared to heat up oxidation ponds. Methane as an energy gas 
can be captured and used for generating electricity, heating up the ponds to speed up 
anaerobic processes, or as cooking gas. Capturing methane reduces GHG emissions by 
53 Gg CO
eqand is projected to increase to 400 Gg COeqby 2030The National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (UNDP, 2018b) envisions a society 
that is “climate-resilient, and whose development follows a low carbon development 
pathway, in pursuit of prosperity for all”. The strategy is designed to provide stimulus 
for Botswana making significant progress on adaptation and mitigation, whilst meeting 
its socio-economic development goals, realising Vision 2036, and achieving the UN 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). As the strategy foresees an emission reduction 
target, mitigation strategies suggest a sustainable energy component. Both the strategy 
and action plan build on seven identical strategic interventions:
• Develop a comprehensive financial and tax incentives programme for energy efficiency, 
energy conservation, and clean energy use in micro, small, medium-sized and rural 
community enterprises.
• Develop a Low Carbon Pathways Methodology and Guidance Toolkit for Botswana and 
conduct training workshops for relevant officials in all ministries (in their own language) 
overseeing carbon-intensive sectors to adopt the low carbon pathway approach into 
their planning cycles.
• Adopt and fully implement the Botswana Renewable Energy Strategy, finalised in 2017.
• Adopt and fully implement the draft net metering guidelines finalised in 2018 to 
incentivise growth in domestic and commercial solar power generation and usage.
• Increase the levels of incentives for renewable energy and conservation-related 
technologies and equipment under Botswana’s Manufacturing Investment Incentive and 
Import Duty Exemption.
• Increase the incentives for renewable energy and energy efficiency related technologies 
and equipment such as solar power to households and businesses.
• Design, establish and operationalise a multi-sectoral greenhouse gas emissions 
monitoring, reporting, and verification system in compliance with United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) standards, to annually measure 
progress against the NDC target of 15% GHG reduction in absolute terms over the 2010 
baseline.
otograph: ShutterstockBox: Climate Investment Platform (CIP)
The CIP is a global initiative supported by IRENA, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and Sustainable 
Energy for All (SEforAll), in co-operation with the Green Climate Fund (GCF). The CIP’s objective is to step up climate 
action and translate ambitious national climate targets into concrete investments on the ground (IRENA, n.d. a). Whilst 
initially focused on energy transition, the ultimate goal of the initiative is to accelerate investments in renewable energy 
and enable the success of the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs).
The platform offers an avenue to strengthen existing collaboration and presents an opportunity to consider ways to 
more effectively bring together stakeholders to catalyse action, all within existing institutional structures and in line 
with the respective mandates of the partner organisations.
In this context, investment forums, a key element of IRENA’s strategy to facilitate investments in renewable energy, 
offer an effective organising framework for the implementation of the CIP through a sub-regional approach.
The sub-regional forums have two main aims: to strengthen the ability of decision-makers to build a strong enabling 
environment for renewable energy investments; and to support developers in preparing bankable projects and 
accessing finance. Post-forum project support is also provided.
In operationalising the CIP, IRENA intends to work closely with multilateral, bilateral and local financial institutions, 
development partners and other institutions that are prepared to provide financial and/or technical resources, and/or 
support the realisation of projects, as well as private companies and private investors.
In Southern Africa, IRENA aims to implement a sub-regional investment forum to scale up renewable energy 
investments in the region, support project development and implementation, and contribute to the creation of policy 
and regulatory frameworks conducive to renewable energy investments. Key forum activities will include matchmaking 
between project developers, potential financiers and investors. Renewable energy projects, along with renewablebased electricity grid and energy efficiency projects, may be considered for support.
Source: IRENA, (n.d.a).
otograph: Shutterstock2.5 Energy efficiency 
In 2017, the World Bank-funded National Energy Efficiency Strategy of Botswana (World 
Bank 2017b) identified efficiency sources, some of which involved the deployment of 
renewable energy. According to the Strategy, 100 000 households are using electric water 
heaters9
, a figure that will rise to 200 000 by 2032. Switching to solar water heating could 
free up as much as 2 PJ of electricity by 2032.
The World Bank (2017) notes that 100 000 smart meters were installed in households 
located in two cities and five major towns. The meters allow BPC to manage the load 
remotely during supply shortages by giving users an hour to comply with a temporary 10 A 
(amperes) limit on maximum demand. Failure to do so results in a four-hour disconnection. 
The meters provide additional benefits, such as remote meter reading, disconnections 
and reconnections. BPC estimates that the programme has yielded 20–30 MW in demand 
savings.
The following additional savings from energy efficiency have been noted in the generation 
sector (World Bank, 2017b): 
• Ensuring the continuous and problem-free operation of power plants could generate 
energy savings that are comparatively larger than the efficiency savings that can 
be achieved in most end-use sectors. According to the World Bank report, the 4.2% 
reduction in thermal efficiency in 2014/15 relative to the level achieved during 2012/13 
represented an energy loss of about 3.2 PJ for that year (2014/15). If the plants were 
operating at maximum capacity and an 80% load factor, every percentage point 
reduction in thermal efficiency would represent an energy loss of about 1.2 PJ.
Public buildings
35% reduction in specific energy consumption
Commercial buildings
30% reduction in specific energy consumption
Residential buildings
36% reduction in specific energy consumption
Mining and manufacturing
20% reduction in energy consumption
Transport
20% improvement in average fuel eciency of road vehicle stock
Agriculture
20TJ saving in energy used for pumping water per year
80TJ saving in fuel for vehicles per year
Public services
40% reduction in energy consumed per head of population
Economy-wide impact: 25% Reduction in total final energy consumption
from eciency gains by 2032 relative to 2017
Sector-level
energy eciency
targets by 2032
Figure 11 National Energy Efficiency Strategy of Botswana
Source: World Bank (2017b).• Reducing the level of own-use at Morupule B, which currently stands at about 14%. In 
South Africa, ESKOM pursued a programme of “internal energy efficiency” to reduce 
the amount of auxiliary power consumption within their own facilities, achieving savings 
of up to 18%. A more modest reduction of 10% in the own-use of power at Morupule B 
would yield annual savings of about 0.2 PJ once the plant is operating at full capacity.
National policies currently in place that promote energy efficiency in Botswana include the: 
a. National Energy Efficiency Strategy (2017);
b. General Energy Efficiency Standards for Buildings;
c. Draft Botswana Building Control Regulation; and
d. The Meteorological Service Act and the Ozone Depletion Substance Regulation.
The Botswana Energy Regulatory Authority (BERA) was also formed partly to regulate 
energy efficient appliances in Botswana.
Although Botswana has made an effort in terms of EE policy frameworks, the country 
currently does not have minimum energy performance standards (MEPS) or energy 
efficiency labelling for appliances. However, at the regional level, there is an expectation 
from SACREEE that MEPS will be introduced for lighting (when they are finalised and 
launched later in 2021). 
Botswana is also on the path to develop technical services and a national framework for 
leapfrogging to energy efficient refrigerators and distribution transformers through a 
project that is expected to be completed in June 2022.
2.6 Renewable energy potential and use 
With regard to renewable energy, Botswana presents considerable opportunities, 
particularly for solar energy but also from biomass sources. If utilised to their full 
capacity, these untapped renewable resources have the potential to reduce the country’s 
dependency on fossil-based energy tremendously, enhancing energy security, addressing 
issues of climate change, increasing access to modern energy services and local economic 
development. 
The development of renewable energies can enable Botswana to meet rising power 
demand, reduce dependency on power imports, diversify generation and energy supply 
portfolios, mitigate climate change and increase access to reliable, clean energy to alleviate 
poverty as well as stimulate and drive economic development. 
Solar
Botswana has a very high rate of solar irradiation, making solar energy a promising 
renewable energy source in the country. 
The Ministry of Minerals, Energy and Water Resources renewable energy resource 
assessment study (MMEWR, 2016a) produced a solar Atlas of Botswana. The results are 
derived from satellite observations and simulations with the HelioCLim 2 methodology. 
These simulations do not provide bankable information but are relevant for high-level 
energy planning. Since the release of this study, the World Bank Group (ESMAP) and IRENA 
have published more recent solar atlases covering Botswana (Figure 12).According to the MMEWR study, the yearly solar resources from global horizontal irradiation 
(GHI) range from 2 050 to 2 920 kWh/m². For comparison, these irradiation levels are 
similar to those in California, which is amongst the most competitive solar market today.
The highest values of insolation appear in the southwestern parts of the country, in the 
Kgalagadi and Ghanzi districts, where values reach 6.2 kWh/m²/day. Few other zones in the 
North-West and Central districts present similar GHI rates. The lowest values are observed 
between the eastern Central district and southern Northeast district, but still reach
5.5 kWh/m²/day. In terms of direct normal irradiance (DNI), the highest values have been 
estimated in the southernmost zone of the country, in the Kgalagadi district bordering 
South Africa, with values above 7 kWh/m²/day. 
From this theoretical potential, technical constraints need to be factored in to assess the 
technical potential. The economic potential varies depending on the cost of electricity and 
hence the power mix. The detailed economic potential analysis was performed for Africa 
(IRENA and KTH, 2014).
Namibia
Botswana
Angola Zambia
Zimbabwe
South Africa
25°E 25°E 29°E
25°E 25°E 29°E
20°S 20°S
25°S 25°S
<= 2 050
kWh/m2
Global Horizontal Irradiation
Annual average
2 050 - 2 100
2 100 - 2 150
2 150 - 2 200
2 200 - 2 250
2 250 - 2 300
2 300 - 2 350
> 2 350
Figure 12 Global horizontal irradiation for Botswana
Source: IRENA Global Atlas for Renewable Energy. 
Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only. Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the 
Botswana has a very high rate
of solar irradiation, making solar energy 
a very promising sourceBox: IRENA Global Atlas geospatial and site assessment services
Resource mapping is the first phase in planning a cost-effective renewable energy project for subsequent development. 
IRENA’s geospatial assessment service identifies areas and zones (and attributes) in a country that are appropriate 
for deploying utility-scale wind and solar PV power projects. The methodology combines resource maps and ancillary 
data, such as transmission lines and road networks, protected areas, land cover, topography and population growth. 
These factors are assessed in order to identify areas and zones that have good resource availability, are within 
reasonable proximity to the necessary infrastructure, and have low environmental and social impacts, based on local 
conditions. Furthermore, the assessment calculates the maximum installable capacity, identifies the energy generation 
potential and suggests possible storage opportunities in each zone. Such information supports adequate generation 
and transmission expansion planning, reduces the risk of investing in unsuitable areas, supports countries in making 
strategic decisions on energy security and increases the share of sustainable sources of electricity generation. 
IRENA’s site assessment service aims to evaluate the technical and financial viability of sites for solar PV and wind 
project development. The methodology uses high resolution site-specific time series resource data, site characteristics 
and technological parameters to calculate annual energy production (AEP) at different exceedance probabilities for 
each site. It further simulates the levelised costs and tariffs at which the sites would become viable for further investment 
in in-situ measurements and subsequent development. This information is of critical value to local authorities, which 
can screen these sites by comparing the pro-forma tariffs or levelised costs to a benchmark, ensuring resources are 
invested only in appropriate locations.
Source: Global Atlas (2021).
Bioenergy
Botswana is endowed with a range of bioenergy resources which could be used for energy 
production. Wood fuel remains the dominant cooking fuel for rural households, as 42% of 
the population relies on it (IEA, 2016). In 2009, a usage rate of 53% in rural and 13.1% in 
urban households was reported (SEforALL, 2012).
The MMEWR renewable energy resource assessment study (MMEWR, 2016a) sought 
to determine Botswana’s bioenergy potential through an analysis that addressed crop 
residues, livestock residues, forest harvesting residues, municipal solid waste and energy 
crops for biofuel production.
It estimated a total energy potential from biomass residues in excess of 19 million tonnes 
per year, potentially corresponding to more than 32 million GJ/year (Table 5). The biodiesel 
and bioethanol potential is even more substantial at 24 million tons per year for biodiesel, 
and 17 billion litres of bioethanol. 
For the considered energy crops (jatropha and sweet sorghum), the theoretical potential 
may be substantially reviewed if the sustainability indicators of the Global Bioenergy 
Partnership were to be applied; for example, the competitive use of agricultural space 
could be factored into the analysis. 
Total energy potential from biomass residues
is estimated to be in excess of 19 million tonnes 
annually or 32 million GJ/yearBiomass
In the context of Botswana, the following biomass sources are considered:
• Crop residues from sorghum, maize, millet, bean/pulse, sunflower, groundnuts and 
watermelon. 
• Manure or livestock residues mainly from cattle, goats, sheep, poultry, pigs and horses. 
The major producers of this type of biomass are located in the Central and North-West 
districts (MMEWR, 2016a). According to the MMEWR study, this type of residue has 
potential that should be further evaluated.
• Agro-industrial residues in maize, sunflower and groundnut. Districts with the most 
important potential in this regard are Central and North-East for crops, and Kweneng, 
Southern, Central and North-East districts for agro-industrial residues.
• According to the same study, the highest yields from forest harvesting residues are 
found in the Central district, in Tutume and Serowe sub-districts. 
• Wood processing residues are also available in the country, but no quantitative data 
is available to estimate production. The study further observed that forest harvesting 
residues represent more than 50% of the total energy potential (Table 5). The other 
residues only offer a limited energy potential that may be tapped by rural communities.
• Regarding municipal solid waste (MSW), an estimation of the production in the country 
has been conducted based on the census of 2011. As expected, 80.6% of its production 
is concentrated in the largest cities of the country, with Gaborone and Francistown 
leading the production of MSW at more than 337 000 tonnes per year.
• The National Energy Policy indicates that approximately 20 known biogas plants (smallscale biogas digesters) are installed across the country. Another (larger) GEF-funded 
project includes, inter alia, the development of 1 000 small-scale biogas digesters and 
three medium-scale digesters to be commissioned (UNDP, 2020).
One of the main existing challenges is to avoid an irreversible decline in wood fuel species 
– a situation that has been already observed in some parts of the country. The study 
mentioned theoretical potentials that should be further defined, taking into consideration 
the sourcing distance, distance to power lines, water supply and road network
(MMEWR, 2016a).
POWER GENERATION CAPACITY CONTRIBUTION (MW) STATUS
1. Crop biomass residues 54 764 642 063
2. Agro-industrial biomass residues 995 14 120
3. Livestock residues (manure) 17 756 735 12 504 115
4. Forest harvesting residues 1 354 566 15 306 596
5. Wood processing residues N/A N/A
6. MSW incineration 422 034 3 798 304
Subtotal 19 589 094 32 251 078
7. Biofuels
· Biodiesel 24 011 569 864 656 585
· Bioethanol (‘000 litres/year) 17 248 517 341 520 635
Table 5 Estimated biomass production and energy potentialBiofuels
The 2016 World Bank study is based on a government study from 2007 to assess the 
potential for biofuel production and use in Botswana. This study revealed the potential for 
the production of biodiesel from Jatropha curcas and bioethanol from sweet sorghum and 
sugarcane (Donald & Kelebogile, 2009). Table 6 presents the estimated potential of the 
most significant crops.
Production (tonnes/year) BIOFUEL ENERGY POTENTIAL (GJ/YEAR)
Jatropha 80 038 652 24 011 569 (tonnes/year) 864 656 585
Sweet sorghum 431 212 914 17 248 517 (‘000 litres/year) 341 520 635
Table 6 Biofuels production potential 
Source: MMEWR (2016a).
The Central district presents the highest biodiesel potential from Jatropha production, 
while bioethanol potential from sweet sorghum is mainly located in the North-West district, 
in the Ngami sub-district.
Another study coordinated by IRENA evaluates and indicates very different potentialities 
for Jatropha, sugarcane and soybean, as depicted in Table 7 (IRENA and KTH, 2014).
The main conclusions of the study are:
• Jatropha is not suitable to cultivate in Botswana, as 100% of the land is restricted due to: 
protected areas, wetlands, existing agricultural lands or urban areas, as well as additional 
exclusion areas; and other restrictions in terms of market access, water availability and 
distances to urban areas and existing grid lines. 
• Sugarcane crops are only viable if irrigated, the extent of production could reach 9% of 
the land. This could represent from 1 200–3 000 million litres of bioethanol. 
• Soybean is identified as a potential crop for biodiesel production; production of this 
crop could reach 3% of the land in a rain-fed condition – after applying land restrictions.
Even if the conclusions of the studies vary in terms of biofuels potential, they collectively 
suggest substantial potential in Botswana. 
FIXED CHARGE (PER MONTH) ENERGY CHARGE (P/KWH)
rain-fed irrigated rain-fed irrigated
restricted 
land
% land areas 
yield
(> 1 t/ha)
restricted 
land
% land areas 
yield
(> 1 t/ha)
restricted 
land
% land areas 
yield
(> 1 t/ha)
restricted 
land
% land areas 
yield
(> 1 t/ha)
Sugarcane 100% 0% 77% 8% 100% 0% 91% 3%
Jatropha 100% 0% 100% 0%
Soybean 61% 0% 80% 3%
Table 7 Available land areas and potential yields (dry mass). 
Source: adapted from IRENA and KTH (2014).Wind
The renewable energy resource assessment study (MMEWR, 2016a) produced the 
Wind Atlas of Botswana, calculated from mesoscale atmospheric model outcomes 
and downscaling models. These simulations do not provide bankable information but 
are relevant for high-level energy planning. Since the release of this study, the World 
Bank Group (ESMAP) and IRENA have published more recent solar atlases covering 
Botswana. These atlases have been created using similar algorithms as the 2016 resource
assessment study.
According to these studies, it appears some areas may present limited wind potential. 
Some regions present wind speeds reaching 7 m/s at 50 m, such as Kgalagadi, Kweneng, 
South-West and Central districts. A long-term meso-scale simulation (5 km resolution) 
at 100 m has yielded average wind speeds above 7 m/s and wind power densities above 
200 W/m². These results must be validated with ground-based data for at least one year in 
the zones of interest (MMEWR, 2016a).
Even if these speeds could be sufficient for the implementation of wind power plants, when 
taking into account the different constraints and profitability criteria, areas of feasibility are 
further reduced. The analysis conducted by IRENA and LBNL for the Africa Clean Energy 
Corridor depicts some suitable zones for wind turbine power deployment, which are mainly 
located in the southern part of Kgalagadi district near Tsabong and the Southern district, 
with a technical potential of up to 1.5 GW (Figure 13).
Namibia
Botswana
Angola Zambia
Zimbabwe
South Africa
25°E 25°E 29°E
25°E 25°E 29°E
20°S 20°S
25°S 25°S
<= 4.5
m/s
Wind speed at 100m
Annual average
4.5 - 5.0
5.0 - 5.5
5.5 - 6.0
6.0 - 6.5
6.5 - 7.0
7.0 - 7.5
> 7.5
Figure 13 Wind Speed Map for Botswana
Source: IRENA Global Atlas for Renewable Energy, based on data from the Danish Technology Institute (DTU). 
Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only. Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the 
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.Small hydropower
Botswana has a limited hydrology suitable for power generation, and regularly suffers from 
severe droughts and floods which make continuous use of large water resources difficult. 
Today, no hydropower resource has been used in Botswana and small hydropower potential 
(SHP) is currently estimated at 1 MW (UNIDO, 2016). Because of its limited potential, 
the development of this form of energy remains marginal and not a priority for energy 
stakeholders. To tap into this resource, more precise assessments are needed.
2.7 Other relevant strategic renewable energy plans
The Africa Clean Energy Corridor
In 2013 and 2014, IRENA conducted two major strategic analyses for the SADC region.10
The first (IRENA, 2013) was a least-cost analysis for the Southern Africa Power Pool (SAPP) 
and the second a GIS analysis of energy potential performed at continent-scale (IRENA 
and KTH, 2014). 
The least-cost analysis was developed with a view to optimising power trading on the 
SAPP. The level of precision is low for individual countries. Figures are therefore illustrative. 
For Botswana, the following technical potentials were identified:
• Solar thermal – 130.7 TWh;
• Solar PV – 137.6 TWh;
• Biomass – 10 MW; and
• Wind (high capacity factor) – 1 152 MW.
The least-cost analysis estimated a potential of 199 MW from renewable energy, 139 MW 
of which in utility-scale projects and 60 MW off-grid. The firm reserve margin would reach 
23% in 2030, with zero net imports.
Subsequently, IRENA reviewed the 2014 analysis of renewable energy potentials using a 
more advanced analytical framework in partnership with the Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory (IRENA and LBNL, 2015). The study for the Africa Clean Energy Corridor (ACEC) 
included a multi-criteria approach including population density, water bodies, land use, etc. 
Rather than a firm capacity in MW, the study delivered maps of areas ranked by levelised 
cost of electricity (LCOE).
For Botswana, the outcomes are presented in Figures 14, 15, and 16. The BPC 2017 production 
cost is indicated in each figure in order to compare the LCOE values to actual production 
costs. Noticeably, there is a good correlation between the 12 sites currently tendered by 
BPC and the IRENA analysis.
Based on its 2015 analysis, IRENA is in process of updating the ACEC study, also taking into 
account the 2017 SAPP masterplan. At the regional level, the study foresees an increase in 
power trade through the interconnectors.
For Botswana, by 2040 the transmission capacity is projected to increase as follows: with 
South Africa, from 549 MW (2019) to 1 349 MW; and with Zimbabwe, from 1 630 MW to 
2 030 MW.DEVELOPMENT
CONSTRAINTS
Substations
Maximum rating (kV)
Water bodies
Transmission lines
Unknown
> 400 101 - 200
301 - 400 66 - 100
201 - 300 Not specified
> 500 kV 
401 - 500 kV
301 - 400 kV
201 - 300 kV
101 - 200
66 - 100 Protected areas
Solar PV
< 120
121 - 125
126 - 130
131 - 135
136 - 140
141 - 145
146 - 150
151 - 155
156 - 160
> 161
Land use\land cover (solar)
Land use\land cover (wind)
Population (>100 persons/km2)
Elevation
Slope (solar)
Slope (wind)
RENEWABLE ENERGY ZONES INFRASTRUCTURE
Total Levelized Cost of Electricity
(USD/MWh)
Renewable energy
power plants
Operational BCP average production
cost 2017: USD 12 cts/kWh
or 128 Pula/Mwh
Potential/proposed Existing Planned
Geothermal
Wind
Solar PV
Solar CSP
Geothermal
Wind
Solar PV
Solar CSP
Major cities
Roads
BL
CF CG
BR CB
BK
BP
BT
CE
CA
BSBMBWBQ
BY
CC BZ
CD
BF BH
BI
DG
DH
DDDE
DI DF
DJ B
A
C D
DK DR
FA FE EB EU FB
FJ
EE
EJ FM
FP
EF
FDEQ
ET FH
EV
FI
FR
EN FC
EX
ER
FL
DP
EO
FK FQ
FG
FF EL
EP FO
DSES
EY
EM
EG FN
EW
DX
DV
F AB
AL
BB W
AH
DT
AC AU
R AW Q AM
Y Z N AY P
G AI S
L J
K
AK
AD AT
AP H
AG
AO AN
AZ BE
AF
CR
CW DC
CI CM
CN
CT
CX
CS
CJ
DB DV
CL
DA CK CQ CY
CU
CP
CZ
CH
CO
AX AQ
AA AR
AV
AE
AS
O
BC
I
T
V
BD
M
E
X
U
EC
DWEI
DN 
DL
DZ
EA
DY DM
DU
BJ
BX
BV BU 
BN
Figure 14 Photovoltaic solar power zones in Botswana. 
Source: IRENA and LBNL (2015). 
Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only. Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the 
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.DEVELOPMENT
CONSTRAINTS
Substations
Maximum rating (kV)
Water bodies
Transmission lines
Unknown
> 400 101 - 200
301 - 400 66 - 100
201 - 300 Not specified
> 500 kV 
401 - 500 kV
301 - 400 kV
201 - 300 kV
101 - 200
66 - 100 Protected areas
Solar CSP
< 200
201 - 205
206 - 210
211 - 215
216 - 220
221 - 225
226 - 230
231 - 235
236 - 240
> 241
Land use\land cover (solar)
Land use\land cover (wind)
Population (>100 persons/km2)
Elevation
Slope (solar)
Slope (wind)
RENEWABLE ENERGY ZONES INFRASTRUCTURE
Total Levelized Cost of Electricity
(USD/MWh)
Renewable energy
power plants
Operational BCP average production
cost 2017: USD 12 cts/kWh
or 128 Pula/Mwh
Potential/proposed Existing Planned
Geothermal
Wind
Solar PV
Solar CSP
Geothermal
Wind
Solar PV
Solar CSP
Major cities
Roads
BS
CFBU
BZ BR
BT
BQ CD BV
CG
CB
CH CC BW
CI
CE
CA F
G
CJ
BY
DC
C
B
CR
CQ DDCN
CW DB CL
CY CS
CM
CZCO
CU CT
CK DA
I
CX
CV
CP
BX
H
FG FE
FFFD
K
A
BO
W BF
Q
AM
AK U
AD
AG
BD T
AP
AH
BC
BA
BK
AT
BI
AV
AQ
BM
AC AE
AL
AS
FB DJ ES
FC
DF EL
EU
ED DE
EQ
DR
DP
DM
EJ EYDS DG
DX EI
DN
EK
EA
DO DI
DW
DK
EM
DZ
EX
DH EZ EF
EWCV DQ
EC
DTEH
DY
ET
EN
EG
EB
DL
D
DU
EP ER EE
EV EO
FA
BG AR BL AZ
E S
Y
A
AN
BN
AW
AY AO
BJ BE AU
AX
BB AA BH
Z
X AI
AB
AJ
Figure 15 Concentrated solar power zones in Botswana
Source: IRENA and LBNL (2015). 
Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only. Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the 
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.D
E
C
R
T
S V
Y
Q
P
X
W
F
BF
Z
AT
AB
BT
I
AZ
BS
AX AV
BB
N
U
BO
O
BU
AW
AC
BV
BC
G
AU
AY
BR
BA
BP
BQ
AA
BE
AL
BD
AH
J K
L
BW
BH
AR
AP
BI
AM
AO
AI
AK
B
M
BJ
BX
AS
AN
BL
AJ
AD
AQ
H
BN
BMBK
BG
A
AG
DEVELOPMENT
CONSTRAINTS
Substations
Maximum rating (kV)
Water bodies
Transmission lines
Unknown
> 400 101 - 200
301 - 400 66 - 100
201 - 300 Not specified
> 500 kV 
401 - 500 kV
301 - 400 kV
201 - 300 kV
101 - 200
66 - 100 Protected areas
Land use\land cover (solar)
Land use\land cover (wind)
Population (>100 persons/km2)
Elevation
Slope (solar)
Slope (wind)
RENEWABLE ENERGY ZONES INFRASTRUCTURE
Total Levelized Cost of Electricity
(USD/MWh)
Renewable energy
power plants
Operational
BCP average production
cost 2017: USD 12 cts/kWh
or 128 Pula/Mwh
Potential/proposed Existing Planned
Geothermal
Wind
Solar PV
Solar CSP
Geothermal
Wind
Solar PV
Solar CSP
Major cities
Roads
Wind
< 50
51 - 60
61 - 70
71 - 80
81 - 90
91 - 100
101 - 110
111 - 120
121 - 130
> 131
Figure 16 Wind power zones in Botswana
Source: IRENA and LBNL (2015). 
Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only. Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the 
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.In this newly designed Clean Energy Corridor, the capacity of variable renewable energy 
increases substantially to benefit from economies of scale and capacity credit at system 
level. In terms of capacity, the simulated results demonstrate that very significant solar PV 
capacities can be achieved.
Renewable Energy Strategy for Botswana
In 2017, the World Bank supported the development of Botswana’s Renewable Energy 
Strategy.11 The strategy is based on a least-cost analysis (MMEWR, 2017c), which follows 
the high-level resource assessment (MMEWR, 2016a) described in previous sections. 
The least-cost analysis considers seven potential wind sites of 50 MW capacity each, and 
six representative sites for solar energy of 25 MW for solar PV and 100 MW for solar CSP 
(Figures 17 and 18). 
A visual inspection of the data shows the sites proposed by the World Bank study overlap 
with the IRENA study, although some large clusters are outside the zones identified by the 
IRENA study. However, there is limited correlation with the solar sites selected by BPC in 
their renewable energy strategy (BPC, 2018b).
From the latest study, a least-cost supply curve is presented in Figure 19; the lowest cost 
renewable energy development would favour the development of PV sites, followed by 
subsequent wind energy development. Solar CSP is improving in terms of cost priority. 
The report highlights the value of storage from CSP to manage the system, despite the 
higher costs. 
11 Further discussions with the World Bank will allow this contribution to be positioned with regards to the development of renewable 
energy regulatory frameworks.
DNI long term annual sum 1996-2009 [kWh/m2]
Excluded
< 2,150.091902
2,150.091903 - 2,251.938361
2,251.938362 - 2,331.152273
2,331.152274 - 2,399.049912
2,399.049913 - 2,466.947551
2,466.947552 - 2,546.161463
2,546.161464 - 2,636.691648
2,749.854381 - 2,885.649658
2,636.691649 - 2,749.85438
Suggested nodes REMix
Selected solar regions
Figure 17 Least-cost analysis, selected solar power (PV and CSP) sites
Source: MMEWR (2017c). 
Notes: in the final RES roadmap, sites N1, N3 and N4 are selected as final recommendations.
Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only. Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the 
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.long term annual mean wind speed 2005-2014 [m/s]
Excluded
< 4.438385541
4.438385542 - 4.956737137
4.956737138 - 5.410294783
5.410294784 - 5.831455455
5.831455456 - 6.187822177
6.187822178 - 6.47939495
6.479394951 - 6.738570748
7.062540497 - 8.228831587
6.738570749 - 7.062540496
Suggested nodes REMix
Selected wind regions
Figure 18 Least-cost analysis, selected wind power sites
Source: MMEWR (2017c).
Notes: in the final RES roadmap, sites N1, N2 and N4 are selected as final recommendations.
Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only. Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the 
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.
120.00
140.00
160.00
180.00
200.00
100.00
80.00
60.00
40.00
20.00
0.00
1
256511766
102112761531
1786
2041
22962551
280630613316357138264081433645914846
5101
53565611581161216376663168867141
$/MWh
GWh/annum
Solar PV
Solar CSP
Moru. B &
new coal
Wind
Eskom
Moru. A
Forest
Harvesting
Other import
options
LFO
Figure 19 Least-cost supply curve for Botswana in 2020
Source: MMEWWR (2017c).In 2017, based on the MMEWR study (MMEWR, 2017c) and a high-level resource assessment 
(MMEWR, 2016a) supported by the World Bank, the Ministry of Minerals, Energy and 
Water Resources published the Renewable Energy Strategy for Botswana. The Renewable 
Energy Roadmap, a document accompanying the Strategy (MMEWR, 2017a) foresees the 
development of large-scale grid-connected renewable energy that may meet 20% of total 
electricity consumption by 2030. The final roadmap recommends the addition of 300 MW 
of CSP and 350 MW of PV by end-2030. 
The study emphasises reducing imports, and the least-cost analysis therefore 
favours baseload capacity, such as coal and CSP; this aspect may explain the strategy 
recommendation to deploy 100 MW CSP as a priority. 
The various zoning studies and least cost analysis results showed that more ambitious 
renewable energy scenarios could be adopted, provided constraints on the management 
of the system could be relaxed, including efficient import/export strategies to and from 
the SAPP.
In this case, the drivers for energy policy would not only be energy independence, but also 
internalised socio-economic benefits and increased diversification of the national economy.
2.8 Drivers for renewable energy deployment in Botswana
Given the energy context described in the previous chapters, many drivers exist to stimulate 
support for the deployment of renewable energy technologies in Botswana. These include 
enhanced energy self-sufficiency, access to modern energy services, climate change 
mitigation and adaptation and local economic value creation.
Enhanced energy self-sufficiency
To meet its electricity peak demand, Botswana imports power from the Southern Africa 
Power Pool – mainly from South Africa – and when imports are not available, resorts to the 
use of backup diesel power plants which are costly to run due to the need for imported fuel. 
Tapping its vast endogenous renewable energy potential will enable Botswana to reach 
adequate and economically feasible energy self-sufficiency and security. This is in line with 
the ambition to become a net exporter in the region, especially in the electricity sub-sector.
Improved access to modern energy services
In Botswana as a whole, about a third of the population has no access to electricity and in 
rural areas the figure is less than 30%. Access to energy is widely recognised as essential 
to improving economic well-being. Access to reliable, cost-effective and environmentally 
sustainable energy through renewable energy technologies can have multiplier effects on 
development, such as reduced health impacts, improved livelihoods, poverty reduction, job 
creation, greater gender equality and improved access to water, sanitation, healthcare and 
food. These cross-cutting impacts of renewable energy are also at the heart of efforts to 
fulfil Sustainable Development Goals.Socio-economic development
With 11.5 million jobs created worldwide to date, renewable energy is a catalyst for new 
employment opportunities. This is especially true in a country traditionally dominated by 
conventional energy sources. It offers new avenues for technological innovation and the 
development of new sectors for economic value creation as anticipated in the Economic 
Stimulus Programme (ESP). According to the National Energy Policy, sustainable utilisation 
of available energy will facilitate the transformation of Botswana from an upper middleincome country to a high-income country by 2036.
Low-carbon development
In its first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to combatting climate change, 
Botswana mentioned its vulnerability to the impacts of rainfall deficits and variability, as 
well as droughts, which are projected to increase in frequency and severity. This comes 
with corollaries such as constrained agricultural production, increasing food insecurity and 
growing water stress. As described above, Botswana’s power generation infrastructure, 
which is heavily reliant on fossil fuels and notably coal, is a major source of CO2 emissions 
as well as local air pollution, with sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxide and micro-particulates 
among the main pollutants. In its first NDC under the Paris Agreement, the country 
committed to reduce its GHG emissions by 15% from a 2010 baseline by 2030. The NDC 
already emphasises the infrastructural development in the energy and transport sectors 
required to achieve this goal.
otograph: Shutterstock3. ENABLING 
FRAMEWORKS FOR 
RENEWABLE ENERGY 
DEPLOYMENT
3.1 Policy and regulatory frameworks
The Botswana Energy Master Plan (MMEWR, 2004) presents the country’s 
socio-economic and environmental goals and highlights the nexus 
between energy and the achievement of these goals. It also details existing 
achievements and outstanding goals since its last review in 1996. 
The following renewable energy-based rural electrification goals are outlined 
by the Botswana Energy Master Plan: 
1. Promote solar energy (government);
2. Grid and non-grid technology integration;
3. Encourage renewable energy-related R&D; 
4. Develop an institutional framework to support renewable-based rural 
electrification;
5. Define strategies to remove barriers to renewable energy uptake; and
6. Use PV power generation – mainly for lighting – to promote child and 
female welfare. 
The Botswana Biomass Energy Strategy (MMEWR, 2009) seeks to 
address the needs of biomass energy end-users and associated problems 
encountered in Botswana, focussing on domestic, industrial and institutional 
thermal applications of biomass, such as cooking and heating. 
The Renewable Energy Strategy and (Road Map) of 2018 encompasses an 
Investment Programme which is derived from the Capacity Expansion Plan 
and guides the Strategy’s structure. The objective of the Strategy is to lay 
out the enabling environment requirements for the implementation of the 
investment plan. The enabling environment embraces the policy, regulatory, 
commercial, legal and procurement frameworks required for renewable 
energy to rapidly assume its warranted role in Botswana’s energy supply mix. 
In conforming to the National Energy Policy, the Strategy has a particular 
focus on private sector participation in the provision of renewable energy, 
including independent power producers (IPPs) for larger RE generation 
projects.
tograph: ShutterstockThe adoption of a National Energy Efficiency Strategy (NEES) is ongoing, which is a 
necessary requirement for Botswana to achieve several of the priorities identified in its 
National Development Plan 10 (2009–2017). The strategy supports and promotes national 
energy security. Other national priorities supported by the strategy are climate change, 
economic development, and universal and affordable access to energy. This demonstrates 
the government’s commitment to enabling the achievement of these goals, providing a 
strong and clear mandate to address energy efficiency.
The Botswana 2017–2023 National Development Plan (Government of Botswana, 2017) 
aims to reduce the country’s reliance on energy imports, including by increasing energy 
saving in all sectors. The Plan foresees the increasing participation of IPPs in the energy mix 
and the increased use of indigenous sources of energy (including fossil resources). Having 
pointed out the declining technology costs, a renewable energy programme is envisaged, 
with solar identified as a niche market with a target of 100 MW by 2017. 
Under the Plan, the government has begun developing a comprehensive renewable energy 
strategy, with the support of the World Bank, that will provide a sound basis to spur 
investments in this sector. 
Government studies to promote renewable energy include a solar water heating survey; 
a biofuels production and use feasibility report; a feasibility study for a 200 MW CSP 
Universiplant; and a study supporting renewable energy feed-in tariffs (Government of 
Botswana, 2017).
In 2011, the Government of Botswana, through the Department of Energy (DOE), 
commissioned a Renewable Energy Feed-in Tariff (REFIT) study. The aim of the study 
was to encourage greater and effective private sector participation in power generation 
in Botswana – in particular for renewable energy technologies (RETs) – through the 
establishment of regulatory mechanisms that reduce risk for investors and developers. 
The REFIT was also developed to create an enabling environment for achieving renewable 
energy targets and goals. However, the REFIT was not implemented due to high proposed 
tariffs and additional funding required. 
The government, in collaboration with UNDP, has secured the services of a consultant to 
review and update the REFIT. The objective of the review is to advise the government on 
up-to-date, practical and effective ways of implementing and monitoring the Feed-In Tariff 
(FIT) Programme, considering global trends, cost implications and technical limitations. 
The consultant will develop relevant REFIT strategies to international standards; generate 
appropriate guidelines for key stakeholders through workshops and tailor-made training 
programmes; and support programme management staff, where applicable, on REFIT 
related issues. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2021.
An Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) was launched in December 2020 to amend and replace 
previous plans. It announces an electricity generation mix comprising at least 15% renewable 
electricity by 2030, as compared to the current 2%. It outlines a least-cost development 
plan for a period of 20 years (2020–2040). The Plan considers various scenarios for 
energy demand and supply strategies and identifies least-cost development paths by 
simultaneously examining (1) demand-side measures, (2) energy efficiency improvements 
and (3) electricity supply options from domestic and regional sources.
The optimal capacity expansion path proposed in the IRP maintains prescribed standards 
for reliable electricity generation systems and a high level of social equity, and also considers 
environmental protection. The main approach of the IRP is based on a detailed technoeconomic analysis of potential demand and supply strategies through various scenarios. 
However, the IRP does not capture the full extent of the potential for renewable energy 
development. The IRP is discussed further in the next section.The latest National Energy Policy (Government of Botswana, 2020a) foresees the provision 
of reliable, affordable energy for sustainable development, and improved access to efficient 
and effective uses of energy resources. Some of the strategies that the National Energy 
Policy aims to implement relate to:
1. The government’s role in investigating Botswana’s supply security challenges and 
investing in an appropriate reserve margin. 
2. The government’s role in facilitating the participation of IPPs to meet national power 
demand peaks and regional exports.
3. Ensuring appropriate regulation of the electricity industry to assure equitable access to 
transmission infrastructure.
4. Ensuring that electricity tariff policies provide a basis for sustainable power supplies 
over long term.
5. Setting cost-reflective tariffs.
6. Reforming institutional arrangements to promote increased access to petroleum 
products.
7. The government’s role in ensuring security of supply and maintenance of strategic 
petroleum oil reserves, through Botswana Oil.
8. Facilitating the optimal country-wide distribution of petroleum products.
9. Ensuring the availability of enabling legislature to facilitate private sector participation 
in the coal sub-sector.
10.Promoting the use of bio-energy resources as a feedstock in the generation of energy 
services.
11. Facilitating the development and use of CSP and PV electricity generation.
Key regulatory and legislative documents
The main regulatory documents identified by this review are:
1. The Botswana Power Corporation Act, 1970 (rev. 2002);
2. The Electricity Supply Act 1973 (amended 2007);
3. The Botswana Energy Regulatory Authority Act, 1973 (rev. 2016);
4. The Environmental Impact Assessment Act, 2005; and
5. The Revised National Policy for Rural Development, 2002.
The Botswana Power Corporation Act (Government of Botswana, 1970) establishes 
the national utility of Botswana. BPC is mandated to manage electricity generation, 
transmission, supply and distribution in areas approved by the Minister, and to trade 
electricity, purchase and sell in bulk.
Aside from appointing the BPC chairman, the Minister may also provide BPC with advice in 
support of the implementation of public policies, provided these do not conflict with other 
legal obligations.Through this Act, BPC is mandated to prescribe tariffs and methods of charging for different 
customer categories. The tariffs should enable operation in a commercially sound manner. 
The revenue requirements are set according to the fair value of assets and reasonable 
returns in accordance with the Ministry. 
The Electricity Supply Act (Government of Botswana, 2007) was enacted in 1973 
(Government of Botswana, 1973), with a provision that necessitates that the Minister 
consult BPC before issuing a generation license above 25 kW. The Act does not mention 
transmission or distribution separately to generation. A generation licensee is entitled to 
build transmission infrastructure as required. In practice, the Act is establishing BPC as an 
integrated monopoly, operating generation, transmission, distribution and retail.
In the 2007 amendment (Government of Bostwana, 2007), the consultation of BPC 
was waived, thereby allowing the Ministry to grant licenses. In this review, generation, 
transmission and distribution licenses can be issued separately, which might open 
possibilities for increasing the number of participants in the generation business, as well as 
the distribution and retail business, should the case emerge. The revised Act provides for 
access to/use of transmission facilities and associated infrastructure owned and operated 
by BPC. The 2016 amendment(Government of Botswana, 2016),tasks the Botswana Energy 
Regulatory Authority with delivering licenses. Notably, the President may acquire land or 
rights over land as deemed necessary for the purpose of generation or supply. 
In the 2007 amendment, government-owned installations are exempted of licenses. The 
2016 amendment no longer mentions exemptions for government buildings.
In the 1973 version of the legislation, power capacities below 25 kW are exempted of 
licenses for the purpose of self-generation on the owner’s premises. The 2007 amendment 
increases this limit to 100 kW, which is maintained in the 2016 amendment.
The Botswana Energy Regulation Authority (BERA) was enacted in 2017 under 
the Botswana Energy Regulatory Authority Act (BERA, 2016) and is responsible for 
implementing renewables-based electricity generation policy.
BERA is responsible for ensuring the transparency of tariffs, taking into account crosssubsidies between classes of consumers as per government policy. Since tariffs are 
regulated, BERA is also responsible for regulating permitted revenues for regulated entities 
in the regulated sector, and ensuring tariffs are established in a transparent manner. The 
regulation of allowed revenues (“revenue requirements”) demands that BERA monitor the 
performance of regulated entities. 
The Act identifies BERA as a source of expertise in relation to tender procedures, alongside 
the Public Procurement and Public Asset Disposal Board – the latter being established 
by the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act (Government of Botswana, 2008). This 
entity is mandated to operate all public procurements or the disposal of public assets, both 
within and outside Botswana.
BERA should encourage the preservation and protection of the environment and 
conservation of natural resources in accordance with any written law. This provision would 
make the Environmental Impact Assessment Act of 2005 relevant for regulated activities, 
including power generation. 
Associated regulations are currently being developed to facilitate the smooth operation of 
the Authority and the BERA Act is currently under review.12The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Act (Government of Botswana, 2005) 
requires that every licensing authority ensure an authorisation has been issued before 
delivering a license. Application to obtain the authorisation shall contain a preliminary EIA; 
while policies or programmes shall contain a Strategy Environmental Assessment (SEA). 
The authority13 in charge of granting the authorisation (“the Department”), may require an 
additional environmental impact assessment. This process entails the applicant submitting 
terms of reference for the EIA to the authority and hiring external consultancy services to 
carry out the assessment.
Ongoing policy developments
Progress is required in strengthening the regulatory framework; the National Energy Policy 
(Government of Botswana, 2020b) launched in December 2020 take into account new 
developments in the energy space. 
In December 2020, the Department of Energy launched an Integrated Resource Plan 
(IRP) for electricity. The Plan aims to “encourage the efficient use of energy and to assure 
access to electricity in Botswana with reliable and self-sufficient electricity generation with 
minimal development impact”. The main supply-side strategic objectives of the IRP were 
identified as follows:
a. Diversification of sources of electricity generation;
b. Competitiveness in the electricity sector;
c. Security of electricity supply;
d. Self-sufficiency in electricity generation and becoming a net electricity exporter; and
e. Mitigation of environmental impact, through various methods such as using low carbon 
technologies in coal.
2 500
2 000
1 500
1 000
500
0
Installed capacity (MW)
201720182019202020212022202320242025202620272028202920302031203220332034203520362037203820392040
Morupule A Morupule B New coal Diesel Gas PV CSP Wind Battery
Firm capacity Peak load
Figure 20 Projected energy mix, 2017 
Sources: (Government of Botswana, 2020a) The outcomes of the IRP Plan include a projection of generation capacity up to 2040. The 
plan does not appear to take into account the actual delivery capabilities of Moropule A 
and B. The BPC projections (BPC, 2020) foresee Morupule reaching full capacity only in 
2023, instead of 2017 in the current IRP. 
In line with the IRP model results, the Government of Botswana has approved and intends 
to implement energy projects with a total installed capacity of 1 540 MW by the year 2040 
to meet the growing energy demand at least cost whilst also reducing the country’s carbon 
footprint. These will be implemented as follows:
• 135 MW solar PV by 2022 (currently under procurement);
• 250 MW coal bed methane (CBM) by the year 2040 (10 to 100 MW by 2025, currently 
under procurement);
• 200 MW CSP plant by the year 2026 (procurement to start during 2021);
• 300 MW new coal by the year 2026 (procurement to start immediately during 2020); 
• 50 MW wind by the year 2027 (procurement to start in 2024 after wind resource 
mapping is complete); 
• 600 MW solar PV by the year 2040 (100 MW solar PV procurement to start in 2025) – 
the projects will be developed through private sector investment as IPPs; and
• 140 MW battery storage by the year 2040 (18 MW battery storage by 2032, procurement 
to start in 2029).
The Legal and Regulatory frameworks involve the Electricity Supply (amended) Act of 2016, 
which makes provision for the licensing and control of undertakings for the generation and 
supply of electricity. The Petroleum Product Act is currently being developed for immediate 
promulgation and the Gas Bill is also being drafted to guide the operations of the gas
sub-sector. For some sub-sectors, regulations/incentives are under development, such as:
1. Guidelines for rooftop solar installation;
2. Building Control Regulation;
3. A MoU between the Department of Energy and the Solar Association of Botswana has 
been signed;
4. Solar home systems may eventually be exempted from import duties; and
5. Biodiesel standards are available and await enforcement.14Summary of policy and regulatory frameworks
15 Under adoption.
16 through BPC.
National Policy Regulatory Instruments
Renewable Energy Law / Strategy 15 Auctions 16
Solar Heating Law / Programme Feed-in tariff 
Solar Power Law / Programme Premium
Wind Power Law / Programme Quota Certificate System 
Geothermal Law / Programme Hybrid
Biomass Law / Programme Net metering
Biofuels Law / Programme Ethanol blending mandate 
National Policy Biodiesel blending mandate 
VAT exemption Solar mandate
Fuel tax exemption Registry
Income tax exemption Finance
Import / export fiscal benefit 17 Currency hedging 
National exemption of local taxes Dedicated fund
Carbon tax Eligible fund 
Accelerated depreciation Guarantees 
Other fiscal benefits Pre-investment support 
Grid Access Direct funding 
Transmission discount/exemption Other
Priority/dedicated transmission Renewable energy in social housing
Preferential dispatch Renewable energy in rural access programmes 
Other grid benefits Renewable energy cookstove programme
Local content requirements
Special environmental regulations
Food–bioenergy nexus 
Social requirements 18
Table 8 Summary of the regulatory framework based on IRENA’s classification
Source: Author’s elaboration, based on IRENA’s classification framework (IRENA, 2016).3.2 Institutional framework
Institutional stakeholders
Botswana’s institutional stakeholders in the power sector are presented in Figure 21. 
The Ministry of Minerals, Green Technology and Energy Security (formerly the Ministry of 
Minerals, Energy and Water Resources, MMEWR) is mandated to regulate mining activities 
and oversee mineral development; and to promote green technology use and a mix of 
sustainable alternative energy sources to provide energy security. 
The Ministry’s vision includes ensuring security of energy supply through both conventional 
and renewable energy sources and enabling the use of green technologies in the 
advancement of mining and energy.
The Botswana Energy Regulation Authority (BERA), established by the Botswana Energy 
Regulatory Authority Act (BERA, 2016), is mandated with renewable electricity generation 
policy implementation. 
The Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources Conservation and Tourism (MENRCT), 
through Department of Meteorological Services (DMS), is the focal point for climate change 
in Botswana. MENT coordinates climate change activities in the country and is responsible 
for reporting to the UNFCCC. Reporting is in the form of National Communications, Biennial 
Update Reports and Nationally Determined Contributions. DMS is tasked with producing 
reliable and accurate weather and climate data, information and related services to enable 
optimal utilisation of resources and contribute to the safety and protection of life and 
property. It provides information on the state of the atmosphere. This includes information 
on past, current and future conditions, as well as warnings and advisories. Benefits to 
society include policy-making decisions in the climate sensitive sectors for socio-economic 
purposes and managing risk arising from climate variability and climate change. 
Ministry of Mineral Resources, Green technology and Energy Security (MMGE)
Ministry of Environment, Wildlife and Tourism (MEWT)
Botswana Energy Regulatory Agency (BERA)
Botswana Power Corporation (BPC)
Eskom (2017 to 2019)
Potential IPP Producers
On-grid 
O-grid 
BPC
Individual producers
GOVERMENT
REGULATORY
AUTHORITIES
POWER
PRODUCERS
Figure 21 Power sector institutional stakeholders
Source: EEP (2017).The Ministry of Basic Education (formerly Education and Skills Development) is in charge 
of the Education and Training Sector Strategic Plan (2015–2020), which seeks to promote 
quality education for all. The five-year strategic programme is articulated around eleven 
priorities, strongly focused on lifelong learning, designing an inclusive education sector, 
upgrading ICT infrastructure in the education sector and increasing e-learning; reviewing 
curricula; and improving governance. The Ministry is relevant to the development of local 
skills supporting the growth of a renewable energy job market in Botswana.
In line with the aim to ensure consistency in professional curricula, the Botswana 
Qualification Authority was founded in 2013 by the 31st Minister of Education and Skills 
under the Botswana Qualifications Authority Act. The Authority provides accreditations 
to learning programmes at all levels. The authority has defined accreditation standards for 
renewable energy and solar energy in particular.
The Botswana Investment and Trade Centre (BITC) has the role of conveying a positive 
image of Botswana to foreign investors. This role is fundamental to attracting foreign 
investors to renewable energy auctions. BITC encourages domestic investment and 
expansion; promotes locally manufactured goods to regional and international markets; 
contributes towards improvement of the investment climate through policy advocacy; 
increases citizen participation in the economy; and creates sustainable job opportunities 
(BITC, 2021). In August 2018, BITC presented Botswana and its opportunities in the energy 
sector at the China Business Forum.
Private sector
From 2009 to 2015, the Joint Venture BPC Lesedi subsidiary for rural electrification was 
jointly owned by BPC (55%) and Electricité de France (45%). BPC Lesedi was placed under 
voluntary liquidation in 2015, as the business model was not effective (BPC, 2015).
Other stakeholders have entered the power market, such as POSCO Energy (Korea) and 
Marubeni (Japan), which are participating in the expansion of Morupule B with 2 units
(5 and 6) of 150 MW each. The consortium won the construction and operation contract for 
30 years (BCCN and JACSES, 2018).
Another expansion phase is under discussion for an additional 300 MW split between two units 
(7 and 8) with the Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO) and Daewoo. Both projects are 
foreseen under an IPP scheme; however, problems in reaching an agreement have jeopardised 
the expansion project of units 5 and 6, which are now on hold (Mmegi, 2016).
Shumba Energy is a locally owned coal and energy company, which has been attempting 
to develop a solar PV project over 1 000 ha in the Maun region. By end-2018, Shumba 
announced a collaboration with the German H2-Industries to construct a solar power 
plant with innovative energy storage technology (liquid organic hydrogen carriers) in the 
framework of the call for tenders for 12 hybrid systems launched by BPC (H2 Industries 
SE, 2018).
Botswana Vision 2036 calls for a
renewable energy contribution to the
energy mix COMPANY COMPANY ACTIVITY PROJECTS UNDERTAKEN COMMENTS
Biodiesel Botswana Biodiesel production
EEP Africa supported project.
Industrial energy efficiency 
improvement demonstration 
project for an existing biodiesel 
production process from waste 
vegetable oil
Project discontinued 
owing to lack of funds
Biowatt Solar energy, energy, biogas 
installations
Installations of solar home systems 
around the country since 2017
Energy company offering 
solar energy, energy 
management and green 
services
Bostrich Products 
International Biogas power generation
EEP Africa supported project.
A feasibility study for 1 MW 
power generation from biogas in 
Mmamashia
Project failed and 
discontinued
Future Fuels Africa Pty. Biogas power generation
EEP Africa supported project
Lobatse Green Town Initiative, 
Botswana 
Waste to energy project in 
Lobatse, Botswana
Project failed and 
discontinued
Golden Links Biogas power generation
EEP Africa supported project.
Bioelectricity generation from 
biogas at the Gaborone waste/
water treatment facility
Project was cancelled 
because the facility owner 
did not want to sign 
agreement
The Diamond Workshop Solid Biomass production
EEP Africa supported project
Fuel briquettes production from 
biomass resources in the village of 
Malolwane
Project failed and 
discontinued
iCarbon Botswana
Provision of cutting edge energy 
management solutions using 
advanced green technologies in 
the market that helps businesses 
provide green services such as 
replacing traditional sources of 
energy with renewable energy
Installations ongoing in different 
parts of the country
Green Issues Botswana
Promotion and installation of 
renewable energy technologies 
as well as offering consultancy 
services
 Installations ongoing in different 
parts of the country
SoSolar Solar PV Promotion and installation of 
renewable energy technologies
Installations ongoing 
in different parts of the 
country
MultiEnergy Solar PV Promotion and installation of 
renewable energy technologies
Installations ongoing 
in different parts of the 
country
Other privately held companies participate in the biomass and solar markets:
Non-governmental organisations
In recent years, non-governmental organisations involved in the renewable energy sector 
include:
• The Renewable Energy Association of Botswana: functions as an engine to grow 
renewable energy technologies and services. It supports development of cost effective, 
sustainable renewable energy generation; promotes consultations, reflections and 
deliberations on key issues in the field of renewable energy technologies in Botswana; and 
presents stakeholders with a unique forum for sharing information, analysing the latest 
developments involving renewable energy technologies, and advocating for partnerships 
and networks. The association’s creation was spearheaded by Network of Excellence 
in Renewable Energy Technologies for Development (NEED) at Botswana International • Green Energy and Sustainability Association (GESA): promotes the use of Renewable 
and green energy technologies in Botswana. The organisation was created in 2017 and 
has been actively engaged in workshops, trainings and pilot projects across the country.
• The Botswana Community-Based Organisations Network (BOCOBONET, 2021) is 
dedicated to enhancing the technical and institutional capacities of its members to 
utilise natural resources for their socio-economic well-being; it provides capacity and 
advocacy. 
• The Solar Industries Association of Botswana (SIAB): a solar energy trade group that 
aims to promote solar energy use, facilitating cooperation between government, 
industry, academia and others in the field of solar energy in Botswana.
International actors
• The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) supported a 5-year scientific project 
(completed in 2017) to develop Jatropha for the production of biodiesel; and a rural 
electrification programme. The UB, DAR and DOE have agreed to extend the Jatropha 
project by way of undertaking a research project focusing on indigenous plants for oil 
potential that will result with biofuels guidelines and blending ratios.
• UNDP/GEF funded the Renewable Energy Rural Electrification Programme until 2013.
• The World Bank funded development of the renewable energy strategy and energy 
efficiency strategy and is currently supporting the Government of Botswana with its 
plan for a green recovery and for the development of renewable energy.
• USAid Power Africa:
› Provided support to BPC for a 100 MW solar procurement (2017);
› Provided support to BERA to create regulatory frameworks, guidelines and 
regulations; and
› Supported development of the Southern Africa Regional natural gas strategy.
Local research and training institutions
• The Botswana Institute for Technology Research and Innovation (BITRI) performs 
outdoor technical tests and research and development on solar thermal systems.
• The University of Botswana Clean Energy Research Centre (CERC) undertakes 
interdisciplinary research on sustainable and renewable energy. CERC offers relevant 
education and is an advocate for renewable energy, energy efficiency and environmental 
protection. The Centre operates the Mokolodi solar research project and is a local 
partner for the SOLTRAIN initiative.
• The University of Botswana provides a pool of experts from all areas including social, 
economic and technical that are required by the RE Sector and that are capable of 
supporting the work in a) Capacity Building (project targeted training, e.g. CERC project 
that specifically trains people to focus on the design, installation and maintenance of 
Solar Water heaters and the same can be extended to the renewable energy rollout to 
capacitate IPPs) and b) Research (the Department of Energy in partnership with the 
University of Botswana are implementing a biodiesel research project and the findings 
of the project will inform policies and strategies).4. KEY CHALLENGES 
AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS
This section aims to dive into the challenges faced by Botswana in increasing 
its uptake of renewable energy and provides recommendations on actions 
to be implemented in the short-to-medium term, covering institutional and 
policy frameworks, regulation, risk mitigation as well as the human capacities 
and skills necessary to develop current renewable energy technologies.
These key issues and recommendations are based on an initial analysis 
that follows the drafting of a background paper. They also arose from the 
exchange of information held at the initial meeting on the RRA process, 
the validation workshop, and from various bilateral meetings with key local 
stakeholders.
4.1 Institutional and policy frameworks
The RRA process and its consultations revealed several plans and strategies 
in Botswana that relate to the overall energy sector as well as the growing 
room for renewable energy development. However, it appears that these 
plans and strategies are only being partly implemented, owing to several 
factors including misalignment between the objectives of some of these 
plans. Other factors that were listed by stakeholders at the time of the RRA 
consultations include the lack of an overarching and binding energy policy 
(which has since been launched), the lack of a specific renewable energy 
framework, and the lack of incentives for renewable energy. At this stage, the 
contribution of renewable energy to the electricity mix is modest.
In this context, fundamental issues that should be examined pertain to 
institutional arrangements, as well as the roles and mandates of national 
institutions to draw a long-term vision for renewable energy development 
in the country. 
Promoting and facilitating the implementation of clear 
long-term vision for renewable energy development
The sector requires coordination between the most relevant stakeholders, 
chiefly the Ministry of Mineral Resources, Green Technology and Energy 
Security and the regulator, to clearly set the paths for future investments in 
line with policy priorities. It must be understood that the strategic priorities of 
a corporation seeking a healthy balance sheet, or financial sustainability, are 
not identical to the priorities of a country seeking economic, environmental 
and social sustainability. The role of policy and regulatory oversight is 
fundamental to aligning priorities, especially with regard to the declining 
costs of renewables, which represents an opportunity for major cost savings.
tograph: ShutterstockSteady renewable energy capacity increases require vision and stability, embodied in 
appropriate and implementable planning. In this regard, Botswana can succeed in its uptake 
of renewable energy by transforming visions and roadmaps into binding commitments that 
contain specific renewable energy technology targets. It is also important that the targets 
that have been outlined across the different policy and strategy documents are aligned to 
provide a consistent, long-term signal to investors.
The experience of other countries such as Morocco have shown that a shift in the energy 
mix, increasing reliance on local resources, and reduced reliance on imports and costly 
fossil-based generation plants is possible when the drivers are established. In the case of 
Morocco, energy independence through harvesting natural resources is coupled with a 
long-term sustainable vision that includes environmental sustainability and harvesting the 
social and economic benefits of renewable energy projects – hence the mobilisation of local 
companies and the development of a local supply chain, supported by a human resources 
management strategy, towards a “just and inclusive energy transition” (IRENA, 2019). 
In this regard, the willingness to issue an IRP is a positive step. Following good practices, the 
Plan should be open to stakeholder participation and revised on a regular basis to account 
for economic drivers, technology drivers and the evolution of the regulatory frameworks. 
The capacity of the DoE to develop and update the IRP, in collaboration with BERA, should 
be reinforced to include new technologies and smart grids. This would provide BERA with 
the necessary tools to support this drive.
Operationalise the regulatory authority
The country has embarked on the path to regulatory reform – alongside the 70% of 
developing countries that have created a regulatory entity and opened private sector 
involvement through Independent Power Producers (IPPs), (World Bank, 2020). The 
regulator’s independence should rely on expertise, which will require BERA to be equipped 
with sufficient internal capacities. Operationalising BERA will require development 
mechanisms to guarantee a sustainable and independent budget over time, as well as a 
degree of political independence and enhanced capacity to hold the utilities accountable 
for their operational and financial performance – which is the purpose of a regulator.
In the interim, pressing issues need to be addressed such as:
• The ability to develop and enforce a tariff methodology, based on cost recovery, with 
elements of performance management;
• The development of grid codes, and a dispatch code; and
• Building the ability to review procurement processes for IPPs, including reviewing the 
environmental impacts of projects and reviewing the cost implications of the PPA.
• Also, stakeholders have noted delays incurred from the application of the Environmental 
Assessment Act, which would require mainstreaming.
During the stakeholder consultations, it was noted that the BERA Act 35(2)(a) exempts 
from license small-scale installations below 100 kW, which was understood as most minigrid systems or rooftop solar systems being outside the scope of the scrutiny of BERA. 
Considering these installations may – on an aggregate level – impact the financial and 
operational performance of the utility, and/or engage end customers (potentially through 
subsidised tariffs supporting rural electrification), the need for BERA to engage in regulating 
network access and tariffs in this segment was highlighted. It is also highly recommended 
that the regulator monitors the enforcement of standards issued by the Botswana Bureau 
of Standards.SECTION SCOPE STATUS
6(2) Under part VI of the BERA Act. “(..), the Authority shall have the following functions”
6(2)(a) Regulate tariffs, including allowed revenue, for regulated 
entities in the regulated sector Financing is being sought
6(2)(c) Subject to the regulated sector legislation, to license 
activities in the regulated sector Not operational
6(2)(d)
Regulate network access for independent power 
producers, privately financed projects in the regulated 
sector
Financing is being sought
6(2)(e)
Provide advisory technical expertise on tender procedures 
to the Public Procurement and Public Asset Disposal 
Board …
Not operational
6(2)(g) Monitor and inspect licenses and enforce license 
obligations
Most of the manpower capacity is active in new 
applications for oil and small rooftop installations
6(2)(h)
Implement policy in relation to the generation of 
electricity from renewable energy sources, as may be 
advised by the Minister
Advisor to the Ministry rather than in charge of 
implementation 
6(2)(i) Oversee project development in the regulated sector Currently working on regulatory tools for planned 
inspections
33(2)
Under part VI of the BERA Act, “The Authority shall establish and maintain a non-discriminatory and efficient 
regulatory framework to be followed by all regulated entities and licensees in the regulated sector. The regulatory 
framework shall include:”
33(2)(a) Administrative fees payable by licensees Not in place and no staff dedicated 
33(2)(b) Matters related to policy Advisory to the Ministry
33(2)(c) Tariff setting Not operational
33(2)(d) Internal and external communication processes Not operational
33(2)(e) Strategic planning processes for the regulated sector
The IRP responsibility is hosted by the Department of 
Energy. BERA is advisor to the process. However, the 
regulations regarding the development and update of the 
IRP are not yet developed
33(2)(f) Licensing of activities for the regulated sector Not operational
33(2)(g) Standards for supplies and services in the regulated sector Not operational
33(2)(h) Processes and methodologies for undertaking tariff 
reviews Not operational
33(2)(i) Processes and methodologies for monitoring performance 
in the regulated sector Not operational
33(2)(j) Technical codes for licensees and regulated activities Not operational
33(2)(k) Consumer dispute protection and resolution Not operational
33(2)(l) Environmental protection Under the scope of the Department of Environmental 
Affairs
Table 9 Status of operationalisation of BERA with regards to the mandate as set by the BERA Act4.2 Regulatory frameworks and policy support
 mechanisms
Though critical, establishing adequate institutional and policy frameworks is not sufficient 
for an effective and sustainable uptake of renewable energy. In the specific context of 
Botswana, regulation and other policy support mechanisms relating to grid codes and 
tariff-setting with the aim to support private sector participation will be key in the short 
and medium terms.
Establish a grid code that is conducive for variable renewable 
power
Under the authority of BERA, grid codes prioritising access to the grid for electricity 
generated from renewable energy, and dispatch based on marginal cost, should be 
developed to govern all current and future electricity generators and replace the BPC 
operational manual, which governs their transmission function. The elaboration of such a 
grid code should include the role of renewable energy generators and storage technologies 
to help system operation remain reliable and secure, where they would specify the ancillary 
services that variable renewable energy and enabling solutions can offer which may be 
financially remunerated. This provides transparency for project implementation by IPPs 
as BPC is currently a vertically integrated utility, potentially transitioning towards a 
single buyer model. Moreover, a robust regulatory system will be crucial at all levels for 
sustainability and stability to ensure protection of projects of public interest from failure.
From the outcomes of the workshops and stakeholder interviews, it appears that 
Botswana’s power sector regulatory framework is clearly being challenged by the global 
transformation affecting the sector worldwide. The attractiveness of variable generation is 
very high in terms of competitiveness, security of supply access and GHG emissions, but 
introduces variability both on the supply and the demand sides, which implies deviation 
from the business-as-usual model and internalised specific competences.
Revise the tariff-setting structure
With the creation of the Botswana Energy Regulation Authority (BERA) in September 2017, 
the definition of tariffs was brought under its supervision. BERA shall ensure that tariffs 
are established on the basis of a transparent tariff methodology by means of its Electricity 
Committee, including some level of performance management.
According to IRENA’s internal analysis, the cost recovery ratio is based on net operating 
expenses. The current price-setting mechanism appears based on ‘rate of return’ regulation 
more than ‘incentive-based’ regulation. The concerns associated with ‘rate of return’ 
regulation include pass-through of inefficiencies to end-consumers, which is potentially the 
case for Botswana. Now that BPC has achieved full cost-recovery, some level of performance 
management should be introduced, including quality of service and other policy directions 
(electrification, GHG emissions, security of supply). Presently, basic elements such as the 
System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) and the System Average Interruption 
Frequency Index (SAIFI) are not yet set by the regulator, although discussions are ongoing. 
Also, the current tariff structure averages costs over all customer groups and does not 
consider the temporal or spatial profile of the consumption. Therefore, pricing is potentially 
currently uncorrelated from demand as a major cost driver in the generation segment. The 
tariff methodology and level would potentially require a different approach.For the time being, the accounting of BPC is presented ‘bundled’, which does not allow it to 
define performance objectives per sub-sector. A presentation of accounts per segment would 
greatly facilitate the task of BERA regarding the establishment of performance standards 
specific to each segment. However, due to the modest size of its power system, it is unlikely 
that the country would move towards full unbundling and the creation of a wholesale power 
market, as would be the ultimate goal of regulatory reform, as the reform costs might exceed 
the actual benefits for small systems (World Bank, 2006; World Bank, 2020).
4.3 Risk mitigation for renewable energy procurement
The IRP, once adopted, communicated and enforced, will have a positive role in guiding 
market participants. It is expected that the IRP would include, or be complemented by 
an electrification plan, encompassing mini-grids and SHS. However, these endeavours will 
need to be completed by further actions to reduce the level of perceived risk discouraging 
private sector participation, and the development and integration of variable renewable 
energy into Botswana’s power system.
Define a clear regulatory framework to minimise risks involved in 
private sector participation
A key concern of the single buyer model is that long-term take-or-pay arrangements may 
introduce distortions in power dispatch and build contractual rigidity in the power system 
(World Bank, 2020). In this case, the full benefits of supplying power from renewable energy 
plants – at zero marginal cost – is jeopardised, in extreme cases leading to curtailments. Such 
extreme situations of market rigidity create uncertainty for investors in variable generation 
assets and reluctance for engagement, which translates into risk premiums on investments.
Another issue is the limited financial capacity of BPC.19 Although improving, the recourse 
to BPC for the procurement and offtake of the national renewable energy strategy has 
limitations. In theory, IPPs could participate in adding new generation capacity. In practice, 
PPAs have not yet materialised. Procurement, contracting and off-taker risks were reported 
during interviews – for reasons explained previously. A key issue of IPP contracts is finding 
a balance of risks between the off-taker (the government) and the private investor. Take 
or pay, capacity charges (e.g., PV + storage, CSP), sovereign guarantees, backstops on 
liquidity and termination may be in high demand in new markets in order to limit risk 
premiums – and eventually a higher cost of electricity. Lacking the ability to find the right 
balance may lead to windfall profits from unaffordable tariffs at one end of the spectrum, 
or the inability for the private sector to engage in the programme – and the stalling of the 
private sector development of renewable energy – at the other end of the spectrum.
From a regulatory standpoint, it is a positive element that competitive procurement 
(auctions) is used for renewable energy IPPs. The scale of participation demonstrates 
the attractiveness of the market. For future tenders, it remains to be determined if the 
procurements should be handled by BPC or through a dedicated IPP procurement entity 
(e.g., IPP office of the REIPPPP). In terms of procurement, a special purpose vehicle could 
be established in Botswana to handle renewable energy public–private partnerships (PPPs).
In any case, the PPAs would need review by the regulator, as these would eventually impact 
retail tariffs. BERA should ensure that, while risk-mitigation mechanisms might be needed, 
these should be limited to meet the legitimate expectations of return. This implies the 
regulator is equipped with such competence internally. The regulator should be equipped to 
deliver licenses and monitor compliance to the licensee’s obligations, including compliance 
to grid codes.Perform a location-specific study (pre-feasibility) for renewable 
energy generation and streamline permitting processes
Experience has demonstrated that efficient investments will build on an integrated 
spatial master plan. Investments in renewable energy generation require the collection of
1–2 years of bankable resource data, and potentially investments in distribution or 
transmission assets. Timely investments therefore require careful strategic planning in 
future project locations.
The risks it addresses are further uncertainties, which would translate into delays and 
higher costs in the procurement phase. A first step is to perform a detailed geospatial 
analysis (pre-feasibility), as proposed by IRENA and the World Bank. The World Bank
(World Bank, 2019a) proposes a process for the sustainable development of solar energy, 
which includes three procurement strategies:
• Location-agnostic: a tender for a pre-determined capacity/energy amount is issued by 
the procurer; the tender is not location-specific.
• Related to a substation: a tender is issued for a certain capacity (MW) at each substation 
identified by the government.
• Assigned to a specific location: specific sites are identified by the government, which 
then proceeds to clear land and construct solar park infrastructure. The successful IPP 
identified in the subsequent tendering process finances, constructs and operates the 
project.
Additionally, the permitting process in Botswana requires clarification, including establishing 
the appropriate framework for environmental impact studies, grid connection studies and 
cost provisions for grid connections.
To further decrease the development risks and fast-track planning permissions, countries 
around the world tend to perform feasibility studies on the most appropriate sites for 
development and organise project-specific auctions (IRENA, 2019). The advantage of this 
approach is to considerably fast-track development, while ensuring the development can 
be in line with sustainable grid operations. In such a scheme, the government invests in 
developing the site, at various levels:
Box: Public–private partnership in Morocco
The CSP projects in Morocco involve MASEN, a private entity with public capital that operates under a double-PPA 
scheme: one with the single-buyer, ONEE, and one PPA with each IPP, supported by a state guarantee. The potential 
gap between (the IPP and ONEE) PPA prices is compensated by the government, fully addressing the off-taker risk. In 
terms of contracting, MASEN invests 25% public equity in the projects and acts as debt provider, under contract with 
major IFIs. The PPAs are contracted under a BOOT scheme, which requires the PPA to specify acceptable reductions in 
performance over time, and hence stringent quality specifications. 
With such scheme, MASEN enables IPPs to access low-cost debt from the IFIs and lowers the cost of equity by fully 
addressing the off-taker risk. It has achieved high performance in the procurement of CSP, PV and PV-plus-storage 
assets since its establishment in 2010.
Source: Green Growth Business Partnership (2020).• Running a resource measurement campaign and acquiring bankable measurements, 
which can significantly accelerate project development;
• Developing site infrastructures, such as roads, utilities and securing transportation for 
large materials; and
• Carrying out environmental and social impact assessments for the site, to fast-track the 
permitting process.
Conduct a study on the grid capability to absorb power from 
variable renewable energy sources
In addition to the location-specific pre-feasibility studies, a comprehensive dynamic grid 
impact study –and support to perform a regular update of the IRP – based on dynamic 
(time-dependent) simulations, with detailed cost assumptions, new technologies and 
advanced dispatch strategies is recommended. The implementation and update of the IRP 
needs to build on grid stability studies of the power system in order to assess the true 
penetration potential of renewable energy – including grid reinforcement and storage on 
a cost-efficiency basis. Potentially, the study could also help BERA develop the grid codes 
and regulations for merit-order dispatch, accounting for the specifics of variable renewable 
energy sources.20
In addition to this recommended action, some countries have considered the installation 
of local cloud monitoring systems coupled with prediction systems to allow balancing 
of the grid. Local competences can be federated around this initiative: e.g., research can 
be recognised at the University of Botswana’s Clean Energy Research Centre on solar 
prediction systems, and BITIRI could be involved in testing and certification.
4.4 Rural electrification and decentralised generation
The rate of electrification in rural areas stood at 28% in 2019. Unfortunately, current 
approaches are seen as inadequate to solve the structural issue of under-investment in rural 
areas. An overall rural electrification framework could entice the involvement of private 
mini-grid operators in rural areas with sufficient density, with a view to rapidly scaling-up 
electrification. In this regard, the following actions are recommended: 
Integrate rural electrification strategies into a single, 
comprehensive document and consolidate rural electrification 
activities
The need for adding to the IRP both small-scale distributed generation at scale, and a 
rural electrification programme, was mentioned in previous sections. During stakeholder 
consultations, the mini-grids, smart grids, waste to energy and solar home systems market 
segments were seen as a potentially large – and untapped – economic sector able to drive 
investment, jobs, entrepreneurship, and gender equity. It is also noted that this sector is 
currently not open to private sector engagement and competition in Botswana, which is a 
deviation from current practices across sub-Saharan Africa.
20 Such a “grid assessment” or hosting capacity study would assess the capability of the existing system to accept variable renewable 
generation with the use of enabling technologies (batteries, other storage), advance technical solutions, and consider the point of 
connection to the grid and available transfer capacity of the transmission system.
This would contribute to the modification of existing codes and development of grid codes that would specify the role of variablePrevious experiences with BPC Lesedi (UNDP, 2011) showed that specific business models 
and companies are needed in these market segments, away from the traditional utility 
business – yet, as a regulated market as far as customers are involved. From stakeholder 
interviews, the actual market potential in terms of location, numbers, capacity and 
willingness to pay, and demand is mostly unknown (potentially in the range of 100 000 
SHS systems, according to expert knowledge). Socio-economic surveys would be required 
to clarify the actual business potential in each segment. These dimensions are necessary 
both for grid-tied rooftop solar installations (impact on the load curve) and off-grid in the 
mini-grid and SHS segment. 
As noted earlier, BERA Act 35(2)(a) exempts from license the small-scale installations 
below 100 kW, which was understood as most mini-grid systems or rooftop solar systems 
being outside the scope of scrutiny of BERA. Considering these installations may – on 
an aggregate level – impact the financial and operational performance of the utility, 
and/or engage end customers – potentially through subsidised tariffs supporting rural 
electrification – there is an opportunity for BERA to engage in regulating network access 
and tariffs. Also, monitoring of the enforcement of standards issued by the Botswana 
Bureau of Standards is highly recommended. 
Ongoing programmes in East and West Africa have brought a wealth of knowledge on 
options and good practices in the mini-grid sector, which is benefitting from steep learning 
curves in generation and storage, and could be brought into perspective in Botswana to 
identify the relevant local business models.
Support the growth of solar rooftop and solar home systems 
through strong incentives and policy instruments
Small-scale systems are not unknown in Botswana. It was reported that the off-grid market 
is dynamic and already some level of notable success deserves attention, such as commercial 
centres producing for self-generation, and hotel and farms currently self-producing with 
PV – apparently in the absence of regulation or a support scheme. The telecom sector, for 
example, has relied on solar PV (with batteries) for many decades. MTN (telecom operator) 
foresees the deployment of 5000 solar-powered towers by 2020 on its network, including 
in Botswana (TowerXchange, 2019). In the tourism sector, the supply of reliable, affordable 
energy is a prerequisite to the further development of the sector, especially in eco-tourism 
expansion. The tourism sector has already invested in the renewable energy sector, in 
particular solar in eco-lodges and camps. Solar thermal and photovoltaic systems are usually 
seen as the better solutions compared to the traditional stand-alone diesel systems thanks to 
their lower O&M costs, as well as the positive image for sustainable tourism.
Rooftop solar
Through the Rooftop Solar Programme, guidelines for rooftop solar installation are 
undergoing development and will provide an alternative suitable mechanism to increase 
the uptake of solar energy as well as facilitate private sector participation. Nonetheless, 
at the moment, excess power generated from small-scale rooftop systems cannot be sold 
to BPC, which strongly limits the incentives for private investment, where the grid can 
reliably supply the electricity service. In addition, local banks do not support individual 
solar rooftop projects.
Furthermore, the management of rooftop solar variability is a source of concern for BPC, 
as rooftop solar is deduced from demand, which might come online rapidly and disappear 
with local meteorological changes (e.g., the passage of clouds). Moreover, the sector suffers 
from a lack of incentives, and much is expected from the ongoing adoption of solar rooftop 
guidelines. Large-scale rooftop solar projects might sell their excess power production to 
BPCThe tariffs are to be set by the rooftop solar guidelinesThe price is expected to level of support would incentivise investment. In addition, developers are concerned by 
the financial viability of BPC, and request that the government extend credit guarantees.
For the promotion of rooftop solar, it is therefore recommended that strong incentives be 
put in place to support the adoption of this technology. Policy instruments such as netmetering and feed-in-tariffs (FITs) for rooftop solar projects would help facilitate market 
access for investors. The government should finalise the FITs.
Solar home systems
The household component of OSAP acknowledges that there are 120 unelectrified villages in 
Botswana, representing 260 000 households. Despite ongoing grid-connection efforts, the 
plan foresees 240 000 households will still be without access by 2021. The authors foresee 
that 60% of these households could be eligible for solar home systems (SHS). Previous 
experience from the RERE programme (UNDP, 2011) was inconclusive. Lessons learnt from 
this experience did not deny the existence of a demand for services, but rather the need to 
develop dedicated planning, business models and implementation mechanisms – potentially 
supporting the engagement of the private sector. 
Although potentially impactful – and complementary to grid-connected and mini-grid 
solutions – the solar home systems (SHS) market segment seems in great difficulty. The 
funding of the off-grid solar programme was reported as challenging, and one operator 
reported financial losses while trying to develop the market. 
This experience is, however, different in other countries, where SHS proved to be low cost 
compared to other options (grid extension and mini-grids); in cases where the population 
density is low, the SHS market segment may be the most effective solution to remote off 
grid households. A considerable breakthrough was reached in the development of mobile 
PAYGO technologies, which have optimised the billing costs.
The performance of the RERE programme was unconclusive, and potentially created a 
negative precedent for this market segment. From the RERE final evaluation report (UNDP, 
2011), however, the issue is less on the side of the market scale than the conditions for 
implementation. The report identified the learnings from the programme and formulated 
recommendations moving forward. In particular, consistent with the outcomes of 
stakeholder’s engagement, it noted:
• An electrification master plan is required, that covers both grid- and non-grid 
electrification. The plan should specify clear timeframes and connection rates. The 
absence of such a plan was identified as a barrier to private sector participation. The 
plan should be consolidated with strategies for grid expansion and mini grids (hence 
coordinated with the Integrated Resource Plan). 
• The SHS market requires support in the form of technical assistance and dedicated 
financial instruments (potentially subsidies), as illustrated by the Lighting Global 
initiative, or the recently released Off-Grid renewable energy fund in Haiti21.
• The lack of mandatory standards and regulations for materials and installers has led 
to issues with the quality of the solar material and impacted the image of solar PV 
technology. The Botswana Bureau of Standards (BoBS) has established a range of 
technical standards for solar system components, leveraging IEC standards whenever 
possible and appropriate. BoBS has adopted IEC TS 62257-9-5 pertaining to pico-PV 
off-grid systems, but it is not compulsory and thus low-quality off-grid solar products 
are readily available in the country. It should be noted that IEC RS 62257-8 standards 
are now published, with standards for pico-products and SHS kits up to 350 kW. Those 
standards are the result of a collaboration with Lighting Global.The opportunity for an SHS value chain deserves to be confirmed, and international 
experience could be brought to Botswana to exchange best practices, leading to 
establishing regulations.
For the promotion of a viable SHS and electricity access value chain, it is recommendation 
that the Government of Botswana explores:
• Testing, certification and import using local certification competences, and establishing 
quality standards based on international standards;
• Organisation of the payment scheme such as lease, upfront payment or loans involving 
financial institutions;
• Distribution, installation and maintenance requirements of the devices in remote areas; 
• Collection of payments, through pay-as-you-go platforms or in cash;
• Gender equity in the energy sector; and
• Demand side subsidies to cover the affordability gap among poor off-grid households.
4.5 End-use applications
Going beyond the power sector, the RRA process also considered opportunities in the enduse sectors. For instance, the bioenergy sector was found to be unexplored, despite the 
following promising prospects:
• In the utility-scale segment, proposals were received for the production of biofuels and 
for a medium-scale biogas plant. 
• For stand-alone systems, biogas could be an option for heating, lighting and cooking, 
through the use of biogas digesters. 
• Biodiesel was demonstrated in Botswana for agricultural machinery.
Develop a strategy for renewable energy and agriculture
The agriculture sector is predominantly based on subsistence agriculture, mainly due to 
traditional farming methods, repeated droughts and limited infrastructure. 
In this sector, solar water pumping, biogas cooking, bioenergy (biodiesel) for transport and 
biogas lighting were identified as relevant for the country. To improve uptake of these energy 
services, financial resources should be mobilised, locally available and affordable technologies 
developed, and both regulations and incentives established. It is suggested that Botswana 
develop a strategy for renewable energy and agriculture that includes the use of renewable 
energy in the agriculture value chain and the use of agro-residues for renewable energy.
Develop a strategy for renewable energy in the transport sector
Bioenergy for transport is not incentivised at this point, despite the existence of biodiesel 
standards, in the absence of a specific Act to trigger enforcement. The local market is 
judged small and unable to generate economies of scale, due to the limited use in the 
transport sector. The sector also lacks local manufacturing and assembly capabilities.The Department of Energy (DoE) with the technical support from the University of 
Botswana (UB) and Department of Agricultural Research (DAR) under the Ministry of 
Agricultural Development and Food Security, are engaged in a research project that seeks 
to stimulate the development of the local biofuel industry.
In this sector, electric solar was also mentioned, as a demonstration is ongoing for solar 
boats in a tourist area. However, the potential for market scale-up are limited. Currently, no 
plans for electric road transportation were identified, nor has an electric vehicle strategy 
been defined. Due to the strong dynamic of this market worldwide, it is suggested that 
Botswana develop an e-mobility strategy.
Promote the role of renewable energy for heating, cooling and 
cooking
The need for increased uptake of renewable-based heating, cooling and cooking was 
mentioned in the stakeholder workshops. This can be realised by raising awareness of 
the technologies available to residences; building the capacity for local manufacturing 
and installation; and enhancing development of bankable proposals in order to ensure 
renewable energy companies can access finance. Local financial institutions should also 
be encouraged to provide finance to private investment in renewable energy solutions. 
This can be facilitated by providing training to financial institutions on renewable energy 
project appraisal. Furthermore, incentives can also be provided by government to ensure 
that citizens can afford the renewable energy services. 
4.6 Local skills development
In Botswana, the current uncertainty in long term planning and lack of realisation is limiting 
private sector engagement, preventing the country from building human capacity, and 
creating local economic benefits and jobs. Sourcing local competences and people is a 
must for implementing a renewable energy strategy that is sustainable. First, there is a need 
for talent and state capacity to design and implement energy strategies. Then, other parts 
of the value chain can also be localised to maximise the spill-over effects of investments. 
In economic terms, the objective is to increase the multiplier effect of public investments.
The IRP foresees only a small number of one-off projects, separated by years of inactivity. 
This is inconsistent with an approach that will maximise local job creation. Currently, as 
each auction is a greenfield project, the private sector has no business case to make 
investments in the local value chain and human capacities that would initiate a thriving 
renewable energy sector. Yet, potential for socio-economic benefits – jobs, research, 
education – are demonstrated by the presence of industry associations and research 
infrastructures despite modest activity in the renewable energy sector. Auctions can 
adapt to address issues around a just and inclusive energy transition. Specific design 
elements for auctions could include small and new players, fostering the development 
of local industries, creating local jobs, contributing to subnational development and 
engaging communities (IRENA, 2019). 
According to IRENA, auctions can be made compatible with local development through 
systematic auction schemes – indicating a commitment to a longer auctioning schedule. 
Under such an approach, a steady stream (rather than a periodic flux) of auctions helps 
market agents to better adjust their expectations and plan for the long term, and helps the 
government to promote the local industry (IRENA and CEM, 2015).Develop local human capacities along the project value chain
There is an opportunity to develop competences for maintaining and repairing renewable 
energy infrastructure and equipment, as in remote areas there is a severe lack of training 
or availability of trained personnel. Private sector engagement in the management of such 
off-grid and mini-grid facilities can be enabled through PPPs. 
Stakeholders also indicated potential for engagement in basic research, certifications, 
policy development and review, regulatory assessment or market surveys and acceptance 
of the technology at large. The assessment of the opportunities for solar rooftops, 
mini-grids and SHS would greatly benefit from the mobilisation of local capacities and 
perhaps the inclusion of women. Botswana should embark on mobilisation, whereby 
national competencies can be mapped against the needs along the supply chain. This 
entails identification and mobilisation of local workforces to ensure local recruitment
(IRENA, 2019).
IRENA, in partnership with the SADC Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency 
(SACREEE), launched the SADC Entrepreneurship Support Facility in 2017 to support 
renewable energy market development in the SADC region through training, mentorship 
and linkage to financial institutions. Several renewable energy SMEs in Botswana are 
currently benefitting from the initiative.
Additionally, building local capacity within BPC and BERA is important to ensure that 
Botswana has the technical capacity to operate a power system with high shares of 
renewables and tackle all the technical challenges to the system. Capacity building 
should include how to model the power system and conduct simulation studies, reserve 
sizing, flexibility analysis, economic dispatch, VRE forecasting, etc., so that Botswana can 
successfully manage any challenges to the system in the future.
Box: South Africa’s Renewable Energy Independent Power Producers Procurement Programme
To bring certainty to the nascent renewable energy market, neighbouring South Africa initiated auctions as capacity 
pipelines, determined initially under the Integrated Resource Plan and further elaborated under the REIPPPP.22 In terms 
of job creation, the REIPPP has generated a total of 40 134 job-years (equivalent of a fulltime employment for one year) 
for South African citizens, of which 33 019 were in construction (101% above planned) and 7 115 in operations .
Source: IRENA (2019).otograph: ShutterstockBIBLIOGRAPHY
AfDB (African Development Bank) (2018), African Economic Outlook: Country Notes,
retrieved 30 June 2019, https://afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/GenericDocuments/country_notes/Botswana_country_note.pdf
BCCN and JACSES (Botswana Climate Change Network and Center for a Sustainable 
Environment and Society) (2018), Fact Sheet 4: Morupule B Coal Power Station 
(Units 5 & 6), https://sekitan.jp/jbic/en/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/4-fact-sheetmorupule-en.pdf
BITC (Botswana Investment and Trade Centre) (n.d.), Go Botswana, retrieved
20 June 2019, https://gobotswana.com/sector/energy
BoB (Bank of Botswana) (2018), Annual Report, retrieved 10 June 2019,
www.bankofbotswana.bw/assets/uploaded/BoB%202018%20Annual%20Report%20
Main%20document.pdf
BoB (2019), Credit rating agencies, retrieved 19 July 2019, http://bankofbotswana.bw/
content/2009110615053-credit-rating-reports
BOCOBONET (Botswana Community Based Organisations Network) (2021), Botswana 
Community Based Organisations Network, 15 June, https://trickleout.net/index.
php/directoryofenterprises/botswana/bocobonet-botswana-community-basedorganisations-network
BPC (Botswana Power Corporation) (2017a), Annual Report, retrieved 19 June 2019, 
https://bpc.bw/about-us/Annual%20Reports/2017%20BPC%20ANNUAL%20REPORT.
pdf
BPC (2017b), BPC news, 5 April, retrieved 20 June 2019, https://bpc.bw/media-site/news/
Pages/-Eskom-and-Botswana-Power-Corporation-.aspx
BPC (2017c), BPC, 27 June, https://bpc.bw/media-site/news/Pages/hybrid-network.aspx
BPC (2018a), Annual Report, https://bpc.bw/about-us/Annual%20Reports/BPC%20
ANNUAL%20REPORT%202018.pdf
BPC (2018b), Presentation on electricity supply in Botswana, August, retrieved
2 July 2019, https://gobotswana.com/sites/default/files/china_mission_bpc_
presentation_27_august_2018.pdf
BPC (2018c), Tender 2273/1. Request for proposal relating to the development, financing, 
construction, operation and maintenance of 12 solar photovoltaic power projects.
BPC (2019), Annual Report, https://bpc.bw/about-us/Annual%20Reports/BPC%20
Annual%20Report%202019.pdf
CD4CDM (Capacity Development for CDM) (2013), CDM Projects, retrieved 22 June 2019, 
http://botswana.acp-cd4cdm.org/cdm-projects-in-botswana.aspx
Donald, L.K., and B.M. Kelebogile (2009), Potential impacts of the production of liquid 
biofuels on food security in Botswana, retrieved 22 June 2019, https://competebioafrica.net/publications/publ/Potential%20Impacts%20of%20Biofuel%20
Production%20on%20Food%20Security%20in%20Botswana.pdfEnergy and Environment Partnership (2017), Renewable Energy Market Landscape Study 
covering 15 countries in Southern and East Africa, https://entwicklung.at/fileadmin/
user_upload/Dokumente/Regionen/Volume_I_Market_Landscape_Study_EEP-SEA_
Report.pdf
GEF and UNDP (Global Environment Facility and United Nations Development 
Programme) (2011), Terminal evaluation of the renewable energy-based rural 
electrification programme for Botswana, final report. 
Global Atlas (2021), Global Atlas for Renewable Energy, https://www.irena.org/globalatlas
Goldberg, A. (2015). The economic impact of load shedding: The case of South African 
retailers, Pretoria: University of Pretoria.
GoB (Government of Botswana) (1970). The Botswana Power Corporation Act.
GoB (1970), The Botswana Power Corporation Act.
GoB (1973), The Electricity Supply Act.
GoB (2005), Environmental Impact Assessment Act.
GoB (2007), Ammendement of the Electricity Supply Act.
GoB (2008), Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act.
GoB (2015a), Economic Stimulus Programme (ESP); A strategy for employment and 
growth: 2015 and beyond, retrieved 19 July 2019, https://tshepomolefe.files.wordpress.
com/2015/12/esp-brochure.pdf
GoB (2015b), Botswana First Nationally Determined Contributions, https://unfccc.int/
sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Botswana%20First/BOTSWANA.pdf
GoB (2016), Amendement of the Electricity Supply Act.
GoB (2017), National Development Plan 2017–2023, Retrieved from https://finance.gov.
bw/images/NDP_11_2017-2023.pdf
GoB (2019), Botswana Third National Communication to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. Retrieved from https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/
resource/BOTSWANA%20THIRD%20NATIONAL%20COMUNICATION%20FINAL%20.
pdf
GoB (2020a), Integrated Resource Plan for Electricity for Botswana.
GoB (2020b), National Energy Policy.
Green Growth Business Partnership. (2020). GGBP Case Study Series - The Moroccan 
Agency for Solar Energy. Retrieved from www.greengrowthknowledge.org/
sites/default/files/downloads/best-practices/GGBP%20Case%20Study%20
Series_Morocco_Moroccan%20Agency%20for%20Solar%20Energy%20%26%20
Moroccan%20Solar%20Plan.pdfH2 Industries SE (2018), Inovative energy storage technology for Solar Energy distribution 
in Botswana, 13 December, https://h2-industries.com/en/german-company-plansusing-innovative-energy-storage-technology-solar-energy-distribution-botswanasouthern-africa-shumba-energy
ICA (Infrastructure Consortium for Africa) (2017). Atlas of Africa Energy resources,
retrieved 19 June 2019, https://icafrica.org/fileadmin/documents/Publications/Africa_
Energy_Atlas.pdf
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2016), Database, retrieved 24 June 2019,
https://iea.org/energyaccess/database/
IEA (2018), IEA Sankey Diagram Botswana,
https://www.iea.org/sankey/#?c=Botswana&s=Final%20consumption
IEA Clean Coal Centre (2013), Coal prospects in Botswana, Mozambique, Zambia, 
Zimbabwe and Namibia, retrieved 19 June 2019, https://iea-coal.org/coal-prospects-inbotswana-mozambique-zambia-zimbabwe-and-namibia-ccc-228/
IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2013). South African Power Pool: 
Planning and prospects for renewable energy, retrieved June 2019,
https://irena.org/documentdownloads/publications/sapp.pdf
IRENA (2016), Renewable energy market analysis: Latin America.
IRENA (2019), Renewable energy auctions: Status and trends beyond price.
IRENA (2020), Renewable power generation costs.
IRENA (n.d.[a]), IRENA for CIP, www.irena.org/irenaforcip
IRENA (n.d.[b]), Investment forums in Southern Africa, https://irena.org/irenaforcip/
Southern-Africa
IRENA and CEM (Clean Energy Ministerial) (2015). Renewable energy auctions: A guide 
to design.
IRENA and KTH (Royal Institute of Technology) (2014), Estimating the renewable energy 
potential in Africa: A GIS approach, retrieved 22 June 2019, https://irena.org/-/media/
Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2014/IRENA_Africa_Resource_Potential_Aug2014.
pdf
IRENA and LBNL (Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory) (2015), Renewable energy 
zones for the Africa Clean Energy Corridor, retrieved June 2019, https://mapre.lbl.gov/
rez/searez/
Ministry of Finance (2018), 2018 budget speech, retrieved 20 June 2019,
http://bankofbotswana.bw/assets/uploaded/2018%20BUDGET%20SPEECH%20FINAL.
pdf
Mmegi (2016), Another 300MW extension for Morupule B, https://mmegi.bw/index.
php?aid=59519&dir=2016/april/22
MMEWR (Ministry of Minerals, Energy and Water Resources) (2004), Botswana Energy 
Master Plan.MMEWR (2009), Botswana Biomass Energy Strategy (BEST), https://lse.ac.uk/
GranthamInstitute/wp-content/uploads/laws/1090.pdf
MMEWR (2016a), Renewable Energy Resource Assessment; draft final report; ECA, 3E and 
DLR; for the World Bank.
MMEWR (2016 b), Electricity Supply Curve: Draft final report.
MMEWR (2017a), Renewable Energy Roadmap.
MMEWR (2017b), Draft National Energy Strategy.
MMEWR (2017c), Renewable Energy Strategy Roadmap: Roadmap.
Mooiman, M., and E. Matlotse (2016), A Multidisciplinary Examination of Solar Power in 
Botswana, retrieved 22 June 2019, https://researchgate.net/publication/311993872_A_
Multidisciplinary_Examination_of_Solar_Power_in_Botswana
SACREEE (SADC Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency) (2019), SACREEE 
Institutional Structure, 18 June, https://sacreee.org/content/institutional-structure
SADC (Southern African Development Community) (2016), SADC Energy Monitor,
retrieved 18 June 2019, https://sadc.int/files/1514/7496/8401/SADC_Energy_
Monitor_2016.pdf
SADC (2018), SADC Renewable Energy & Energy Efficiency Status Report,
https://.sacreee.org/sites/default/files/documents/files/SADC_EN_%28web%29.pdf
SAPP (Southern African Power Pool) (2017), SAPP Pool Plan 2017.
SAPP (2018), Annual Report, retrieved 18 June 2019, http://sapp.co.zw/sites/default/files/
SAPP%20Annual%20Report.pdf
SAPP (2020), Annual report 2019.
SEforALL (Sustainable Energy for All) (2012), Rapid assessment gap analysis Botswana, 
www.seforall.org/sites/default/files/l/2015/05/Botswana_RAGA.pdf
Statistics Botswana (2014), Population and Housing Census 2011: Analytical Report.
Statistics Botswana (2018a), Formal Sector Employment Survey, June 2018, retrieved 
25 June 2019, http://statsbots.org.bw/sites/default/files/Formal%20Sector%20
Employment%20Stats%20Brief%20June%202018.pdf
Statistics Botswana (2018b), 2021 Population & Housing Census Cartographic Strategy, 
https://statsbots.org.bw/sites/default/files/documents/Statistics%20Botswana%20
2019%20Annual%20Reportpublications/2021%20Population%20%20Housing%20
Census%20Cartographic%20Strategy.pdf
TogoFirst. (2019, October). Retrieved from TogoFirst: https://www.togofirst.com/en/
energy/1510-4152-togo-a-total-of-317-communities-will-have-access-to-light-usingsolar-mini-gridsTowerXchange (2019), How MTN is energising Africa with 5,000 new rural sites by 2020, 
https://towerxchange.com/how-mtn-is-energising-africa-with-5000-new-rural-sitesby-2020
UN (United Nations) (2018), Data, retrieved 20 June 2019,
http://data.un.org/en/iso/bw.html
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) (2005), Renewable Energy-based 
Rural Electrification Programme, http://bw.undp.org/content/botswana/en/home/
operations/projects/environment_and_energy/solar_pv_project.html
UNDP (2011), Terminal evaluation of the Renewable Energy-based Rural Electrification 
Programme for Botswana: Final report.
UNDP (2018a), Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 statistical update,
retrieved 30 June 2019, http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/countrynotes/BWA.pdf
UNDP (2018b), A national climate change action plan for Botswana; Final action plan.
UNDP (2020), Promoting production and utilization of biogas from agro-waste in South 
Eastern Botswana UNDP PIMS: 5299 / GEF project ID: 00098758; mid-term Review.
UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa) (2018), Energy crisis 
in Southern Africa: Future prospects, https://uneca.org/sites/default/files/
PublicationFiles/energy_crisis_in_southern_africa_future_prospects_final.pdf
UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization) (2016), World small 
hydropower development report, retrieved 22 June 2019, http://smallhydroworld.org/
fileadmin/user_upload/pdf/2016/WSHPDR_2016_full_report.pdf
World Bank (2006), Handbook for Evaluating Infrastructure Regulatory Systems.
World Bank (2010), Botswana Country Profile, https://enterprisesurveys.org/data/
exploreeconomies/2010/botswana#infrastructure
World Bank (2017a), Access to electricity (% of the population), https://data.worldbank.
org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?locations=BW&view=chart
World Bank (2017b), National Energy Efficiency Strategy for Botswana.
World Bank (2019a), A Sure Path to Sustainable Solar.
World Bank (2019b), World Bank data, 19 June, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator
World Bank (2020), Doing Business report, https://doingbusiness.org/en/data/
exploreeconomies/botswana
World Bank (n.d), World Bank data, https://data.worldbank.org/country/
botswana?view=chartP.O. Box 236
Abu Dhabi
United Arab Emirates