File Name: CHL-NEP-2012-EN
Year: 2012
Country Name: Chile
Country Code: CHL
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: February 2012
Start Year: 2012
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

NATIONAL ENERGY STRATEGY
2012-2030
FEBRUARY 2012Introduction
Chile s Energy Challenge
ThFdtif Dld Ct
Turismo Chile
´ Chile is at a critical moment in its history. It is faced by the 
enormous challenge and the noble task of generating the 
right conditions to achieve development over the coming 
decades. This is the objective that this Government has set 
itself and represents the serious aspiration of our country to 
bring greater and better opportunities to our fellow Chileans. 
Transforming Chile into a developed country not only implies 
achieving certain macroeconomic goals, but also making a 
significant step forward, both quantitatively and qualitatively 
in education, strengthening healthcare guarantees; making 
decisive progress in the access to and quality of housing; and 
putting an end, once and for all, to extreme poverty so as to 
improve the circumstances of thousands of Chileans who 
currently live in poverty. 
Our development requires sustained growth by the Chilean 
economy. In effect, Chile grew at a rate of 5.4% between 1986 
and 2010 (7.4% between 1986 and 1998 and 3.3% between 
1999 and 2009). Since 2009 - particularly in 2010 and 2011 
- our country has recovered its ability to grow quickly. The 
productive sector has reacted vigorously and the economy has 
become very active and this in turn has resulted in positive 
Chilean economy in 2011 was 6.3%, with most sectors showing 
strong expansion. 
As our country grows, it needs more energy, so there is a natural 
linkage between the economy and energy. Therefore, the 
challenge for Chile today is to have sufficient and competitive 
energy resources to support this development. Energy is 
an essential material for society. Its availability and supply 
directly affect social and economic growth and consequently 
the reduction of poverty. The lack of access to reliable energy 
sources and networks constitutes a dangerous limitation 
to sustained social progress, to economic growth and to the 
wellbeing of the population. 
This being the case, when it comes to forecasting growth, Chile 
must be clear that it can sustain it with clean, safe, economical 
energy. 
The Foundations of a Developed Country 
ShutterstockDemand in a Developed Society 
Central, SIC), 25.6% from the Norte Grande Interconnected System (Sistema Interconectado del Norte Grande, SING) and 0.8% 
from the medium-sized systems in Aysén and Magallanes. 
The maximum demand during the year just gone was 6,881 MW from the SIC, and 2,162 MW from the SING. 
On analyzing gross generation during 2011, the SIC produced 46,095 GWh, which represents 6.8% growth compared to 2010, 
while the SING generated a gross total of 15,878 GWh, 5.2% more than the previous year. 
Between now and 2020, growth rates of around 6% to 7% are projected for electricity consumption in Chile, which means 
almost 100,000 GWh of total electricity demand by that year. That means that an increase in supply of some 8,000 MW of new 
generation projects would be needed to satisfy the demand. 
This is a mammoth undertaking, particularly considering that Chile is predominantly an importer of energy resources and that it 
has in recent years been particularly dependant on fossil fuels, the prices for which have increased the marginal costs of energy 
generation, leading to higher electricity prices. 
SIC and SING Demand 2000 - 2030
Demand (GWH)
160.000
140.000
120.000
100.000
80.000
60.000
40.000
20.000
0
 SIC SINGEvolution of marginal costs for the SIC y SING
123RF
impacted by the abrupt change in the conditions of gas 
supply from Argentina, as well as the increase in investment 
costs for conventional technologies. Electricity prices in Chile 
are in fact among the highest in Latin Amercia and higher 
than the OECD average. It can therefore be seen that Chile is 
very exposed with regard to energy and one of our challenges 
must be to have sufficient and competitive energy resources 
to sustain our growth. 
-00 
y-00 
-00 
-01 
y-01
-01
-02
y-02
-02
-03
y-03
-03
-04
y-04
-04
-05
y-05
-05
-06
y-06
-06
-07
y-07
-07
-08
y-08
-08
-09
y-09
-09
-10
y-10
-10
-11
y-11
-11
us$/MWh
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
SING
SICUndoubtedly our country needs more energy, but not 
irrespective of type. Our Government has from the beginning 
made a fundamental commitment that Chile will develop 
energy sources that enable the country to have sustainable 
economic growth while providing adequate safeguards in 
terms of health and environmental protection. One clear 
example, among other measures, are the emission standards 
for thermoelectric plants brought in by our Government in 
2011. As a result, Chile is now applying similar standards to 
those applied in the European Union. 
Our first commitment is therefore to develop clean, renewable 
energy sources, which are, moreover, abundant in our country. 
Water is a major component of our electricity matrix, and in 
2011 represented almost 35% of the energy produced. We are 
therefore decidedly promoting its development because of 
the great potential offered by this resource. 
Non-conventional renewable energy (NCRE) sources are 
another option. The development of this type of project 
depends on the characteristics inherent in each of the available 
technologies and the different obstacles they face. Therefore 
our challenge will be to sustainably boost their development, 
taking account of the degree of maturity of the projects and 
this will increase over the years to come. 
Despite our commitment to this area, we realize that we 
cannot discount fossil fuels as a source of energy generation. 
 They are important to security of supply, as long as the plant 
factor is high and the costs are more or less competitive with 
respect to the other technologies. However, we must extend 
the regulations regarding the use of these types of fuel and 
demand the highest standards of environmental compliance. 
Our objective is therefore to achieve development within 
the framework of an absolute commitment to protecting the 
environment, but bearing in mind that no energy alternative, 
with the exception of energy efficiency measures, has a zero 
environmental effect. We therefore need an energy supply from 
clean, safe and economically efficient sources, incorporating 
the lowest possible costs with a view to the growth of the 
different productive sectors. 
A Sustainable ChallengeThe need for a Long-Term Vision
10.000
20.000
30.000
40.000
50.000
60.000
70.000
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Generation by the SICand the SING 2000-2011
Wind power
Derivatives
Biomass
Coal
Natural Gas
Hydroelectric
The Chilean electricity sector was a global pioneer in 
establishing competitive conditions in the generation and 
sale of electricity, maintaining the transmission and distribution segments under a system of financial regulation. In 
addition, private investment in generation, transmission 
and distribution assets led to significant expansion in the 
capacity of each of our electricity systems, thus satisfying 
the maximum demand of the country. 
However the regulatory framework of the sector has shown 
significant weaknesses, which have become clear when 
particular situations have needed to be addressed, such as 
the severe drought which resulted in electricity rationing 
in the late 1990s, the unexpected restrictions in the supply 
of natural gas from Argentina from 2004 onwards and the 
lower rainfall of recent years. In the face of these events, 
our country has gone through a period of switching to generation by power plants mainly based on coal and diesel. 
Thus coal has come to represent an increasing proportion 
of our energy matrix. This was the sector’s response to the 
complex energy situation which has arisen in Chile over the 
last decade. However, it was not a long-term strategy or 
plan. 
Similarly, the temporary dependence of our matrix on particular sources of fuel, in particular Argentine gas, meant 
that the planning and development of our electricity transmission infrastructure did not take into account long-term 
guidelines or the expansion of other sources of generation.
Gross Generation (GWH)At the same time, the Chilean public began to show in
creased concern about the configuration of our electricity 
matrix. Electricity projects began to attract a growing level 
of conflict and this increased the timeframes for implementing investments in the sector. As a result, there was a 
delay in important electricity infrastructure projects coming online, and this delay brought risks from the perspective of the security of our energy matrix. Thus we are now 
faced with an ongoing scenario of litigation on electricity 
matters, with the consequent uncertainty both for investors and for the public. 
All of these facts have led us to the conclusion that it is 
imperative to focus our efforts and work hard on developing an action plan to deal with the different challenges 
presented by this sector in the medium- and long-term, 
without neglecting the issues we are now facing, which 
must be addressed in good time. We have made it a priority 
to work in partnership with the Environment Ministry to review the existing environmental processes and instruments 
incorporating greater information about the real possibili
ties of electricity development, the costs involved and 
the impacts and to deepen the dialogue and information 
available to the public. This will enable environmental management in the area to be improved, improve the decisions 
about the location of projects, protect our environmental 
heritage, generate informed debate and provide a greater 
level of legal certainty to the approval processes. 
Meanwhile, also with the aim of strengthening our electricity system in the long-term, we must continuously review 
the design and functioning of the existing institutions. This 
is to ensure that these institutions are effectively fulfilling 
the purpose assigned them by the regulations. The complexity of our electricity systems, the growing need to incorporate competency, transparency, increased safety and 
reliability and the conviction that is motivating us to push 
forward the development of clean and efficient energy 
sources mean that the structure, functions and roles of the 
various important entities in the sector must be reviewed.
 Looking to the long-term, we need to move forward in 
creating the conditions for making our matrix ever-cleaner, 
more diverse and safer, in ensuring there is the greatest 
possible number of actors in each segment and that the 
networks are sufficiently robust and have enough slack. 
It is therefore essential to have a national strategy which 
holistically includes each of the elements necessary for 
achieving a clean, secure and economical electricity matrix 
in the long-term. This is the commitment we made when 
we developed this National Energy Strategy (Estrategia 
Nacional de Energía, ENE). 
The objective of the National Energy Strategy or ENE is to 
adopt a clear position with regard to the future development of our energy matrix, as well as outline the main 
orientations and measures which we will adopt in order 
to make it happen. The ENE we are presenting today is 
focussed primarily on the development of our electricity matrix, establishing the principle guidelines of our 
Government’s public policy in this area. The ENE is about 
and the future of electricity in Chile, taking account of the 
public participation forums, the balance between national 
and regional growth and the required safeguarding of the 
environment. 
Taking the SIC and SING together, 3% of our current 
electricity matrix comes from NCRE sources, 34% from 
hydroelectricity and 63% from thermoelectric plants. 
Our objective for the future composition of the matrix is 
to accelerate the incorporation of NCRE sources and to 
strengthen the development of hydroelectricity. 
Law 20.257 to promote Non Conventional Renewable Energy sources sets the target of 10% for NCRE by 2024 (in the 
nominal frameworks included in this law). Our Government 
regards this target is inadequate. We will therefore perfect the current legislation, progressing in the design and 
implementation of alternative promotion mechanisms, as 
well as building Pilot Projects. With the measures defined in 
this strategy, we are looking to more than double this share 
123RFthe remaining share coming from thermoelectric sources.
 Our Government has decided that it will not take any decision regarding the use of nuclear energy for generating 
electricity. However, we realize that it is responsible and 
necessary to continue the studies and technical exchanges 
with developed countries so that future Governments will 
be able to take decisions in this area with the participation 
and adequate knowledge of the public. 
In order to guide the electricity matrix of the SIC and SING 
in this way - without forgetting the particular aspects of 
our medium-sized systems in Aysén and Magallanes – and 
in the conviction that we must address the current weaknesses and fragilities, the National Energy Strategy is based 
on the following fundamental pillars. 
First, to make a real commitment to energy efficiency 
establishing it as a highly important public policy through 
which we will seek to reduce consumption and unlink 
growth and energy demand. 
Second, to ratify the need to increasingly incorporate non 
conventional renewable energy sources into the Chilean 
electricity matrix. 
Third, to clearly and decidedly strengthen traditional 
renewable energy sources. To this end, our country must 
make the most of its comparative advantages, reducing its 
external dependence and limiting the increase in greenhouse gas emissions. 
Fourth, to strengthen the design and solidity and boost the 
development of our transmission system. 
Fifth, to address the different challenges presented by the 
market and electricity distribution. 
Six, to promote sustained progress with developing internaThe design of each of these pillars is inspired by fundamental principles, such as the long-term reliability of the system; 
access and equity for everyone in Chile; the vision of the regions; the promotion of a market with greater levels of competition and lower prices; national energy security and independence; efficiency and social commitment; environmental 
protection; spaces for international integration and technological innovation, among others. 
This document introduces the key characteristics of each of the pillars and also includes some of the legal, regulatory and 
administrative measures and certain public-private initiatives which are necessary for its implementation. 
IstockphotoI. 
Growth with Energy Efficiency
123RFThe need for greater levels of energy efficiency (EE) has 
never been as clear as it is now. Factors such as the high 
costs of energy, growing concern for the environment and 
energy security in Chile have contributed to a growing 
awareness of the need for further developing EE. 
However, this awareness must translate into concrete actions and energy efficiency must become a normal habit 
for all public and private stakeholders and throughout the 
residential, commercial, mining, transport and industrial 
sectors. 
Recent experience demonstrates efforts to develop energy 
efficiency. Firstly, the National Energy Efficiency Program (Programa País de Eficiencia Energética, PPEE) which 
was implemented between 2005 and 2010, put EE on the 
agenda as an issue of national importance. Secondly, the 
recent creation of the Chilean Agency for Energy Efficiency 
(Agencia Chilena de Eficiencia Energética) strengthened 
public-private commitment in this area. However, making 
energy efficiency one of the cornerstones of this strategy 
requires a strong institutionalization with greater public 
engagement in order to meet the new challenges. 
damental point: energy efficiency must become an active 
pillar in the national strategy in order to address growing 
energy demand, and only through the Government’s effective commitment during the implementation stages will it 
be possible to contribute to its development. 
For this reason, the Government’s energy strategy cannot be limited solely to facing the challenges presented by 
traditional energy generation, nor to exclusively promoting 
the development of new sources of energy. It is essential 
for this strategy to incorporate, as a fundamental principle, 
the efficient use of energy, which will allow us to begin 
to separate economic growth from increased consumer 
demand. 
To achieve this, we believe it is essential to set a specific 
goal for energy efficiency that coordinates all the available 
measures for its attainment. In accordance with studies 
and an adequate safeguarding of productivity, our proposal 
is that in 2020 we are able to decrease by 12% the final 
energy demand projected for that year. 
To do this, we believe it is necessary to adopt the following 
Turismo ChileThe Energy Efficiency Action Plan is intended to be a guide 
for the public and private sectors so that they can take the 
necessary actions to realize the great potential of Energy 
Efficiency identified for this decade and the next. 
As indicated, the Action Plan has as its goal a 12% decrease 
in the projected energy demand for 2020. This will allow for 
an estimated decrease of over 41,500 Tcal (Teracalories) 
in the year 2020, which represents 1,122 MW of displaced 
electricity and 4,150,000 non-consumed Toe (Tonnes of 
Oil Equivalent), with the consequent economic benefits for 
Chile. Achieving this goal will generate additional benefits 
such as job creation, higher levels of industrial output and 
lower levels of CO2 emissions, among others. 
The Action Plan measures aim to incorporate elements of 
energy efficiency into the different productive sectors. In 
the construction sector, including social housing, the Plan 
aims to improve the energy values for buildings built without 
energy efficiency criteria, to design buildings to high EE 
standards and to offer construction products and services 
with efficiency criteria, etc. 
For the industry and mining sector, the Action Plan will 
encourage the adoption of energy efficiency measures 
through developing and implementing energy management 
systems, promoting cogeneration and the incorporation of 
efficient technology and technical assistance into projects. 
In the transport sector, data on energy use will be compiled 
and systematized, in order to encourage greater efficiency 
in passenger transport and freight. A vehicle labeling system 
and the setting of minimum energy efficiency standards for 
vehicles will also be put in place. 
The demand for modern appliances with low energy 
consumption will be promoted, through the establishment 
An Energy Efficiency Seal will be created which will be 
awarded to those companies who lead the way in developing 
energy efficiency on a national level. This will allow them 
to reduce their energy costs, increase their competitiveness 
and reduce their emissions. 
Our aim is to make this seal the registered trademark for 
efficient companies. The attainment and category of the seal 
will be determined by parameters such as the implementation 
of energy management systems, the quantity and type 
of projects developed and the proportional reduction in 
energy consumption. This seal will cover specific categories, 
depending on the productive sector of the company.The Creation of the Interministerial Commission for the Development of Energy Efficiency 
Policies 
These programs, complementing the Minimum Energy 
Performance Standards, seek to accelerate the transition to 
more efficient lighting technologies for the residential and 
public sectors (especially municipalities). Different stages 
of the plan are envisaged aimed at the poorest households 
and the public in general. The goal will be to promote and 
educate the public on the benefits of adequate energy 
consumption and to stimulate and accelerate the transition 
to more efficient technologies and appliances.
We will establish Minimum Energy Performance Standards 
(MEPS) with which products, equipment, appliances, 
materials and other products that utilize any kind of energy, 
must comply for them to be sold in Chile. This measure will 
limit the maximum amount of energy that can be consumed 
by a specific product, while ensuring optimum performance 
and that user satisfaction is not affected. 
We will also increase the labeling of appliances so as to 
inform the public about the energy performance of the 
products on sale, thus incorporating energy efficiency into 
consumer decisions. 
Public energy efficiency policies cannot be conceived in isolation, but should instead be established across sectors. 
Coordination between public organizations and ministries is key to achieving the estimated potential energy saving for each 
of the areas which consume it, such as the public, residential, commercial and transportation sectors. 
For this purpose, we will create an Interministerial Commission for the Development of Energy Efficiency Policies, through 
which the measures or agreements adopted will be integrated into the policies of each participating entity or institution. 
This authority will periodically report on its management directly to the President of Chile. II. 
The Take-off of Non-Conventional 
Renewable Energy 
123RFHowever, the non conventional renewable energy (NCRE) 
sources have not yet adequately developed as they currently 
only account for some 3% of electricity production. In fact, 
despite being approved by Chile’s Environmental Impact 
Assessment System (Sistema de Evaluación de Impacto 
Ambiental, SEIA), many investment projects associated with 
these kinds of technologies have not materialized, for a variety 
of reasons. 
Indeed, the development of NCRE in Chile is faced with a number 
of obstacles that have prevented or hindered the realization 
of such projects on a large scale. Among the most common 
barriers or obstacles is the high cost of the initial investment, 
the limited possibilities for financing, difficulties in the access 
and connection to transmission lines and in signing long-term 
contracts. 
In conclusion, the use of NCRE presents economic and technical 
challenges that must be addressed without delay, so the matrix 
can successfully make greater use of these energy sources. 
The Government therefore intends to use a series of 
However, we must bear in mind that these energy sources 
must be integrated in a serious and responsible manner, and 
their effects must be measured. Therefore this goal must 
be tempered by balancing the foundations and technical 
projects and bearing in mind important parallel objectives, 
such as ensuring an accessible, secure and economical supply 
of energy through competitive projects and technologies. 
In this sense, it is also necessary to consider other variables 
such as not stretching the generation investment plan too 
thin, and likewise for the transmission investment plan; and 
to analyze the potential cost overruns in terms of system 
investment, operations and development. 
To achieve this goal, we propose the following measures in 
the National Energy Strategy:
3.500
3.000
2.500
2.000
1.500
1.000
500
0
In process of qualifying
EQR approved, not yet built
Under construction
In operationIn order to give further impetus to the development of NCRE, 
we will improve upon current legislation. 
Parallel to the scheme included in the laws in this area, and 
with the goal of attracting investors interested in developing 
NCRE projects, open tenders will be carried out by NCRE block, 
in which the generators who participate could be awarded 
a State subsidy to improve the conditions of energy sales. 
This will be defined according to the bids submitted. This 
will decrease the risks to which such projects are currently 
exposed. Through this measure, we will support those new 
technologies that are not currently competitive enough to 
enable them to develop. This mechanism will complement 
current legislation. 
aDevelopment of NCRE 
Public tools providing up-to-date information will be 
strengthened and implemented to guide and facilitate private 
investment in NCRE projects. A geo referenced platform 
will be created that will compile dynamic information so 
the viability of an NCRE project can be assessed. This will 
include a portfolio of NCRE projects; a database of potential 
resources and State land available for the development 
of such projects; detail of energy demand at an industrial, 
commercial and residential level; information on roads and 
electricity infrastructure; environmental protection areas 
and available information on land planning so as to identify 
the availability of compatible lands with other productive 
uses. This platform will be integrated with the platforms 
of other State organizations that have the authority to 
manage national land, such as that of the National Assets 
Ministry and those available on the SEIA. The goal will be 
to offer certainty regarding the feasibility of NCRE projects 
Geo referenced Platform – Economic 
Potential for NCRE Projects 
ShutterstockAs it is important and necessary that the Government 
establishes policies regarding NCRE and that these policies 
are implemented for the benefit of Chile, we propose, in 
addition to the current tasks of the Renewable Energy 
Center (Centro de Energías Renovables, CER), a new public 
institutional structure to promote and facilitate the 
conditions for establishing non-conventional renewable 
energy in Chile. 
Development and Financing New Institutions to Boost NCRE 
This line of action will focus on working with other public 
institutions to design and strengthen development 
mechanisms, consisting of the creation of effective 
coverage, insurance, new lines of credit with international 
financing, feasibility studies, among other economic 
incentive measures. 
There are different obstacles to the implementation of each type of NCRE technology, so a different long-term strategy 
is needed for each of the energy sources: solar, wind, bioenergy, biomass, geothermal, mini-hydro and tidal. Under this 
strategy, we will work together with the public and private sectors, researchers and public representatives so as to develop 
measures to address the obstacles to each of these technologies, taking into account aspects such as research, development 
and innovation (R+D+i), resource exploration, development tools, funding and regulatory framework. 
From this perspective, and recognizing the great attraction of geothermal energy for our country due to its potential and 
high plant factor, we are preparing a new regulatory base to encourage investment based on this renewable resource. 
Furthermore, a new subsidy and incentives plan will be implemented for pilot NCRE projects to further develop various 
technologies in a national context, thus attaining fundamental practical knowledge to recognize the technical and economic 
benefits of Chile taking advantage of its own renewable resources. It is hoped that the development of such pilot projects 
Strategies for Technology 
Sernatur ShutterstockIII. 
The Role of Traditional Energy
Greater Prevalence of Water Resources, 
ShutterstockFrom the far north to the south, Chile’s water resources 
have great potential – in particular, from the Maule region 
to the basins separating the Aysén region from Magallanes. 
It is estimated that Chile’s hydro potential, both in reservoir 
and run-of-river projects, could easily exceed 9,000 MW. 
This is a clean and renewable resource which we cannot 
ignore and which, is and will continue to be a fundamental 
component of our electricity matrix. 
We are firmly convinced that the hydroelectric component 
of the matrix must continue to grow steadily and that 
hydroelectricity will continue to be the principal source of 
electricity in Chile for the decades to come. 
The development of projects must be accompanied by 
mitigating measures and requirements of the highest level. 
Building any kind of electricity generation project today 
entails much greater consideration of the fundamental 
environmental, social and economic variables than used to 
be the case. Specifically, we believe that in order to continue 
developing hydroelectricity, not only must projects comply 
with current environmental regulations, but there must 
also be a review of the processes for ensuring transparency 
of information and we must work with local communities, 
so as to continue to strengthen their participation. 
Because of the exceptional conditions characterizing the 
area from Palena towards the south – with its environmental 
construction and operation of hydro-electric projects. It 
is therefore necessary to extend the mitigation measures 
required for projects to develop and to minimize the impact 
of the transmission lines which transfer the energy to the 
large centers of consumption. The different investors 
and administrators of projects developed in the southern 
region of Chile must also consider transferring energy 
using the most modern technology, including submarine 
or underground cables as far as the geographical, social, 
technical and economic conditions permit, thus minimizing 
the environmental and physical impact involved in the 
development of such projects. 
A special plan will therefore be developed to safeguard 
Chilean Patagonia, broadening protection and excluding 
any generation and transmission initiatives from areas with 
vast resources of an exceptional nature. 
Without a doubt, the development of hydroelectricity 
requires greater coordination and planning with regard to 
transmission. This not only involves decisions regarding 
the large electricity generation centers, but also practical 
solutions for the delays to smaller projects trying to connect 
to the grid, which is currently very difficult for them. 
Thus, as a part of reforms to the transmission system, we will 
generate the conditions to overcome these shortcomings 
and adopt all the measures that will enable us to have a This Government’s decision to confirm the importance of 
hydroelectricity for Chile and consider it a key sector in the 
development of our electricity matrix, together with the 
development of NCRE, goes hand-in-hand with the goal 
of having a cleaner, more autonomous matrix which is less 
dependent on imported fossil fuels. Chile must exploit its 
comparative advantage and prioritize energy development, 
from both traditional renewable energy sources such as 
water, and non conventional renewable energy sources 
such as geothermal, solar and wind energy. 
However, our vision of the matrix in the future cannot 
dispense with coal, among other fossil fuels. Coal provides 
both technical and economic stability to our electricity 
system, thereby bringing certainty to the adequate 
development of the electricity matrix. Indeed, coal-based 
electricity generation has been with us for a large part of our 
history and this will continue to be the case in the coming 
decades. In the past five years, a number of coal-based 
electricity generation projects were approved, and they 
are now in operation or under construction. Additionally, 
various projects are in the pipeline for the coming years, 
and these will be necessary to ensure an adequate supply 
to cover the projected demand in the short-term, as well as 
providing security of supply and market competition. 
All of these projects must comply with the highest 
environmental standards and requirements. 
Regardless of the progress made with the environmental 
regulations applicable to these projects, such as the 
emission standards for power plants issued in 2011 by our 
Government, as well as technological progress, we must 
strengthen our action on CO2 emissions and increase our 
efforts to mitigate the influence of the global economy on 
the price of energy in Chile. 
Parallel to this, it is important in the medium- and 
long-term to advance with the technical and economic 
validation of technologies for CO2 capture and storage, as 
well as introducing coal gasification technologies for use 
in combined cycle plants, with a view to the use of coal 
in Chile’s electricity matrix becoming more efficient and 
sustainable. 
In recognition of the fact that thermoelectric technology 
is used to produce electricity in Chile, platforms containing 
information about land must be implemented. These 
will enable areas of land to be defined for excluding or 
developing thermoelectric power plants. This will ensure 
that the environment and areas of tourist, social or 
economic interest are adequately safeguarded and at the Assets Ministry.
An important decision by this Government is to design mechanisms that will encourage the adoption of increasingly clean 
and efficient technologies. We will also study the possibility of incorporating tax instruments to dampen the disadvantages 
and promote the advantages and social benefits of projects, so as to reorientate our electricity matrix. 
We must also recognize the growing presence of liquefied natural gas (LNG) as an alternative source of energy in the longterm. There is in fact significant potential for further developing our LNG regasification plants. The availability of this 
resource and its growing global share, together with new techniques and processes of exploration and production, show 
that LNG is an attractive alternative for the decades to come. Also in this field, new techniques and processes for exploration 
and production and non-conventional resources show new alternatives for the future. For this reason, we will also promote 
both traditional and innovative exploration processes in Chile. IV.
A New Focus on Transmission
123RFElectricity transmission infrastructure is fundamental for 
energy development, both for reliable electricity supply and 
for competition and access to various generation sources. 
Electricity transmission in Chile today presents significant 
degrees of fragility, and the completion of projects in this 
area faces serious difficulties, potentially affecting the whole 
system. This situation has brought considerable delays in the 
completion of important transmission projects, resulting 
in a complex scenario both for those who wish to invest 
in generation and for the overall security of the country’s 
electricity system. 
At the same time, small generators, and in particular 
renewable resource generators located far from the 
main transmission lines, as well as others who wish to be 
connected to the distribution networks, suffer difficult and 
limited access to electrical networks in a scenario where 
there is an ever-increasing need for their contribution to the 
electricity supply. 
This makes it essential for us to have a long-term vision which 
takes into account all the electricity networks needed by the 
country over its whole length and breadth, with sufficient 
development of electricity networks, which will facilitate 
access for all investors in generation projects and foster 
initiatives using renewable energy sources. 
In such a framework the State will play a key role in the 
planning of transmission systems, the dimensioning of 
networks and definition of their territorial scope, the creation 
of utility corridors, and the improvement of legislation 
governing concessions and easements. 
It is therefore essential to improve our current regulations 
governing trunk transmission, sub-transmission and 
additional transmission, in order to ensure the coherence 
necessary to achieve this new focus on transmission. 
In this new design, the studies which we are carrying out 
regarding whether it would be advisable to interconnect the 
Central Interconnected System (SIC) and the Norte Grande 
Interconnected System (SING) are of great importance, with 
the object of increasing the security of the system and making 
better use of energy resources. Our Government is analyzing 
this possibility with special interest, considering the probable 
economic and institutional advantages for the sector.The State would be able to declare Utility Corridors, which 
may be expropriated or the object of easements in the public 
or national interest, based on information provided by studies 
and interministerial coordination. 
To implement this concept, the current electricity regulations 
will be modified, creating a specific regulation for facilities 
listed as being of public or national interest, which would 
make use of these corridors. Some of the aspects to be dealt 
with by the new regulations would be: the remuneration 
regime for these facilities, their dimensions, and territorial 
planning for expansion of the transmission system through 
their development. 
In order to make the electricity concession process more 
fluid and suited to the challenges of generation and system 
demand, we will present to National Congress observations on 
the bill on this subject which is presently before Congress, with 
the object of making the procedure for obtaining electricity 
concessions quicker and more precise, while safeguarding 
the legitimate rights of third parties. Likewise, modifications 
will be made in parallel to the current regulations in all areas 
which do not fall into the legal domain. 
Creation of Utility Corridors 
Electricity Concessions These regulatory changes are important for imparting consistency to the regulatory framework governing transmission systems, 
under the new focus of a public electricity highway. Furthermore they are necessary for the connection of generation projects to 
the electricity system, and therefore for our target of ensuring competitive generation prices by eliminating barriers. They are 
also necessary to provide a regulatory framework for the new focus on a public electricity highway for transmission installations. 
In trunk transmission, regulatory change goes hand-in-hand with the new concept of a public electricity highway, which will 
require a review of the systems for assigning payment to installations, and of the objectives and structure of trunk transmission 
studies. 
In the area of additional transmission, definitions will be made for aspects such as the conditions for open access by third parties to 
transmission lines under this classification, the minimum asset valuation conditions for such open access, and the corresponding 
payment scheme. 
Finally, in sub-transmission, work will be done on improving the mechanisms for connection to these networks, and their long 
term security and development. 
We will improve the existing regulation governing the connection of small generators, in order to facilitate the connection of 
these projects. The transparency mechanisms governing the information provided by distribution companies, and the costs 
associated with such information, will be improved, incorporating processes which will give greater participation and oversight 
to the Superintendency of Electricity and Fuels (Superintendencia de Electricidad y Combustibles, SEC). Information guidelines 
will be created for investors interested in becoming involved at the distribution level. The procedures for determining the 
costs and benefits for the distribution network resulting from the connection of a small generator will be modified. 
Progress will be made in implementing the concept of intelligent networks as broadly as possible, in order to help the 
introduction of distributed generation, among other things. To this end the technical and economic viability of the concept 
will be analyzed, taking into account developments, implementations and local and international experience of pilot projects, 
and trying above all to evaluate the advantages of implementing this new technology (offering both a social and a private 
benefit) in the Chilean market. 
Facilitating Connection for Small Generators and Intelligent Networks V. 
Towards a More Competitive 
123RFChile was a world pioneer in liberalizing its electricity market, being the first country in the world to privatize the electricity 
sector. This has enabled the country to increase the installed capacity of the SIC by four times, and that of the SING by 
six times, in the last twenty years. This has created a market which has been able to meet the maximum demands on the 
electricity system, although it is not free of difficulties, as already indicated in this document. 
However, as we have mentioned, a series of weaknesses may be observed which need to be addressed now in order to ensure 
an electricity market with greater levels of competition, security and reliability. Throughout this document, a series of 
measures is described whose overarching object, apart from meeting the specific proposals of their general framework, is the 
desire to introduce more competition into the sector in the medium- and long-term. It is our conviction that the regulatory 
framework should encourage and facilitate the entry of new actors into the system, with the resulting diversification of the 
participants, thereby progressing towards a more competitive and efficient electricity market, in which the market operator 
can take independent decisions in matters affecting both supply security and the levels of competition and transparency 
prevailing in the electricity market. 
At the same time it is essential to improve the tender mechanisms for regulated clients, since on the one hand the existing 
mechanism does not efficiently provide long-term signals to the end client, and on the other, contrary to expectations, 
this mechanism has not led to large numbers of new actors entering the market. The existence of contracts with electricity 
distributors affected by generator breakdown, and the impact of this on the market, ratifies the need for a change of course 
in this respect. 
It is therefore natural to adapt the electricity tariff terms for end consumers, in a scenario in which technology has evolved 
sufficiently to allow clients the flexibility of choosing between several economic and technical alternatives for meeting their The Chilean electricity market requires an organization with the quality, independence and strength necessary for the 
physical and economic operation of the electricity system. Likewise the need for transparent information and effective market 
supervision will provide the necessary foundations for institutional reform of the organization responsible for the security and 
economic operation of the electricity system, and access to it. 
Independent Operation Centers will be created for each electricity system, replacing the Economic Load Dispatch Centers 
(CDEC). They will be legal entities with their own assets, an autonomous management structure and clearly defined 
responsibilities. The objective will be to guarantee the independence and proper functioning of electricty market operators, 
such that operational decisions on electricity installations, and decisions leading to economic transfers between market 
operators, are timely and transparent for all parties operating in the market. 
These new institutions will also have a clear role in the planning of transmission systems, contributing to the development of 
electricity transmission infrastructure, and to the security and sufficiency of the system in the long term. 
Creation of Independent Operation Centers 
123RFThe regulation of supply tenders will be improved, with the objective of generating the most effective mechanisms for 
awarding energy blocks at prices which reflect long-term conditions, damping uncertainty in supply and demand and reducing 
the negative effects of speculative actions. 
In addition, the minimum notice periods for calls to tender will be modified and tender schemes will be designed with shorter 
contract periods. The standardization of the resulting contracts will also be studied. 
Furthermore, specific measures will be established to introduce greater competition at the level of tariffs to final customers, 
through the design of effective mechanisms for tariff flexibility to regulated clients, allowing these to manage and optimize 
their electricity consumption. In the same context, one of the measures proposed is to lower the limit defining the classification 
of free clients from 500 kW to 100 kW. 
Likewise the feasibility will be assessed of implementing free choice of electricity supplier through the introduction of the 
“sales agent”, establishing the necessary guarantee and verification schemes to ensure that the contracts signed are duly 
backed by production. All these changes will be implemented gradually in the retail market. In this respect, existing regulations 
will be reviewed to evaluate the separation of network activity from commercial activity in the distribution segment. 
At the same time, distribution tariff calculation processes will be reviewed in order to implement any modifications needed to 
reflect business risks properly and improve tariff calculation procedures. 
In order to consolidate the distribution of energy generated 
as an effective solution tending towards a more efficient 
electricity system with increased supply, a regulatory 
design incorporating Net Metering will be implemented 
after approval by Congress. The object of this initiative is to 
allow end users (e.g. families or small businesses) to install 
technologies for generating electricity from non conventional 
renewable energy sources in their homes or businesses. The 
energy generated by each of these small producers may be 
used for own consumption or for injection into the network, 
Net Metering for Residential Generators VI.
Sustained Progress with the Optionslimited. There are numerous reasons for this and the flawed 
experience of gas integration with Argentina clearly has not 
helped. It is important to understand the great benefits that 
electricity integration would bring, as has been shown by 
many cases regionally and around the world. 
In the medium- and long-term, regional electricity 
integration, as well as contributing towards greater security 
of supply, will enable the diversification of the energy 
matrix, increasing competition in the electricity market, as 
well as reducing costs. It will also mean full utilization of 
infrastructure and fewer local pollution and greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
There are many possibilities and points for interconnection 
that are being analyzed internationally. The alternatives we 
must study include the Deep Integration Agreement which 
our country most definitely supports; the efforts of Colombia 
to build lines towards both Central America and the southern 
and Argentina at different points along our borders and to 
continue deepening our links with Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador. 
In the medium-term, Chile aspires to work together with 
other countries in the region to develop an interconnection 
infrastructure which brings benefits to all the parties involved. 
To this end, joint operation rules and electricity interchange 
mechanisms must be designed and a framework of rights and 
responsibilities must be established to promote investment 
in international transmission links. 
We believe that regional electricity interconnection will 
occur in a framework of respect and observance of a joint 
legal institutionality and the existence of benefits for all 
participants. Thus we will be able to aspire in the long-term 
to develop systemic integration, in which the stakeholders 
can freely draw up energy contracts, promoting reliable 
joint operations and improving the conditions for electricity 
consumers across the region.The objective of this document is to explain the Government’s 
vision with regard to electricity and to describe the challenges 
which will be addressed immediately by this Administration. 
It also summarizes what we consider to be the priorities for 
the sector and the guidelines and concrete solutions which 
must be adopted to deal with the sustained growth in energy 
demand and to provide the security and solidity our system 
requires. 
We will work with a range of stakeholders in Chile and at 
regional level in order to implement the measures necessary 
to fulfil this strategy . All the actions, projects, regulations and 
public policies which are adopted as a result of this document 
will be shared in a transparent and timely manner with the 
public, through different participation mechanisms both 
locally and nationally in such a way that the different social 
stakeholders can get to know the assumptions, foundations 
and technical facts behind them. We place great value on 
the contributions which the public and different technical 
entities (such as academic organizations, research centers, 
consumers’ associations, business associations and public 
entities, among others) can make towards the topics outlined 
in this document, as we are aware of the extraordinary 
Implementing the Strategy 
sufficiently transparent, providing the information needed to 
enable dialogues to be open and well-informed. 
This document constitutes an energy roadmap for the coming 
years and has been drawn up based on valuable contributions 
our Government has received from intermediary groups, 
consultants, commissions and other sectors of society and 
the public. However, we know that this cannot be an isolated 
effort. Chile needs institutions for the long-term that will 
periodically review, study and establish the objectives for 
the energy matrix of our country, incorporating technical, 
economic and social criteria. This should involve experts, 
related organizations, the public and guidance from the 
authorities. We have demonstrated the need to outline the 
pillars for Chile’s long-term energy policy and vision, but 
we also know that this process will require revisions and 
assessments on an ongoing basis to incorporate changes and 
address new challenges or needs that may arise in the future. 
We are firmly convinced that only in this way will we build 
a matrix which takes account of the main concerns of the 
public and the technical, economic ad political foundations 
that must accompany it. This will give the energy matrix 
123RFiil 