File Name: CHN-NRER-2016-EN
Year: 2016
Country Name: China
Country Code: CHN
Category: NRER
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2016
Start Year: 2016
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

EU-China Roadmap on energy cooperation (2016-2020)
Against the background of multiple challenges related to addressing climate 
change, environmental degradation and energy security and changing market 
conditions, China and the European Union have a mutual interest and role to 
promote low-carbon development, protect the environment, address climate 
change and encourage clean energy development. 
Therefore, having agreed that the goals of future cooperation between the EU 
and China in the field of energy should be to:
• Ensure that energy cooperation makes a key contribution to the 
comprehensive strategic partnership between China and the EU;
• Enhance mutual trust in energy cooperation; 
• Streamline the coordination of cooperation in the field of energy;
• Build mutual trust on market-related energy issues;
• Contribute to the transformation of the energy system, to the sustainable 
development of the global energy system and to energy and climate 
resilient investment;
China and the EU intend to enhance collaboration in areas of mutual interest 
related to the management of the energy system – on both the supply and the 
demand sides - as well as other relevant crosscutting issues. 
A. Energy Supply: Sourcing, Production and Distribution
Both China and the EU are highly dependent on imports of fossil energy sources 
and together represent approximately a third of total global consumption. This 
creates common interests in the pursuit of energy security, cleaner technologies 
and renewable energy sources. Future cooperation related to the Supply of 
Energy should focus on three sectors: renewable energies, fossil fuels and 
nuclear power. 
1. Renewable energy sources
a. Foster trade and investment in renewable energy, thereby reducing 
costs by improving competition. b. Develop distributed generation and Combined Heat and Power (CHP): 
• Jointly promote the development and the implementation of 
distributed energy resource systems as well as cogeneration of 
electricity based on renewable energy sources, in particular in less 
developed regions;
• Share best practices in the promotion, development and 
implementation of CHP production from renewable energy sources;
• Facilitate the construction of infrastructure and the development of 
the market for district heating and cooling and for CHP.
d. Expand the bio-gas sector: 
• Exchange insights on bio-gas technologies, markets and policies; 
• Further the production of methane and bio-gas, encourage the 
uptake of new technologies and equipment in this sector.
2. Power grid sector:
• Explore opportunities of distributed energy generation;
• Promote the further development of intelligent, flexible and more 
reliable distribution networks, in particular smart grids.
3. Fossil fuels
a. Energy Crisis Prevention and Management:
• Establish a joint platform for managing (potential) energy supply 
disruptions;
• Promote mutual understanding and strategy coordination for energy 
crisis management.
b. Technical exchanges on the flexibility of thermal power generation and 
CHP;
c. Technical and policy cooperation on efficient electricity generation 
from clean coal and gas 
4. Nuclear safety
• Exchange of ideas and experiences and cooperation among 
concerned actors in industry, civil society and different levels of 
government in the EU and China.B. Energy Demand: Consumption
Energy demand continues to increase in the EU and China, with considerable 
economic, environmental and technical implications. This creates common 
interests in improving the management of the energy system on the consumption 
side, as well as in using energy more efficiently. Future cooperation related to 
energy demand will focus on demand side management and on increasing 
energy efficiency. 
1. Demand side management 
a. Management of the energy system:
• Share information on energy demand/supply analysis and 
management methods to keep the energy system in balance;
• Share calculation methodologies for determining the appropriate 
energy mix. 
b. Management of the electric energy system: 
• Explore Demand Side Management policies related to electricity;
• Grid structure design;
• Cross-border and regional power transmission infrastructure 
development;
• Optimisation of grid system and measures to expand the application 
of renewable energy.
2. Energy efficiency
a. Promote the production and consumption of energy-efficient
appliances:
• Work towards harmonising energy labels of appliances, equipment 
and buildings.
b. Develop energy standards in consumer goods:
• Strengthen the cooperation on energy consumption standards for 
consumer goods, aiming at mutual recognition of existing and 
future schemes;
• Increase business cooperation in eco-design, systemic design and 
circular economy planning at the industrial level (manufacturing, transportation, energy, food, land use).
c. Develop a market-oriented Energy Performance Contracting (EPC) 
system. 
C. Cross-cutting Issues
1. Energy regulation and pricing
a. Share best practices on energy regulation:
• Build a cooperation platform on energy regulation. 
b. Enhancing coordination in regulatory policies:
• Work towards harmonising regulatory policies on grid 
development, including dispatching policies;
• Promote transparent regulation of oil and gas pipeline 
infrastructure.
c. Reform energy supply prices and support policies:
• Share experiences on the reform of energy pricing and support 
policies, especially in terms of pricing policies of renewable energy, 
electricity market and natural gas markets.
2. Energy and the environment
a. Promote the mobilisation of market mechanisms for environmental 
protection: 
• Endeavour to develop market mechanisms that incite cleaner 
production;
• Encourage the development of a market for green goods that reduce 
energy consumption.
b. Link energy conservation and environmental protection policies: 
• Give priority to environmental cooperation projects, including 
those with a strong emphasis on energy efficiency; 
• Include energy efficiency in environmental policy guidelines.
3. International cooperation
a. Improve trade and investment conditions in the energy sector. b. Engage in international energy institutions:
• Support China's increased involvement in international energy 
institutions; 
• Cooperate within the framework of the Energy Charter Treaty 
(ECT).
Both sides envisage establishing cooperation inter alia through:
• Dialogues and policy discussions on regulatory frameworks, market 
developments, trade, investment and the global energy architecture, as 
well as an energy research platform for exchange of views on technical 
and technological developments;
• Business-to-business fora in the energy sector;
• Cooperation projects that develop and implement energy efficient, clean 
and low-carbon technologies.
Progress in the aforementioned priority areas should be reviewed no later than in 
2018 on the basis of a report that will be drawn up by the relevant services.
This EU-China Roadmap on Energy Cooperation does not constitute an 
agreement under international law.
European Union Government of P.R.C.
Commissioner for Climate Action National Energy Administrator
and Energy
Miguel Arias Cañete Nur Bekri
___________________________ _____________________________