File Name: CIV-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Cote d'Ivoire
Country Code: CIV
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 1–4 February 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
4 December 2020
Original: English
2016378X (E) 040121
First regular session 2021
1–4 February 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Côte d’Ivoire
(2021–2025)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework …………… 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management …………………………………………….…………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
 Results and resources framework for Côte d’Ivoire (2021–2025)………………………………… 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework
1. Since 2011, Côte d'Ivoire, a lower-middle-income country, has been engaged in a process 
of peace consolidation and economic reconstruction after a decade (2000-2010) of political 
difficulties that have torn the nation’s socioeconomic fabric, undermined peaceful coexistence 
and adversely affected its economic development gains. Since the end of the post-electoral 
turmoil, the country recorded strong economic growth of approximately 8.4 per cent annually 
(2012-2019) that led to a significant drop in the poverty rate from 44.4 per cent in 2015 to 39.45
per cent in 2018, with regional variations.
2. The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has slowed the momentum, with growth 
projections revised from 7.2 per cent to 1.8 per cent in 2020. Slow progress towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals has impacted the country's response capacities and resilience. 
In turn, the impact of the pandemic could slow achievement of the Goals. More than 32 per
cent of households risk falling below the poverty line. Private businesses, public enterprises, 
international institutions, non-governmental organizations and other entities were impacted by
the pandemic, which severely compromised job prospects for many young people, especially 
women. COVID-19 has highlighted the capacity gap in human capital and the need to address 
structural inequalities, particularly quality of and access to public health services. 
3. The Government has identified new pillars of the 2021-2025 National Development Plan 
(NDP) focused on: deepening governance and modernization of the State; transformation of 
the economy; development of human capital; strengthening social inclusion; and regional 
development and support to infrastructure. UNDP is positioned as a key partner to support the 
country's transformation agenda. The new United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), coordinated by the office of the Resident Coordinator, 
has eight strategic areas perfectly aligned with the NDP: youth promotion; gender equality; 
basic education and functional literacy; basic social services; sustainable agriculture; 
industrialization; management of natural resources; and governance. 
4. On its path to emergence, Côte d'Ivoire faces several structural development challenges, 
exacerbated by the unprecedented impact of COVID-19. Aligned to the UNSDCF, in 
collaboration with the United Nations family and its partners, UNDP is strategically positioned 
to support the Government in addressing four main challenges:
(a) Non-inclusive governance and lack of social cohesion. In 2019, the country engaged in 
the third-cycle universal periodic review (UPR) before the Human Rights Council. The 
Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the 
Committee on the Rights of the Child also considered periodic reports submitted to them. The 
incomplete transitional justice process and ongoing alleged human rights violations in the 
absence of a solid accountability system, constitute major challenges to social cohesion and 
lead to negative perception of justice and safety by the populace. According to Transparency 
International (2018), corruption is perceived as omnipresent and the country ranks 105 of 180 
countries on the Corruption Perceptions Index, losing two places. Considering the recent 
terrorist attack on a military outpost on the northern border and the threat of violent extremism 
to regional stability in the coastal areas of West Africa, the Government created a military 
operational zone on 13 July 2020, reinforcing its security services and troops in the area ahead 
of the presidential elections. The causality dilemma between governance and social cohesion 
was also overlooked. However, Côte d'Ivoire has shown strong progress in overall governance 
as shown by the improvement of 9 points in the Ibrahim Index of African Governance in the 
period 2010-2019, which enabled the country to move from twenty-second to eighteenth place 
between 2018 and 2019;
(b) Non-inclusive growth and persistent inequalities. Côte d’Ivoire has a low Human 
Development Index of 0.516, although its ranking showed a slight gain from 172 to 165 of 189 
countries in 2019. Income inequalities have reduced but remain high especially outside the economic centre of Abidjan with a Gini coefficient which fell from 41per cent to 35 per cent
over the period 2015-2018, benefiting mainly the better educated people in urban areas. Some 
8 per cent of the poor are in urban areas, representing about 1 million people left behind, mostly 
women and youth;
(c) Persistent gender inequalities. Though declining, gender inequality remains significant, 
with a national Gender Inequality Index of 0.657 in 2018, compared to 0.663 in 2015 and 0.667 
in 2011. Côte d’Ivoire ranks 157 of 189 countries. Poverty affects more women (47.4 per cent)
than men (45.4 per cent). In 2019, women’s participation in government remained low at 11.37
per cent for the current parliament, 14.8 per cent in the Government and 7.96 per cent in 
municipalities. The 2019 Government law promoting the representation of women in elected 
bodies sets a minimum of 30 percent women candidates for single-member or list ballots.
Young people lack civic education and face limited access to frameworks for dialogue and 
decision-making, which are often reflected in incidents of electoral violence;
(d) Limited sustainability in the management of natural resources and vulnerability to 
climate change. Côte d'Ivoire has experienced a degradation of its natural capital and an 
increasing vulnerability to climate change. The country has lost nearly one third of its stock of 
natural resources. Ivorian forests are degrading at a rate of approximately 171,000 hectares per 
year, including protected areas. The post-disaster needs assessment (2019) estimates the cost 
of losses and damages at over $36 billion and the recovery needs at $400 billion. The country 
repeatedly faces floods and landslides caused by heavy rains, primarily affecting urban coastal 
areas such as Abidjan, where increasingly uncontrolled urbanization continues to increase
multidimensional vulnerability to climate change and disasters and increases poverty.
5. UNDP has comparative advantages to contribute to the efforts of the United Nations country 
team (UNCT). The programmatic offer is anchored in its mandate as a lead development 
agency in the United Nations system, carried out through an integrated development approach. 
Following the socioeconomic impact assessment of the COVID-19 pandemic to support the
national response, UNDP developed a guidance note for effective implementation of recovery 
policies in line with the NDP, UNSDCF and the corporate COVID-19 offer 2.0, “Beyond 
Recovery: Towards 2030”. UNDP co-facilitates the inclusive governance, and
industrialization and sustainable development outcome groups under the UNSDCF, together 
with the International Organization for Migration, United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization and United Nations Environment Programme respectively. UNDP builds on its 
experience and the development results obtained under the previous country programme (2016-
2020), in particular regarding the integration of the Sustainable Development Goals into 
national policies and programmes, the institutionalization of the International Conference on 
the Emergence of Africa, improvement of the legal framework for youth employment, support 
for the national forest policy and the mobilization of resources from the Green Climate Fund. 
UNDP demonstrated leadership in support to the NDC revision process, working with other 
partners alongside the government and positioning the NDCs in the country's post-COVID-19 
recovery process. UNDP will act as a Sustainable Development Goal integrator through the 
establishment of a country platform to facilitate the implementation of integrated home-grown 
solutions to complex development challenges, based on approaches that enshrine the principles 
of human rights, gender sensitivity and environmental and social standards. 
6. In response to recommendations of the independent country programme evaluation and the 
Common Country Analysis, the programme will address the challenges of governance and the 
quality of institutions, inclusive growth and reduction of inequalities and the sustainable 
management of natural resources and climate change adaptation, including the circular 
relationship among all three. This UNDP comparative advantage will involve capitalizing on 
the achievements and activating development levers such as the high potential of natural 
resources and the best development planning approaches to support accelerated efforts to 
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.II. Programme priorities and partnerships
7. The country programme will contribute to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
and African Union Agenda 2063 and is fully aligned to the NDP (2021-2025). It will be 
implemented in line with joint interventions planned in the new UNSDCF (2021-2025), 
involving the following pillars: (a) inclusive governance, rule of law and institutional 
modernization; (b) inclusive growth and reducing inequalities; and (c) sustainable management 
of natural resources, climate change adaptation and resilience. The programme will align with 
the knowledge areas identified under the UNDP Global Policy Network to develop local and 
national programme management capacities.
8. UNDP will adopt a holistic, risk-informed, conflict-sensitive intervention strategy that 
considers the country’s socioeconomic and politico-security contexts and the subregional 
dimensions. A thematic and geographic focus will foster greater effectiveness for sustainable 
outcomes. UNDP will consider both the already-critical Sustainable Development Goal
baselines and the socioeconomic consequences of COVID-19. The programme will thus 
emphasize reducing vulnerability, particularly within households, small and medium-sized 
businesses and the informal sector, to contribute to reducing inequality and capacity gaps. The 
programme will seek to support youth employment, particularly young women, by promoting 
innovation and green jobs, using its accelerator lab and experiences of the accelerator labs 
network to identify solutions to endemic unemployment,. The new programme will address the 
interdependence between inclusive governance and social cohesion.
9. UNDP will perform its integrator role within the United Nations development system by: 
(a) establishing integrated platforms to support acceleration of the Sustainable Development 
Goals; (b) supporting the development of an integrated data ecosystem with the UNCT; (c) 
mobilizing innovative financing for the Goals, specifically through the integrated national 
financing framework; (d) promoting new integrated development solutions; (e) transferring 
knowledge and technologies via South-South and triangular cooperation; (f) combining an offer 
of high-level policy advice and targeted downstream programmatic interventions during and 
post-COVID-19; (g) co-creating innovative development approaches through the accelerator 
lab to reach those furthest behind; (h) developing a fresh partnership with civil society and the 
private sector; (i) strengthening partnerships with donors and international financial institutions 
including the World Bank, Islamic Development Bank, European Investment Bank and African 
Development Bank; (j) continuing to adopt a human rights-based approach; and (k) securing 
government funds. 
10. The new programme seeks to contribute to restoring trust in institutions, an Ivoirian 
society living in a peaceful environment, resilient to crises and shocks and enjoying the benefits 
of inclusive growth and shared prosperity. The theory of change underlying the programmatic 
offer purports that: 
(a) If essential governance functions are strengthened by building respect for human rights,
enhanced transparency, equitable access to justice and participation by young people and 
women, with special emphasis on local government, and if conflict prevention and management 
systems function based on mediation and reconciliation, then Ivoirian citizens will live, over 
the long term, in an environment characterized by the rule of law and national cohesion; 
(b) If the business environment is favourable to the emergence of a community-based local 
economy and if private sector investments can be mobilized to bolster entrepreneurship among 
young people and women, then economic growth will be inclusive, create jobs and reduce 
poverty and inequalities; 
(c) If production and consumption practices that preserve natural capital are used, and if the 
adoption of environmental standards for natural resource management enables the development of green value chains, and mechanisms to prevent and respond to shocks and disasters are 
operational, then Ivoirians will build resilience to conflict and climate change.
Inclusive governance, rule of law and quality of institutions
11. Priority will be given to strengthening national governance systems including the national 
response to COVID-19 so as to build confidence in institutions to bridge the gap between 
people and the State. This will entail supporting state modernization through e-governance and 
digitalization of public administration to ensure continuity and effectiveness in the delivery of 
essential services. 
12. Interventions will aim to: strengthen institutional capacities, using a human rights-based
and people-centred approach; strengthen the rule of law; and support reforms to improve 
transparency and access to justice and security, with particular attention to the penal chain, anticorruption, gender-based violence and social cohesion. The programme will use a holistic 
approach to support the judiciary to combat impunity and an integrated response to genderbased violence. It will focus on integrating digital transformation and solutions in the justice 
system to deliver high-quality judicial services. UNDP will forge partnerships with the 
European Union, the Government of Germany, Japan International Cooperation Agency,
United States Agency for International Development and United Nations agencies.
13. UNDP will strengthen national mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human
rights through supporting the implementation of UPR recommendations accepted by the 
country. UNDP will contribute to strengthening accountability and responsibility of public 
institutions and the Ivory Coast Financial Intelligence Unit responsible for combating
corruption, money-laundering and financial crimes.
14. Efforts will build on the previous programme achievements to improve the quality of 
democracy by supporting the electoral process to achieve transparent, inclusive and peaceful 
elections and encourage electoral reforms in the post-electoral period. The new programme will 
strengthen the functioning of the parliament and judiciary in terms of accountability and civic 
engagement, with national dialogue processes to promote positive values, attitudinal change 
and participation of young people and women.
15. UNDP will cooperate with United Nations agencies particularly the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations Population Fund and United 
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women to consolidate gains in 
democracy, peace, justice, security, gender equality and women’s empowerment. Emphasis 
will be placed on removing structural barriers and risks to women’s economic empowerment, 
political and social participation and leadership. 
16. The UNDP contribution to building social cohesion and preventing violent extremism 
will prioritize capacity-building for national and community entities responsible for conflict 
prevention, early warning systems and strengthening dialogue, mediation and reconciliation 
with increased participation of women and young people.
17. To strengthen inclusive processes and local governance, particular emphasis will be given 
to local planning and access to basic services, including financing and budgeting, 
decentralization, support to the electoral process and the participation of and leadership by 
young people and women.
18. By drawing lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic, UNDP will promote investment in a 
resilient health system that addresses the social determinants of health, maintains core functions 
and provides care to the most disadvantaged and marginalized communities, including persons 
living with HIV/AIDS. Emphasis will be placed on institutional coherence and the promotion 
of innovation through setting up e-governance systems in the public sector. UNDP will 
strengthen institutional coordination to improve crisis management and promote resilient recovery and effective implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals through policies 
and decision-making based on reliable data primarily from national sources.
Inclusive growth, resilience and reducing inequalities 
19. Through this pillar, UNDP will support the Government in reducing income inequalities 
and underemployment through innovative entrepreneurship and development of income and 
employment opportunities for vulnerable populations living in extreme poverty, with a focus
on women and youth. Stimulating local economies through promotion of circular economy 
approaches, including in the digital, green and blue economy sectors, will be prioritized to build 
better, more resilient and sustainable communities.
20. UNDP will establish partnerships with dedicated institutes, the European Union and 
United Nations agencies to support the development and implementation of policies that 
promote structural transformation of the economy towards achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals by 2030. The focus will be on eliminating structural constraints to develop 
inclusive value chains in the agriculture, tourism and mining sectors. Emphasis will be placed 
on the participation of local economic actors, the development of micro, small and mediumsized enterprises in sectors involving young people, women, people with disabilities, displaced 
people, migrants and other vulnerable groups. The aim is to strengthen multi-stakeholder 
platforms to facilitate dialogue within the value chains integrating economic, social and 
environmental aspects.
21. UNDP will support the strengthening of public-private dialogue to advance reforms for
social progress and strengthen the resilience of enterprises to shocks, drawing lessons from the 
COVID-19 pandemic. These interventions will facilitate the transition to sustainable 
employment and the creation of more productive and inclusive jobs for women and young 
people, thereby reducing poverty.
22. UNDP will focus on improving access to renewable energy as a lever in promoting private 
investment and accelerating progress towards the Goals, in partnership with Germany. This 
intervention aims to develop and scale up capacities to create green jobs and facilitate the 
creation of productive activities in rural areas, especially for women and young people.
23. UNDP will encourage innovation and partner with the private sector to help young 
entrepreneurs to innovate, develop, scale up and diversify their businesses; promote the 
adoption of innovative, inclusive business models that respect human rights; enable youthowned MSMEs to recover from the impact of COVID-19 and other shocks; promote green 
jobs; and foster ecosystem platforms such as YouthConnekt.
24. UNDP will adopt an integrated local development approach to carry out interventions in 
the target provinces, taking account of economic opportunities offered by each intervention 
zone with the involvement and ownership of decentralized communities in charge of local 
development. These interventions will be aligned to local development plans integrating the 
Sustainable Development Goals.
Sustainable management of natural resources and adaptation to climate change
25. UNDP will work to build community resilience, giving particular attention to: (a) local 
and national development planning, integrating constraints and opportunities related to climate 
change; (b) investments in climate-resilient and environmentally sustainable livelihoods; and 
(c) strengthening environmental and forest management, support for efficient mobilization of 
climate finance, (d) leading the support to the process of NDC revision in the run-up of the next 
COP. Jointly with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and UNEP, 
UNDP will support dialogue on the sustainable management of forest resources, involving 
ministries in charge of the environment, forests and agriculture, the parliament, the private 
sector and CSOs. 26. The programme will promote development of low-carbon emissions, local strategies
emphasizing forest-related economic partnerships and pooling of innovative solutions in the 
area of sustainable forest management. It will also support sustainable, modern and competitive 
agriculture and use of international standards and smart production systems that protect natural 
resources, and other green and blue economy sectors. To that end, UNDP will support SouthSouth cooperation initiatives to encourage the sharing of knowledge and best practices. The 
partnerships built through international commitments to combat climate change will seek to 
take continued advantage of climate finance, including the Global Environmental Facility, the 
GCF and the Adaptation Fund. Specifically, UNDP will support national processes for 
mobilizing climate funds. Strong partnerships will be forged with GEF, GCF and United 
Nations agencies.
27. In a context marked by the country's vulnerability to climate change and strong pressures
on natural resources which threaten the ecosystem and the living conditions of the population, 
the programme will contribute to developing the capacities of national stakeholders and 
strengthen the management of natural resources through the adoption of best practices in: (a) 
protection of biodiversity; (b) ecosystem restoration; (c) reduced pressure on natural resources; 
and (d) crisis management. UNDP will stress the application of international standards and the 
adoption of risk-informed and conflict-sensitive interventions.
28. The programme will focus on building capacities in disaster risk reduction and 
management in the context of post-COVID-19 recovery. These include strengthening the 
institutional framework for disaster risk reduction to support post-disaster recovery; improving 
multi-hazard early warning systems at national and local levels; supporting the revision of landuse and urban development plans; and promoting the mapping of risk areas and the assessment 
of damages for prevention and improved risk governance for resilience and sustainable growth.
29. UNDP will help the Government bring together relevant ministries and development 
partners, including the European Union, AfDB and World Bank, to coordinate development 
financing and support the establishment of innovative financing mechanisms for the 
achievement and monitoring of the Sustainable Development Goals within the integrated 
national financing framework.
III. Programme and risk management 
30. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in 
the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control 
framework.
31. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to response to force majeure. The 
harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in collaboration with other United Nations
agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to relevant projects.
32. UNDP is committed to working with other United Nations agencies in response to the 
2016 quadrennial comprehensive review of operational activities for development of the United 
Nations system, specifically by implementing the common chapter of the strategic plans of 
UNDP, UNFPA, the United Nations Children’s Fund and UN-Women. This will entail working 
jointly on strengthening national data systems disaggregated by gender and age, gender-based 
violence, promoting the rights of the disabled and climate and disaster resilience.33. Taking full advantage of reform of the United Nations development system, UNDP will 
play an integrator role within the UNCT by establishing a multi-actor platform to provide 
integrated solutions to the multifaceted challenges facing Côte d’Ivoire. To promoting 
knowledge products, UNDP will operationalize the accelerator lab to explore, map and test 
local initiatives and scale up innovative results.
34. Risks of further socioeconomic shocks linked to the COVID-19 pandemic and social and 
environmental issues, including insecurity associated with the spread of violent extremism,
could jeopardize UNDP access to target populations. UNDP will strengthen collaboration with 
development partners and other United Nations agencies to foster conflict analysis, community 
security and human security approaches as well as more integrated planning/programming 
across the peace-humanitarian-development nexus.
35. In view of the forthcoming presidential elections, the risk of potential post-electoral
unrest is high and a review of national priorities remains a possibility. To mitigate this risk 
based on improved risk management, the crisis risk dashboard is activated. Given the severity 
of the risks, a programme criticality exercise may be envisaged. UNDP will revise its
programme offer to maintain alignment with the set priorities.
36. There is a financial risk associated with the fact that the programme relies on government 
co-financing. If the COVID-19 pandemic and its socioeconomic impacts persist and growth 
stagnates, government contributions may be affected. To mitigate financial risks, UNDP will 
diversify its resource base (AfDB, IDB, Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa) and 
instruments (blending) and regularly update its partnership and communication strategy and 
related action plan.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
37. UNDP will prioritize use of national and global data sources and traditional monitoring 
methods, specifically field visits to monitor its programmes and projects. The country office 
will build the capacities of national partners and staff to implement social and environmental 
standards and the UNDP accountability mechanism. UNDP will use its accelerator lab to 
collect real-time data on innovative local solutions emerging from programme implementation.
38. Based on programme results and the political environment, the theory of change and 
resources framework will be adjusted as needed. External assessments, independent 
evaluations, GEF evaluations and audits conducted in accordance with the organization’s 
directives will guide programme implementation.
39. UNDP will implement its gender equality strategy, advance the Gender Equality Seal
Initiative and invest at least 15 per cent of the budget in gender interventions. The gender 
marker will be used to monitor spending and improve gender planning. Five per cent of the 
budget will be allocated to monitoring, quality assurance and communication on results.
40. A knowledge management strategy will be adopted to make the results and lessons 
learned available to diverse audiences. Collaboration with universities, institutes, national and 
international partners will be strengthened. UNDP will invest in communicating its results 
through real-life stories, using innovative tools including social media.Annex. Results and resources framework for Côte d’Ivoire (2021-2025)
National priorities: 1. Deepening of governance and modernization of the State; 2. Strengthening social inclusion
UNSDCF Outcome 8 : By 2025, governance systems are more inclusive, accountable, efficient, have quality data, and people live in an environment where the rule of law, labour rights, gender 
equality, peace and security are respected and effective
Link with the Strategic Plan, Outcome 2: Accelerate structural transformations conducive to sustainable development
Outcome indicators: Baseline data, 
targets
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities
Country programme products
(including indicators, baselines and targets)
Main partners 
and partnership 
frameworks
Indicative resources 
by effect (in 
thousands of $)
Indicator 1a: Corruption Perceptions Index 
(CPI) score
Baseline: 35 (2019)
Target: TBD
Indicator 1b: Safety index
Baseline: 1.1 (2018)
Target: TBD
Indicator 1c: CPI score
Baseline: 35/100 (2019)
Target: TBD
Indicator 1d: Ibrahim Index of African 
Governance 
Baseline: 54.5 Points (22nd rank) (2018)
Indicator 1e: Gender Inequality Index
Baseline: 0.657 (2018)
Target: TBD
Indicator 1f: E-Government Development 
Index
Baseline: score 193, ranking 171st (2019)
Target: TBD
Source: World Bank report for 
Africa
Frequency: Biennial
Responsibility: World Bank
Source: National Security 
Council http://www.gouv.ci
Frequency: Annual/biennial
Responsibility: Ministry of 
Security and Civil Protection
Source: Transparency 
International Annual Report
transparency.org
Frequency: Annual/Biennial
Responsibility: Transparency 
International
Source: African Governance 
Report 
Frequency: Annual/Biennial
Responsibility: Mo Ibrahim 
Foundation
Source: Côte d'Ivoire voluntary 
national review report
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Ministry of 
Planning and Development
Source: United Nations 
Department of Economic and 
Output 1.1. The institutions in charge of promoting the rule of law, the 
private sector and CSOs have technical and operational capacities to 
strengthen the promotion and respect of fundamental rights and to fight 
more effectively against gender-based violence.
Indicator 1.1.1a. Proportion of human rights violations including cases of 
gender-based violence, disaggregated by age and sex of the victim and 
nature of the offence reported to administrative and judicial authorities 
judged and processed
Baseline: 54% (2019)
Target: 65%
Source: Reports of the National Council for Human Rights, Ministry of 
Justice and Human Rights, Association of Women Lawyers of Côte d'Ivoire
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.1.1b: Proportion of human rights violations and other crimes
including cases of gender-based violence, disaggregated by age and sex of 
the victim reported to the institution in charge of human rights treated
Baseline: 55% (2019)
Target: 80%
Source: Reports of the National Human Rights Council, Ministry of Justice 
and Human Rights, Association of Women Lawyers of Côte d'Ivoire
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.1.2: Proportion of legal aid beneficiaries disaggregated by age 
and sex of the victim
Baseline: 35% (2019)
Target: 60% of applicants for legal aid
Source: Reports from the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights 
(Department of Civil and Criminal Affairs)
Frequency: Annual
National Assembly 
and Senate
Ministry of Justice 
and Human Rights
Ministry of 
Planning and 
Development
National Council 
for Human Rights
Association of 
Women Lawyers of
Côte d'Ivoire 
National 
Democratic 
Institute
Ministry in charge 
of solidarity and 
social cohesion
Ministry in charge 
of modernization 
and innovation of 
the public service
Prime Minister's 
Office
Regular: $4,000
Other: $13,412Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: United Nations 
Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs
Indicator 1.1.3. Proportion of preventive detainees compared to the prison 
population in the intervention areas
Baseline: 39%
Target: 30%
Source: Reports from the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights (Directorate 
of Civil and Criminal Affairs); and the National Council for Human Rights
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.1.4. Number of confirmed cases of murders, kidnappings, 
enforced disappearances, arbitrary detentions and acts of torture suffered by 
women and men, including journalists, people working in the media, trade 
unionists, human rights defenders, human rights and political actors (SDG
16.10.1)
Baseline: 500 (TBC) (2019)
Target: 250
Source: Reports of human rights organizations and the National Council for 
Human Rights
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.2. State and non-State actors in charge of the State modernization 
process and citizen control are equipped with digital and/or innovative 
solutions and offer quality services at national and local levels.
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of actors, UNDP partners using accelerator lab 
innovative development solutions in their service offers
Baseline: 0 (2019)
Target: 15
Source: Reports from the ministry responsible for modernization and 
innovation in the public service and the Ministry of the Digital Economy
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.2.2: Proportion of women, men and young people whose last 
experience with public services was satisfactory (SDG 16.6.2, IRRF1 2.6)
Baseline: 40.6% (2015)
Target: 50% of women, men and young people attending public services
Source: National Institute of Statistics
Frequency: Every five years
Output 1.3. State and non-State institutions responsible for democratic 
consolidation and strengthening social cohesion, local authorities and local 
actors, including women and young people, have technical and operational 
capacities to improve inclusive processes and the prevention/peaceful 
management of conflicts
Human rights 
organizations
Umbrella 
organizations of 
local authorities
European Union
Government of 
Japan/JICA
Embassy of 
Germany
Embassy of the 
United States 
(USAID)
IOM, UNESCO, 
UN-WomenIndicators 1.3.1: Proportion of women and young people participating in 
decision-making.
Baseline: Parliament: 11.37%; Government: 14.8%; municipalities: 7.96%
(2019)
Target: Parliament: 20%; Government: 20%; municipalities: 20%
Source: UN-Women
Frequency: yearly
Indicators 1.3.2: Number of local communities with a structure for direct 
participation of civil society, including women and young people, in the 
management and development of local communities integrating the SDGs
and implementing a process-participatory budget, which operate on a regular 
basis
Baseline: 6 (2018)
Target: 20
Source: Reports of the General Directorate of Decentralization and Local 
Development
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.3.3: Number of conflicts prevented or having been the subject 
of a peaceful resolution with the involvement of women and young people 
in particular
Baseline: 24 (2019)
Target: 150
Source: Reports from the Ministry in charge of solidarity, social cohesion 
and the fight against poverty; Reports from the National Observatory for 
Solidarity and Social Cohesion
Frequency: Annual
National priorities: 1. Transformation of the economy; 2. Development of human capital; 3. Strengthening social inclusion
UNSDCF Outcome 2: By 2025, small and medium-sized enterprises / industries have greater access to innovative systems of sustainable and inclusive economic diversification and to trade 
opportunities, as well as to investments, especially in the manufacturing transformation sector.
Outcome 5: By 2025, young people, girls and boys, especially those in vulnerable situations, have greater access to socio-economic opportunities and develop their full potential
Link with the Strategic Plan, Outcome1: Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions
Indicator 2a: Proportion of men, women 
and children of all ages living in a situation 
of poverty in all its forms, as defined by 
Côte d'Ivoire (SDG 1.2.2; IRRF 1.1)
Baseline: 2012
Target: TBD
Indicator 2b: Doing Business ranking
Source: Voluntary national 
review report
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Ministry of 
Planning and Development
Output 2.1: National and local institutions in charge of development 
policies have strengthened their capacities in planning, gender-sensitive 
budgeting, implementation, monitoring/evaluation for the achievement of 
the SDGs
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of national and local institutions with capacities 
in planning, gender-sensitive budgeting, implementation and 
monitoring/evaluation
Ministry of 
Planning and 
Development
Ministry of 
Territorial 
Administration
Regular: $1,872
Other: $31,500Target: TBD
Indicator 2c: Human Development Index
(IRRF 2.a)
Baseline: 0.516 (2018) 
Target: TBD
Indicator 2d: Unemployment rate 
disaggregated by age and sex (SDG 8.5.2)
Baseline: (2019)
Target: TBD
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: World Bank
Source: national human 
development reports 
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: UNDP
Source: Report of the 
employment survey in Côte 
d'Ivoire
Frequency: Biennial/triennial
Responsibility: National 
Institute of Statistics 
Target: 10
Source: Economy and finance reports, reports of the Ministry of the 
Interior and Decentralization and of the Ministry of Planning and 
Development
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of national and local policies and strategies 
developed and implemented in the context of reducing inequalities in 
favour of the poorest populations
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Source: Strategy documents adopted by the Government
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.2: Public-private dialogue is strengthened and allows an inclusive 
environment favourable to the development of value chains, circular 
economy and small and medium-sized enterprises, employment for women 
and young people in the digital, green and blue economy sector
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of SMEs created by women and young people
supported per year
Reference: 0
Target: 100
Data source: Centre for the Promotion of Investments in Côte d’Ivoire
reports
Frequency: Annually
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of reforms improving the business environment 
and the development of SMEs for young people and women
Baseline: 10
Target: 15
Source: Reports from the Ministry of Planning and Development 
Committee for the mobilization of external resources, Directorate General 
of Planning and the Fight against Poverty)
Frequency: Annual
Ministry for the 
Promotion of Small 
and Medium-Sized 
Enterprises 
Ivorian Federation 
of SMEs
General 
Confederation of 
Businesses of Côte 
d'Ivoire
European Union
UNIDO, 
FAO, IFAD, 
UN-Women, WFP, 
UNICEF, UNFPA
National priorities: 1. Transformation of the Economy; 2. Regional development and supporting infrastructure
UNSDCF result 7: By 2025, communities have greater access to terrestrial and marine ecosystems and living environments that are more sustainably managed, integrated, inclusive and improve 
their resilience.
Link with the Strategic Plan, Outcome 3: Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
Indicator 3a: Official development 
assistance and public expenditure devoted to 
Source: Voluntary national 
review report
FAl/biil
Output 3.1: Public and private institutions engaged in the preservation of 
the environment and the fight against climate change and the communities 
hthittitihd thliid t
Ministry of the 
Environment and 
Regular: $500
Oth$17825the preservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity and ecosystems
Baseline: 2019
Target: TBD
Indicator 3b: Proportion of sites important 
for terrestrial and freshwater biodiversity 
that are in protected areas (by type)
ecosystem) (SDG15.1.1, 15.1.2)
Baseline:2019
Target: TBD
Indicator 3c: Annual carbon dioxideequivalent emissions (per million metric 
tons) (SDG 9.4.1)
Baseline: 2019
Target:
Indicator 3d: Economic losses due to 
natural hazards as a proportion of GDP 
(SDG 1.5.2, 11.5.2)
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Responsibility: Ministry of 
Planning and Development
Source: Sector report
Frequency: Annual/biennial
Responsibility: Ministry of 
Environment and Sustainable 
Development
Source: REDD+ secretariat 
report
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Ministry of 
Environment and Sustainable 
Development
Source: Voluntary national 
review report
Frequency: Annual/Biennial
Responsibility: Ministry of 
Planning and Development
sustainably manage natural resources in the targeted regions and protect 
vital ecosystems
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of public and private structures with strengthened 
capacities in natural resource management
Baseline: 0 (2019)
Target: 30
Source: Reports from public and private structures trained
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of community platforms for the sustainable 
management of forest resources
Baseline: 0 (2019)
Target: 20
Source: Society for Forest Development report
Frequency: Annual
Output 3.2: State institutions, local authorities and communities in the 
targeted regions have the necessary infrastructure, technical and 
technological capacities for the prevention and management of natural 
disaster risks and the improvement of resilience
Indicator 3.2.1: Proportion of local administrations having adopted and 
implemented local disaster risk reduction strategies, in accordance with the 
strategies followed at the national level (SDG 1.5.4)
Baseline: 0 (2019)
Target: 10
Source: Reports from the National Office for Civil Protection and Reports 
from the Ministry of the Interior and Decentralization
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of people who died, disappeared or directly 
affected by disasters, per 100,000 people (SDG 11.5.1)
Baseline: 100,000 (2019)
Target: 5,000 
Source: Reports from the National Office for Civil Protection and from the 
Ministry of the Interior and Decentralization
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.2.3: Existence of a national mechanism for monitoring the 
progress of the climate change mitigation and adaptation policy
Indicator 3.2.4: Number of climate change mitigation and adaptation 
ild d diiil
Sustainable 
Development,
Ministry of the 
Economy and 
Finance,
Ministry of 
Agriculture and 
Sustainable 
Development,
Ministry for the 
Promotion of 
SMEs,
Private sector
Communities
GEF
GCF
UNEP, FAO, 
IFAD, UNIDO, 
ILOBaseline: 0 (2019)
Target: 2
Source: National mechanism for monitoring the progress of the climate 
change mitigation and adaptation policy
Frequency: Once