File Name: COD-CPD-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Dem. Rep. of the Congo
Country Code: COD
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 May, 3-4 and 6-7 June 2019
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2024
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
25 March 2019
Original: English
1904948X (E) 100419
Annual session 2019
30 May, 3-4 and 6-7 June 2019, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Republic of the Congo 
(2020-2024)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale ..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management .................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
 Annex
Results and resources framework for the Congo (2020-2024) 9I. Programme rationale
1. The Republic of the Congo has an estimated population of 5.2 million (2018), of whom 
51 per cent are women and 47.7 per cent are under age 20, as indicated in the National 
Development Plan (Plan National de Développement (PND)) 2018–2022. The population 
growth rate of this sparsely populated country is 3 per cent. The country has significant 
natural resources that offer strong development potential, but the oil crisis of 2014 
undermined economic and social development efforts and left the country in an 
unprecedented crisis.
1
2. Although Congo is classified as a middle-income country, the 2014 crisis revealed the 
fragility of its economy. Gross domestic product (GDP) contracted by 3.1 per cent in 2016 
and 5 per cent in 2017. The weak economic recovery in 2018 is mainly driven by an 
increase in oil production and the price of oil. The economy showed a slight improvement
in 2018, which should be confirmed in 2019, with estimated growth rates of 1 per cent and 
3.2 per cent of GDP respectively for these years.
2
 However, this recovery remains 
precarious. The non-oil share of GDP, already marginal prior to the 2014 crisis, showed a 
7 per cent3 decline in 2018. The weak prospects for economic growth will certainly affect 
the Government’s co-funding of development activities.
3. Official development assistance has represented some 0.3 per cent of total 
programmable aid since 2017,
4 of which the social sector received 48 per cent and the 
economic sector 21 per cent, mainly for infrastructure and services.
5
4. The Human Development Index value remained stable, at 0.61, and the Congo ranked
137 of 189 countries6in 2018. The poverty level, estimated at 46.5 per cent according to 
the 2014 national Human Development Report, remains high. Poverty is more pronounced 
in rural (54 per cent) than urban (32.3 per cent) areas and among people with disabilities 
and indigenous peoples, who also have limited access to education, literacy and basic social 
services.
5. The Congo ranked 143 on the Gender Inequality Index in 2017, showing large 
disparities in gender equality. Progress was made in recent years with respect to women’s 
representation in decision-making spheres, particularly in the Senate and the National 
Assembly.
7 These modest advances, however, should not conceal the sociocultural barriers 
faced by women and the significant challenge of gender-based violence. According to a 
2016 report,8 persistent customs and traditions prevent women from realizing their 
potential.
6. In 2018, the Congo ranked 41 of 54 African countries in the Ibrahim Index of African 
Governance. Numerous governance challenges result in low levels of satisfaction on the 
part of the population and service users. These challenges include: the inefficiency of the 
central and decentralized administrations; the insufficient technical and financial capacities 
of human resources; the low quality of services; a judicial and security system that poorly 
protects human rights; and unequal access to justice. Given the weaknesses in transparency 
and accountability in the management of public affairs and of citizen participation in local 
decision-making, the system of economic governance is inefficient and decentralization is 
only slightly effective. The Congo was ranked 165 of 180 countries on the 2018 
Transparency International Corruption Perception Index, with a score of 19/100.
 
1 According to an International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission report of November 2018, the county’s debt accounted for 96 per cent of GDP as 
of that date. 
2
IMF, op. cit.
3 World Bank Group, Situation économique de la République du Congo, September 2018.
4 According to data from the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 
5
Ibid.
6
 Human Development Report 2017. Congo also ranked 13 of 53 African countries.
7
Slight increases were observed in the Senate (from 10 per cent in 2012 to 21 per cent in 2017), National Assembly (from 9 per cent in 2012 to 
11 per cent in 2017) and in local department councils (from 12 per cent in 2014 to 22 per cent in 2017).
8 Report prepared in 2016 by the ministry in charge of the promotion of women with support from UNDP.7. Despite the signing of a ceasefire and cessation-of-hostilities agreement in December 
2016 between the Government and Pastor Ntumi, one of the main opposition figures, and 
an amelioration of the situation, the security situation in the Pool region still requires 
special attention. At the beginning of 2018, 158,717 displaced persons were registered and 
affected by insecurity, 114,086 of whom were in the Pool and Bouenza departments.
9
Moreover, despite the collection of weapons in the Pool, the reintegration of ex-combatants 
is not yet effective. The negative impact of the deterioration of social and economic 
conditions, in addition to the high levels of poverty in this region (74.8 per cent compared 
to 32.3 per cent in urban areas), can put youth at risk of being co-opted for political reasons. 
Reconciliation between communities and ex-combatants, and between ex-combatants and 
the police force, needs to be strengthened. Additional risks include the subregional 
challenges in northern Cameroon and the Central African Republic.
8. The country has ratified international and subregional agreements for management of 
Congo Bassin. Despite its proactive policy of carrying out major initiatives in the green 
and blue economy, its 65 per cent forest cover, many rivers and extensive national parks 
(covering 12 per cent of the country), the Congo faces numerous challenges related to 
climate change: sustained degradation of its natural resources and environment due to 
anthropogenic pressures from overexploitation of forest products; the reduction of fallow 
land; excessive and illegal extractive mining; uncontrolled irrigation; illegal clearing for 
agricultural purposes; and repeated bush fires. Promoting diversification of the economy 
should be based on sustainable agriculture and ecotourism, to promote sustainable value 
chains and production methods that preserve ecosystems. This would mitigate pressure on 
natural resources, avoid excessive deforestation, limit air, soil and water pollution and 
enhance the resilience of the population to climate change.
9. With a very young population, the Congo needs to focus on human capital 
development, as the youth unemployment rate (ages 15–29) is estimated at 30.5 per cent10
(2016). The importance of the informal sector, particularly in agriculture where most 
young people work, and the inability of the education system to meet the needs of the 
labour market reinforce the need for greater investment in training opportunities and 
development of adequate skills, especially in high-potential sectors such as sustainable 
agriculture and ecotourism. Given its relevance for sustainable management of resources 
and for employment, agriculture is a key sector for sustainable development.
10. The 2017 independent country programme evaluation highlighted important 
achievements which need to be consolidated. Policy frameworks have been developed
including policy papers on the development of internal trade and the national land policy, 
the national tourism strategy and the national employment policy. For the new programme 
cycle, UNDP will support government authorities in operationalizing the policies to 
contribute to economic diversification. 
11. The evaluation recognized that UNDP has enabled the Congo to elaborate several 
strategic documents related to biodiversity and tourism and reinforced the coordination 
mechanism at country level for sustainable development management. The evaluation 
highlighted that for the new UNDP programme, direct support to implementation at 
community level will be a key comparative advantage, including supporting authorities in
systematically monitoring achievements to sustain programmatic outcomes. This will 
require a focus on systematic monitoring, better coordination and effective ownership by 
national counterparts. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
12. The country programme is designed to support the Republic of the Congo to build on 
progress achieved and address remaining gaps in governance, peacebuilding, security, 
economic diversification and poverty reduction, and strengthen resilience with the aim of 
reducing inequalities and breaking the cycle of poverty. UNDP will build on its 
comparative advantages in the areas of governance, women’s empowerment and gender 
 equality, environmental sustainability and resilience to enhance its contribution to Congo’s 
achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
13. The programme is based on the assertion that long-term investments in sustainable 
agriculture and ecotourism, together with skills development and strengthening of
accountable, transparent and inclusive governance, protection of human rights, reduced 
gender inequalities and an inclusive State-citizen dialogue, will improve trust in 
government actions, build peace and strengthen security. If governance is inclusive and 
accountable, government actions will promote effective economic diversification in a 
sustainable way. The UNDP contribution to inclusive governance will support this
transformation with the aim of leaving no one behind.
14. The programme adopts an integrated approach to problem analysis combined with 
better targeting (taking into consideration key factors such as vulnerability and potential) 
of actors and sectors (agriculture and ecotourism for example) where interventions will be 
concentrated in both urban and rural areas. This should help to strengthen the coherence 
of actions and promote the scaling-up of successful pilot initiatives. UNDP will 
consolidate gains in capacity-building of networks of non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) to amplify advocacy for improving the legal framework for civil society 
intervention. UNDP will strengthen its collaboration with academia and scientific 
researchers, which is essential for supporting the development of the agricultural, tourism 
and environmental sectors, particularly for promoting renewable sources of energy.
15. The programme, developed in consultation with the Government and national partners, 
civil society organizations (CSOs), the private sector and development partners including 
the United Nations system, represents the UNDP contribution to the United Nations 
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2020–2024. It is in line with the PND 
2018-2022, the United Nations Humanitarian Response Plan, the African Union Agenda 
2063, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018–
2021. It builds on the UNDP comparative advantages in policy and technical support and
lessons learned from the previous programme.
16. In its integrator role, UNDP will encourage the promotion of cross-cutting and 
inclusive approaches based on social cohesion and peacebuilding dynamics. The 
programme has two interrelated pillars that simultaneously address challenges related to 
governance and peacebuilding (pillar 1) and sustainable economic diversification and the 
resilience of institutions and communities vulnerable to climate change and crises (pillar 
2). Emphasis will be placed on the most vulnerable communities and populations to leave 
no one behind and reduce gender inequalities and economic disparities to break the cycle 
of generational and multidimensional poverty through more equally shared growth. In 
addition to convening stakeholders to support the country’s achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals, UNDP will strengthen and leverage partnerships for Goal-related 
financing, including with the private sector and technical and financial partners. UNDP 
will build on the current portfolio of Global Environment Facility (GEF) projects and the 
opportunities around strategic forest management and other areas with international 
financial institutions and bilateral partners to explore jointly with the Government 
opportunities for advancing sustainable development. 
17. UNDP will respond to government priorities through signature solutions 1-4 and 
contribute to the achievement of the targets identified in the UNDAF related to Sustainable 
Development Goals 1, 2, 5, 8, 13, 16 and 17.
18. As the Goals have been contextualized and integrated in the country’s strategic 
documents, particularly the PND, with the support of UNDP, the programme will focus on 
operationalizing them through national and local discussion platforms around the 2030 
Agenda. The aim is to localize the Goals through local development plans. UNDP will 
strengthen its partnerships with relevant local partners in line with its partnership and 
resource mobilization strategy. It will focus on strengthening the capacities of communitybased organizations to provide inclusive services to the most vulnerable men and women 
and on the normative and policy-related aspects and concrete needs of the population and 
beneficiary institutions to cope with an evolving context at both the local and national 
levels. It will consolidate and extend its partnership with the private sector (chambers of programmatic support for national development priorities and institutional-level capacity 
development, and to mobilize technical expertise and financial resources using the national 
implementation modality.
19. In both pillars, UNDP will enhance South-South and triangular cooperation and 
collaborate with national centres of excellence, with an emphasis on innovative approaches
that can be adapted to the national context, such as Rwanda’s YouthConnekt and Green 
Fund initiatives. UNDP is supporting a partnership between Morocco and the Congo to set
up a Blue Fund for natural resource management and aims to expand this partnership to 
include the Islamic Development Bank to support projects on skills development and 
livelihoods for women and youth. UNDP will promote knowledge-sharing on issues such 
as financing for development and the blue and green economy, building on the results of 
a development finance assessment to be conducted with the support of the Regional Bureau
for Africa. 
Strengthening governance, peacebuilding and security
20. In partnership with the Ministry of Planning and Finance and the UNDP Pôle de 
Dakar, the programme will support the development and use of tools for monitoring 
transparency and managing public finances, including the planning, programming, 
budgeting, monitoring and evaluation chain. This includes improved capacities for 
collection of data related to the Goals as well as monitoring and improving the coordination 
of development aid policies and programmes by the Office of the Prime Minister, the
National Assembly, the Senate and the High Authority Against Corruption. This support 
will help to strengthen a culture of accountability and transparency and the technical, 
human and organizational capacities of anti-corruption institutions to strengthen the 
integrity and transparency of the national system. These initiatives will be undertaken in 
collaboration with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Similarly, 
support will be provided to strengthen the national statistics system to better monitor the 
PND.
21. UNDP will work with the Ministry of Interior and Decentralization to develop 
methodological tools for local development planning by local and regional authorities
based on the Sustainable Development Goals. This will strengthen citizens’ participation 
in decision-making on the development and implementation of local development plans. 
It will further contribute to the implementation of the decentralization policy, which is a 
government priority, in particular through operationalization of the strategic plan for 
reforming the State developed by the Ministry of Civil Service, and to social protection. 
These tools will systematically address issues of gender equity and equality. 
22. In partnership with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations 
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the 
Ministry for the Promotion of Women and the Integration of Women in Development, 
UNDP will continue to collaborate on the operationalization of the national gender policy, 
specifically through advocacy to improve the legal and institutional framework for 
reducing gender inequalities, and the identification of appropriate funding mechanisms 
for women's entrepreneurship. To accelerate results on poverty reduction and women’s 
employment, UNDP will develop and strengthen strategic partnerships with the private 
sector which have already shown encouraging results, for example in the forest 
management and oil sectors.
23. In partnership with the United Nations Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in 
Central Africa (UNCHRD), UNDP will continue to support the Ministry of Justice and 
Human Rights and the Ministry of Social Affairs to establish a platform for collaboration 
for implementation of the recommendations of the universal periodic review (UPR), the 
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and other human rights 
treaty bodies, including human trafficking. This platform will bring together the 
Government, civil society and national human rights institutions to improve the 
effectiveness of implementation. In partnership with the Joint United Nations Programme 
on HIV/AIDS, the Ministry of Health and the National AIDS Council, UNDP will support 
strengthening of the legal and policy environment for equitable access to health,
particularly by marginalized and vulnerable groups.24. UNDP will provide advisory support to the Ministry of Interior and Decentralization, 
the Office of the High Commissioner for the Reintegration of Ex-Combatants (Haut 
Commissariat à la Réinsertion des Ex Combattants (HCREC)) and the National Council 
for Dialogue and Civil Society to strengthen social cohesion, by supporting platforms for 
intercommunity dialogue in the Pool Department. Participation of women and women-led 
organizations will be key. In partnership with the Ministry of Interior and Decentralization 
and the Ministry of Defence, UNDP will work towards strengthening the technical and 
operational capacities of the police and gendarmerie. UNDP will continue to support 
government efforts for peacebuilding, reconciliation and social cohesion, specifically the 
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme signed 
by the HCREC for reintegration of former combatants and associated populations, among 
them internally displaced persons including women. In that context UNDP will also 
support the application of an action plan for implementation of Security Council resolution 
1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.
Diversification of economy in a sustainable manner and promotion of resilience of 
communities and institutions vulnerable to climate change 
25. In partnership with the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, the programme will 
emphasize developing cocoa and banana value chains, beekeeping11 and promotion of 
ecotourism by developing national protected areas and ecosystems. UNDP will help 
diversify economic activities for youth, women and indigenous people in targeted areas
and support developing their skills to access these opportunities and thus reduce 
inequalities. 
26. To this end, UNDP, in partnership with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO), the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Tourism and 
Environment, will contribute to strengthening the policy, institutional and regulatory 
framework for the agricultural and ecotourism sectors. UNDP will assist the Ministry of 
Agriculture, the Ministry of Forest Economy, the Ministry of Tourism and Environment 
and small- and medium-sized enterprises to identify and promote niches with high 
potential for decent jobs and sustainable incomes, as well as to develop value chains in the 
respective sectors. Emphasis will be placed on building human capital and skills that match 
employment requirements and activities promoted by young people and women in 
partnership with the private sector for innovative and sustainable financing.
27. UNDP will strengthen collaboration with the Ministry of Forest Economy and the 
Ministry of Tourism and Environment for developing and implementing plans for 
managing and developing parks and protected areas such as Lac Télé Community Reserve, 
Odzala Kokoua National Park and the Lossi Gorilla Sanctuary as tourist sites. This will be 
done in line with the ongoing transboundary initiatives with Cameroon, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo and Gabon. The programme will emphasize strengthening the 
national system of protected areas, jointly managed with local communities to ensure the 
sustainability of production methods through capacity-building for local communities.
This will be achieved by helping the Government to develop a sustainable financing 
mechanism following the model of the funds for the management of protected areas and 
the Congo Basin, e.g., the Blue Fund, the Green Climate Fund, particularly for the benefit 
of young people, women and the poorest populations to strengthen the resilience of 
communities most vulnerable to climate change. UNDP will work to support improving 
knowledge and dissemination of adaptation techniques and technologies in the climate 
change, water and agriculture sectors. UNDP will continue to support the Ministry of 
Environment in updating the National Climate Change Adaptation Plan as a strategic 
programming framework for climate change.
28. Planned interventions will be implemented under the leadership of the Government 
(Ministry of Planning and other key ministries). The proposed programme is building on 
a framework of multiple partnerships with public-private sector entities, CSOs and 
academia. This will entail strengthening joint initiatives with United Nations agencies in 
the framework of Delivering as One and the UNDP integrator role. It will be implemented 
through innovative, multidimensional approaches of both upstream and downstream initiatives with the support of government cost sharing in the context of a lower middleincome country. 
III. Programme and risk management
29. This country programme document outlines the contributions of UNDP to national 
results and serves as the accountability tool of the country office to the Executive Board. 
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels are 
prescribed in the organization's programme and operations policies and procedures, and in 
the internal controls framework. In accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/9, all 
direct costs related to the implementation of the programme will be charged to the projects 
concerned. National implementation will be the preferred approach to programme 
implementation, and the appropriate operational modalities will be defined according to 
the interventions to strengthen ownership and accountability. If necessary, national 
execution may be replaced by direct execution to enable response to force majeure. The 
harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be used in a coordination with other 
United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. A macro-assessment of the public 
finance management system and the micro-assessments of relevant partners will be carried 
out in 2019 to identify potential risks related to the management of public resources. 
UNDP will build the capacities of implementing partners on results-based management 
and on UNDP project and programme management rules and procedures. In collaboration 
with other United Nations agencies, UNDP will implement the joint programming 
framework and business operations strategy under Delivering as One.
30. UNDP will review its capacities and find appropriate measures to ensure its financial 
sustainability including improving the implementation of the direct project costs, the 
allocation of staff according to programmatic needs and the deployment of project units in 
the field for efficient implementation. For the effective use of resources, financial 
management controls will be implemented in line with the internal control and improved 
cost-recovery mechanisms. To ensure national ownership, national partners will be fully 
engaged in planning and management processes.
31. The main potential risks to programme implementation include: (a) deterioration of 
the security context and sociopolitical instability resulting from a worsening of the 
socioeconomic, political and governance environments in the country and the subregion. 
This is linked to a possible aggravation of the humanitarian crises in Likouala and the Pool
region, to possible political tensions around the presidential and parliamentary elections 
scheduled for 2021-2022 and to instability in the subregion; (b) a decline in the country's 
oil resources, which may lead to reduced public funding and affect opportunities for 
government financing. This will require the country office to adopt a bold approach to 
resource mobilization in Congo’s middle-income country context; and (c) limited capacity 
of government institutions and national partners in programmatic implementation and 
application of HACT rules and procedures.
32. UNDP will mitigate these risks through regular monitoring and scenario-based 
analysis, making required adjustments in case the situation deteriorates. To diversify its 
resources and increase its capacities for programme delivery, the country office will 
develop and implement its partnership and communication strategy and action plan, with
support from the Bureau of External Relations and Advocacy and the active engagement 
of partners. This will allow the country office to diversify and widen its funding base by 
developing partnerships with international financial institutions (e.g., World Bank, IMF) 
and other sources of global funds (Green Climate Fund, GEF, Peacebuilding Fund) and 
with traditional and non-traditional partners (foundations, the private sector). 
IV. Programme monitoring and evaluation
33. Monitoring and evaluation will be aligned with the results framework of the UNDAF 
and the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021 and backed by the PND results monitoring 
framework. At least 5 per cent of the office's programmatic resources will be allocated to 
monitoring and evaluation activities. UNDP will allocate additional resources to
strengthen national capacities for: (a) data collection and better monitoring of progress carried out using a results-based management and quality assurance approach. Monitoring 
will be carried out annually and will be integrated into the UNDAF monitoring system.
34. Regular monitoring of country programme outputs will be carried out based on 
credible data. There will be a final evaluation of relevant projects funded by the GEF. The 
contributions to national results will be regularly reviewed to guide decision-making and 
adjust the programme as needed. UNDP will work with national partners responsible for 
monitoring results of development activities and the United Nations country team
monitoring and evaluation group. The collection and analysis of indicator data will be 
disaggregated by sex, age, etc., to inform the core principle of the 2030 Agenda to leave 
no one behind. The gender marker will be integrated into all projects and will serve as a 
resource allocation tool. UNDP will actively participate in joint annual reviews of the 
UNDAF in collaboration with other stakeholders. A midterm evaluation will assess the 
effectiveness of the country programme, including lessons learned, to inform the 
development of the next cycle.Annex. Results and resources framework for the Congo (2020–2024) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY/GOAL: PND strategic axis: strengthening of governance
Sustainable Development Goals: 5, 16 and 17
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP:
By 2024, the Congolese populations will benefit from an improved system of institutional, democratic, human rights, administrative and economic governance that promotes inclusive and participatory 
development based on peacebuilding and humanitarian efforts.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 3. Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises 
UNDAF outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source, frequency and
responsibilities Indicative country programme outputs
Major partners / 
partnerships
frameworks
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome ($)
Indicator 1.1.: Primary government 
expenditures as a proportion of original 
approved budget, by sector (education, 
health, tourism, etc.)
(Goal 16.6.1)
Baseline: 41% 
Target: 50%
Indicator 1.2.: Percentage of 
recommendations made by 
international bodies for the protection 
of human rights and accepted by the 
Government that are implemented
Baseline: 0% (37 recommendations 
from the sixth report (2012) of the 
Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW))
Target: 54% 
Indicator 1.3: Mo Ibrahim Index of 
African Governance
Baseline: 40.3 (2018)
Target: 43.1 
Data source: Reports from 
different sectoral ministries and 
the Statistical Commission of 
Parliament 
Frequency: Annual
UNDP, UNICEF, UNESCO, FAO, 
UNFPA, UNHCR, WFP, OHCHR
Data source:
Periodic reports of UNHCRD
Report of human rights NGOs
National report on the Goals
PND evaluation report
Report of the Statistical 
Committee of Parliament
Reports of CEDAW and other 
treaty bodies
Data source: Perception survey
Frequency: Biannual
Data source: Mo Ibrahim Annual 
Report
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.1: Departments involved in research and planning (33) and 
their directors have enhanced technical capacities to formulate, 
implement, monitor, evaluate and coordinate inclusive development laws, 
policies and programmes aligned to human rights commitments 
Indicator 1.1.1: Number of (a) departments and (b) departmental directors
who adopt and implement systematic tools and practices to monitor and 
evaluate sectoral policies
Baseline: 0
Target: (a) 33 (b) 10
Data source: Monitoring and evaluation framework paper of sectoral 
departments
Frequency: Midterm
Indicator 1.1.2: Proportion of newly formulated development policies that are 
gender-sensitive
Baseline: 0
Target: 30%
Data source: General Directorate of Planning
Frequency: Biennial
Indicator 1.1.3: Existence of a validated assessments/reviews of the PND 
implementation conducted by the DEP
Baseline: No
Target: Yes 
Data source: Monitoring and implementation reports of the PND
Ministries of Justice and 
Human Rights, 
of the Interior, of Finance, of 
Planning and Development, 
of Women and the 
Integration of Women in 
Development, of Public 
Services and State Reform 
Parliament 
CSOs
Media 
NGOs
Auditors Board
National Police
Gendarmerie Nationale
HCREC
UNHCR, UNFPA
UNHCDH-United Nations 
Office for Central Africa
UNESCO
PBSO
Congolese Human Rights 
Observatory 
Association pour les Droits 
de l'Homme et l'Univers 
Regular:800,000
Other: 14,500,000Baseline: 0.465
Target: 0.40 UNDP, UNICEF, UNESCO, FAO, 
UNFPA, UNHCR, WFP, OHCHR
Data source: Gini Index
Frequency: Biannual
UNDP, UNICEF, UNESCO, FAO, 
UNFPA, UNHCR, WFP, OHCHR
Output 1.2: Parliamentary processes and the national courts responsible 
for audit and budgetary discipline t strengthened to promote inclusion, 
transparency and accountability
Indicator 1.2.1: Parliament has improved capacities to undertake inclusive, 
effective and accountable law-making, oversight and representation (Strategic 
Plan indicator 2.2.2.3)
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
Data source: Official Journal-Parliament report-Training reports
Frequency: Biennial
Output 1.3: CSOs have the technical capacity to effectively exercise their 
participatory and accountability role in defining and monitoring public 
policies and promoting transparency in governance action
Indicator 1.3.1: Number of (a) NGOs and (b) organizations of media 
professionals utilizing the public space to assume the roles set out in the law 
on transparency and accountability in public financial management
Baseline: 0 
Target: (a) 50 NGOs, (b) 20 
Data source: Reports of institutions and civil society; Media press releases
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.4: Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, Ministry of Social 
Affairs, civil society and national human rights institutions have improved 
capacities for the effective use and implement the recommendations of the 
UPR, CEDAW and other human rights treaty bodies 
Indicator 1.4.1.: Number of recommendations from the UPR, CEDAW 
including recommendations on gender equality, human trafficking and 
protection of rights of vulnerable groups.
Baseline: 10 
Target: 60
Data source: Reports of treaty bodies and human rights institutions and NGOs 
(UPR, CEDAW, Human Rights Watch, National Human Rights Council, 
Congolese Observatory of Human Rights, United States Department of State)
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.5: National capacities strengthened for reintegration, 
ilitifl t f flit d tif ilt 
Multi-partner support 
programme for local 
elections in Congo
High Council on Freedom of 
Communication
National Commission to 
Fight Corruption and Fraud
Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative 
National Financial 
Investigation Agency
World Bank
Bilateral agencies (United 
States Agency for 
International Development)Indicator 1.5.1: Percentage of platforms/community dialogue committees set 
up at the local and national levels with at least 50% women 
representativeness
Baseline: 7 
Target: 16 
Data source: Reports of HCREC /Land Administration
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.5.2: Number of dialogue mechanisms provided during electoral 
cycle
Baseline: 0
Target:15
Data source: Report of the National Electoral Commission and Observers
Frequency by end of cycle
Indicator 1.5.3: Number of ex-combatants (men and women) reintegrated 
into communities
Baseline: 0 
Target: 10,000 (W: 2,500; M: 7,500)
Data source: Reports of HCREC, Ministries of Social Affairs and of
Humanitarian Action
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.6: The national statistics system has strengthened technical 
capacities for the systematic production of reliable, disaggregated, quality 
data to efficiently monitor the implementation of the PND and progress 
on the Sustainable Development Goals
Indicator 1.6.1: Number of data-collection/analysis mechanisms providing 
disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the Goals:
(a) Conventional data-collection methods (e.g., surveys)
(b) Administrative reporting systems
(c) New data sources (e.g., big data)
Baseline: (a) 2; (b) 1 voluntary national review on the Goals;
(c) 0
Target: (a) 3; (b) 4; (c) 1 crisis risk dashboard 
Data source: National monitoring reports on the achievement of the Goals, 
national Human Development Report
Frequency: Annual Indicator 1.6.2: Percentage of local authorities with a land-use plan including 
a general cadastral plan and disaster risk management plan
Baseline: 0
Target: 30% 
Data source: Ministry of Land Affairs and Public Domain
Frequency: End of cycle
Indicator 1.6.3: Percentage of local authorities that efficiently use newly 
designed methodological tools of local development planning and 
implementation mechanisms 
Baseline: 0
Target: 25%
Data source: Reports of the General Directorate of Local Authorities
Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY/GOAL:
PND Strategic Axis: Economic Diversification 
Sustainable Development Goals: 1, 2, 8, 13 and 17
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2024, the poorest Congolese populations have access to renewable energies and diversified economic opportunities that create jobs and sustainable incomes in 
the fields of agriculture, food security and ecotourism while respecting environmental standards and contributing to increasing resilience to climate change.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. Accelerate structural change that is conducive to sustainable development
Indicator 2.1: Youth unemployment 
rate, disaggregated by sex and 
geographical area 
Baseline 30.5% (W: 31.6%, M: 29.5%, 
urban: 39% rural: 11.7%)
Target: 28%
Indicator 2.2: Proportion of the 
population living below the poverty 
line (disaggregated by sex)
Data source:
Reports of ILO and of Ministries 
of Labour and of Youth
General population and habitat 
census
General agricultural census
Third household living conditions 
survey
Report of national employment 
agency 
Frequency of data collection:
Biennial
FAO, UNESCO, UNDP, WFP, 
UNHCR
Output 2.1: Vulnerable populations, especially women and youth in 
targeted areas, have access to viable, diversified and environmentally 
friendly economic opportunities in sustainable agriculture and 
ecotourism
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of: (a) new jobs created; and (b) people with 
improved livelihoods, disaggregated by sex, in newly developed value chains, 
sustainable agriculture and ecotourism.
Baseline: (a) 0; (b) 0
Target: (a) 2,000 (1,000 women, 1,000 men); (b) 2,000 (1,000 men, 1,000
women)
Data source: Reports on wildlife conservation services, statistics on 
ecotourism by the Ministry of Tourism
Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of developed and operational ecotourism sites
Baseline: 1
Target: 5
Ministries of Tourism and 
the Environment and of 
Forest Economy
Central African Forest 
Commission,
International Commission of 
Congo Basin Oubangui 
Sangha 
Conference on Wet 
Ecosystems of Dense Humid 
Forests of Central Africa
Blue Fund for the Congo 
Basin;
GEF
FAO
Green Climate Fund
World Wildlife Fund 
Wildlife Conservation 
Regular: 751,000 
Other: 15,025,000Indicator 2.3: Proportion protected 
area at national level managed 
sustainably by populations
Baseline: 12%
Target: 15%
World Bank and of the 
Ministries of Labour and of Youth 
General population and habitat 
census 
General agricultural census
Third household living conditions 
survey
Frequency of data collection:
Biennial
FAO, UNESCO, UNDP, WFP, 
UNHCR
Data source
Ministry of Planning report
National Human Development
report
Frequency of data collection: 
Biennial
FAO, UNESCO, UNDP, WFP, 
UNHCR
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.1.3: Number of ecotourism fauna and flora cultural products 
developed and available in the market
Baseline: 2
Target: 4
Data source: Reports of the Congo Agency for Fauna and Protected Areas, 
report of the Directorate General for Tourism
Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.1.4: Number of youths, women and indigenous people who 
found a job following skills development supported by UNDP
Baseline: 0
Target: 1,000 youth, 500 women, 250 indigenous persons
Data source: Reports of Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Women and NGOs
Frequency: annual
Output 2.2. National institutions and populations adopt sustainable
biodiversity management frameworks, practices and measures to counter 
the effects of climate change.
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of parks and reserves sustainably managed with the 
participation of the populations
Baseline: 3 
Target: 5 
Data source: Report of the Agence congolaise de la Faune et des aires 
protégés (Congolese Agency for Fauna and Protected Areas)
Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.2.2 Number of agricultural farmers (disaggregated by sex) of the 
target areas that adopt climate change adaptation practices and techniques
Baseline: 74 (35 women, 39 men)
Target: 1,000 (400 women, 600 men) 
Data source: Odzala Kokoua Park report, project report
Frequency: Biannual
Indicator 2.2.3: Number of artisanal miners that adopt sustainable mining 
practices
Baseline: 0 
Target: 300 (270 men, 30 women)
Source: Report of the Ministry of Mines 
International Union for 
Conservation of Nature 
Congolese Agency for Fauna 
and Protected Areas
United States Agency for 
International Development 
European Union 
World Tourism Organization
UNEP
UNIDO
GEF,
Islamic Development BankOutput 2.3: The department in charge of energy has strengthened 
capacities to put in place legal and regulatory measures that promote and 
facilitate access to renewable energy for the populations in targeted areas
Indicator 2.3.1: (a) Number and proportion and households benefiting from 
clean, affordable and sustainable energy access (micro-hydro); (b) Womenheaded households; (c) rural households with access
Baseline: 250
Target: (a) 1,500; (b) 600/40%; (c) 150/10%
Data source: Report of the National Rural Electrification Agency
Frequency: End of programme