File Name: COG-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Congo
Country Code: COG
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 3 to 6 February 2020
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2024
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
9 December 2019
Original: English
1921189X (E) 131219
First regular session 2020
3 to 6 February 2020, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo (2020-2024)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo (2020-2024) 9I. Programme rationale
1. The Democratic Republic of the Congo, a country in transition that is undergoing a 
peacebuilding process with a United Nations mission in place since 1999, experienced its first 
peaceful transfer of power following the 30 December 2018 elections, despite the contestations. 
Since the Global and Inclusive Agreement of 2002, the country has undergone political 
developments that have contributed to strengthening its political and administrative governance and
enabled it to achieve socioeconomic progress. Recent analyses1show that the average growth of 
gross domestic product (GDP) over the period 2002–2018 reached 5.5 per cent, peaking at 9.5 per 
cent in 2014. The inflation rate dropped from its highest level in 2009, i.e., 53.4 per cent, to 7.7 per 
cent in 2018.
2This had enabled the country to achieve a commendable performance with per capita 
income almost doubling between 2005 and 2017, from $218.52 to $457.853at purchasing power 
parity.
2. However, this growth has been non-inclusive and the country is still characterized by significant 
poverty, high inequality and extreme vulnerability. Nearly 64 per cent of the population live below 
the poverty line, with large disparities between urban (61.5 per cent) and rural (75.7 per cent) areas.
4
Although its Human Development Index (HDI) improved significantly from 0.333 in 2010 to 0.457 
in 2017, the country ranked 176 of 189 countries in 2017, with an overall loss of 30.3 per cent in 
the inequality-adjusted HDI and a Gini coefficient of 42.1. Despite a fairly high Gender 
Development Index of 0.852 in 2017, women’s involvement in politics and decision-making 
remains marginal due to cultural, structural and institutional barriers.
5
In 2018, only 10 per cent of 
those elected to the National Assembly were women, while the proportion of women in the national 
Government is 17 per cent in 2019.
6
3. Poverty is reflected in the lack of employment opportunities. The unemployment rate is linked 
to weak diversification of the essentially agriculture-based economy and weak development of the 
secondary and tertiary sectors. Unemployment particularly affects young people at 37.8 per cent 
compared to the national rate of 17.7 per cent. The unemployment rate for women is 19.6 per cent
compared to 15.2 per cent for men.
7 The agricultural sector employs around 62 per cent of the 
working-age population. In 2017, 77.12 per cent of men and almost 87 per cent of women were 
employed in the agricultural sector, mainly food,8and over 56 per cent of the population lived in 
rural areas. However, there is a gradual decline in the agricultural sector contribution to GDP 
(nearly 32 per cent in 2000 against 18.6 per cent in 2016)9 due to insecurity, climate change and 
opportunities in the mining sector. This drop poses crucial challenge for the survival and 
improvement of people's living conditions, particularly for rural women, youth and indigenous 
peoples. In addition, the mining sector, which is a major source of the country's economic growth, 
plays an insignificant role in job creation and income distribution, in particular because of its weak 
integration with the rest of the economy, inadequate governance and lack of transparency in terms 
of revenue flows.
10 Around 80 per cent of mining is artisanal and uses rudimentary manual
techniques. The workforce, almost half women, suffers a variety of labour and social problems.
11
This method of mining leads to conflict and environmental degradation and exacerbates gender 
inequalities and poverty.
 
1 Common Country Assessment, 2018. 
2 Annual report 2017 of the Congo Central Bank.
3 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator
4 UNDP Democratic Republic of the Congo, National Human Development Report, 2016.
5 UNDP Democratic Republic of the Congo, « Inégalités politiques, socio-économiques et édification de la Nation/État en RDC », 
2015.
6 https://journalofficiel.cd/lesTextesDesLoisParPublication/1
7 http://ins-rdc.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Rapport-enquete-123.pdf
8 World Bank, Democratic Republic of Congo Systematic Country Diagnostic, March 2018.
9 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator
10 World Bank, Systematic Country Diagnostic, March 2018.
11 P
tPiStdAtil MiiithDtiRblif CJ20104. In terms of overall governance, the country is among the 18 lowest-scoring countries with 
increasing deterioration over the past 10 years, ranking 47 of 54 African countries on the 2018 
Ibrahim Index of African Governance. This poor performance can be explained partially by 
structural causes, especially weakened rule of law; inadequate accountability and transparency; a 
lack of technical and human capacities for efficient institutions that provide services to citizens;
and the poor business environment.
12 Regarding the rule of law, it ranked 47 of 54 countries on the 
Ibrahim Index, with a score of 30.6/100 compared to the African average of 53.9/100. The country 
ranked 161 of 180 countries on the 2018 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index, 
with a score of 20.
5. Security and humanitarian challenges increased in the period 2016–2018, particularly with the 
conflicts that have inflamed the Grand Kasai and Ituri.
13 The conflicts have exacerbated 
socioeconomic vulnerability, with an estimated 12.8 million people, more than 15 per cent of the 
population, needing humanitarian assistance and protection in 2019.14 These vulnerable populations 
face human rights violations, including sexual and gender-based violence, as well as chronic 
malnutrition and epidemics, including cholera, measles and Ebola. Additionally, there are an 
estimated 5.6 million internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the country, including 1.6 million in 
2018. The refugee situation further complicates the humanitarian and security context; Democratic 
Republic of the Congo hosts more than 533,000 refugees from neighbouring countries, while
781,000 Congolese refugees are hosted in the region, notably in Burundi, Uganda and Zambia.15
6. The Democratic Republic of the Congo was ranked the fifth most vulnerable country to climate 
change in 2016.
16 This high vulnerability as well as the low level of preparedness and recovery 
processes calls for investment and innovation to improve planning and response to major 
emergencies such as droughts and floods. Between 1990 and 2010, the country lost 0.37 per cent
of its forest area annually and 1.27 per cent per year between 2010 and 2015. This loss is the main 
contributing factor to greenhouse gas emissions, considering that the country’s industrial sector 
accounts for only 0.1 per cent of emissions. In addition to deforestation, slash-and-burn agriculture 
and land-use change contribute to greenhouse gas emissions, hindering achievement of the
nationally determined contributions to reduce emissions and adapt to climate change. Because only 
14 per cent of the population have access to electricity, there is heavy reliance on wood and 
charcoal.
17
 
7. The evaluation of the country programme 2013-2017, which was subsequently extended to 
2019, recognized the role of UNDP as the leader on mainstreaming the Sustainable Development 
Goals and contributor to key development outcomes that have benefited the most fragile 
communities. The support of UNDP, with the collaboration of technical and financial partners, 
enabled the Government to: (a) contextualize the Goals and integrate them into its National 
Development Plan 2019-2024; (b) initiate the desired statistical revolution in monitoring and 
evaluation of progress towards the Goals; (c) improve the population’s satisfaction rate with public 
services (justice system, police, armed forces) by 9 per cent;
18 (d) improve financial inclusion by 
enabling more than 1.68 million rural and peri-urban poor (56 per cent women), to have access to 
microfinance institutions; (e) have a natural disaster risk reduction platform; (f) contribute to
reducing the sexual violence prevalence rate by 35.63 per cent between 2013 and 2018; and (g) 
have a legal framework that is more gender-sensitive, aimed at promoting gender equity and 
equality of rights, opportunities and gender in all sectors of national life, notably the equitable 
participation of women and men in the management of state affairs.19
8. Lessons learned from the evaluation of the previous country programme revealed that: (a) the 
impact, relevance and efficiency of the programme were limited by its weak integration and
 
12 The country ranked 182 of 190 countries on the World Bank’s 2018 Ease of Doing Business Index.
13 Provinces of Kasai/Kasai-Central/Kasai-Oriental and Lomami.
14 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Aperçu des besoins humanitaires: République Démocratique
du Congo, 2018.
15 Idem.
16 ND-GAIN Country Index, 2016.
17 http://infocongo.org/fr/rdc-les-consequences-du-changement-climatique-se-font-sentir-plus-rudementapproaches of using projects and micro-projects; (b) poor performances were recorded in terms of 
capacity-building, mainly due to institutional instability and regular staff turnover, which hinder
the sustainability of outcomes; (c) the focus on traditional partners as primary funding sources 
limited the expansion of the programmatic portfolio and the mobilization of innovative resources; 
and (d) the lack of reliable statistics hampered accurate planning and measurement of development 
interventions.
9. The country office has been recognized for its achievements by 80 per cent of its partners, 
including the Government, and as a reliable, valuable partner that plays an important role in the 
country's development. In addition, 70 per cent of its partners recognized the professionalism of 
UNDP and the high quality of its services. A 2015 partnership review highlighted the need for 
UNDP to strengthen its Sustainable Development Goal coordination role and operational 
efficiency. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
10. This programme’s theory of change assumes that extreme poverty, inequalities and 
vulnerability can be reduced through improvement in the rule of law, the structural transformation 
of the economy and strengthened resilience of the population. The rule of law ensures that the 
Government operates in line with constitutional provisions, is accountable to the law, guarantees 
due process and provides remedies for rights violations. This is particularly important for people 
living in extreme poverty, who face discrimination and exclusion that negatively impact their access 
to quality and equitable justice. Strengthened rule of law contributes to effective resolution of
disputes, curbing corruption and reducing impunity, and to creating an enabling environment for 
investment, business and structural transformation of the economy. This will boost the productivity 
of the agricultural sector, which is the main provider of jobs, through technological innovations, 
the development of agribusiness and agricultural value chains, and will ensure economic
diversification. Another vehicle for the expected structural transformation is the management of 
natural resources (mines, forests, land and water) according to the equity-based sustainable 
development standards and in a manner that reduces inequalities, mitigates the impact of conflicts, 
fosters social cohesion, strengthens community resilience and provides economic opportunities.
11. The programme, designed in consultation with key stakeholders, will adopt an integrated
approach structured around the following three priorities: (a) governance for sustainable 
development; (b) economic transformation and sustainable management of natural resources; and 
(c) support to stabilization and strengthening of the resilience of affected populations. This is in 
line with the National Development Plan, the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) 2020-2024 and UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021. To uphold 
the principle of leaving no one behind, it will target the disadvantaged (poor, youth, women, 
displaced and/or returned populations, indigenous people and people with disabilities) in the most 
fragile and conflict-affected regions, especially the Grand Kasai, north-eastern and south-eastern 
regions, as well as the provinces affected by the Ebola outbreak. Using data from recent household 
surveys and based on vulnerability criteria, the programme will identify the most relevant target 
populations and areas.
12. UNDP will implement its interventions at the central and local levels and focus on 
strengthening the resilience of individuals and communities in areas where it has a comparative 
advantage, specifically: access to justice; access to public services, local governance, livelihoods 
and socioeconomic reintegration, environmental protection, sustainable solutions, adaptation to 
climate change and disaster management. This will be achieved by: (a) Sustainable Development 
Goal localization and implementation; (b) anchoring of interventions in the most fragile and 
instable areas, with a focus on vulnerable groups; and (c) essential strategic support at the central 
level.
13. The programme will be implemented in partnership with national counterparts at the central, 
provincial and local levels, civil society organizations (CSOs) and the private sector, as well as with 
thUitd NtiOitiStbilitiMiiithDtiRblif thC(MONUSCO), United Nations agencies (International Labour Organization, United Nations Capital 
Development Fund, United Nations Children’s Fund, United Nations Entity for Gender Equality 
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), United Nations Office for Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), 
World Food Programme), the World Bank, Green Climate Fund, Central African Forest Initiative
and other technical and financial partners (Governments of Belgium, Canada, Germany, Japan, 
Netherlands, Norway and Sweden, European Union delegation, Korea International Cooperation 
Agency, United Kingdom Department for International Development, United States Agency for 
International Development, France Cooperation Agency).
14. The programme will build on good practices through South-South and triangular cooperation 
focusing on: (a) collaboration with Senegal and Togo on emergency community development 
programmes after their successful launch in those two countries; (b) sharing the experience of 
Democratic Republic of the Congo on mini-hydroelectric plants with Burundi, Cameroon, Equatorial 
Guinea and Sao Tome and Principe, which have expressed interest; and (c) collaboration with 
Zimbabwe to share experiences regarding the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. 
The country office will work with relevant partners and the respective UNDP offices to define 
mechanisms for collaboration and strategic objectives to be achieved through the cooperation. The 
programme will also facilitate the establishment of a national policy dialogue framework to ensure 
transparency and effectiveness in aid coordination and management including those related to southsouth and triangular cooperation.
Priority 1. Governance for sustainable development
15. This priority is aligned with signature solutions 1, 2 and 6 of the Strategic Plan. It will 
contribute to improving the legal and institutional environment needed to strengthen the inclusion 
of targeted populations in decision-making and to promote their well-being. 
16. National ownership of the electoral process will be enhanced by strengthening the capacities 
of the Electoral Commission and other stakeholders in conducting post-electoral reviews of the 
2018 general election and reforms, and in organizing inclusive and peaceful elections. UNDP will
enhance parliamentary strengthening, citizen engagement and women’s representation in decisionmaking through capacity-building and advocacy. 
17. UNDP will support decentralization and local development by strengthening the equitable 
participation of men and women in decision-making and related processes, as well as the capacity 
of decentralized territorial entities to respond to the needs of the population. Emphasis will be 
placed on the formulation and implementation of integrated development plans at all levels in 
compliance with the Sustainable Development Goals, and on modernizing the statistical tool for 
development planning, control of public finances and institutional accountability. UNDP 
interventions will aim to improve governance of natural resources and the management of 
territories. UNDP will support capacity-building of women, youth, and civil society to enable them
to lead, participate meaningfully and influence decision-making processes. UNDP will assist in the 
improvement of the strategic, legal and institutional anti-corruption frameworks, as well as in the 
design and implementation of an effective national action plan. The programme will facilitate the 
establishment of a national policy dialogue framework to ensure transparency and effectiveness in 
aid coordination and management. UNDP will support the newly created Presidential Strategic 
Cell, a think tank to advise the Office of the President on key strategic priorities.
18. The new country programme will contribute to strengthening the rule of law by increasing the 
effectiveness of the supply and demand for justice, particularly the criminal justice system. This in 
turn will contribute to improving the security of the population (including refugees and IDPs)
20 and 
ensure protection of human rights and fight against impunity for international crimes. This will be 
done through improving access to justice, particularly for the most vulnerable, the coordination of
justice and security actors including community leaders, and supporting the reform of the justice 
and security sectors, including by improving coordination and information management over the whole penal chain. Under the Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law arrangement, a joint justice 
programme will build synergies with related interventions of MONUSCO and other United Nations
agencies, and bring coherence to all UNDP contributions in the areas of transitional justice, the 
implementation of the national policy for the reform of justice, the police reform action plan, the 
strategy to fight sexual and gender-based violence, and coordination between justice, peace, the 
restoration of human dignity and reconciliation.
Priority 2. Economic transformation and sustainable management of natural resources
19. In line with signature solutions 1, 4, 5 and 6 of the Strategic Plan, this programme will support 
the Government in achieving structural transformation towards a sustainable and inclusive green 
economy using a human development approach. It will focus on actions that are conducive to the 
reduction of poverty and inequalities, the rationalization of the sustainable use of natural resources 
and the fight against climate change.
20. UNDP will contribute to the structural transformation of the economy and the reduction of 
poverty and inequality through supporting diversification, social inclusion and the creation of 
decent jobs for women and youth. UNDP will support the transition of economic actors from the 
informal to the formal sector, with emphasis on: (a) increasing opportunities to small-scale farmers 
including women and youth by linking them to value chains, and the development of inclusive 
models associated with agribusiness and technological innovation.; (b) supporting greater 
economic and social inclusion of small-scale producers including women and youth engaged in
mining, based on in-depth sectoral analyses; (c) promoting and catalysing start-ups and innovative 
initiatives by women and youth and supporting the development of youth entrepreneurship and 
small and medium-sized enterprises/industries (SMEs/SMIs); and (d) ensuring financial inclusion 
and supporting the development of basic economic infrastructures such as renewable energies and 
modern energy services, new information and communication technologies and rural roads. To the 
extent possible, the programme will support the development of integrated, gender-responsive, 
climate-adaptive social protection systems and social safety nets.
21. As part of the sustainable management of natural resources and the fight against climate 
change, the programme will assist the Government in the implementation of multilateral 
environmental agreements that it has signed and ratified, specifically the nationally determined 
contribution and a REDD+ investment plan. Priority will be given to the transfer of innovative and 
environmentally sound technologies and practices in the energy, agriculture, forestry, protected 
areas, water and basic infrastructure development sectors. To mobilize climate funding and deliver 
on these priorities, UNDP will provide technical support to the relevant government institutions 
including the ministries in charge of the environment, agriculture and livestock, rural development, 
energy and land management.
Priority 3. Support to stabilization and strengthening the resilience of the populations
22. In alignment with signature solutions 3 and 6 of the Strategic Plan, the programme will provide 
support to fragile and conflict-affected regions through a comprehensive and integrated support 
package. This will include downstream support for the promotion and protection of the rights of 
vulnerable and affected populations, and the restoration and strengthening of state authority at the 
local and community levels to deliver services and promote peacebuilding, rule of law, security and 
good governance. UNDP support will target returning refugees, focusing on improving their access 
to livelihood opportunities.
23. UNDP will contribute to preventing and managing conflicts through a stabilization and conflict 
transformation strategy, taking into consideration the needs of the target populations. Specifically, 
UNDP will achieve this through: (a) the durable solutions approach for IDPs and returnees; (b) the 
holistic approach to tackle sexual and gender-based violence; (c) the social cohesion approach 
based on community dialogue; (d) inclusive socioeconomic revitalization of local economies by 
restoring destroyed livelihoods; and (e) skills development to support sustainable livelihoods.
24. Strengthening of community resilience in areas affected by natural and climate disasters will 
bhid thhitidltthh tht ittholistic management of the causes of conflict. The approach will consist of: (a) identifying the 
different threats that disrupt social and community life in order to prevent them; (b) developing and 
implementing appropriate emergency plans to mitigate the impact of conflict and provide support 
for victims; (c) developing policies and mechanisms for anticipating and managing these risks and 
threats; and (d) implementing a holistic strategy to address the social determinants of HIV and 
Ebola.
III. Programme and risk management
25. The programme will be executed under the coordination of the Ministry of International 
Cooperation, Regional Integration and Francophonie. Joint steering committees comprising 
technical and financial partners, UNDP and relevant sectoral ministries will ensure quality control. 
The projects will use the most appropriate implementation modality to ensure the sustainability of 
outcomes. Barring exceptional cases, the national implementation modality will be applied. 
National ownership and mutual accountability for development results will be strengthened through 
annual workplans aligned with national and programme priorities. In coordination with other 
United Nations agencies, the harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be used to 
manage fiduciary risks and build the capacity of implementing partners. The country office will 
involve United Nations Volunteers to strengthen project implementation capacity, especially for 
activities at the community level. The search for opportunities for voluntary participation and the 
engagement of citizens will also be one of the strategies for achieving development and 
peacebuilding outcomes.
26. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
national, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the 
organization's programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control 
framework. As per Executive Board decision 2013/9, cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. 
27. Through steering and technical committees, UNDP will continue to work with national and 
local government partners, the private sector, civil society, women's organizations, universities and 
research centres at each stage of project management to ensure government leadership and mutual 
accountability. The participation of these partners will follow the UNDP guiding principles and the 
other modalities mentioned above.
28. The implementation of the programme may be subject to certain risks, specifically: (a) low 
levels of resource mobilization; (b) persistent impacts of climate change on livelihoods; (c) high 
turnover of implementing partner staff; (d) lack of improvement in the socioeconomic situation; (e) 
resurgence of conflicts in the programme target areas; (f) fiduciary risks; (g) weak institutional 
capacities; (h) implications and needs deriving from the political and MONUSCO transitions; and 
(i) resurgence of the Ebola outbreak
29. To mitigate these risks, UNDP will: (a) focus on major integrated and transformational projects 
(emergency community development programme) for greater impact and efficiency, and to 
facilitate scaling up; (b) rely on its local representatives to improve synergy and the efficiency of 
interventions; and (c) strengthen its resource mobilization strategy to diversify its resource and 
funding base by extending the support of the private sector, emerging countries, foundations, 
international financial institutions and vertical funds including the Green Climate Fund. This will 
be achieved by leveraging the Sustainable Development Goal platforms, which will make it 
possible to strengthen the significant relevance of the programme to a large coalition of actors that 
can play a financing role; (d) apply the UNDP social and environmental standards to monitor 
environmental and natural risks and fully mainstream gender from the design phase to the execution
and evaluation of all projects; (e) advocate for the timely sharing of information and the designation 
of programme coordinating assistants in the event of implementing partner staff turnover; (f) 
ttilllthikthh thtiitt() dtklif risks in scenario planning in order to better adjust the programme; (h) undertake HACT spot checks
to ensure full programme and financial compliance; and (i) establish a roster of partners and 
integrate institutional capacity-building into the implementation of the programme.
30. A mechanism for systematically identifying and leveraging opportunities for innovation,
particularly within a network of accelerator laboratories to fast track the achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals will be established to benefit from innovative capacities at all 
levels. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
31. In cooperation with the United Nations development system and multilateral and bilateral 
partners, UNDP will collect disaggregated data and qualitative information to produce the evidence 
and analysis to monitor national and local efforts towards the achievement of programme outcomes 
and prioritized Sustainable Development Goal targets. UNDP gender markers will be used to track 
gender-based investments and improve planning and decision-making to promote gender equality. 
32. UNDP will promote responsibility and accountability throughout the programme management 
cycle through aligning the country programme monitoring and evaluation framework with those of 
the UNSDCF and National Development Plan. The programme results and resources framework is 
fully aligned with the integrated results and resources framework of the Strategic Plan. UNDP will 
work with the government coordinating ministry, implementing partners and representatives of 
beneficiaries to hold annual, midterm and final reviews of the programme to aid learning and timely 
decision-making. 
33. UNDP, in collaboration with United Nations agencies and the regional organization on 
statistics AFRISTAT, will strengthen the capacity of the National Institute of Statistics focusing 
on: (a) modernizing the statistical tool for development planning, control of public finances and 
institutional accountability; and (b) production of data disaggregated by gender, region, and other 
socioeconomic attributes. This will help to assess progress towards the Sustainable Development 
Goals at national and local levels. At least 5 per cent of the programme budget will be allocated to 
data collection and monitoring and evaluation of the programme.
34. UNDP will develop a multi-year study plan and research programme to guide its work with 
strategic research and think-tank institutions on thematic studies to test certain hypotheses of the 
theory of change underlying the programme. 
35. UNDP will establish partnerships for the costed evaluation plan to ensure the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the programme and to develop and generate knowledge. Midterm evaluations of the 
three outcomes will be carried out at the end of the third year of the programme cycle (2022) to 
highlight the progress made and identify the challenges, mitigation solutions and strategic 
orientations to be adopted. UNDP will partner with UNFPA, the Office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Government and CSOs to conduct thematic evaluation to
assess the outcome of the fight against sexual and gender-based violence. As per the evaluation 
policy, all mandatory project evaluations will be conducted to serve accountability and learning and 
inform new project designs. Annex. Results and resources framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo (2020-2024)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PILLAR 1 OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT – Strengthen economic governance and peacebuilding
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Peace consolidation, human rights, civil protection, social cohesion and democracy
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
UNSDCF outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, 
baselines targets)
Major partners / 
partnerships
frameworks
Indicative resources by 
outcome ($)
Indicator_1. 3.2: The Country’s 
Ibrahim Index of African 
Governance
Baseline: 32.1; Target: 44.6
Indicator_1.3.4: Voter turnout 
(national, provincial and local)
Baseline: 47.56%; Target: 60%
- Mo Ibrahim 
Foundation report.
- Freq: Annually
- National 
Independent 
Electoral 
Commission report.
- Freq: Annually 
Output 1.1 Constitution-making, electoral and 
parliamentary processes and institutions strengthened to 
promote inclusion, transparency and accountability 
especially for women and youth.
Indicator 1.1.1. Number of constitution-making bodies with 
mechanisms for civic engagement, including the participation of 
women and other marginalized groups.
Baseline: 47; Target: 52
Indicator 1.1.2 Number of polls held according to democratic 
standards Baseline: 3; Target: 5
Indicator 1.1.3. Number of women in the decision-making bodies 
(Parliament, government) Baseline: 144; Target: 300
Indicator 1.1.4. Number of decentralized territorial entities 
providing essential quality services to the populations 
Baseline: 3, Target: 7
• National Government
• Provincial 
governments
• National assembly
• Independent National 
Electoral 
Commission
• Women’s and youth 
organizations
• CSOs
Regular: 18,000,000
Other: 62,500,000
Output 1.2: Institutions and systems enabled to address 
awareness, prevention and enforcement of anti-corruption 
measures to promote citizens’ participation, inclusion, 
accountability and the well-being of populations, notably 
women and youth.
Indicator 1.2.1 Existence of effective measures adopted to 
mitigate and remedy corruption risks at national and subnational 
levels. Baseline: No; Target: yes
Indicator 1.2.2 Number of CSOs/networks involved in citizen 
oversight, accountability and transparency in the management of 
natural resources Baseline: 0; Target: 6
• National Government
• Provincial 
governments
• Provincial assemblies
• NGOsOutput 1.3: Capacities, functions and financing of rule of law 
and national human rights institutions and systems 
strengthened to expand access to justice and security, with a 
focus on women and other marginalized groups.
Indicator 1.3.1: % of trials that have fully respected the five 
fundamental principles of fair trial 
Baseline: 0%; Target: 50%
Indicator 1.3.2: Existence of governance and oversight of rule of 
law institutions with strengthened capacities.
Baseline: No; Target: yes 
• National and 
provincial 
governments
• Ministry of Justice
• Auditorat militaire 
(Military Prosecutor’s 
Office)
• High Judicial Council
• Bar Associations and 
CSOs
Output 1.4: Planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring 
and evaluation chain at national, provincial and local levels, 
including, the National Institute of Statistics, have 
strengthened capacities for Sustainable Development Goal 
delivery, monitoring and evaluation
Indicator_1.4.1 No. of provincial and local development plans 
that integrate the Sustainable Development Goals 
Baseline: 5; Target: 21
Indicator_1.4.2 Existence of data collection/analysis mechanisms 
providing disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals:
(a) Conventional data collection methods (e.g., surveys) 
Baseline: No; Target: yes
(b) Administrative reporting systems 
Baseline: No; Target: yes
(c) New data sources (e.g., big data) Baseline: No; Target: yes
• National and 
provincial 
governments
• Ministries of Justice
• Auditorat militaire 
(Military Prosecutor’s 
Office)
• National and 
provincial planning
• Provincial Planning 
Divisions and 
Branches 
• Civil society.
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PILLARS II and V OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT: Diversification and transformation of the 
economy – The environment, sustainable and balanced development
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Inclusive economic growth, agricultural development, demographic dividend capture, social protection and sustainable management 
of natural resources
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
Indicator_2.1.4: Employment 
rate of youth and women
Baseline: 71%; Target: 76%
- National Statistics 
Report. National
Institute of Statistics
- Freq: Annually
Output 2.1: Solutions developed for sustainable 
management of natural resources, including sustainable 
commodities and green and inclusive value chains with 
access for women and youth.
• Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development
Regular:
49,500,000
Other:Indicator_2.2.3: Multidimensional poverty rate
Baseline: 74%; Target:<50%
Indicator_2.2.3
Reforestation rate
Baseline:15%; Target: 50%
- Human Development 
Report
- UNDP
- Freq: Annually 
- Report of Ministry of 
Environment
- Ministry of Environment
- Freq: Annually
Indicator_2.1.1: Number of micro, small and medium-sized 
enterprises utilizing supplier development platforms for 
inclusive and sustainable value chains. 
Baseline: 0; Target:1,000
Indicator_2.1.2: % of local agricultural producers linked to 
local markets in targeted areas, disaggregated by sex and age
Baseline: 0%; Target 50% (50% women and youth)
Indicator_2.1.3 Number of people involved in non-agricultural 
income-generating activities (as a result of technological 
development) in targeted rural areas, disaggregated by sex and 
age. Baseline: 0; Target: 4,000 (2,000 women and youth))
Indicator 2.1.4: Number of localities with required 
infrastructure for improved rural development in the targeted 
areas (rural roads, storage facilities, warehouses, renewable 
energy capacity, information technology infrastructure, etc.)
Baseline: 0; Target: 5
• Centre for Agricultural 
and Technologic 
Research
• Agence Nationale de 
Promotion des 
investissements
• Private sector
• CSOs
268,000,000
Output 2.2: Women and youth are enabled to access and 
engage in decent employment and livelihood schemes in the 
mining sectors.
Indicator_2.2.1. Existence of a gender-responsive operational 
legal and regulatory framework for artisanal mining. 
Baseline: No; Target: Yes
Indicator_2.2.2. No. of structured and operational 
cooperatives/associations of artisanal miners (men and women) 
Baseline: 0; Target: 5
Indicator_2.2.3. No of livelihood options created to increase 
‘vulnerable/disadvantaged’ women’s and youth’s 
empowerment in the mining sector
Baseline: 0; Target: 2
• Ministry of Mining
• CSOs (bringing together 
small-scale mining 
producers)
• Private sector.
Output 2.3: Marginalized and vulnerable groups, 
particularly, poor, women, youth and people with 
disabilities are empowered to gain access to financial 
services to build sustainable productive capacities.
• Ministry of Planning 
(Agence Nationale pour 
la Promotion des 
Investissements)Indicator_2.3.1 No. and type of financial products placed on 
the market, disaggregated by financial products aimed at poor, 
women, youth and people with disabilities 
Baseline: 0; Target: 2
Indicator 2.3.2 No of people accessing financial services 
disaggregated by sex.
Baseline: 1,083,642 [41.92% women]; Target: 1,583,000 [45% 
women]
• Ministries of Finance, 
of the Economy, and of 
SMEs/SMIs
• Civil society
• Private sector
Output 2.4: Solution adopted to improve access to clean 
affordable and sustainable energy. 
Indicator_2.4.1: No. of micro-hydro power plants 
constructed/rehabilitated
Baseline: 3; Target: 8
Indicator_2.4.2: No. of households that have adopted 
sustainable cooking ovens and fuel 
Baseline: 0; Target: 10,500
Indicator_2.4.3: No. of households that have access to 
renewable energy in the target areas.
Baseline: 95,744; Target: 140,800
• Ministry of Energy 
• Provincial governments
• Women’s and youth 
organisations
• NGOs/CSOs
Output 2.5: National and local institutions including civil 
society and the private sector have strengthened technical 
and operational capacities to drive inclusive and 
sustainable management of the natural resources (water, 
forests, land, minerals, etc.) and climate change mitigation 
and adaptation actions stated in the nationally determined 
contribution.
Indicator_2.5.1 No. of agricultural models that combine yield 
performance with environmental sustainability implemented 
Baseline: 0; Target: 5(maize-rice-beans-cocoa-coffee)
Indjcator_2.5.2: Existence of an operational national 
greenhouse gas inventory system that is linked directly to 
relevant sectors (e.g. energy, agriculture, forestry, transport, 
etc.). Baseline: No; Target: Yes
• Ministry of the 
Environment
• Civil society
• Private sectorNATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PILLAR II OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT: Strengthening of governance and peacebuilding
UNSDCF (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Access to basic social services and humanitarian assistance
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
Indicator_3.1.1:
Number of local conflicts that 
ended with sustainable solutions
Baseline: 0; Target: 3
Indicator_3.1.2: Number of 
pacified and reconciled towns in 
the east of the country
Baseline: 0; Target: 2
Indicator_3.1.3: The Country’s 
Ibrahim Index of gender-based 
violence.
Baseline: 50.0; Target: 65
- Human Rights and
International Security and 
Stabilization Support 
Strategy: Poll reports –
peacebuilding.
- MONUSCO/Stabilization 
Support Unit (SSU)
- Freq: Annually
- Human Rights and
International Security and 
Stabilization Support 
Strategy: Poll reports –
Peacebuilding.
- MONUSCO/SSU 
- Freq: Annually
- Mo Ibrahim Foundation 
report.
- Freq: Annually
Output 3.1: Local communities and institutions have 
strengthened technical capacities for prevention and, 
management of conflicts.
Indicator_3.1.1 Data-informed development policies, plans 
and institutions to strengthen social cohesion and prevent risk 
of conflict in place. Baseline: No; Target: Yes
Indicator_3.1.2 Number of dialogue and conflict 
management mechanisms set up and functional
Baseline: 2; Target: 5
Indicator_3.1.3 Number of temporary jobs created in the 
communities in the target areas
Baseline: 3,000; Target: 20,000
Indicator_3.1.4: Number of at-risk youth with capacities for 
potential employment in the target areas.
Baseline: 3,000; Target: 20,000 
• Provincial governments
• Provincial assemblies
• Local leaders and civil 
societies
• Religious groups
• Women’s and Youth 
organizations
Regular: 
11,896,000
Other:
38,000,000
Output 3.2: Government institutions and communities at 
the local and central levels, are enabled to effectively 
promote gender equality and prevent and fight genderbased violence.
Indicator 3.2.1: Percent reduction in reported gender-based 
violence cases. Baseline: 35.63%; Target: 60%
Indicator_3.2.2: No. of cases of gender-based violence 
treated at the community level 
Baseline: 5,242; Target: 8,347
• Ministry of Gender and 
Family
• Ministry of Justice
• Provincial governments
• Provincial assemblies
• Civil society
• Hospitals and health 
centres
Output 3.3: The communities and institutions have 
strengthened technical capacities to cope with crises and 
natural and climate disasters.
Indicator_3.3.1: Existence of mapping and an action plan on 
risks and threats at the provincial level 
• Ministry for 
Humanitarian Affairs
• Provincial governments
• Civil societyBaseline (2019): No; Target: Yes [5 provinces]
Indicator_3.3.2: Existence of a national policy on crisis 
prevention and management. Baseline: No; Target: Yes
Indicator_3.3.3: Number of households that have benefited 
from actions mitigating risks and threats from natural and 
climate disasters. Baseline: 2,100; Target: 4,000
TOTAL 
Regular: 
79,396,000
Other: 368,500,000