File Name: COL-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Colombia
Country Code: COL
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 August – 4 September 2020
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2024
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the
United Nations Office for Project 
Services
Distr.: General
5 July 2020
Original: English
2008917X (E) 280720
Second regular session 2020
31 August – 4 September 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Colombia (2021-2024)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Colombia (2021-2024)……………………………………… 10Framework
1. Colombia is facing major challenges: the stabilization and territorial consolidation of areas 
affected by the armed conflict; the economic integration of migrants from Venezuela, which is 
expected to increase; and the acceleration of Sustainable Development Goals catalysts related 
to gender equality, the environment, sustainable production, and consumption. Within this
framework, the ‘Peace with Legality’ policy implemented by the President underscored
people’s constitutional right to peace within a rule-of-law framework, as a reference for 
implementing the agreement between the Government and the former Revolutionary Armed 
Forces of Colombia (‘FARC’).
2. Colombia played a central role in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The 
country participated in the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and played 
an active role in defining and negotiating the 17 Goals and the 2030 Agenda. Colombia
pioneered the creation of a High-Level Commission to prepare and implement the Goals in 
2015 and the presentation of National Voluntary Reviews at the United Nations in 2016 and 
2018.
3. The National Development Plan, 2018-2022 and the Common Country Assessment 
highlight the following development challenges and root causes: productivity stagnation; labour 
informality; population and regional gaps; violence, illegal economies and organized armed 
groups in remote regions with low institutional presence; improving transparency; 
strengthening justice; vulnerability to disaster and climate change; sustainable use of natural 
resources, responsible production and consumption; and prevention and management of 
disaster risks and protection of biodiversity.
4. In line with the National Development Plan, the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework, 2020-2023, and the UNDP Strategic Plan, this country programme
document traces the road map to achieving the 2030 Agenda. Country programme outcomes 
complement efforts, priorities, and government responsibilities at the national and local levels.
Specifically, the priorities in the National Development Plan applicable to this country 
programme are legality, entrepreneurship, equity, development of the ‘orange economy’,
peacebuilding, the implementation of a cross-cutting approach of sustainability, and
environmental conservation and protection.
5. The Government recognized the comparative advantage of UNDP in providing technical 
assistance to local governments – especially municipalities in categories 5 and 61 –, oversight 
and control bodies (public ministries), and judicial and extra-judicial transitional institutions. 
The strategy supported in this country programme focuses on the most disadvantaged regions 
and serves the most vulnerable population, based on gender, ethnicity, human rights, and 
environmental sustainability. This country programme supports government efforts to stabilize 
and consolidate the territories affected by violence and poverty. Increasing income and reducing 
multidimensional inequality and poverty gaps remain priorities to fostering structural 
transformations in line with the 2030 Agenda.
6. During the COVID-19 crisis, the analytical capacity of UNDP for data management has 
been essential in leading the socioeconomic response framework of the United Nations system. 
The global knowledge network allows UNDP to identify best practices to support government 
such as the National Planning Department on micro-focus systematization and information 
systems to review potential beneficiaries form social programmes. The UNDP
multidimensional approach and the application of social, economic, and environmental
dimensions to achieve the 2030 Agenda allowed the organization to implement a concrete 
response on the ground to transform people’s lives and to support the Government and the 
United Nations system.
7. UNDP programming and operations capacities and territorial presence in conflict-affected 
areas with weak basic services highlight UNDP value added in implementation capacity and
1 Municipalities with a population of 10
000 inhabitants or fewerwith income not exceeding $15000 as a minimum legal monthly salarycomplement government initiatives, as well as United Nations system efforts and other 
international efforts. The bridging role played by UNDP between relevant actors was a key 
contribution to the development and stabilization process. UNDP carved out a niche in the 
process leading to the final agreement and its implementation.
8. UNDP focuses on both rural and urban inclusive development. People in poverty and 
vulnerability include people who are seeking employment and entrepreneurship opportunities, 
live in precarious neighbourhoods, lack equal opportunities, suffer from various forms of 
exclusion, or face barriers due to their migrant or returnee status. Enhancing their productive
and socio-emotional capacities, respecting their different needs, and expanding their ability to 
secure a sustainable livelihood, comprise one of the focus areas. 
9. The new country programme will require UNDP to maintain a strong leadership role in the 
United Nations system in; the integration, design, and implementation of innovative, scalable,
and sustainable interventions to address development challenges at the subnational level;
resource mobilization; and partnership building. The UNDP comparative advantage is to 
implement integrated solutions in income-generation and livelihood activities. Based on 
previous experience, UNDP signature approaches will foster a strong partnership with the 
Government and national/local institutions, while also pursuing synergies among 
complementary initiatives. Thus agriculture value chains can enhance biodiversity approaches, 
links forward and backward in the chain, opportunities for blended finance and impact 
investors, improved access to markets while linking income opportunities with both 
environmental sustainability and social cohesion.
10. The work on climate change, disaster risk reduction, adaptation, and mitigation is focused 
on balancing environmental conservation with fostering livelihoods and socioeconomic 
inclusion of the population strongly dependent on natural resources. They also increase energy 
efficiency and competitiveness in the private sector. Value chains of grains local to specific 
poverty and violence-affected regions have led to increasing resilience and incomes of 
vulnerable families while fostering biodiversity. Water harvesting in La Mojana (the area most 
affected by climate change) is improving livelihoods for the communities that implement water 
solutions while improving resilience by the families.
11. In addition to targeted initiatives, women’s political and economic empowerment, their 
active participation, and the reparation of gender-based violence crimes were addressed across 
different projects. UNDP is committed to breaking down the barriers that prevent gender 
equality in programme strategies and planning while fostering solid social and environmental
safeguard standards and procedures that lead to inclusive and participatory project design and 
implementation.
12. The comparative advantage of UNDP in response to the COVID-19 crisis lies in its ability 
to (a) articulate and support the Government and citizens with accurate response mechanisms, 
maintaining a holistic approach and focusing on preventing the exacerbation of inequalities 
during the emergency and throughout the recovery process; and (b) enhance and create 
partnerships to complement efforts implemented by the United Nations system, such as 
supporting the World Health Organization/Pan-American Health Organization to provide
personal protective equipment so that beneficiaries can resume economic and educational 
activities.
13. Based on the recommendations made by the independent country programme evaluation
and the assessment of the joint transitional solution programme, this country programme
emphasizes mobilization and partnership-building with civil society, state institutions, and the 
private sector. It will take advantage of synergies among diverse initiatives and programme
areas and will focus on developing flexible tools that are fit for purpose, maximize the effects
of partnership at the territorial level, and enhance the United Nations system contribution.14. Through cross-cutting gender, ethnic and human-rights approaches, UNDP will support 
national efforts to consolidate the territories affected by violence and poverty within the 
framework of the ‘Peace with Legality’ policy; integrate and reduce socio-economically
vulnerable Venezuelan migrants, Colombian returnees and host populations; and strengthen 
institutional technical capacities at national and local levels to accelerate the implementation of 
prioritized Sustainable Development Goals. Colombia will thus be in a better position to 
stabilize and consolidate ‘lagging behind’ territories, turn Venezuelan migration into an 
opportunity for development, and advance implementation of the Goals and the 2030 Agenda, 
leaving no one behind.
15. Expected results of the Cooperation Framework and the country programme document, 
particularly in strategic areas 1 and 2, reflect the nexus between humanitarian action, peace,
and sustainable development under the ‘new ways of working’ approach to establish systems 
and strengthen synergies between complementary programmes. The programme complements 
efforts of other United Nations coordination instruments; the regional response plan for 
refugees and migrants; the integrated strategic framework for the United Nations Verification 
Mission; and the humanitarian response plan of the humanitarian country team. The 
Government and UNDP have therefore identified three major priorities where our comparative 
advantage is recognized.
16. The first is support for the implementation of the Government’s ‘Peace with Legality’
policy in prioritized areas, the territorially focused development programmes (where 
75 per cent of households are led by women); ex-combatants’ reincorporation into civilian life;
the substitution of illicit crops with other agricultural activities; traditional economies;
industrial activity; and service provision with a focus on sustainable alternative development. 
Since most municipalities face challenges around deforestation and require innovative actions 
aimed at low-carbon rural development, environmental sustainability criteria will be 
incorporated.
17. Second, the Government has requested international assistance to support efforts for 
economic integration and comprehensive attention to the migratory flows from Venezuela. Its 
main objectives are the economic integration of migrants, host populations, and returned 
Colombians, and to provide comprehensive care in education, health, family welfare, and 
habitability. Colombia views this condition as an opportunity for development, capacitybuilding of institutions that will benefit the economy in the mid- and long-terms, consumption, 
labour expansion, productivity, and the creation of new businesses. It also considers that
municipalities would manage strategies to integrate migrants into host communities. The role 
of UNDP is to develop ‘actor mapping’ at the local level, identify joint strategies for
coordination with the United Nations system, and explore and manage partnerships with 
institutions and non-governmental actors.
18. Third, UNDP will complement the Government efforts in strategic issues related to the 
acceleration of catalyst Sustainable Development Goals. The UNDP approach, through human 
and sustainable development, provides an understanding of the challenges and opportunities 
within the integrator role of UNDP and enables a platform to achieve the Goals. Responsible 
production and consumption, environmental liabilities resulting from illegal, artisanal and 
small-scale mining, and deforestation, are challenges to sustainable development. To move 
towards gender equality, better follow-up of national and local public investment through a 
public-budget gender-marker is needed. Tackling youth unemployment requires advancing on
the fourth industrial revolution, the circular economy, the ‘orange economy’, and youth 
entrepreneurship. UNDP promotes a training process with sustainable results articulating the 
role of public and private sectors in the consolidation of value chains promoting the creation of 
entrepreneurial ecosystems in the territories prioritized by the Government. 
19. Besides those priorities, it is necessary to strengthen social cohesion and livelihoods due 
to COVID-19. UNDP stands ready to support transformational challenges while examiningmedium-term implications. Several actors are working with the Government on the health and 
economic crisis brought about by COVID-19 to respond to emergency needs.
Stabilization: ‘Peace with Legality’
20. Through its territorial reach and impartiality UNDP will support government efforts to 
reincorporate former FARC combatants and their families integrally and effectively; activate
local development in territorially focused development programmes municipalities; incorporate 
families belonging to the Substitution National Programme for Illicit Crops into legal 
economies with a transversal approach, and promote the economic empowerment of female excombatants. Colombia will strengthen its institutional presence in those municipalities; attend 
populations affected by conflict, considering their differentiated needs; increase the substitution 
of illicit crops; and achieve stabilization and consolidation while leaving no one behind.
21. UNDP will play a key role in supporting the comprehensive implementation of territorially 
focused development programmes, serving as a trusted partner in integrated transformative 
projects. UNDP will strengthen local government capacities by formulating transformative 
projects prioritized by citizens in the programmes, promoting women’s participation and
providing technical assistance for implementing women-led initiatives; strengthening their 
capacities in leveraging national and private sector funding; assisting in the implementation of 
open-government strategies to increase transparency, citizen participation, and accountability;
bringing technical assistance to strengthen local and national capacities; promoting the 
substitution of illicit crops in rural areas; improving land use, including land regularization, 
community infrastructure, and economic development; supporting local communities in
identifying profitable local economic alternatives based on sustainable agricultural products;
providing ecosystem services; and funding environmental service programmes.
22. UNDP will support the Government in the transition phase of FARC ex-members to 
civilian life. Jointly with organizations such as UNFPA, the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), UN-Women, the World Food Programme (WFP), and the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO), among others, will support: (a) technical assistance to institutions whose 
mandates affect the reincorporation process, such as the National Reincorporation Council and 
the Reincorporation and Normalization Agency, at a technical, financial and operational levels;
(b) a comprehensive, integral and locally-based FARC socio-economic reincorporation 
process; (c) promotion of initiatives that allow the redistribution of care work and encourage 
the effective participation of women and their economic autonomy; (d) structuring and 
implementation of reincorporation projects, with a community and gender focus, between the 
ex-combatant population and receiving communities, that enable social cohesion, reconciliation 
and joint economic development; and (e) supporting government and FARC members in 
formulating a national road map transitioning from previous aggrupation zones to formal living 
spaces. 
23. The implementation of territorially focused development programmes must consider the 
environmental aspects of the final agreement. UNDP will support the Government in
strengthening local communities to manage profitable local economic alternatives based on (a) 
biodiversity and sustainable agricultural products; (b) ecotourism and agritourism services; and 
(c) technical support to local experts to reconcile conservation and the sustainable use of natural 
capital to supersede agricultural practices. These will be jointly implemented with FAO, WFP 
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in line with their mandates and comparative 
advantages.
24. UNDP has experience in implementing solutions to strengthen the social, commercial, and 
organizational skills that promote rural entrepreneurship and business development, and to 
incorporate technologies that increase the competitiveness and social capital of local 
organizations. This model enables individuals and organizations to forge alliances with private 
and public partners at the local and national levels.25. UNDP will support government efforts to respond to migration from Venezuela in various
ways: economic inclusion through employment and entrepreneurship opportunitiesthat identify
the different needs of men and women; development assistance for the most vulnerable 
populations;strengthening institutional capacities for providing sectoral services and promoting 
favourable environments for coexistence, citizen security, and reduced violence, including
gender-based violence. Ensuring the socio-economic integration of Venezuelan migrants, 
Colombian returnees, and host communities, turning migration into a development opportunity, 
is a priority.
26. UNDP will support national institutions on migration for development, linking early 
recovery, stabilization, and sustainable development efforts. Jointly with partners such as UNWomen and WFP, UNDP will support: (a) fostering socioeconomic integration opportunities 
for migrant populations and host communities with a gender lens that considers care work 
initiatives intended to allow the active participation of women; (b) promotion of citizen security 
and peaceful coexistence, with a specific focus on protective actions and prevention of genderbased violence, sexual exploitation and xenophobia; and (c) support of the institutional 
response capacity to enhance sustainability in those actions. Knowledge management and 
innovation will be core strategies to capitalize on migration as a positive factor in sustainable 
development. UNDP can assess the social and environmental impacts of migration within its 
projects and build government capacities to assess those impacts.
Technical assistance for Sustainable Development Goals catalyst acceleration
27. Based on its experience and tools, UNDP will support government efforts to (a) appropriate 
the Goals and the follow-up, promotion, monitoring, and open government tools; (b) implement 
actions in gender equality, environmental management, sustainable consumption and 
production, and food and nutritional security; (c) promote the ‘orange economy’ and create 
opportunities for entrepreneurship and employability for young people; (d) improve 
surveillance and control of jurisdictional fact-finding functions (judicial and non-judicial) to 
assist vulnerable populations and the justice administration; and (e) enhance territorial planning 
and risk management. Colombia will advance in strengthening territorial and national
institutions to accelerate the inclusion of the most vulnerable, leaving no one behind and 
ensuring environmental sustainability to reduce gaps in the Goals and comply with the 
2030 Agenda.
28. UNDP will support the government in contributing directly to Goal 16 as a facilitator for
peaceful societies to strengthen civil oversight capacities (such as the public prosecutor’s and 
ombudsman’s offices), transitional justice (special jurisdiction for peace), and human rights 
protection, enhancing access by men and women victims and populations at risk of being left 
behind. UNDP will support the judicial representation and non-judicial participation of victims 
in transitional justice mechanisms (including victims of sexual and gender-based violence);
social dialogue for reconciliation; research and social participation for the reconstruction of 
historical memory; the search for missing persons; and early warning systems. UNDP will 
ensure differentiated approaches (gender, lifecycle, ethnic, and disability) and promote
community participation.
29. Within its integrated development solutions to end poverty, protect the planet and ensure 
that all people enjoy peace and prosperity, UNDP will harness systemic approaches connecting 
issues across sectors and thematic areas, leveraging the creativity and know-how of society to 
build solutions that respond to people’s daily realities. It will consolidate the acceleration of 
Sustainable Development Goals targets for left-behind populations, closing gaps throughout the 
strengthening of local capabilities in support of the Sustainable Development Goals National 
Commission. This country programme document responds to the pivotal need for a multistakeholder perspective recognizing partnerships for sustainable development to mobilize and 
share knowledge, expertise, technology, and financial resources, supporting private sector 
collective platforms to mobilize concrete actions, analyse data, drive innovation, and support 
well-informed decision-making processes to meet the needs of subnational authorities.30. The Government is fostering inclusive growth by supporting creative and cultural 
industries under the ‘orange economy’ route. UNDP supports these efforts by transferring the 
initiatives to the territories by prioritized by the government, with a special focus on youth, 
migrant and returned women, productive diversification and a strengthened territorial economy.
31. UNDP will contribute its global expertise and methodologies already tested elsewhere. 
Public priority inference will enable the forecasting of the achievement of the Goals based on 
historic data and policy decisions. A local democratic governance index will enable the tracking
of evidence-based progress. Methodologies led by the Management System for Governance 
(known as ‘SIGOB’) will help local governments plan and implement programmes to accelerate 
Goals attainment with strong monitoring systems. Those efforts will take place in conjunction 
with a strategy to strengthen civil society, youth, and women by increasing their participation 
in public policy proposals and programmes to achieve the Goals.
32. The National Council for Economic and Social Policy (‘CONPES 3918’) defines
49 indicators within the Sustainable Development Goals Framework regarding pedagogic 
gender and differentiated approaches projects, follow-up on progress related to planning tools,
and the provision of inputs to achieve the Goals at the local level. UNDP will contribute to 
strengthening national environmental system institutions to support the Government in its
environmental commitments, mobilizing resources in the rural sector for strategic actions, and 
expanding studies on indigenous and black communities.
33. The UNDP response to COVID-19 is framed around three objectives: First, helping to 
prepare and protect people from the pandemic and its impacts. Second, responding during the 
outbreak, working across key sectors to slow the spread of the virus, and providing social 
protection for vulnerable populations, promoting a whole-of-government and whole-of-society 
response to complement health-sector effort. Third, recovering from the economic and social 
impacts, assessing them, and taking urgent recovery measures to minimize long-term impact, 
particularly for vulnerable groups, including women, and helping societies recover.
34. Building on signature capacities of partnership building, innovation, operational efficiency, 
technical assistance and programme delivery, UNDP will: (a) strengthen and support health 
systems and disaster risk management systems, articulating efforts with national and local 
governments, to confront COVID-19, including the procurement of urgently needed health and 
medical supplies and expansion of the capacities of health care personnel about government 
requisitions; (b) inclusive and integrated crisis management and response, supporting 
governments in maintaining core functions and planning, coordinating, communicating and 
financing responses; (c) ensuring social protection measures to protect vulnerable populations, 
including women, and conducting an economic impact needs assessment and response to 
support key actors in stabilizing, reactivating, and establishing sectoral recovery laboratories 
(for zero deforestation sectors), allowing the co-creation of new strategies to face post-COVID19 challenges and opportunities.
III. Programme and risk management
35. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional, and headquarters levels with respect to the country programme are prescribed 
in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control Framework.
36. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all the programme to enable a response to force majeure. 
The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other 
United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.National Planning Department, and the Presidential Agency for International Cooperation in 
Colombia as the official and technical coordinators of international cooperation. UNDP will 
provide technical assistance, and administrative and management support.
38. The country programme will be operated according to results-based management 
principles to ensure effectiveness and in accordance with UNDP risk management policies and 
procedures. Its social and environmental standards, fundamental to the achievement of 
development outcomes, will be mainstreamed into programme and project cycle management. 
The Social and Environmental Compliance Unit will ensure accountability to individuals and 
communities, responding to complaints that UNDP may not be resolving. Any person or 
community who believes the environment or their wellbeing may be affected by a UNDPsupported project or programme may file a complaint. A representative, such as a civil society 
organization, may file a complaint on behalf of affected communities.
39. The country programme received inputs from government entities through international 
cooperation coordinators. Bilateral counterparts, civil society organizations, and programme 
beneficiaries were consulted. The country programme includes the National Development Plan 
and the Cooperation Framework priorities. A country programme board will be set up with 
national counterparts responsible for coordinating international cooperation to oversee 
programme implementation.
40. The context requires a flexible programme to ensure a timely and integrated response to 
address country challenges, territorial reach and administrative capacities, to be strengthened 
through a multi-annual investment plan. UNDP will expand its partnership strategy, seeking 
alliances with new stakeholders such as multilateral development banks, the private sector, and 
national institutions. Initiatives will be developed to leverage South-South, triangular, and interterritorial (‘COL-COL’) cooperation, within the framework of the priorities defined by the 
Government.
41. The main programme risks are related to political polarization, the presence of illegal 
armed groups, illegal economies, increased migration from Venezuela, COVID-19 
socioeconomic impacts, environmental climate change, and natural disasters. To mitigate them, 
UNDP will implement inclusive communication and consultations with relevant stakeholders;
provide technical oversight, knowledge, and support; and build resilient communities to reduce 
risk from disasters and health emergencies. UNDP will also adopt risk-informed decisionmaking, increasing programme effectiveness and relevance, greater assurance, and innovative 
solutions. A strategic assessment of current and potential partnerships will be advanced as a 
stepping stone to forging new alliances.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
42. Programme supervision and evaluation will be coordinated with the government 
institutions responsible for international cooperation. UNDP will collaborate with the 
Government to take full advantage of information systems, tools, platforms, and data-collection 
mechanisms for tracking progress. 
43. UNDP will use national information sources, databases, and reports from the various 
ministries, as well as other national and international sources, as applicable and required. Data 
on evidence will be disaggregated by sex, age, ethnic groups, territory, life cycle, disabilities,
and other parameters.
44. Indicators, baselines, and targets set the bases for monitoring and evaluation and may be 
adjusted along with the Cooperation Framework indicators. The monitoring and evaluation plan
includes technical meetings with implementing partners and government entities, annual field 
visits, annual implementation progress reviews and reports, a midterm review and a final 
independent evaluation to be delivered in the first quarter of 2024. Other delivery dates will be 
communicated by the Government in due course.45. Most data will derive from national sources, sector entities, and other partners. UNDP is 
committed to improving gender mainstreaming in projects promoting gender markers 2 and 3.
Efforts will be made to increase the financial resources allocated to projects for the promotion 
of gender equality and women’s empowerment. UNDP will help monitor the information 
management and analysis system of the Cooperation Framework. Environmental and social 
screening mechanisms and protocols will be included to manage risk for counterparts.
46. The strategy will include: (a) a quality assurance support mechanism with a gender-based 
approach, identification of good practices, and capacity development; (b) a strategic evaluation 
plan to support strategic decision-making, learning, and accountability; (c) an integral, multiannual and interdisciplinary research agenda; (d) an effective communications plan; and 
(e) monitoring environmental and social risks.Annex. Results and resources framework for Colombia (2021-2024)
National priority or goal: Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 1,2,4,5,6,8,9,16,17
United Nations Sustainable Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) outcome involving UNDP #1. Stabilization: ‘Peace with Legality’
Related Strategic Plan outcome: 3. Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
Cooperation Framework 
outcome indicator(s), baselines, 
and target(s)
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs Major partners / partnerships
and frameworks
Estimated cost by 
outcome ($)
Multidimensional poverty rate
Baseline (2018):19.6%
Target (2024): 14.5%
Urban-rural extreme poverty gap
Baseline (2018):3.2
Target (2024):2.5
Percentage of active ex-combatants 
who are in the process of 
reincorporation at 50%
Baseline (2019) 30%
Target (2024):100%
Number of hectares of eradicated 
illicit crops
Baseline (2018): 33,000
Target (2024): 50,000
Fiscal performance index
Baseline (2017): 68.37 
Target (2024): 80
Large integrated household 
survey 
Quality of life survey
Illicit crop monitoring system
Output 1.1. FARC women and men ex-combatants and 
their families have access to a comprehensive and 
effective reincorporation process per their needs
supporting government efforts.
Progress in country plans and strategies under 
implementation for the reintegration of former combatants 
(Integrated Results and Resources Framework, 3.2.1.2)
Baseline (2019): 51.7%
Target (2024): 70%
Number of ex-combatants benefiting from jobs and 
improved livelihoods in crisis or post-crisis settings, 
disaggregated by sex and other characteristics
Baseline (2019): 5,723 (4,000 men, 1,723 women)
Target (2024):7,000 (4,892 men, 2,108 women)
Output 1.2. Communities in territorially focused 
development programmes (PDET) municipalities 
prioritized by the Government improve their quality of 
life through the design and implementation of ad hoc 
job creation and livelihoods initiatives within the PDET 
framework, with a gender perspective.
Number of vulnerable populations living in PDET
territories improving their livelihoods through the 
implementation of efficient economic strategies for the 
development of their territory, disaggregated by sex, age, 
and disability
Baseline (2019): 3,095 (1578 men, 1,516 women) 
Target (2024): 5,000 (2,250 men, 2,750 women) 
Number of infrastructure projects and environmental 
initiatives promoting economic and social development
within PDET municipalities, incorporating a differentiated
and gender approach.
Baseline (2019):268
Target (2023): 363
Presidential Adviser on stabilization and 
normalization
Presidential Adviser on equality for 
women (PAEW)
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development
Ministry of Finance and Public Credit
Ministry of Labour
MESD
Territorial Renewal Agency (TRA)
National Planning Department
Presidential Agency for International 
Cooperation in Colombia
Colombia in Peace Fund
National Replacement Plan
Rural Development Agency
Reincorporation and Standardization 
Agency
Public Employment Service Unit
National Learning Service (NLS)
United Nations organizations
Private sector
Research institutes
Bilateral donors
Multilateral donors
Regular 300,000
Other 38,746,846Progress in national strategies to improve dialogue 
capacities, consensus-building and reconciliation around 
contested issues, with equal participation of women and 
men (PDET Strategies)
Baseline (2019): 31.37%
Target (2024): 50%
Output 1.3. Illicit crops substituted with agricultural, 
livestock, economic, artisanal, industrial and service 
activities are focused on sustainable alternative 
development, as support to Colombian government 
efforts.
Number of productive solutions to strengthen livelihoods as 
a tool for development of legal economies 
Baseline (2020):40
Target (2024):80
National priority or goal: SDGs 1,8,9,10,16
UNSDCF outcome involving UNDP #2. Migration as a development factor
Related Strategic Plan outcome: 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Unemployment rate
Baseline (2018): 18%
Target (2024): 17%
Labour informality rate, defined as 
those employed who contribute to a 
pension fund
Baseline (2018): 94%
Target (2024): 90%
Migration module
Large integrated household 
survey 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
(MFA) databases
United Nations organizations
NLS
Local authorities
Output 2.3. Venezuelan migrants, returned Colombian 
populations and host communities have access to labour 
market and entrepreneurship options offered by 
government and other actors through a coordinated
action of the labour, trade and industry, tourism and 
foreign relations sectors, among others.
Number of new ventures consolidated, with improved 
productive capabilities for Venezuelan migrants and 
Colombian returnees
Baseline (2019): 22
Target (2024):50
Number of women and men supported who effectively 
access employment opportunities aligned within the 
Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan (RPMP)
with a gender perspective
Baseline (2019):150 (70 Women, 60 Men)
Target (2023):2,500 (1,375 Women, 1,125 Men)
Output 2.4. Venezuelan migrants, returned Colombian 
populations and the host communities in municipalities 
and localities prioritized by the Government, enjoy 
favourable environments in terms of coexistence, citizen 
security and risk of gender-based violence, through the 
Management Unit for the Integral 
Response to Venezuela Migrants 
MFA
Ministry of National Education
Ministry of Health and Social Prosperity
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Tourism 
Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology
National Family Welfare System 
NLS
Migration Colombia
Local authorities
United Nations organizations
Private sector
Bilateral donors
Multilateral donors
NGO members of the inter-agency 
mixed migration group (GIFMM)
Regular 300,000
Other 3,794,916combined action of government institutions and nongovernmental actors.
Number of individuals participating in activities promoting 
social cohesion aligned within the RPMP
Baseline (2019):1,250
Target (2024):5,000
National priority or goal: SDGs 1,4,8,9,10,12,13,15,16,17
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #3. Technical assistance for SDG catalyst acceleration
Related Strategic Plan outcome: 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
Percentage value added of 
the ‘orange economy’ policy
Baseline (2019) 2.9
Target (2024) 5.0
Number of victims returned, 
relocated or locally integrated
Baseline (2019): 1,602,670
Target (2024): 3,115,670
Reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions with respect to the to the 
national reference scenario 
Baseline (2017): 0 million tonnes 
of carbon dioxide equivalents
(tCO2 eq)
Target (2023): 36 million tCO2 eq
Growth in national deforestation 
from previous year 
Baseline (2017): 23%
Target (2022): 0%
Open government index
Baseline (2018): 58.2
Target (2024): 65
Ministry of Culture
Ministry of Environment and 
Sustainable Development
(MESD)
Civil Service Administrative 
Department
Local governments
Pan American Health 
Organization/World Health 
Organization, annually
Output 3.1. The Government and territorial entities 
strengthen their capacities to accelerate the 2030 Agenda 
and the SDGs.
Number of platforms and planning tools at local and 
national levels promoting alliances to accelerate the 
fulfilment of the SDGs using a multi-stakeholder approach
with a gender, human-rights and ethnic perspective
Baseline (2020):3
Target (2024): 26
Number of national and subnational strategies implemented 
to advance toward a green, low-carbon economy with a 
gender perspective
Baseline (2019): 44
Target (2024): 60
Output 3.3. Government institutions strengthen 
capacities and implement strategies to promote 
production, sustainable consumption, and preservation 
and sustainable use of natural resources.
Number of municipalities supported in the design and 
formulation of programmes and strategies for rural 
development in production and consumption, focusing on
the most vulnerable populations, with a gender approach
Baseline (2020): 38
Target (2024): 50
Number of institutions with strengthened capacities for 
implementation of environmental management to mitigate 
the carbon footprint of infrastructure works and incorporate 
strategies for consumption patterns promoting the 
sustainable use of natural resources
Baseline (2019):9
Target (2024): 28
Presidential Adviser on Youth
PAEW
MESD
Attorney General’s Office
Ombudsman Office
TRA
National Unit for Disaster Management
Unit for the Attention and Integral 
Repair of Victims
National Administrative Department for 
Statistics
Local Authorities
SDG Commission Members 
UN Agencies
Private Sector
Research institutes
Bilateral donors
Multilateral donors
Regular 208,000
Other 256,858,238Area of land under sustainable land management or 
sustainable forest management (hectares)
Baseline (2019): 1,164,082
Target (2024): 1,294,082
Output 3.4. The Government, through the national 
‘orange economy’ policy and the ‘Sacúdete’ strategy, 
strengthens capacities to consolidate the entrepreneurial 
ecosystem, innovation, cultural transformation, 
productive inclusion, and formal employment to 
support government efforts.
Number of entrepreneurs’ business models focused on 
creative and cultural industries, participating in businessstrengthening processes focused on innovation, cultural 
transformation, productive inclusion, and formal 
employment
Baseline (2019):48
Target (2024):302
Number of individuals trained in essential and technical 
skills that successfully established productive life projects
focused on innovation, cultural transformation, productive 
inclusion, and formal employment
Baseline (2019): 108
Target (2024): 300
Output 3.5. Surveillance and control institutions, with 
jurisdictional, judicial and non-judicial functions, 
strengthen their capacities to attend to prioritized 
populations and justice administration with a gender 
and differential approaches.
Number of national and local institutions with strengthened
capabilities to attend victim redress mechanisms including 
transitional justice, community-oriented security services 
and oversight mechanisms
Baseline (2019): Total 95: (5 national, 90 local)
Target (2023): Total 177: (7 national, 170 local)
Output 3.6. Territorial governments, particularly 
municipalities under categories 5 and 6, design, 
implement, and effectively monitor their planning tools 
in accordance with government guidelines, considering 
gender and differentiated approaches.Number of PDET municipalities supported in formulating 
institutional management plans, programmes and projects
Baseline (2018): 0
Target (2024):170
Number of social organizations in PDET municipalities 
with strengthened capacities that allow them to intervene in 
public management 
Baseline (2018): 149
Target (2024): 200
Output 3.7. Preserve the ability of the most vulnerable 
and affected people to meet the basic needs caused by 
the pandemic, through productive activities and access 
to social safety nets and humanitarian assistance in 
coordination with the government.
Number of vulnerable and affected people benefiting from 
jobs and improved livelihoods in crisis 
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2024): 5,291
Output 3.8. Ensure continuity and safety from risk of 
infection of essential services (health, water and 
sanitation, food supply, among others) for population 
groups most exposed and vulnerable to the pandemic in 
coordination with the government.
Number of preventive solutions to strengthen livelihoods 
and protect population groups exposed to the pandemic
Baseline (2020): 1
Target (2024): 50
Output 3.9 Secure continuity of the supply chain for 
essential commodities and services such as food, timecritical productive and agricultural inputs, and nonfood items in coordination with the government.
Number of initiatives for individuals, that promote the 
supply chain to maintain essential commodities and 
services during the pandemic
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2024): 50