File Name: COM-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Comoros
Country Code: COM
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 August – 2 September 2021
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
29 June 2021
Original: English
2108848X (E) 160721
Second regular session 2021
30 August – 2 September 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Comoros (2022-2026)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
Annex
Results and resources framework for the Comoros (2022-2026)................................................. 8I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Since 2010, Comoros has experienced accelerated economic growth, reaching 3.7 per cent
in 2018. The country joined the lower-middle-income category in 2018 and the medium 
human development category in 2019 (Human Development Index 0.554, 156th of 189 
countries). Nevertheless, in 2019, 37.3 per cent of Comorians were living in 
multidimensional poverty and 42.4 per cent were below the national poverty line.
1 Progress 
remains fragile due to: (a) the volatility of growth and its undiversified base; (b) low 
exploitation of regional integration opportunities and the potential of green and blue 
economies; (c) ecological fragility and high vulnerability to climate change and shocks; (d) 
the country's limited adaptation and mitigation capacity; and (e) lack of preparedness, 
response and recovery from disasters,
2
as the passage of Cyclone Kenneth and the 
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have recently demonstrated.
3
 In addition, global 
governance indicators suggest that this is an area requiring additional attention. Comoros is 
ranked 38th of 54 countries in the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, having lost 2.6 points
between 2010 and 2019.
2. There are important gender disparities in Comorian society; for example, women have a
Human Development Index and gross national income of 0.519 and $2,300, compared to
0.583 and $3,885 respectively for men.
4
 More than 82 per cent of actively employed women 
work in the informal sector5and women are underrepresented in political bodies (only 16.7
per cent of seats in Parliament, 6 per cent of the Government’s Cabinet Ministers and 28 per 
cent of local authorities’ cabinet members). Young people face high unemployment (38 per 
cent in the 18-35 age group are unemployed),
6
are insufficiently trained in sectors with 
growth potential and there is little support for young entrepreneurs. Persons with disabilities 
are largely ignored and their needs neglected (more than 60 per cent have never attended 
school and 67.3 per cent are economically inactive).7
3. The country’s 2019 development strategy, the Plan for an Emerging Comoros (Plan 
Comores Emergent (PCE)), acknowledges these challenges while capitalizing on the 
country’s economic and ecological potential and young labour force, aiming to make it an 
emerging country by 2030. The plan targets five areas driving sustainable growth: (a) tourism 
and handicrafts; (b) blue economy; (c) financial and logistic services; (d) modernized 
agriculture; and (e) industrial niches to diversify the economy. Infrastructure, human capital 
and digital technology are identified as catalytic priorities. Moreover, the PCE integrates the 
interrelated challenges of climate change, disaster risk reduction and biodiversity 
conservation, thereby placing ecological transition at the heart of the sustainable development 
of Comoros. 
4. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) 
articulates the contribution of the United Nations system to the Government’s vision for 
development and advancement of the Sustainable Development Goals in Comoros. The 
UNDP contribution is based on its comparative advantages and integrator role. UNDP will 
be lead agency for the UNSDCF “planet" pillar and play a major role in the “prosperity” and 
“peace/governance” pillars. UNDP will also make an important strategic contribution to aid 
coordination. It will be at the forefront of analysis on emerging challenges including post1. UNDP Human Development Report, 2020.
2. Common Country Analysis, 2020.
3. The Global Climate Risk Index 2021 lists Comoros as 16th most at risk out of 180 countries and 59th for lack of capacity to 
adapt to climate change.
4. Human Development Report, 2020.
5. National Institute of Statistics and Economic and Demographic Studies (Institut Nationale de la Statistique et des Etudes 
Economiques et Démographiques (INSEED)), Comorian Market Study (2016). 
6. INSEED, 1 2 3 Study, Phase 3 (2014).
7UNDPCase Study: Disability-inclusive COVID-19 response and recovery (2021)COVID-19 recovery, the blue economy, integrated digital transformation and climate 
finance.
5. UNDP will build on its reputation as an effective and reliable partner of State and nonState actors and on its new development approaches ("Next Generation UNDP"). It will 
support sustainable development in Comoros and the implementation of the UNSDCF by: 
(a) Promoting integrated multidimensional and multisectoral development approaches
including around resilience and economic transformation; 
(b) Capitalizing on the UNDP global network of expertise, competencies and knowledge to 
build local capacities and draw on lessons learned from similar contexts; 
(c) Mobilizing priority partnerships integrating civil society and the private sector around 
innovative financing and new business models; 
(d) Supporting digital transformation and launching high-potential pilots, including through 
mainstreaming technological innovation for climate-resilient agriculture, disaster resilience, 
energy transition, resilient water supply, integrated waste management and entrepreneurship, 
in collaboration with regional accelerator labs and through the establishment of a local 
accelerator lab;
(e) Promoting the empowerment of women, creation of new opportunities for youth and
socioeconomic integration of persons with disabilities and the consideration of their rights 
and needs; 
(f) Capitalizing on its presence on all islands; 
(g) Expanding efforts for regional integration, supporting the establishment of South-South 
and triangular cooperation through the Comorian International Cooperation Agency and 
promoting technology and knowledge transfer in strategic sectors. For example, in terms of 
South-South and triangular cooperation, Benin, India, Morocco, United Republic of 
Tanzania, Tunisia and South Africa will be involved in climate-smart and digital agriculture;
Morocco in water management; France, Japan, Madagascar, Turkey and the United States 
of America in disaster resilience; Maldives, Mauritius and Seychelles in circular economy; 
Iceland, Kenya and New Zealand, in geothermal energy; and France, Morocco, Senegal and
Tunisia in development finance.
(h) Promoting the humanitarian-development-peace nexus.
6. The proposed programme reflects the lessons learned from the independent evaluation of 
the preceding country programme, which recognized the progress made and the value added
by UNDP. The evaluation recommended that UNDP: (a) strengthen its governance portfolio; 
(b) consolidate support to energy transition, promoting sectoral partnerships; (c) increase 
national ownership and continue efforts to strengthen the capacities of national counterparts 
and partners; (d) replicate successful pilot experiences and significantly involve 
communities; (e) review development financing and support increased aid effectiveness 
whilst capturing new funding including remittances; and (f) develop a realistic theory of 
change. The proposed programme, and the UNSDCF to which it is aligned, also build on 
lessons learned from the evaluation of the previous United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
7. The proposed programme is the result of a national consultation process involving 
government, civil society and other development partners, building on inclusive dialogue 
around the UNSDCF. The process helped to identify how the United Nations system could 
complement the work of other partners. It is based on the principles of integrated United 
Nations programming and the comparative advantages of UNDP. At the request of the United 
Nations country team, UNDP took a lead role in the elaboration of the Common Country Analysis and the facilitation of related consultations. In line with the UNSDCF, the 
programme is fully aligned with the African Union and Southern African Development 
Community Agenda 2063, the ecological and economic agenda of the Indian Ocean 
Commission, the UNDP Strategic Plan, the strategic offer of the UNDP Regional Bureau for 
Africa, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (Samoa) Pathway and the Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015-2030). It also contributes to the priorities set 
in the PCE and the Government’s 2020–2024 Interim Development Plan which constitute the 
national frameworks for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
8. The programme is fully aligned with the three development settings of the Strategic Plan: 
eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions; accelerate structural transformations for 
sustainable development; and build resilience to shocks and crises. The six UNDP signature 
solutions are also integrated in a cross-cutting manner to achieve the programme’s results. 
9. The theory of change underpinning the programme is as follows:
(a) If ecological resilience and resilience to climate change and natural disasters are enhanced 
through the conservation of biodiversity, the sustainable provision of ecosystem goods and 
services, capacity-building and management, through the adoption of adequate mitigation 
and adaptation measures, i.e., integrated coastal zone management and the promotion of 
sustainable habitats with a small environmental footprint.;
(b) If the Comorian economy is more competitive, inclusive and creates sustainable jobs and 
added value as part of the emergence of an entrepreneurial ecosystem that further develops 
the potential of the green, blue and circular economies and agroecological value chains in an 
environment conducive to public and private investment;
(c) If State and non-State institutions, including the private sector and civil society 
organizations, are fully involved and more efficient, accountable and transparent in a context 
of improved access to information, and if social cohesion and citizen participation are at the 
heart of public action;
(d) Then, by 2026, the Comorian population, particularly the most vulnerable, will be more 
resilient and will enjoy shared prosperity in a dynamic of accelerated ecological transition, 
digital innovation and improved governance;
(e) Because the country will have reduced its vulnerability to climate change and disasters, 
slowed the loss of biodiversity, valued ecosystem services and put its economy on a path of 
sustainable forward-looking growth upheld by more competent public and private institutions 
that are gender-sensitive and support the rights of all Comorians and maintain social 
cohesion;
(f) Provided that the population and the authorities take ownership of the objectives of this 
programme, that political leadership is transformational and adheres to the principles of 
sustainable development, that the country realizes the relevant structural investments planned 
in the PCE, and that the effects of climate change and crises do not exceed the resilience of 
the population, the State and its infrastructure and environment.
10. This programme is built on three interrelated Sustainable Development Goal pillars 
(planet, prosperity and peace) and will contribute to the UNSDCF outcomes described below.
11. UNSDCF outcome 1: By 2026, State and non-State actors and the Comorian population, 
especially the most vulnerable, are more resilient to climate change, natural disasters and 
crises and ensure sustainable and integrated management of land and marine ecosystems and 
associated ecosystem goods and services, in a context of promoting sustainable habitats with 
a small environmental footprint.
12. The UNDP contribution will focus on: (a) the protection and development of marine and 
terrestrial ecosystems, knowledge and capacities to conserve biodiversity; (b) the creation of 
a biodiversity trust fund; (c) the sustainable management of ecosystem goods and services, 
including in particular a resilient water supply and sustainable access to clean and affordable energy; and (d) strengthening the technical, technological and financial capacities required 
for disaster preparedness and response at all levels, including strengthening institutional and 
regulatory frameworks for coordination and integrated disaster management as well as 
knowledge and understanding of the interrelationships between disasters, climate hazards and 
biodiversity conservation.
13. UNDP will work the following United Nations agencies on the issues of access to water, 
waste management, environment and sustainable habitats: Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), 
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the World Health 
Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 
14. UNSDCF outcome 2: By 2026, the Comorian population, especially the most vulnerable, 
enjoys shared prosperity, built on a more competitive and inclusive economy, on renewed 
public-private partnerships and in a perspective of sustainable growth oriented towards the 
sectors of the future (green, blue and digital economy).
15. The UNDP contribution will focus on: (a) the establishment of an inclusive
entrepreneurial ecosystem in growth sectors (green, blue, circular and digital economies) 
supported by strengthened public-private partnerships; (b) promotion of socially, 
economically and environmentally engaged youth; (c) women’s social, political and 
economic empowerment; (d) scaling-up of successful experiences in climate-smart 
agriculture and agricultural diversification, including innovative solutions focused on 
adaptative techniques and technologies; (e) social coverage of rural communities in areas of 
concentration; and (f) creation of an enabling environment to drive economic transformation 
post-COVID-19.
16. Partners include FAO, the International Labour Organization (ILO), International Trade 
Centre, UNICEF, United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and UNWomen, working on the blue and green economies and social protection.
17. UNSDCF outcome 4: By 2026, public institutions are more inclusive, efficient, 
accountable and resilient and strengthen citizen participation in public life, social cohesion, 
human rights, gender equality and democracy.
18. The UNDP contribution is based on: (a) the establishment of platforms and innovative 
tools (including digital) that promote active citizen engagement in decision-making, inclusive 
dialogue with elected officials and social cohesion; (b) strengthened capacities of civil society 
for advocacy based on accessible, disaggregated and reliable data; (c) strengthened 
operational, technological and technical capacities to improve development planning and 
management in a context of institutional efficiency and accountability; and (d) the use of "big 
data" including around platforms for aid coordination, foreign direct investment and trade 
integration.
19. Partners will include the United Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding 
Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and UN-Women around citizen participation and 
social cohesion.
20. The achievement of the results for this programme cycle is based on seven factors for 
success: (a) a multisectoral approach to maximize impact and promote the adoption of 
socially and economically innovative, gender-sensitive and ecologically responsible 
solutions, coupled with “top to bottom” and “bottom-up” approaches to ensure ownership at 
all levels; (b) promotion of the fourth industrial revolution and digital transformation,
including using innovation and digital technology as vectors of opportunity, efficiency and 
inclusion in all aspects of the economy, governance and society, building on the legislative 
and regulatory frameworks developed with UNDP support; (c) promotion of a human rightsbased approach, leaving no one behind and the promotion of differentiated approaches by targeting vulnerable groups (women, youth, persons with disabilities, people vulnerable to 
climate change); (d) lessons learned from previous evaluations and scaling-up of successful 
experiences; (e) use of regional integration as a platform for new opportunities, particularly 
for youth and women; (f) the effective appropriation of the small island developing States 
offer as a reference programmatic framework and the underlying opportunities including 
access to blue finance; and (g) taking into account the challenges, opportunities and lessons 
learned from the management and socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19.
21. In synergy with the interventions of other partners, the programme will build on and 
strengthen partnerships with technical and financial partners, including the European Union, 
World Bank, African Development Bank and the French Development Agency. 
22. This programme will also serve as a platform for partnerships with the catalytic funds of 
the United Nations, bilateral and multilateral partners, financial institutions, vertical funds 
and South-South cooperation, as well as partnerships with the private sector and diaspora.
UNDP will collaborate with the national Chambers of Commerce and Industry, the Chamber 
of Agriculture, national agencies, public utility services, private companies, women's 
organizations and networks, civil society, microfinance and research institutions and 
incubation structures.
23. Because the evaluation of the previous country programme indicated that national State 
and non-State partners wish to be more involved in the formulation and implementation of 
projects, the participatory dynamic initiated during the formulation of the proposed 
programme will be maintained and strengthened in the development, implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of projects and programmes. The evaluation also suggested that 
UNDP continue national execution for most of its projects to strengthen national capacities 
for results-based management and foster national ownership. UNDP will build on the 
recommendations from the result of the micro-assessment of implementing partners of United 
Nations projects and programmes conducted in 2020 through the harmonized approach to 
cash transfers, and relevant recommendations from the latest national implementation audits
to accelerate the gradual ownership of the programme by national implementing entities.
III. Programme and risk management
24. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and 
internal control framework.
25. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
26. The country office will use the UNDP quality assurance standards and social and 
environmental risk management and strict accountability mechanisms. The enterprise risk 
management framework will guide the design and implementation of the portfolio. 
27. The significant level of risk of most of the programme's implementing partners requires 
UNDP to provide appropriate expertise, while strengthening their capacities and paying 
particular attention to the sharing of responsibilities within the national execution modality. 
The establishment and coordination of an inclusive national dialogue framework and conflict 
prevention mechanisms will help to mitigate the risks of political instability and conflict.28. Risks related to resource availability are managed through a realistic approach to 
programming based on secure resources and building on the resource mobilization 
momentum of the country office during the current cycle. The principles of flexibility in 
planning and resource allocation will be based on a systematic analysis and assessment of the 
overall context and risks.
29. In order to limit the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19 and other shocks on the 
allocation of human and financial resources, UNDP will strengthen its support for the 
prevention and coordination of the response. It will also directly address the socioeconomic 
impact of COVID-19 across the programme including through the targeting of those worst 
impacted by the crisis.
30. To optimize the efficiency of interventions and manage fiduciary risks, the financial 
supervision of programme/projects and the evaluation of implementing partners will be 
strengthened. The principles of the United Nations Global Compact will be carefully applied.
31. Given the intensification and increase in the frequency of extreme weather events and the 
high vulnerability of Comoros to disaster risks, the country office has put in place a business 
continuity plan which outlines the full range of responses to assessed risks, including 
relocation. UNDP will also use, when appropriate, mechanisms for coordinating national and 
subnational multisectoral responses as a means of risk mitigation. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
32. The UNDP performance monitoring system will be harmonized with that of the UNSDCF 
and with the United Nations Evaluation Group norms and standards (2019). UNDP will 
actively participate in the UNSDCF thematic and results groups. Programmatic achievements 
will be reviewed annually and outputs reviewed semi-annually through a budgeted and 
integrated evaluation plan. The programme will be subject to a final evaluation in 2026. 
33. Project steering committees will be fully inclusive of vulnerable groups identified during 
the design phase. They will monitor their progress and risks annually or more often. Results 
of participatory evaluation will be systematically shared to improve the implementation of 
current and future projects. Joint monitoring missions will be organized with national 
counterparts and donors.
34. To address the shortcomings identified by the independent country programme 
evaluation, the monitoring and evaluation mechanism will be built on a strengthened data 
collection and statistics system. The results-based management will be improved through an 
inter-agency project supporting the development of disaggregated data (age, gender, type of 
disability, island). Furthermore, the office has established a monitoring and evaluation 
system, including the creation of a specialist position. A budgeted results-based 
communication plan will be implemented to ensure visibility of the results of UNDP and 
partners. Evaluations will be conducted in accordance with the approved evaluation plan.
35. UNDP will ensure that a system for classifying activities by their contribution to the 
promotion of gender equality is included in projects and programmes. The country office is 
engaged in the Gender Equality Seal certification.
36. The country office will maximize recent investments in new technologies to make its 
monitoring and evaluation system more efficient and proactive.Annex. Results and resources framework for the Comoros (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITIES OR GOALS: 
Interim Development Plan (2020–2024): 
o Sustainable management of the environment by strengthening the protection of the natural resources and biodiversity, the fight against climate change and the improvement of waste 
management
Plan Comores Emergent (PCE) Catalyst 2: Upgraded infrastructure for an efficient economy
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: UNSDCF outcome 1: By 2026, State and non-State actors and the Comorian population, especially the most vulnerable 
groups, strengthen their resilience to climate change, natural disasters and crises, and ensure sustainable and integrated management of terrestrial and marine ecosystems as well as ecosystem goods 
and services while promoting sustainable habitats with a small environmental footprint.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES 2 - Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development and 3- Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
Signature solutions 3 (Enhance national prevention and recovery capacities for resilient societies), 4 (Promote nature-based solutions for a sustainable planet), 5 (Close the energy gap) and 6 
(Strengthen gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls)
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUT 
(Including indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR 
PARTNERS/PARTNERSHIP 
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST 
BY OUTCOME ($)
Indicator 1.2: Proportion of the 
Comorian population with 
sustainable access to drinking 
water for domestic and 
productive sector usage and 
sanitation due to resilient supply 
infrastructures,
disaggregated by gender and 
geographic 
Baseline: 15%
Target: 75%
Indicator 1.3: Proportion of the 
population with access to 
electricity.
Baseline: 46% (2017)
Target: 76%
Indicator 1.4: Area of forest 
ecosystems, mangroves, coral 
reefs, seagrass beds
Baseline: Primary (14,291.8 ha) 
and secondary (3,273.1 ha) 
forest cover = Total 17,564.9 ha; 
Mangroves: 197.25 ha; seagrass 
beds: 6,030 ha; reef cover 
Source: Ministries of 
Environment and Economy 
reports
Frequency: Annual
Source: National Electricity 
Company of Comoros / Ministries 
of Environment and Economy 
reports
Frequency: Annual
Source: General Directorate of 
Water and Forests reports
Frequency: Annual
OUTPUT 1.1: Capacities of State and non-State actors, 
particularly decision makers and communities living in 
protected areas, are improved to understand the 
fundamental importance of ecosystems, ecosystem 
goods and services, and to support their conservation, 
management and sustainable use.
Indicator 1.1: Net loss in area of ecosystems of primary 
and secondary forests, mangroves, coral reefs and 
seagrass beds 
Baseline: Primary (14,291.8 ha) and secondary (3273.1 
ha) forest cover = total 17,564.9 ha; mangroves: 197.25 
ha; seagrass beds: 6,030 ha; Reef cover (30,000 ha of 
which 18,000 ha healthy) (2020)
Target: No net loss
Data source: National Agency for Protected Areas, 
annual
Indicator 1.2: Average abundance and biomass per unit 
surface area of fish and invertebrates within marine 
protected areas 
Baseline: Abundance 80 individuals / 100 m²; Biomass 
256 g / m² (2020)
Target: Abundance 120 individuals / 100 m²; Biomass 
350 g / m²
Data source: National Agency for Protected Areas, 
annual
National
Sectoral Directorates (Environment, 
Civil Security, Energy, 
Meteorology)
Commissariat for Solidarity and the 
Promotion of Gender
Comoros Environmental Fund 
University and research institutes 
(volcanology, agriculture, fisheries 
and the environment)
Geological Bureau of Comoros 
National company in charge of the 
exploitation and distribution of 
water 
National Electricity Company of 
Comoros 
Centre for Emergency and 
Protection Operations 
Directorate of Energy, Mines and 
Regular resources: 
4,000,000
Other resources: 
74,000,000(30,000 ha including 18,000 ha 
in good health)
Target: No net loss
Indicator 1.5: Proportion of the 
population covered by natural 
hazard early warning systems, 
disaggregated by sex 
Baseline: 18% (2020)
Target: 40%, of whom 20% 
women
Indicator 1.6: Number of local 
authorities that have adopted 
integrated coastal zone 
management plans that include 
less vulnerable urban areas and 
the promotion of sustainable 
habitats with a small 
environmental footprint.
Baseline: 0
Target: 12 of which 4 are led by 
women
Source: General Directorate of 
Civil Security reports
Frequency: Annual
Source: Land Use Planning 
Department reports
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.3: Volume of funds mobilized for the 
conservation of biodiversity
Baseline: $0 (2020)
Target: $5,000,000 
Data source: Comoros Environmental Fund, annual
Banda Bitsi Association
NGO Development of Forest 
Environment Management
International:
African Union
SADC
Climate Investment Platform
Climate Technology Centre
Network
Global Fund for Coral Reef
Stockholm International Water 
Institute
Geothermal Development Company
Kenya Electricity Generating 
Company (KenGen)
UN-Habitat
UNEP
UNICEF
WHO
FAO 
UN-Women 
SIDS Dock
International Renewable Energy 
Agency 
Africa Renewable Energy Initiative
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic 
Development 
Bilateral cooperation
(Governments of France, Italy, New 
Zealand, United Kingdom)
African Development Bank
World Bank
OUTPUT 1.2: The Comorian population, especially the 
most vulnerable groups, have access to sustainable 
water supply services for domestic and production 
purposes
Indicator 1.2.1: Proportion of the population benefiting 
from safely managed sustainable drinking water supply 
services, disaggregated by sex 
Baseline: 15% (2017)
Target: 60%, of whom 50% women
Data source: National company in charge of the 
exploitation and distribution of water, annual
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of gender-responsive 
mechanisms for the coordination and integrated 
management of water resources, 
Baseline: 1 (2020)
UNDP target: 4
Data source: National company in charge of the 
exploitation and distribution of water, annual
Indicator 1.2.3: Proportion of farmers benefiting from 
resilient irrigation infrastructures in concentration areas, 
disaggregated by sex and age 
Baseline: 22% (2020)
Target: 70%, of whom 50% women and 30% youth
Data source: National Strategic Directorate of 
Agriculture and Livestock, annual
OUTPUT 1.3: Solutions enabled for sustainable access 
to clean and affordable energy by rural and urban 
population
Indicator 1.3.1: Share of renewable energy in final 
electricity consumption 
Baseline: 4% (2017)
Target: 30%Data source: Directorate of Energy, Mines and Water, 
annual
Indicator 1.3.2: Number of innovative and gender-
responsive solutions for the production and management 
of green energy 
Baseline: 0 (2020)
UNDP target: 15, of which 3 are specific to the needs of 
women
Data source: Directorate of Energy, Mines and Water, 
annual
Indicator 1.3.3: Existence of a comprehensive legal and 
regulatory framework for renewable energy, favorable to 
public and private investments
Baseline: No (2020)
Target: Yes
Data source: Directorate of Energy, Mines and Water, 
annual
OUTPUT 1.4: State and non-State actors, as well as the 
general population, have the technical, technological, 
financial and operational capacities to strengthen their 
resilience to climate change and disasters.
Indicator 1.4.1: Number of local governments that have 
adopted disaster risk reduction strategies aligned with the 
national strategy
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 12 
Data source: General Directorate of Civil Security, 
annual
Indicator 1.4.2: Proportion of the population covered by 
multi-hazard early warning systems disaggregated by 
islands.
Baseline: 18% (2020)
Target: 40% proportionally distributed by island
Data source: General Directorate of Civil Security, annual
Indicator 1.4.3: Number of local governments that have 
adopted integrated coastal zone management plans that 
include sustainable habitats with a small environmental Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 10
Data source: Equipment and Territorial Planning, annual
NATIONAL PRIORITIES OR GOALS:
Interim Development Plan (2020–2024): 
o Relaunch the economy for 6% growth; 
o Promote growth and improve the conditions and the lifestyle of the populations; 
o Promote the rapid recovery of the economy and improve the flow of information within the population towards strong social cohesion; Ensure that the sub-sectors are drivers of socioeconomic development
PCE Catalyst 3: Human capital that prepares for the future, PCE pillars 1/2/4
PCE Catalyst 4: Structural reforms for an enabling competitive environment
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: By 2026, the Comorian population, and in particular the most vulnerable, will enjoy shared prosperity, built on a more 
competitive and inclusive economy, on renewed public-private partnerships, and sustainable growth building on the sectors of the future (green, blue and digital economy)
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES 1- Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions and 2- Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development 
Signature solutions 1 (Keeping people out of poverty), 4 (Promote nature-based solutions for a sustainable planet), 6 (Strengthen gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls)
Indicator 2.5: Proportion of 
actors in agricultural value 
chains having adopted 
sustainable and safe practices, 
disaggregated by sex and 
geographic area
Baseline: 5% (2014)
Target: 30%
Indicator 2.6: Share of workers 
covered by a social protection 
system, disaggregated by sector, 
type of job, sex and 
vulnerability status 
Baseline: 20% (2020)
Target: 35%
Indicator 2.7: Existence of an 
operational integrated waste 
management system 
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
Source: Ministries of Agriculture 
and Environment reports 
FAO reports
Frequency: annual
Source: Ministry of Employment 
/ House of Employment Reports / 
ILO reports
Frequency: annual 
Source: Ministry of Environment 
Reports / National Agency for 
Integrated Waste Management 
reports
Frequency: Annual
OUTPUT 2.1 National and subnational government 
enabled to develop and implement plans and strategies 
for the emergence of a forward-looking 
entrepreneurial ecosystem with a small ecological 
footprint 
Indicators 2.1.1: Number of regulatory frameworks for 
promoting entrepreneurship in the green and blue economy 
created to promote efficient, socially responsible 
companies with a small ecological footprint 
Baseline: 2 (2020)
Target: 4
Data source: Annual report of the Ministry of Economy 
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of incubation facilities 
specializing in female, youth and innovative 
entrepreneurship 
Baseline: 7 (2020)
Target: 14
Data source: UNDP report
Indicator 2.1.3: Volume of financing mobilized with the 
support of UNDP for the structuring projects of the PCE 
Baseline: $0 (2020)
Target: $150,000,000 
National:
Ministry of Youth, Employment and 
Labour
Ministry of Health, Solidarity, 
Social Cohesion and Gender
Sectoral Directorates (Agriculture, 
Economics)
Rural centres of economic 
development 
National Research Institute for 
Agriculture, Fisheries and the 
Environment 
National agencies
(international cooperation, 
promotion of investment, 
digitalization and waste 
management)
General Commissariats (solidarity, 
planning, social protection and the 
promotion of gender)
Regular resources: 
3,500,000
Other resources: 
21,600,000OUTPUT 2.2: Vulnerable populations, in particular, 
youth, women, and people living with disability are 
enabled to access and benefit from the positive impacts 
of the development of the green blue and circular and 
digital economies
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of micro-, small and medium-
sized enterprises and cooperatives led by youth, women 
and people living with disability created 
Baseline: 836 (2019)
Target: 300, of which 150 led by women, 200 by youth, 
20 by persons with disabilities
Data source: Comoros Investment Promotion Agency, 
annual
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of people benefiting 
economically from the collection and recycling of waste, 
disaggregated by sex, age, and disability situation 
Baseline: 200 (2020)
Target: 850 of whom 425 women, 600 youth and 85 
persons with disabilities
Data source: National Integrated Waste Management 
Agency, annual
National Tourism Office of 
Comoros
Union of Chambers of Commerce, 
Industry and Agriculture 
Platforms for Youth and Women 
Entrepreneurs
International:
The Canada Fund for Local 
Initiatives / Canadian International 
Development Agency
International Trade Centre
ILO
FAO
UNICEF
UNIDO
UN-Women
India, Brazil and South Africa 
Facility
French Development Agency 
OUTPUT 2.3: Technical capacities of key actors in the 
agro-ecological value chains, in particular women, 
youth and people living with disabilities, are 
strengthened to access digital technologies and develop 
resilient, innovative agricultural solutions Indicator 2.3.1: Number of farmers across all agricultural 
value chains using resilient techniques and technologies 
for increased productivity, disaggregated by sex, age, 
sector of activity 
Baseline: 4,202 (2020), of whom 1,986 women
Target: 8,824, of whom 4,500 women and 2,000 youth
Data source: National Strategic Directorate of Agriculture
and Livestock, annual
Indicator 2.3.2: Proportion of rural households in key 
focus areas covered by a basic social protection scheme 
Baseline: 7% (2020)
Target: 50%Data source: National Strategic Directorate of 
Agriculture and Livestock, Rural centres of economic 
development, annual
Indicator 2.3.3: Number of people using digital tools and 
workspaces to support agricultural value chains, 
disaggregated by sex and age 
Baseline: 0
Target: 40,000 of whom 20,000 women, 30,000 youth
Data source: Rural centres of economic development,
Union of Chambers of Commerce, Industry and 
Agriculture, annual
Indicator 2.3.4: Proportion of farmers in key focused 
areas with property rights or guaranteed rights to 
agricultural land, by type of right, disaggregated by sex 
Baseline: 7% (2020)
Target: 25%, half of whom women
Data source: National Directorate of Agricultural and 
Livestock Strategies, annual
NATIONAL PRIORITIES OR GOALS 
Interim Development Plan 2020–2024: 
o Guarantee the peace, security and stability of the country and consolidate democracy; 
o Reform and modernize administrations for greater visibility, efficiency and quality, and for better career management; 
o Promote equitable justice serving the country’s emergence
PCE Catalyst 1. A reformed and more stable institutional framework
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4: By 2026, public institutions are more inclusive, effective, accountable and resilient, and strengthen citizen participation 
in public life, social cohesion, human rights, gender equality and democracy
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES 2: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Signature solutions 2 (Strengthen effective, inclusive and accountable governance), 6 (Strengthen gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls)
Indicator 4.1: Overall quality 
of national institutions (Africa
Country Policy and Institutional 
Assessment) 
Baseline: 2.8 (2020)
Target: 3.5
Indicator 4.2: Resource 
absorption rate
Baseline: 48% (2019)
Target: 80%
Source: World Bank Reports
Frequency: Annual 
Source: World Bank, IMF, 
UNCTAD, AfDB reports
Frequency: Annual
OUTPUT 4.1: The parliament and CSOs have 
adequate technical and technological capacities for 
innovative interaction and inclusive dialogue for 
effective participation of Comorian citizens in public 
life
Indicator 4.1.1: Number of mechanisms and platforms 
for citizen engagement and participation of civil society, 
including women, in decision-making and legislative 
processes and promotion of social cohesion
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 5
Data source: Assembly of the Union of the Comoros, 
National: 
Ministry of the Interior
Assembly of the Union of the 
Comoros
General Planning Commission 
Commissariat for Solidarity and the 
Promotion of Gender
National Agency for Digital 
Regular resources:
2,463,000
Other resources:
5,000,000Indicator 4.3: Existence of 
operational medium-term 
sectoral expenditure 
frameworks
Baseline: 0
Target: 5 
Indicator 4.4: Transparency 
International Corruption 
Perceptions Index ranking
Baseline: 160th
Target: 130th
Indicator 4.5: Ibrahim Index of 
African Governance
Baseline: 38th place (2019)
Target: 30th
Source: Ministry of Finance 
Reports
Frequency: annual
Source: Transparency 
International reports
Frequency: Annual
Source: Mo Ibrahim Foundation 
reports
Frequency: Annual 
Indicator 4.1.2: Number of users of an integrated 
information system on democratic governance, social 
cohesion and the protection of rights and freedoms, 
disaggregated by sex, age 
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 20,000, of whom 8,000 women and 14,000 youth
Data source: Comorian Platform for Citizen Watch, 
annual
Indicator 4.1.3: Number of CSOs using digital 
technologies and big data for public engagement
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 5
Data source: National Agency for Digital Development, 
annual 
National Human Rights and 
Freedoms Commission
Comorian Agency for International 
Cooperation
Non-State:
Comorian Platform for Citizen 
Watch
International:
UNFPA
Department of Political and 
Peacebuilding Affairs
OHCHR
UN-Women
World Bank
European Union
OUTPUT 4.2: Operational, technological and technical 
capacities of public institutions at the national and local 
levels enabled to improve the effectiveness, efficiency, 
transparency and accountability of the development 
planning and management systems
Indicator 4.2.1: Number of public institutions and nonstate organizations with publicly available tools and 
information systems 
Baseline: 2 (2020)
Target: 5
Data source: INSEED, annual
Indicator 4.2.2: Number of sector planning units set up 
and operational to improve development planning and 
coordination 
Baseline: 2 (2020)
Target: 5
Data source: General Secretariat of the Government, 
annual
Indicator 4.2.3: Existence of an operational gendersensitive integrated national financing framework 
Baseline: No (2020)
Target: Yes
Data source: Central Bank, annual