File Name: CPV-CPD-2005-EN
Year: 2005
Country Name: Cabo Verde
Country Code: CPV
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 6-9 September 2005
Start Year: 2006
End Year: 2010
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme and of the
United Nations Population Fund
Distr.: General
1 August 2005
English
Original: French
0545119 (E) 240805 250805
Second regular session for 2005
6-9 September 2005, New York
Items 4 and 8 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Draft common country programme document for
Cape Verde (2006-2010)
Addendum
UNDP results matrix
Summary
This addendum to the draft common country programme document for Cape
Verde contains the results of matrices which refer solely to the UNDP portion of the
common country programme.Agency-specific results matrix: UNDP
Country programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of pDemocratic governanceNational priority: Promote good governance, strengthen effectiveness and ensure equity so that Cape Verde can contin
development.
UNDAF impact: National institutions enforce policies based on a human rights- and equity-based approach in order to 
country to graduate from the group of least developed countries (LDC).
1. Institutions andpopulation groups defineand implementappropriate strategies toconsolidate socioeconomic gains in thecontext of the country’sgraduation from thegroup of least developedcountries (LDC)
1. Programme to supportthe country’s strategyfor smooth transitionfrom the LDC group
1.1. Capacities ofnational institutionsresponsible forimplementing thestrategy for LDCgraduation arestrengthened andappropriate resourcesare mobilized(organization of sectoralround tables,internationalnegotiation, sharing ofexperience).
Number of agreementsnegotiatedResources mobilizedStaffing enhanced
United NUnited NConfereDevelopand/or tDGCI: NGOs/CimplemNetherlBank, Ebudgetatechnic
1.2. Capacities formanagement andcoordination ofinternational aid andawareness of newresource transfermodalities arestrengthened.
Rate of implementationof aid according to newtransfer modalitiesProportion of budgetaryaid in country assistance
PortugaUSA (Mfinancinand/or parrange
1.3. The strategy forcommunication on theoutcome of transition isestablished.
Number ofcommunicationsproducedCountry programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of p
2. Programme to supportmajor State reforms andcapacity-building inpublic bodies
2.1. The country’spublic administrationresponds moreeffectively to citizens’needs (capacitybuilding, civic centres).2.2 The Parliament iscloser to citizens andworks more effectivelyin its legislativeactivities and themonitoring ofGovernment actions.2.3. The strengthenedelectoral system andprocesses become moreparticipatory.
Degree of citizensatisfaction in relationto the functioning ofState institutionsLevel of implementationof State reformsNumber of draft lawsadoptedFrequency ofparliamentary questionsto Government ontopical mattersRate of participation inelections
United agencieand/or tDGCI, AssembexecutiNGOs/CimplemLuxembEU, USFrance, financinand/or parrange
2. National institutionsensure application ofgender equality andequity in the political,economic, social andcultural fields
3. Programme to supportthe promotion ofdecentralized authoritiesand local governance
3.1. Managementcapacities of localcommunities arestrengthened.3.2. Allocation ofmunicipal budgetaryresources andmonitoring of their useare conducted withcitizen participation inorder to enhancespending in socialsectors and those relatedto childhood
Number of localgovernment officialstrainedPercentage of the budgetallocated to socialsectors approved by themunicipal councilRate of spending inmunicipal budgetsallocated to the socialsector
United agencieIFAD: ftechnicDGCI, CCCD, MinistrMAI: eagencieNGOs/CmunicipimplemEU, AuPortugafinancinCountry programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of p
4. Programme to supportstrengthening of the ruleof law, protection of thesecurity of persons andgoods, gender equityand the defence ofcitizens’ fundamentalrights
4.1. Strengthening of thecapacities of nationalinstitutions responsiblefor combating drugabuse and ensuring thesecurity of persons andgoods.
Variation in the crimerateNumber of anti-drugtrafficking operationscarried out
4.2. Strengthening of thecapacities of the Stateand civil society for thepromotion andprotection of humanrights.
Degree of citizensatisfaction in relationto the protection of theirrights
4.3. Development andstrengthening of thecapacities of nationalinstitutions responsiblefor implementing theNational Gender Equityand Equality Plan.
Gender-adjusted HumanDevelopment Index(HDI)
4.4. Application of thelegal framework in orderto better satisfy demandfor gender equity andequality.
Gender-related lawsadopted andimplemented
3. National institutionspromote development ofthe information societythroughout the country
5. Programme to supportnational strategy oninformation andcommunicationtechnology fordevelopment
5.1. Strengthening of thecapacities of nationalinstitutions responsiblefor implementing thenational e-governanceplan.
Level of implementationof the nationale-governance plan.
United agencieand/or tDGCI, INE: exCountry programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of p
5.2. Development ofeducation andinformation programmesfor the new informationand communicationtechnologies (NICTs)
Level of popularinformation andeducation on NICTs
NGOs/CimplemEU, Auvarious Country programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of pCombating povertyNational priority: Reducing extreme poverty and hunger; promoting socio-economic rights to combat hunger (PRSP).UNDAF impact: The most vulnerable communities are included and are parties to the country’s socio-economic develo1. The most vulnerablepopulation groups areintegrated intodevelopmentmechanisms throughappropriate policiesand programmes
1. Programme to supportstrategies for nationaldevelopment, povertyreduction and theachievement of theMillennium DevelopmentGoals (MDGs).
1.1. The PRSP/MDGmonitoring system andthe national statisticalsystem are operational.1.2. Updating andreview of the PRSP.1.3. Adoption of policiesto facilitate improvedaccess to basiccommodities.
United agencieand/or tDGCI, executiChambmunicipproduceimplemWorld Bvarious 
2. Programme tostrengthen theparticipation of vulnerablepopulation groups ineconomic development.
2.1. The national microcredit system isfunctional.2.2. Policies on landaccess strategy areimplemented.2.3. Improving access tothe labour market forthe poorest populationgroups.2.4. Improved capacitiesfor involvement ineconomic developmentfor community andvolunteer organizations.
Output monitoring andassessment reports.PRSP updated/reviewed.Number of legislativemeasures for access tobasic infrastructures andfood products.Rate of access to microcredit (gender/locality).Number of legalprovisions to improveaccess to land for thepoor.Number of personsreceiving training(gender/age/locality).Number of projectsimplemented by a poolof associations, andnumber of volunteers incommunityorganizations.
United agencieand/or tMTS, DIEFP, DagencieNGOs/Ccredit FimplemAustria(MCA)various Country programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of p2. National andinternational institutionsensure the application ofpolicies to improvenational productivity.
3. Programme tostrengthen private-sectorinvolvement in theeconomy.
3.1. Implementation ofpolicies to promoteactivities in favour ofvulnerable populationgroups in the agricultureand fisheries sector,light industry, tourism,handicrafts andtraditional skills.3.4. Strengthening of theprivate sector’sinstitutional and humancapacities forinvolvement in theeconomy.
Rate of creation ofmicro-activities andentrepreneurship.Number of trainingcourses conducted.
United agenciefinanciatechnicMAAP/executiNGOs/Cof ComimplemEU, USdevelopvarious Country programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of pEnvironment and natural resourcesNational priority: To develop infrastructure, promote land use and protect the environment.UNDAF outcome: Population groups and national institutions are stakeholders in the sustainable management of the enconservation of natural resources.1. National institutionsimplement strategic andlegal frameworks as wellas environmentalmonitoring andmanagementmechanisms.
1. Programme formonitoring ofinformation andcapacity-building inenvironmentalmanagement.
1.1 National reports onthe Rio Conventions aredrafted anddisseminated.1.2 The environmentalinformation andmonitoring system isoperational.1.3 National capacitiesfor environmentalmanagement aredeveloped according toan action plan alignedwith the second nationalenvironmental actionplan (PANA II).
Number of nationalreports on the developedconventions.Information andmonitoring systemavailable.Number of nationalframeworks forinstitutions andcommunity associationstrained in environmentalmanagement.
United agencieUNEP, financiatechnicMAAP, agentNGOs/CANMCagentsNetherlFrance, WWF, IfundingCountry programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of p2. Inhabitants areinvolved in theprotection andmanagement of naturalresources as part of thenational heritage and asource of economicdevelopment.
2. Programme forimplementation ofenvironmentalconventions.
2.1 The national actionplan for Cape Verde’sadaptation to climatechange is drafted andimplemented.2.2 Communities masterand apply terrestrial andmarine biodiversitymanagement tools.2.3 Communities masterand apply desertificationcontrol techniques.
National action plan forCape Verde’s adaptationto climate changeavailable.Number of communitymembers who havemastered and applyterrestrial and marinebiodiversity tools.Number of communitymembers who havemastered and applydesertification controltechniques.
United agencieUNEP, financiatechnicMAAP, executiNGOs/SINDP, IimplemNetherlFrance, WWF, Iof vario
3. National institutionsand civil society ensureenvironmental disasterpreventive managementand response.
3. Programme ofsustainableenvironmentalconservation throughaccess to microcredits.
3.1 Young volunteerscontribute to jobcreation and povertyreduction through theimplementation ofenvironmentally-relatedactivities.3.2 Communities applytools for sustainablenatural resource usethrough access to smallgrants.
Number of jobs createdby young volunteers.Number of grants given.Number of communitymembers who applytools for sustainable useof natural resources.
United FAO, GUNESCfinanciatechnicMAAP, executiNGOs/CINERFagentsNetherlFrance, WWF, Iof varioCountry programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of p
4. Environmentaldisaster prevention andresponse programme(recurrent drought,desertification,migratory desert locusts,volcanic eruptions,tsunamis).
4.1 Strategic disasterprevention and responseplans developed andimplemented.4.2 National disasterresponse institutions arestrengthened.4.3 A risk andvulnerability map isestablished.
Number of localstrategic environmentaldisaster prevention andresponse plansdeveloped andimplemented. Availablelocal early-warningplans.Available risk andvulnerability maps.
United agencieWMO: technicMAAP, DefencserviceagentsNGOs/CANMCagentsNetherlCILSS: Country programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of pHuman capitalNational priority: To develop human capital and guide the education and vocational training system towards priority arUNDAF outcome: National and municipal institutions and civil society ensure the integration of the right to socio-econ
context of the country’s social and demographic transition.
1. The most vulnerablesectors of the populationenjoy the right to accessto quality education andhealth services.2. National institutionsensure implementationand monitoring ofprogress on theachievement of humanrights related to basicsocial services.3. National institutionsand civil society areenhanced to combat theHIV/AIDS epidemiceffectively.
1. Education and healthsystem modernizationand expansionprogramme.
1.1 The quality andsustainability of thenational adult vocationaltraining and literacysystem is enhanced.1.2 National institutionsare supported in theimplementation of aninformation systemwhich helps to ensurethe monitoring andevaluation ofprogrammes andservices.
Gender-specific literacyrate.Number of institutionshaving established amonitoring andevaluation system.
United agencieand/or tMEVRHCCS-SIexecutiNGOs/CmunicipimplemAustriavarious Country programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of p
2. Support programmefor the implementationof the national strategicplan to combatHIV/AIDS.
2.1 Persons invulnerable situationshave better access toservices for theprevention of STD/HIV.2.2 Care of personsliving with HIV/AIDSand their families isstrengthened.2.3 The participation ofNGOs and civic leaders,and the private, publicand political sectors isstrengthened.2.4 HIV/AIDSawareness and theavailability ofmonitoring andevaluation mechanismsare enhanced.2.5 The mobilization ofsustainable financial andtechnical resources isencouraged.
Number of personsreceiving assistance toprevent risksNumber of personsunder careChanges in budgets tocombat HIV/AIDSapproved at the nationaland municipal levelsRates of HIV/AIDSprevalence are knownFinancial and technicalresources mobilized
United agenciefinanciatechnicMS, CCexecutiNGOs/CmunicipimplemPortugavarious Country programme outcomes/outputs
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of pSocial welfareNational priority: To enhance the effectiveness and sustainability of the social welfare system.UNDAF outcome: National and municipal institutions ensure an effective and sustainable social welfare system.1. Vulnerable sectors ofthe population,particularly childrenand adolescents, enjoytheir right to socialwelfare, water andsanitation and toimproved food security.
1. Social welfareeffectiveness andsustainabilityprogramme.
1.1 The capacities ofnational, central andlocal institutions andcivil society arestrengthened to (i)enhance access to andthe quality of watersupply and sanitationservices and (ii)improve school andcommunity hygiene.
Coverage rate of cleandrinking water andsanitation services
United agencieand/or tMTS, IexecutiNGOs/CmunicipimplemPortugafinancin
Grand total:– Governance: $ 3 450 000– Poverty: $ 1 805 000– Environment: $10 450 000– Human capital: $ 1 280 000– Social welfare: $ 100 000Grand total for the programme: $17 085 000List of abbreviations and acronyms
ACBF African Capacity-Building Foundation
ADB African Development Bank
AN National Assembly
ANMCV Associação Nacional dos Municípios Caboverdianos
(National Association of Cape Verdean Municipalities)
CCA Common country assessment
CCCD Coordinating Commission on Drug Control
CCS-SIDA Coordinating Committee on AIDS Prevention
CILSS Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the
Sahel
CNDH National Human Rights Council
CNE National Election Council
CSO Civil society organization
DDC Drylands Development Centre
DGA Directorate General for the Environment
DGAE Directorate General for Election Support
DGAEA Directorate General for Adult Education Support
DGAL Directorate General for Local Administration
DGAP Directorate General for Public Administration
DGASP Directorate General for Agriculture, Forestry and Animal
Husbandry
DGCI Directorate General for International Cooperation
DGDT Directorate General for Tourism Development
DGI Directorate General for Industry
DGP Directorate General for Planning
DRHS Demographic and Reproductive Health Survey
DSS Development support services
EU European Union
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GEF Global Environment Facility
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
ICT Information and communications technologies
IEFP Instituto de Emprego e Formação Profissional (Minister of
Employment and Vocational Training)IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
ILO International Labour Organization
IMF International Monetary Fund
INDP Instituto Nacional de Desenvolvimento das Pescas (National
Institute of Fishing Development)
INE Instituto Nacional de Estatística (National Statistics Institute)
INERF Instituto Nacional de Engenharia Rural e Floresta (National
Institute of Rural Engineering and Forestry)
INGRH Instituto Nacional de Gestão dos Recursos Hídricos (National
Institute for Water Resources Management)
INIDA Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária (National Institute
for Agricultural Research and Development)
ISPs Internet service providers
ITU International Telecommunication Union
IUCN International Union for the Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources
KfW Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
MAAP Ministry of Environment, Agriculture and Fishing
MAI Ministry of Internal Administration
MCA Millennium Challenge Account
MD Ministry of Defence
ME Ministry of Environment
MEVRH Ministry of Education and Human Resources
MFP Ministry of Finance and Planning
MIT Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport
MS Ministry of Health
MTS Ministry of Labour and Solidarity
NGOs/CSOs Non-governmental and civil society organizations
NGO Non-governmental organization
NOSI Núcleo Operacional da Sociedade de Informação
OCHA Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
TRAC Target for resource assignment from the core
TTF-DG Thematic trust fund (democratic governance)
TTF-P Thematic trust fund (poverty)
UN United NationsUNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
UNV United Nations Volunteers
US United States of America
WB World Bank
WMO World Meteorological Organization
WWF World Wildlife Fund