File Name: CRI-CPD-2023-EN
Year: 2023
Country Name: Costa Rica
Country Code: CRI
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 January to 3 February 2023
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for Project 
Services
Distr.: General
30 November 2022
Original: English
2227334X(E) 071222
First regular session 2023
30 January to 3 February 2023, New York
Item 7 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Costa Rica (2023–2027)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ...................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Costa Rica (2023-2027)..................................................................... 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework
1. This country programme document describes how UNDP will contribute to achieving 
the results agreed on in the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework (UNSDCF) for Costa Rica, 2023-2027.The country programme and UNSDCF 
were developed through a participatory process aligned with national priorities. More than 
30 dialogues, forums and technical consultations were held and included national and local 
governments, international financial institutions, civil society organizations, the private 
sector, women’s groups, and groups of interest such as indigenous groups, lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex, asexual and other sexual and gender diversities.
2. The UNSDCF, 2023-2027, will work towards reversing the high level of 
socioeconomic inequalities in Costa Rica, enhancing the country’s resilience and capacity 
to respond to a crisis, promoting economic activities compatible with sustainable 
development, and reducing levels of unemployment and labour informality, particularly, 
outside of the Great Metropolitan Region. The UNSDCF will prioritize improving the lives 
of women, indigenous peoples, afro-descendant, migrants, lesbians, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, queer, intersex, asexual, and others (LGBTQIA+) persons, older persons, and 
people with disabilities, specifically those living in rural, coastal and transboundary 
territories which have been left out. The UNSDCF envisions the United Nations system 
working at the intersection of inclusion, economic empowerment, resilience and human 
rights for a middle-income country belonging to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. Working with the United Nations country team, UNDP will 
support the integration of the Sustainable Development Goals (the Goals, hereafter) into 
public policies and programming related to inclusion, gender equality, a transition towards 
a green, blue and purple economy, and preparedness for recovery and response to multiple 
risks and crises. 
3. Despite a longstanding tradition as a peaceful country, with high social investment, a 
high human development index of 0.810 (2020), ranking of 62 out of 189, and decades of 
uninterrupted democracy, Costa Rica faces increasing income inequality; its Gini index 
went from 0.507 in 2010 to 0.524 in 2021.
1 By 2021, 16.4 per cent of households were 
multidimensionally poor2, and income poverty affected 26 per cent of households, 
four percentage points more than in 2019. Low growth, a high level of labour informality 
(45 per cent), and the country’s economic model together disproportionately affect women 
and marginalized groups negatively – particularly those living in rural, coastal and 
transboundary territories – as well as vulnerable groups, such as indigenous peoples and 
afro-descendants. Women have been particularly impacted by the economic and social 
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has widened economic gender gaps and brought 
high levels of domestic abuse; an average of 133 protection measures against domestic 
violence are taken daily.
4. The crime rate in Costa Rica has increased significantly in the last two decades. 
According to the Judicial Investigation Agency, the homicide rate went from 6.4 in 2000 
to 11.4 in 2021, mainly affecting young males. Violence has increased due to the 
penetration of organized crime at various levels and territories, generating consequences 
in the political, social, economic and environmental spheres. The incidence of femicide
(approximately two per month) and other kinds of violence against women is also critical, 
affectingtheir physical, economic and political autonomy.
1 UNDP, Human Development Report 2021.
2 Global multidimensional poverty index 20215. State institutions face significant challenges in ensuring access to opportunities for the 
entire population.This leads to some mistrust in institutions and the risk of insolvency of 
public finances. Public social spending as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP)
in 2020 was 6.75 per cent for education and 5.38 per cent for health; although these figures 
have been consistent throughout the last decade, education and health outcomes do not 
reflect such a level of investment. In addition to this problem, the Government of Costa 
Rica faces severe corruption cases. 
6. The country’s tax system is regressive and dependent on carbon consumption. 
According to 2018 data, 21 per cent of total government income derives from fossil fuel 
consumption.Currently, the single tax on fuels in Costa Rica represents 10 per cent of the 
tax revenue collected by the Government, and property tax on conventional fossilconsuming vehicles represents 78 per cent of property taxes. The study, “A green Costa 
Rican COVID-19 recovery: aligning Costa Rica´s decarbonization investments with 
economic recovery”, concluded that decarbonization-related capital investments may 
significantly facilitate economic recovery and lead to higher employment and value added 
by 2025. Employment could be 1.8 per cent higher by 2025 and value added could be 
slightly higher as well, by 2.3 per cent.
7. A significant proportion of economic activities generate environmental externalities 
that further erode fiscal finances. The agricultural sector produces 4.7 per cent of GDP. It
positions the country as a leader in commodities exports, making it one of the world’s 
highest per hectare and capita consumers of agrochemicals. Additionally, the 
manufacturing sector, which represents 13.5 per cent of the country’s GDP, lacks good 
practices regarding waste treatment and the use of chemicals that generate high pollution. 
On the other hand, it is estimated that less than half of the water consumed in industrial 
activities is treated adequately.Moreover, uncontrolled housing development in the coastal 
areas negatively affects their biodiversity and hurts the ecosystems.
8. Costa Rica ranks 12th on the world risk index due to high exposure to natural hazards.
According to estimates by the National Commission for Risk Prevention and Emergency 
Attention, from 2016 to 2020, the country spent more than $820 million on replacing
elements affected by different types of disasters, while it only spent $308 million during 
2011-2015. This vulnerability to natural hazards is exacerbated by its proximity to 
politically unstable and highly impoverished countries, which increases the pressure of 
migrants and refugees on government and interagency services. As of November 2020, 
there are an estimated 100,600 persons of concern to the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees, including refugees, asylum seekers, stateless persons and 
others of interest, of which the vast majority are from Nicaragua. Costa Rica is used as a 
transit route by migrants toward the United States, increasing the pressure on local 
resources.
9. These are the development challenges that UNDP will address in the new programme 
cycle. To face these challenges and multiple crises, UNDP will leverage its experience and 
presence in communities, enhanced by the accumulated knowledge and lessons learned in 
identifying social and environmental issues at all levels; understanding gender equality as 
a point of convergence and articulator of UNDP actions; developing data, analysis and 
knowledge products to support the design and implementation of public policies related to 
the Goals, including on the environment, employment, social protection, citizen security, 
risk management, among others; and promoting innovation capacities in all sectors to 
generate development solutions.10. UNDP has a unique role due to its experience convening multi-stakeholder and 
interinstitutional democratic dialogue processes to reach an agreement and foster 
collaboration for systemic change. UNDP is experienced in managing digital platforms, 
generation of information, and data relevant to policy decision-making. UNDP mobilised 
resources from emission reductions into the country to fund the payment of ecosystem 
services, particularly benefiting indigenous territories and rural communities. UNDP
supported development initiatives to improve the resilience of communities to water stress 
and generate employment opportunities in the coastal pacific and Caribbean regions and 
peripheral urban areas, placing women in all their diversity at the centre of these 
interventions. 
11. The decentralized country programme evaluation conducted in 2021 found that UNDP 
had high effectiveness in achieving most output targets, generating results of strategic 
importance.In a complex context, UNDP was able to carry out a process of strengthening 
counterparts for sustainable development, such as the National Institute for Women 
(INAMU) and the Ministry of Environment and Energy (MINAE). Other issues
highlighted by the evaluation crucial for the new country programme’s success are:
(a) UNDP staff capacity and quality; (b) key successes such as the first-ever transfer of 
emission reduction payments into a government trust fund; (c) achieving the highest ever 
delivery rates while operating under the COVID-19 business continuity plan; and (d) the 
ability to mainstream the intersectional gender approach in all aspects of programme 
implementation.
12. As a country office certified with the gold seal for gender equality, UNDP has worked 
continuously on mainstreaming intersectional gender equality, women’s empowerment 
and new masculinities within its programme and projects. Efforts to mainstream gender in 
programming have improved gender markers in the portfolio and, more significantly, in 
developing gender equality strategies in seven government institutions. UNDP led a joint 
programme on social protection and has supported the community of practice of 
135 private sector companies accelerating their certification process for the seal of gender 
equality. UNDP has helped mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic’s socioeconomic effects,
facilitating the implementation of three financial instruments targeting women. 
13. The country programme evaluation also noted areas for further development that 
UNDP addresses in this new programme. UNDP, as provider-of-integrated-solutions,
ensures a more coherent United Nations system. UNDP has demonstrated this through its 
leadership of the gender and environment interagency groups, facilitating consultations,
and drafting the environment and governance chapters of the common country analysis and 
UNSDCF formulation. As provider-of-integrated solutions for the Goals, UNDP has also 
been fostered by engaging political parties contesting the 2022 election to improv e 
awareness of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development among candidates for the 
legislative assembly.
14. UNDP will continue to foster South-South and triangular cooperation with countries 
interested in replicating the country’s successful payment-for-ecosystem services and landuse change monitoring experiences. The country programme will expand on the sharing 
of lessons learned, consolidating exchanges with African countries, particularly in the 
Congo River basin.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
15. The country programme vision is to help the citizens of Costa Rica transform their 
development model to eliminate economic, social and political inequalities that have affected the country for a long time. Interventions will be aligned with: (a) the 
decentralization priorities of the Government; (b) more efficient State institutions;
(c) sustainable economic activities that generate employment and benefits to traditionally 
marginalized regions; and (d) response to multiple threats, all in compliance with the 
constitution, democratic governance, an intersectional gender approach, and respect for 
human rights. The programme will focus on three UNSDCF outcomes and is aligned with 
the UNDP strategic plan, 2022-2025, its signature solutions approach, and the regional 
strategy to strengthen effective governance through productivity, inclusion and resilience.
16. The theory of change, which is anchored in the national development plan, long-term 
policies and the National Pa ct for the achievement of the Goals, considers the following 
assumptions: if more robust, evidence-based public policies – which are inclusive and 
consider local, national and transboundary levels – are implemented, in particular with 
regard to intersectional gender perspectives and inequalities stemming from a centralised 
and carbonised development model that further marginalises women and vulnerable 
groups, such as indigenous people, afro-descendants, migrants and peripheral territories; if
the promotion of structural transformation strengthens green, blue and purple economies; 
and if strengthening the capacity of public, private and civil society sectors improves the 
response to different types of crises and helps the country to adapt to climate change 
impacts; then Costa Rica will advance to a new human development stage that is more 
comprehensive, resilient and leaves no one behind.
People-centred governance
17. The UNDP theory of change in this area is: if UNDP provides strategic innovation and 
digitalisation for the design, implementation and evaluation of evidence-based public 
policies, then these policies will be better suited to take advantage of technology, be more 
effective, and data will be more cyber secure and transparent.Interventions will therefore 
generate evidence for decision-making, enhance information analysis, and foster digital 
participatory approaches, allowing for more voices of municipalities, women, LGBTQIA+, 
indigenous peoples, afro-descendants, migrants, older people, and people with disabilities 
to provide inputs into the design and implementation of policies. 
18. UNDP will upgrade the technologies and digital tools of the National Institute of 
Statistics and Censuses (INEC), the National Geographic Institute, state universities, the 
Mixed Institute of Social Assistance (IMAS), the Ministry of National Planning and 
Political Economy (MIDEPLAN), INAMU, and the Ministry of Finance (MOH) for 
enhanced data generation and disaggregated information analysis to leave no one behind 
from State services. The focus will be on social protection systems, eliminating 
environmental and social externalities resulting from economic activity in rural and coastal 
regions, and a more effective and prompt response to disasters. Partnerships will include 
the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, the Human Development Report 
Office in UNDP, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), UNFPA, the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the International Labour Organization (ILO), 
and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNWomen).
19. The institutional transformation will require improved capacities to construct and 
implement intersectoral, territorial and multi-level agreements. UNDP will facilitate
democratic dialogue interventions that are gender transformative and culturally sensitive 
to complement data analysis and ensure society-wide agreements on complex institutional 
transformation.20. These efforts will be supported by digital and information technology solutions 
developed in the previous programme cycle, such as digital land-use change monitoring, 
technology solutions for better targeting of people living in poverty, or applications to scale 
up actions for forest restoration, water and waste management. The expected impact is the 
transformation of institutions into modern, effective means to improve the livelihood of all 
Costa Ricans, as described in outcome 2.1 of the UNSDCF.
Share prosperity
21. The UNDP theory of change in this area is: if UNDP fosters economy-wide 
agreements for the consolidation of inclusive and resilient green, blue, purple and circular 
approaches with a territorial approach, then this will contribute to the emergence of decent 
work and entrepreneurship opportunities outside of the Great Metropolitan area, in 
compliance with government priorities. UNDP will leverage its experience promoting 
upcycling, circular economy, sustainable fishery and green commodity approaches to 
support State institutions in enabling environmentsthe private sector needs to create formal 
employment opportunities. For this purpose, UNDP will coordinate with the Presidency, 
MIDEPLAN, MOH, MINAE and the National Institute for Housing and Urbanism (INVU) 
as a central element of the transition to a green economy that entails green urban 
renovation. 
22. Blue economy interventions will entail identifying and conducting feasibility studies 
to promote opportunities that foster employment in coastal areas, such as marine spatial 
planning, management of harmful substances, and development of environmental service 
provisions for fishing communities by collecting plastics or processing sargassum, among 
others. This will entail close liaison with the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), 
the National Institute of Fishing and Aquaculture of Costa Rica (INCOPESCA), the 
Central American Integration System (SICA), the Inter-American Tropical Tuna 
Commission (IATTC), and the MINAE. UNDP will draw expertise from the United 
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), UNEP, the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), ILO, as well as key 
international partners such as the German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ), the 
Interamerican Development Bank (IADB), the World Bank and the Central American 
Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI).
23. UNDP will continue to expand partnerships with civil society coalitions, youth -led 
organisations and volunteer networks, leveraging their grassroots experience in 
environmental and climate action to support the transition to a green and circular economy.
24. UNDP will contribute to generating legislation and policies to reduce fiscal 
dependence on income derived from hydrocarbon consumption. It will also collaborate in 
developing financial solutions that form part of a Government-led integrated national 
financing framework in coordination with other United Nations organisations, international 
financial institutions, and the national banking system. Interventions will strengthen
municipal and national institutions’ capacities to promote a green, blue, purple and circular 
economy through the design of tax and tariff reforms. Interventions will develop skills for 
high-value jobs in the framework of the fourth industrial revolution to promote formal 
employment of women and vulnerable populations in territories with a high 
multidimensional poverty index ranking. Interventions will contribute to aligning private 
finance and investment with the Goals. All these partnerships and interventions will 
contribute toward the UNSDCF outcome 3.2,related to the full participation of women and 
vulnerable populations in an inclusive and innovative economy.Resilient to adversity
25. The UNDP theory of change in this area is: if UNDP works with different stakeholders 
on disaster risk management, resilient and inclusive recovery strategies, with an 
intersectional gender perspective, through interventions throughout the country, then the
capacity of national and local public sectors, civil society, and the private sectorsto address 
the driving forces generating risks (under a prospective approach) to reduce the existing 
risks (through corrective measures) and to respond and prepare for multiple crises and 
threats will be strengthened. This will entail incorporating incorporate ‘build back better’
and ‘polluter pays’ principles in policies, and prioritizing recovery strategies that have not 
yet been sufficiently developed, such as risk transfer mechanisms, early warning systems, 
and other financial solutions to build resilience. 
26. Emphasis will be given to ecosystem and community-based adaptation strategies 
within the water, waste and sanitation sectors in complement and in line with nationally 
determined contributions and the national decarbonization plan. UNDP will mobilize 
resources from vertical funds and carbon markets to enhance conservation and sustainable 
use of biodiversity; obtain integral transboundary water management resources; promote 
sustainable consumption and production; foster greener, more energy-efficient 
technologies; increase hectares of forest cover or under restoration (as nature-based 
solutions provide a low-cost way to prepare for different threats and crises) – all with an 
intersectional gender perspective. By investing in water harvesting knowledge and 
expertise by State institutions and rural aqueduct associations, UNDP will improve 
community-based adaptation measuresin areas with water stress. 
27. All these interventions entail partnerships with the National Commission for Risk 
Prevention and Emergency Response (CNE), the Costa Rican Institute for Water and 
Sanitation (AyA), the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR), 
UNFPA, UNICEF, and financial institutions such as the IADB, the World Bank and 
CABEI. The programme will foster collaborative action for systems change using 
multidimensional and multi-stakeholder approaches and a transboundary perspective to 
achieve these results with key partners. UNDP will build on a solid history of collaboration 
and existing projects with over 50 local governments and 30 national government 
institutions, such as the Ministry of Economy, Industry and Commerce (MEIC), the 
Ministry of Labour and Social Security (MTSS), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
Worship (MRE), the Ministry for Innovation, Science, Technology and 
Telecommunications (MICITT), the Ministry of Security (MSP), the Ministry of Justice 
(MJP), the Ministry of Culture and Youth (MCJ), the Judicial Branch, the Legislative 
Branch, and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE). UNDP will work with academia and 
think tanks to advocate for evidence-based research on gender equality.
28. This strategy will contribute toward the efficient use of ecosystem resources for the 
protection of the planet and adaptation to climate change, in alignment with outcome 4.2 of 
the UNSDCF.
III. Programme and risk management
29. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results 
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level. The 
accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels, with respect 
to country programmes, is prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations 
policies and procedures and internal control framework.30. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be used in a coordinated 
fashion with otherUnited Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions 
and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
31. The MRE and MIDEPLAN will oversee this programme. The UNSDCF steering 
committee will provide strategic orientation.
32. Risks that may affect the implementation of this programme are political, economic, 
institutional, financial, environmental and socioenvironmental. 
33. The new administration in Costa Rica emphasizes deregulation to facilitate ease of 
doing business, employment generation, and cost-of-living reduction. The resulting 
expedited business development could generate associated environmental and social 
protection risks; UNDP will generate data and information and advocate and invest in 
policy communicationsto make the business case so that deregulation policies continue to 
advance the historical environmental and social wins of previous policies and to 
mainstream recovery and response mechanisms to multiple threats and crises.
34. Slow economic recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with the economic 
impacts of the war in Ukraine, could lead to increased levels of poverty, reduced attraction 
to foreign investment, and reduced earnings from tourism and commodities exports. This 
would not only slow down the proposed transition towards green, blue and purple 
economic models but could also increase social mistrust in institutions, increase social 
conflict, and weaken overall democracy. UNDP will strengthen spaces and participatory 
mechanisms for democratic dialogue and conflict management and promote transparency 
and accountability to avoid and alleviate any negative impacts.
35. The country’s high vulnerability to multiple threats and natural hazards could trigger 
an emergency that surpasses institutional response capacity. Starting with pilots, UNDP 
will invest in disaster risk prevention, early warning, and preparedness in all interventions,
ensuring central and local governments can improve internal and transboundary 
coordination and put risk transfer mechanisms in place to build back better. Ensuring 
international coordination with United Nations specialised agencies and strengthening the 
inter-agency emergency response mechanisms from the start of the programme cycle will 
be crucial for the quick deployment of resources in times of crisis and early recovery.
36. The UNDP accountability framework underscores its commitment to results and riskbased performance management, as well as shared values and a culture of accountability 
and transparency, following the UNDP enterprise risk management policy. The UNDP 
social and environmental standards and accountability mechanism will be applied to all 
programme interventions, including a stakeholder response mechanism. To update and 
manage grievance mechanisms, UNDP will continuously update stakeholder mapping to 
identify stakeholders who do not benefit from interventions or conflict with programming. 
This will create measures for conflict resolution and ensure no one is left behind. This will 
be particularly important for programmes related to indigenous peoples and pa yment for 
ecosystem services, which UNDP recognizes will require information and timely, inclusive 
participation in consultations and decision-making processes that may affect beneficiaries’ 
livelihoods or the ecosystems on which they depend. 
37. The UNDP oversight policy includes the organization of independent internal and 
external oversight to provide assurances that functional systems of internal controls are in place, including evaluation of the policy framework, efficient utilisation of resources, and 
adherence to professional and ethical standards in UNDP. This is particularly important in 
managing environmental vertical funds, especially with regard to separating functions 
between oversight and execution roles of associated projects, as UNDP employs more 
implementation partners in the new programming cycle.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
38. In coordination with MRE and MIDEPLAN, UNDP will effectively follow up on the 
commitments of this programme. For that purpose, the monitoring, evaluation and learning 
plan will be closely aligned with all programmatic interventions ensuring that oversight is 
provided on time and compliant with all quality assurance procedures. Furthermore, UNDP 
will incorporate the role of a monitoring and evaluation officer into the office structure to 
ensure early identification of delays in achieving results and to support the collection and 
dissemination of lessons learned. To cover monitoring, evaluation and communication 
expenses, UNDP will allocate at least 3 per cent of the programme budget, proportionately 
charged to projects.
39. UNDP will strengthen collaboration with data and information-generation entities, in 
particular INEC, the National Geo-environmental Information Centre, state universities,
and the statistics and information focal points from the Ministry of Health, MIDEPLAN, 
the Central Bank (BCCR), MOH, the Ministry of Culture and Youth, and IMAS. UNDP 
will support the strengthening and updating of digital tools employed by information 
systems, which are key to monitoring the advancement of the Goals, such as the National 
Information System and Unique Registry of Beneficiaries, the National System for 
Integrated Water Resource Management, and the System for Monitoring Land Use Change 
Within Production Systems. 
40. The programme will emphasize indicators with disaggregated data in areas that have 
lagged behind in national and institutional statistics, such as women, LGBTQIA+, 
indigenous peoples, afro-descendants,migrants, older persons and people with disabilities. 
The UNDP gender marker will track gender gaps and ensure that at least 70 per cent of 
total programme expenditures are in accordance with the gender equality strategy. 
Regarding regular resources, at least 15 per cent will be allocated to gender equality and 
women’s empowerment.The UNDP gender strategy will contribute to integrating gender 
indicators into the monitoring action plan.
41. To improve evidence-based competencies, data collection and analysis capacities will 
be enhanced through training and new analytical tools in collaboration with domestic and 
international academic institutions and the UNDP regional hub. UNDP will strengthen the 
liaison between communication, knowledge management and statistics teams to increase 
the impact of communication pieces in national decision-making. 
42. A balanced evaluation plan will be implemented to ensure learning and accountability, 
in agreement with the Government, following the UNDP evaluation policy and United 
Nations Evaluation Group guidelines. This plan complements UNSDCF, outcome, 
thematic and project evaluations, as required.Annex. Results and resources framework for Costa Rica (2023-2027)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strengthened capacities for provision of quality and accessible services for all. Sustainable Development Goals 1, 3, 4, 5, 11, 12, 16, 17.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: UNSDCF outcome 2.1. By 2027, institutions are transformed and modernised to provide peoplecentred, inclusive, innovative, effective, efficient, timely and flexible, gender-transforming quality services, articulated with other institutions and with a strong territorial 
approach, allowing municipalities to become the main agents of change in local development, especially in territories with a lower development index.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and 
human development.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF 
DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COSTBY 
OUTCOME 
(United States 
dollars)
Indicator 2.1.2. Percentage of 
people living in poor households 
determined by multidimensional 
poverty method, by sex, zone.
Baseline (2020):
Total: 20.1% 
Male: 21.1% 
Female: 19.2% 
Urban: 16.2% 
Rural: 30.4% 
Target (2027)
Total: 15.1%
Male: 16.1%
Female: 14%
Urban: 14.1%
Rural: 24.7%
Indicator 2.1.4. Percentage of 
people living in dwellings with 
optimal basic services, by sex, 
zone.
Baseline (2020):
Total:93.6%
Male: 93.3%
Female: 93.8%
INEC, Judicial Branch
Annual
Output 1.1. Public institutions 
have strengthened capacities for 
designing, implementing and 
evaluating public policies to 
achieve 2030 goals, based on the 
generation of evidence data, 
digitalization and information 
analysis and participatory 
approaches.
Indicator 1.1.1. Number of public 
policies that have improved in their 
design, implementation and 
evaluation of evidence-based and 
participatory approaches with an 
intersectional gender perspective, 
built with the support of UNDP.
[IRRF.1.1.1]
Baseline (2022): 3
Target (2027): 8
Frequency: annual
Source: UNDP
Indicator 1.1.2. Number of digital 
platforms and applications 
developed with support from 
UNDP that accelerate 
digitalization, and facilitate 
Judiciary
MAG
MCJ
MIDEPLAN
MINAE
Ministry of Health
MJP
MTSS
MSP
INAMU
INVU
IMAS
INCOPESCA
AyA
BCCR
Costa Rican Institute of Pacific Ports 
(INCOP)
Indigenous territories
Private sector 
Donors: Global Environment Facility 
(GEF), Green Climate Fund (GCF), 
Global Fund, Government of Costa 
Rica
Regular
$287,100
Other
$10,985,000DP/DCP/CRI/
4
Urban; 97.1%
Rural: 84.3%
Target (2027) 
Total:96.5%
Male: 96.3%
Female: 96.9%
Urban; 99.0%
Rural: 90.5%
Indicator 2.3.1. Percentage of 
informal employment in non-
agricultural employment by sex.
Baseline (2020):
Total:44.9%
Male: 42.4%
Female: 48.3%
Target (2027): 
Total:34.0%
Male: 31.8%
Female: 35.2%
Indicator 2.3.2. Intentional 
homicide rate by sex (per 100 
inhabitants)
Baseline (2020):
Total:11,1 
Male: 19.7 
Female: 2.4
Target (2027)
Total: 8.7
Male: 15.2
Female: 1.5
decision-making in the public and 
private sectors, with an 
intersectional gender perspective 
for Sustainable Development 
[IRRF.1.1.3]
Baseline (2022): 3
Target (2027): 9 
Frequency: annual
Source: UNDP
Output 1.2.Public and private 
sectors, civil society 
organizations, youth groups and 
volunteer networks have 
improved capacities for 
constructing and implementing
intersectoral, territorial and 
multilevel agreements based on 
democratic dialogue, which is 
gender-transformative, 
culturally sensitive and 
contribute to the advancement of 
the 2030 Agenda.
Indicator 1.2.1. Number of 
agreements drafted that facilitate 
the transition to a green, blue, 
circular, resilient and inclusive 
with an intersectional gender 
perspective, guided by the NDC 
and NDP. [IRRF SP 2.1.3]
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 3 
Frequency: Annual 
Source: UNDP
Indicator 1.2.2. Number of tools 
that promote the prevention and 
attention to violence, especially 
violence against women of all ages 
and in their diversity. [IRRF 6.3.2] 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 3 Frequency: Annual 
Source: National Plan for the Care 
and Prevention of Domestic 
Violence, United Nations country 
team, UNDP
Output 1.3. National and local 
public institutions have 
strengthened their capacities to 
manage, inform and supervise 
substances harmful to the 
environment, as well as to 
substitute and eliminate them. 
Indicator 1.3.1. Metric tons of 
CO
2
e avoided due to management
of chemicals, refrigerants 
imported, and actions to promote 
sustainable mobility and carbon 
sequestration as a result of forest 
restoration activities. [IRRF SP 
4.1.2]
Baseline (2022): 68.5 MT 
Target (2027): 22.26 MT 
Frequency: Annual
Source: Environmental Quality 
Management Department (DIGECA), MINAE
Baseline (2022): 2 MT
Target (2027): 10 MT 
Frequency: Annual
Source: DIGECA, MINAE
Indicator 1.3.3. Number of 
initiatives drafted with support 
from UNDP demonstrate progress 
in promoting solutions to plastics 
pollution with an intersectional 
gender perspective.
Baseline (2022): 2 
Target (2027): 5
Frequency: Annual
Source: UNDPDP/DCP/CRI/4
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: A strengthened and inclusive economic model which generates opportunities of formal employment of quality and entrepreneurship in 
all territories. Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: UNSDCF outcome 3.2. By 2027, women in their diversity and vulnerable populations participate 
in and benefit from an innovative, inclusive economy that enhances their opportunities for decent work and entrepreneurship, with better conditions to access financing 
mechanisms.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive, and digital transitions; 
Indicator 3.2.1. Unemployment 
rate, by sex.
Baseline (2020):
Total: 19.5%
Male: 15.5%
Female: 25.4%
Target (2027):
Total: 9%
Male: 6.1%
Female: 10%
INEC, Annual
MINAE, National System of 
Conservation Areas, protected areas map
Output 2.1. State institutions 
create conditions to overcome 
multidimensional poverty by 
facilitating formal employment 
opportunities based on green, 
blue, circular and purple 
enterprises with an intersectional 
gender perspective, prioritizing 
populations in conditions of 
vulnerability such as people with 
disabilities, migrants, indigenous 
peoples, and Afro-descendant 
population.
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of 
initiatives implemented with 
support from UNDP that promote 
formal employment among women 
and vulnerable populations through 
developing skills for high-value 
jobs in the framework of the fourth 
industrial revolution under a model 
of sustainable development and 
with an intersectional gender 
perspective. [IRRF 1.3.1]
Baseline (2022): 1
Target (2027): 7
Frequency: Annual
Data source: Legislative Assembly
Indicator 2.1.2. Number of people 
(disaggregated by sex), who 
benefit directly from initiatives
facilitated by UNDP, related with 
employment opportunities in
Presidency
Legislative Assembly
MAG
MCJ
MEIC
MICITT
MIDEPLAN
MINAE
Ministry of Heath
MOH
MTSS
IMAS
BCCR
INCOPESCA
INAMU
INCOP
Rural Development Institute (INDER)
Indigenous Roundtable
Chambers of Commerce and Exporters
Private sector 
Donors: GEF, GCF, Global Fund, 
Adaptation Fund, Government of Costa 
Rica
Regular
$382,800
Other
$22,660,000territories with a high 
multidimensional poverty index 
and among priority interest groups
most vulnerable. [IRRF 1.3.2]
Baseline (2022): 30,000
Target (2022): 40,000
Frequency: Annual
Data source: IMAS, INEC
Output 2.2.National and local 
public sectors have strengthened 
capacities for the promotion of a 
green, blue, purple and circular 
economy and the strengthening 
of climate action.
Indicator 2.2.1. Number of bills, 
drafted with the support of UNDP, 
being analysed in the legislative 
assembly to reduce fiscal 
dependence on income derived 
from hydrocarbon consumption 
and mitigate the cost to the State of 
the environmental and social 
impacts of unsustainable economic 
activity, guided by the NDC and 
NDP. [IRRF E.3.2]
Baseline (2022): 1
Target (2027): 7
Frequency: Annual
Data source: Legislative Assembly
Indicator 2.2.2. Number of public 
policies or technical standards 
drafted with support from UNDP, 
that contribute to promoting 
sustainable production, 
biodiversity, circular economy, and 
climate action at the national and 
municipal level, guided by the 
NDC and NDP. [IRRF EA.3.2]
Baseline (2022): 5
Target (2022): 8
Frequency: AnnualDP/DCP/CRI/4
Data source: UNDP, MEIC
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strengthened national and subnational, public and private capacities for prevention, preparation, reaction and response to crises. 
Sustainable Development Goals 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: UNSDCF outcome 4.2. By 2027, people, communities and institutions mitigate and adapt to 
climate change and a sustainable and efficient use of ecosystem resources that conserve and prevent the degradation of nature, stop pollution and protect the planet.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk.
Indicator 4.1.1. Number of people 
directly affected as a result of 
disasters per 100,000 inhabitants.
Baseline (2020): 1,224
Target (2027): 1,102
Indicator 4.2.1. Percentage of 
local governments adopting and 
implementing disaster risk 
reduction strategies at the local 
level.
Baseline (2020): 98.8%
Target (2027): 100%
CNE
Annual
Output 3.1. Central and local 
public institutions, indigenous 
territories, and local 
organisations have strengthened 
capacities for disaster risk 
management, including resilient 
and inclusive recovery strategies, 
with an intersectional gender 
perspective, based on a correct 
assessment of loss and damage.
Indicator 3.1.1. Number of 
initiatives with UNDP support that 
strengthen capacities for 
prevention, early warning, 
management of multiple threats, 
and disaster recovery with an 
intersectional gender perspective 
transformation. [IRRF SP 3.1.1]
Baseline (2022): 7
Target (2027): 14
Frequency: Annual
Data source: UNDP, CNE
Indicator 3.1.2. Number of 
institutions at national and local 
levels with strengthened capacities 
for comprehensive risk 
management, including integrated 
water resources management with 
a gender perspective.
Baseline (2022): 206
Target (2027): 400
MAG
MCJ
MICITT
MIDEPLAN
MINAE
Ministry of Heath
Ministry of Public Works and Transport 
MSP
MTSS
Legislative Assembly
AyA
BCCR
CCSS
CNE
ICE
ICT
IMAS
INAMU
INCOP
INDER
INEC
INVU
Municipalities
Indigenous Territories
Donors: GEF, GCF, Global Fund, 
Government of Costa Rica
Regular
$287,100Frequency: Annual
Data source: UNDP, municipalities, AyA
Output 3.2. Central and local 
government institutions, civil 
society and the private sector increased support for 
ecosystems-based adaptation 
strategies with a gender 
perspective and consolidated 
social inclusion.
Indicator 3.2.1.Funds mobilised,
with support from UNDP, from 
public and private sectors to 
support the mitigation and 
conservation efforts and 
sustainable use of biodiversity and 
forests with a gender perspective 
and social inclusion as adaptation 
measures. [IRRF SP 4.2.1]
Baseline (2022): $10 million
Target (2027): $30 million
Frequency: Annual
Data source: UNDP
Indicator 3.2.2. Area of hectares 
(Ha) of increased forest cover or 
restoration that contribute to 
ecosystem-based adaptation, with 
support from UNDP [IRRF 4.1.2]
Baseline (2022): 1000 Ha
Target (2027): 2000 Ha
Frequency: Annual
Data source: National Geo-
environmental Information Centre, 
MINAE, National Forest Financing 
Fund 
Output 3.3. State institutions and 
rural aqueduct associations have improved water resource 
management through DP/DCP/CRI/4
community-based adaptation 
measures and managing multiple 
risks.
Indicator 3.3.1. Number of 
interventions by UNDP that 
improve water resources 
management and sanitation.
Baseline (2022): 1
Target (2027): 5
Frequency: annual
Data source: AyA, municipalities