File Name: DZA-NREP-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Algeria
Country Code: DZA
Category: NREP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: May 2020
Start Year: 2015
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

SEFA Appraisal Request (SGR) - Green Baseload
Algeria Renewable Energy Program (AREP) 
May 2020Project Summary
Project 
description 
Algeria Renewable Energy Program (AREP) aims to boost Algeria’s plans (National Renewable Energy Development 
Strategy 2015-2030) to untap the high solar energy potential (2,000 kWh/m2annual average irradiation), diversify the 
energy mix and attract private investments in the power sector. Algeria aims to add 13.5 GW of solar energy capacity by 
2030. AREP supports Algeria, to deploy this huge utility-scale solar energy generation capacity through a transparent, 
well-structured and competitive selection of Independent Power Producers (IPPs). AREP’s specific objective is to 
provide technical and financial assistance to complete and roll-out the technical, legal and institutional framework that 
will allow private IPPs to come and invest in feasible and financially profitable solar energy projects. AREP components 
are: (i) solar sites identification, prioritization and preparation- solar potential determination, technical, financial and 
legal, environmental and social studies/agreements for each selected site; (ii) Capacity building on “Preparation of 
relevant legal template agreements including Power Purchase Agreements (PPA), Concession Agreements, Direct 
Agreements, Interconnection Agreements and Land Agreements etc.”, negotiation and related legal and regulatory issues; 
and (iii) project management and coordination. AREP builds on the Bank’s IPP procurement experience in other 
countries (Ethiopia, Nigeria and Angola).
Cost structure 
The total cost of the project is estimated at USD 1.056 million. SEFA is expected to contribute USD 0.995 million to 
cover technical assistance including the hiring of a consulting firm to: (i) identify and assess the potential of identified 
sites to develop solar projects using, updating and validating existing studies already available.; (ii) prepare the legal 
framework including templates of concession and PPA agreements; and (iii) prepare the bidding documents for the 
selection of potential IPPs. Eventually, the project will be complemented with a supplementary fund from the MiddleIncome Country Technical Assistance Fund (MIC TAF), which envisaged to contribute up to USD 0.5 million to provide 
training to staff from SONATRACH and Algerian authorities in developing bankable private sector financed renewable 
energy projects under the IPP/PPP scheme. It will also complement an envisaged potential provision of legal advisory 
services for IPP/PPP, undertaken by the African Legal Support Facility (ALSF), which will produce an IPP procurement 
toolkit and will provide capacity building.
Description of 
recipient 
The SEFA grant recipient will be the Algerian Government. SONATRACH, the national oil and gas company, will be 
the Executing Agency for the program responsible for the implementation of the grant, in close collaboration with the 
Ministry of Energy and SONELGAZ, the state-owned electricity utility. SONATRACH has been mandated by the 
Government of Algeria to promote the development and operation of solar and wind power plants through an IPP/PPP 
framework with the participation of competitively selected private operators.
SEFA 
Alignment and
Role
The SEFA grant will play a crucial role in creating the enabling environment for the development of PPP renewable 
energy projects in Algeria. This will enable the deployment of “greener” power alternatives to gas-based options to meet 
baseload requirements. As such, the technical assistance to be funded by SEFA grant will allow the structuring of 
bankable projects that will ultimately leverage private investments and deliver a sustainable energy solution with strong 
economic, environmental and social returns.
Bank’s role 
The specific Bank role will be to enable the selected priority renewable energy solar projects to be made bankable and 
afterwards developed and implemented by private IPPs. Upon selection of the private IPPs to design, build, own and 
operate the solar power plants, the Bank is expected to play a leading role in structuring sovereign and non-sovereign 
financing in favor of SONATRACH and the selected IPPs. 
Implementation 
arrangements 
The program will be managed by an experienced team through a newly established Project implementation unit (PIU) 
within SONATRACH. The PIU will be in charge of the project activities including the procurement of the consulting 
firm as well as the supervision of their works. 
Strategic 
alignment 
AREP’s objectives are aligned with the National Renewable Energy Development Strategy 2015-2030 objectives. The 
program aligns with the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) and will contribute to the attainment of the 3 of the 
High 5 priorities (Light Up and Power Africa, Industrialize Africa, Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa). 
The operation is aligned with the New Energy Pact for Africa 2016-2025 which focuses on the establishment of a 
renewable energy policy framework (flagship 1) and the need to increase the number of bankable energy projects 
(flagship 3). It aligns with the Energy Policy and Private Sector Development Strategy (2013-2017). The program is 
also in line with the Bank CSPi 2016-2018 for Algeria (which was extended to 2019/2020), particularly with its Pillar 
II "Support for the transformation of the energy sector. The project aligns with Algeria’s NDC under the Paris 
Agreement in which the Government highlights opportunities to significantly increase solar PV and reduce emissions, 
conditional on external assistance. It also aligns with the Banks second Climate Change Action Plan and climate finance 
targets.
Development 
The project will have a significant impact in allowing the development of renewable energy projects as well as enabling 
private operators to establish in Algeria and operate in the energy sector. Particularly, the project will: (i) assist Algeria in
diversifying its energy generation sources by increasing the share of RE in the energy mixthereby reducing the CO2Contents
Application Summary ii
Acronyms iii
A. INTRODUCTION 1
1 Country context 1
2 Energy sector context 1
3 Institutional context and Government priorities 2
4 Development partners’ activities in energy sector 4
5 Program rationale 4
6 Justification for SEFA intervention and strategic alignment 4
B. SEFA INTERVENTION 5
7 Objective 5
8 Program implementation arrangements 6
9 Grant components/objectives/activities 6
10 Outputs and key activities 7
11 Risk assessment 7
12 Indicative implementation schedule 8
13 Procurement arrangements 9
14 Financial management, disbursement, audit arrangements and legal & compliance 10
C. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 10
Annexes iv
Annex 1 Bank’s portfolio in Alergia iv
Annex 2 Tentative breakdown of budget for the SEFA AREP program support for Algeria v
Annex 3 Key Activities and Logical framework of SEFA Grant vi
Annex 4 Procurement plan viii
Annex 5 Risk assessment for implementation of SEFA program in Algeria ix
Annex 6 Terms of Reference for an individual consultancy xi
Annex 7 Terms of Reference for the recruitment of a consultancy firm xiv
Annex 8 Procurement methods and procedures xix
Table 1 Overall program 5
Table 2 AREP governance setting 6
Table 3 Indicative implementation Schedule 8
Table 4 Project’s estimated costs (in USD million) 8
Table 5 Summary of Procurement Arrangements (in USD ‘000) 10Application Summary
Processing Stage
Final
Date
5/28/2020
Bank Team Lead
Djamali IBRAHIME
Carlos MOLLINEDO
SEFA Team Support
SEFA TU
Program Sector/Technology
Renewable Energy (RE)
Program Country/Region
People's Democratic Republic of Algeria
Executing Agency
SONATRACH Société Nationale pour la 
Recherche, la Production, le Transport, la 
Transformation, et la Commercialisation des 
Hydrocarbures
Partner Donors
N/A
Program Description
The Algeria Renewable Energy Program (AREP) aims to diversify the energy mix and reduce Algeria’s natural 
gas-based power concentration by promoting the development of private sector-led solar PV energy projects. 
AREP will support the rolling out of a viable, competitive and sustainable procurement framework that will 
enable and stimulate investments by Independent Power Producers (IPPs) in solar energy. AREP is articulated 
around the following milestones:
(i) Develop and operationalize the new IPP/PPP procurement framework by supporting the preparation of 
bankable RE solar priority projects that are suitable for IPPs; 
(ii) Provide hands-on training and guide government officials on IPP procurement related issues, 
specifically socio-environmental, technical and legal issues.
Program Components
(i) Solar sites identification, prioritization and preparation which include: bankability, solar potential 
determination, technical, financial and legal, E&S studies/agreements for each selected site.
(ii) Project documents and tender documents preparation, negotiation and related legal and regulatory 
issues. The Preparation of relevant legal template agreements should include Power Purchase 
Agreements (PPA), Concession Agreements, Direct Agreements, Interconnection Agreements and 
Land Agreements as well as any other key project documentation required by local legislation to tender 
IPPs / selection and analysis on optimal financial options and financial modelling.
(iii) Program management and coordination.
Key Performance Indicators
Capacity installed of solar investment projects 13.5 GW
Annual reduction of CO2 emissions 1.7 million tonnes
Cumulative additional private investment in RE projects USD 1 billion
Summary Financing Plan (USD million) 
Components SEFA 
funding
GOA 
contribution Total
1 Technical 
feasibility support
Solar sites identification, prioritization and preparation: 
bankability, solar potential determination, technical, financial and 
legal, E&S studies/agreements for each selected site.
0,360 0,360
2 Transaction 
advisory
Project documents and tender documents preparation, negotiation 
and related legal and regulatory issues. 0,550 0,550
Financial options 
3 Project 
management Program management and miscellaneous (technical support) 0,085 0,085
Government contribution (in kind) 0,056 0,056
GRAND TOTAL 0,995 0,056 1,051Acronyms
AFD French Development Agency MoE Ministry of Energy
AfDB African Development Bank MoF Ministry of Finance 
ALSF Africa Legal Support Facility MTF Medium-term framework 
AREP Algeria Renewable Energy Program MW Megawatt
BNA National Bank of Algeria NMCE New Economic Growth Model
BPS Borrower Procurement System OSE Electricity System Operator 
BPM Bank Procurement Policy and 
Methodology
PEVP Power, Energy, Climate and Green 
Growth Sector Complex
CODZ Algeria Country Office (of AfDB) PFM Public financial management 
CREG Electricity and Gaz Regulation 
Commission
PFC Power Facto Corrector 
DFID U.K. Department for International 
Development
PIU Project Implementation Unit
DZD Algerian Dinar PMPs Bank Procurement Methods and 
Procedures
EE Energy efficiency PPA Purchasing Power Agreement 
ESIA Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment
PPP Public Private Partnership
EPC Engineering procurement and 
construction 
PSD Private sector development 
ESMAP Energy Sector Management Assistance 
Program
PV Photovoltaic 
ESMF Environmental and Social Management 
Framework
QCBS Quality Cost Based Selection
EU European Union RAP Resettlement Action Plan 
GDP Gross Domestic Product RE Renewable Energy 
GHG Greenhouse Gas REFIT Renewable Energy Feed In Tariff
GIZ German Agency for International 
Cooperation
REOI Request for Expressions of Interest
GMGs Green Mini-Grids RFP Request for Proposals
GRTG Algerian Gas Transmission Network 
Management 
SBD Standard Bidding Document
GRTE Algerian Electricity Transmission 
Network Management
SDA Société de Distribution de l'électricité et 
du gaz d'Alger
GOA Government of Algeria SDC Algerian Electricity and Gas 
Distribution Company
GPN General Procurement Notice SDDs Bank Standard Solicitation Documents
GW Gigawatt SEFA Sustainable Energy Fund For Africa
HH Household SEforALL Sustainable Energy for All
HDI Human Development Index SGR SEFA Grant Request
ICB International Competitive Bidding SKTM Shariket Kahraba wa Taket 
Moutadjadida
IEA International Energy Agency SONATRACH Société Nationale pour la Recherche, la 
Production, le Transport, la 
Transformation, et la 
Commercialisation des Hydrocarbures
IFC International Finance Corporation SONELGAZ Société nationale de l'électricité et du 
gaz
IPP Independent Power Producer SPE Algeria Electricity Production 
Company
ISP Institutional Support Project TA Technical Assistance
KNGZ Canalization Company TOR Terms of Reference
KV Kilo-volts USAID U.S. Agency for International 
Development 
LCS Least Cost Selection Method USD US dollars A. INTRODUCTION
1. Country context
1.1 Algeria, Africa’s largest country (2.4m Km2) and first natural gas exporter, has vast natural
resources and large economic potential. It has an estimated population of 42 million of which, 
almost 30 % are younger than 15 years and 73% live in urban areas (2018). Algeria’s progress in 
human development and poverty reduction has been considerable. It ranks 85
th out of 189 
countries on the 2018 Human Development Index (HDI) – the third best ranked African country. 
Over last two decades, poverty rates have been declining at record levels thanks to major social 
assistance programs (direct transfers, universal subsidies, etc.) amounting to 12% of GDP in 
2018. With a GDP per capita reaching USD 4,238 (2018), Algeria is the fourth African economy; 
still heavily dependent on fossil fuel-based revenues. Real GDP growth reached 1.5% in 2018, 
compared to 1.4% in 2017, and was sustained at 1.5% in Q1-2019. Growth in the hydrocarbon 
sector was sluggish, with economic activity contracting by 6.5% and 7.7% in 2018 and Q1-2019, 
respectively – partially offsetting the slight increase in nonhydrocarbon growth of 3.4% and 3.9% 
in 2018 and Q1-2019 respectively.
2. Energy sector context
2.1 Algeria's has reached universal electrification thanks to an ambitious program 
implemented by the Government since the 1970s. The access electrification rate has increased 
in 45 years from 34% in 1970 to more than 99%, including 100% in urban areas. The entire 
territory is electrified thanks to the connection of more than 8.6 million households by 
interconnected electricity networks or by isolated and decentralized networks. 
2.2 Electricity demand has increased markedly over the last decade. The gross demand reached 
60995 GWh in 2018 (recording an average growth rate of 7% per year between 2010 and 2018);
it is expected to reach 98980 GWh in 2024 and 125805 GWh in 2029. In line to the increase of 
electricity demand, the peak load demand has grown rapidly reaching 13676 MW in 2018 and is 
expected to reach 20400 MW in 2024 and 25751 MW in 2029. This upward trend has been 
supported by low energy prices, improved standard of living, increased urbanization and high 
levels of public investment. At present, the power sector accounts for the largest share of total 
domestic gas use and the continuation of this trend can ultimately make adversely impacted on 
the country’s natural gas balance and resulted in the underutilization of its export potential.
2.3 Algeria has a current generation capacity of 21 GW of which 96% from natural gas, 1% 
from diesel, 1% from hydro, 2% from other renewable sources (mainly solar PV). Total 
thermal generation capacity will reach 33 GW in 2027 (SONELGAZ estimates). Electricity is 
generated by SPE and SKTM – the two subsidiaries of SONELGAZ Group. SKTM focuses on 
producing thermal electricity to feed the isolated networks in the South and on producing 
electricity from renewable sources throughout the national territory. 
2.4 Algeria's electricity requirements are currently almost exclusively met by fossil fuels, 
particularly natural gas. The energy transition requires the gradual integration of renewable 
energy sources into the energy mix, which will make possible both to diversify energy production 
and meet the growing electricity demand targets. An increasing share of natural gas production is 
now directed to cover the domestic consumption (estimated at 51 billion m³ in 2020 and 55 billion 
m³ in 2030). Therefore, natural gas export volumes are decreasing (35 million TOE in 2017 
compared to 57 million TOE in 2004). Unless Algeria secures its energy transition and prepares 
for the post-oil era, it will inevitably have to make trade-offs between the need to meet domestic 
consumption and the need to secure foreign exchange, via fossil fuel exports. 
2.5 Algeria’s expansion plans in transmission and distribution support renewable energy 
development. The transmission network includes 29,000 km of high-voltage and mediumvoltage transmission lines (60 kV to 400 kV) and 400 substations. It includes 4 interconnections 
with Morocco (2 in 220 kV and 2 in 400 kV), and five interconnections with Tunisia (1 in 90 kV, 2 in 150 kV, 1 in 220 kV and 1 in 400 kV). The total length of the national electricity distribution 
network reaches 329,000 km (2018). Algeria’s electricity transmission network development 
program (2017-2027) envisages the construction and commissioning of 286 substations and 
23,126 km of additional transmission lines for a total investment cost of DA16 billion (USD 1.7 
billion) – an expansion of the Algerian grid is also part of the action plan, in order to support 
(intermittent) renewable energy development. Likewise, the distribution network development 
program (2017-2027) plans to make an average of 300,000 new connections to electricity per 
year.
2.6 Electricity and gas tariffs are regulated and set by the public authorities. Electricity tariffs 
have remained frozen from 2005 to 2016, causing significant gaps between the cost of electricity 
and gas and the selling price, therefore leading to negative financial results for SONELGAZ. In 
2016, there has been a 20% increase in the selling prices of electricity and gas however this last 
tariff adjustment is still not enough to catch up with the real cost of electricity and gas services. 
For example, the cost of producing electricity is 0.103 USD/kWh while the selling price is 0.034
USD/kWh. The difference is covered by the State in the form of a subsidy. Since 2016, the 
Government has implemented a progressive tariff system. It reviewed the tariff structure in order 
to create a social tranche of 125 kWh/quarter which would not be affected by any future tariff 
increases while those consuming more than 125 kWh would be subject to a price approaching the 
real cost of servicing electricity and gaz.
2.7 Algeria has enormous renewable energy potential that remains untapped. Given its 
geographical location, Algeria has one of the highest solar potential in the world. The duration of 
solar exposure on almost the entire national territory exceeds 2,000 hours annually and can reach 
3,900 hours (high plateaus and Sahara). The annual average irradiation reaches 2,000 kWh/m2
which is an acceptable level compared to regional neighbors: Morocco (2,200 kWh/m2), Egypt 
(1,300 kWh/m2) and Tunisia (1,905 kWh/m2). To date, the share of renewable electricity 
represents 2% of the country's energy mix. Algeria has an installed RE capacity estimated at 354 
megawatts (MW), including 344 MW of photovoltaic energy, produced by 24 power plants.
Additionally, a call for tenders to produce 150 MW of solar energy (several PV solar plants of
10MW each) was launched by the Electricity and Gas Regulatory Commission (CREG) in 
November 2018. However, only 5 financial offers have been accepted for further processing (as 
the price proposed, 0.07 USD/kWh, was lower than the ceiling set by CREG, 0.088 USD/kWh)
for the construction of five solar PV plants with a total capacity of 50MW. Regarding wind 
potential, it can be noted that the South is characterized by higher speeds than the North, 
particularly in the South-East, with speeds above 7 m/s and exceeding 8 m/s in the Tamanrasset 
region.
3. Institutional context and Government priorities
3.1 Five national actors dominate the Algeria’s power sector: The Ministry of Energy governing 
the whole sector, SONELGAZ in charge of electricity and natural gas distribution, and 
SONATRACH in charge of hydrocarbon development and management and two regulator 
entities (NCREEE and CREG). 
Ministry of 
Energy (MoE)
Responsible for setting and implementing the Government’s energy strategies and policies, 
overseeing the public enterprises and public institutions operating in the sector and under its 
jurisdiction, and ensuring the organization/operation of the electricity, gas and oil markets.
SONATRACH A 100% state-owned company which oversees the exploration, production, processing and 
marketing of hydrocarbons and their derivatives. It is the largest Algerian company and the 
twelfth largest oil and gas company in the world. In 2017, the national hydrocarbon company 
recorded a turnover of DA4031 billion (USD 35.1 billion) compared to DA3398 billion 
(USD 29.6 billion) in 2016, an increase of 18%. This performance was mainly due to the 
increase in the average annual price per barrel, from USD 44.81 in 2016 to USD 54.04 in 
2017. Exports represented nearly 95% of turnover in 2017. As at 31 December 2017, the 
Group recorded a 57% increase in net income to DA326 billion (USD 2.8 billion), compared 
with DA207 billion (USD 1.8 billion) at the same period in 2016. The Group is also the largest contributor to the national budget. SONATRACH has indeed paid to the Treasury, 
for the year 2017, a contribution amounting to DA 2228 billion (USD 19.4 billion), thus 
strongly supporting the dynamics of the Algerian economy. Since the recent crisis (COVID 
and fall in oil prices), the government has instructed SONATRACH to significantly reduce 
its investment and operating costs.
SONELGAZ A 100% public holding company which, through 44 subsidiaries, holds a monopoly on the 
production, transmission, distribution, import and export of electricity. It also holds a 
monopoly in the power distribution, power transport and the distribution of natural gas sold 
to Algerian households and companies. SONELGAZ Group is the second largest national 
group after SONATRACH. Its revenues come mainly from its distribution subsidiaries. 
Despite the significant increase in tariffs in 2016, electricity and gas selling prices remain 
generally below their service cost, which tends to keep SONELGAZ in a structural deficit 
situation. SONELGAZ’s activities are carried out by the following subsidiaries:
• Electricity generation: (i) Shariket Kahraba wa Taket Moutadjadida (SKTM). Created 
in 2013, it focuses focusing on renewable energy in remote areas (southern region). 
SKTM’s capital is entirely held by SONELGAZ, the holding company; (ii) Algeria 
Electricity Production Company (SPE) 
• Electricity transmission: (i) Algerian Electricity Transmission Network Management 
(GRTE), and (ii) Electricity System Operator (OSE).
• Electricity distribution: Algerian Electricity and Gas Distribution Company (SDC).
• Gas transmission: Algerian Gas Transmission Network Management (GRTG).
• Gas distribution: SDC and Canalization Company (KANAGHAZ).
The National 
Commission for 
RE and EE
(CNREEE)
Created very recently created (October 2019). The Commission's mission is to define a 
national strategy for the development of renewable energies and energy efficiency and to 
coordinate national efforts to implement the government programs. The commission also 
provides support to institutional and economic stakeholders in terms of training and 
research, development of scientific and technical information on renewable energy.
Electricity and 
Gas Regulatory 
Commission 
(CREG)
Created in 2002, CREG is an independent body with a legal status and a financial autonomy. 
It is vested with two main missions: (i) Advise on the organization and functioning of 
the electricity and national gas market and (ii) Supervise and control of the respect 
of laws and regulations related to the electricity and the national gas market.
3.2 Algeria has embarked on the path of renewable energies to provide sustainable solutions to 
environmental challenges. Algeria aims to become a major player in the production of electricity 
from solar PV and wind power. The objective is to contribute to the diversification of the energy 
mix. The strategy underpins the “energy transition objective” which is aligned with the objectives 
of the New Economic Growth Model (NMCE) adopted by the government in October 2016. The 
NMCE makes it a priority to maintain the country's external financial sustainability and mentions 
in this context the need to work towards ''the implementation of a sustained energy efficiency and 
renewable energy development policy that will generate a substantial exportable surplus of 
hydrocarbon production''.
3.3 The National Renewable Energy Development Strategy 2015-2030 particularly includes 
13.5 GW of solar energy capacity to be implemented through public-private partnerships 
(PPP), where Algerian entities will own 51% of the project company and the remaining 49% 
could be owned by foreign private investors. Algeria’s National Renewable Energy Development 
Strategy 2015-2030 was adopted in February 2011, revised in May 2015 and placed as a national 
priority in February 2016. Such a strategy aims at building 22 GW, from solar and wind. By 2030, 
the share of renewable energies should represent nearly 27% in terms of production and 37% in 
terms of installed capacity and will save nearly 30 billion cubic meters of natural gas. Fitting fully 
into this strategy, the SONATRACH’s Vision SH-2030 targets to develop 2.3 GW of solar power 
led and financed by private sector investors. It is in this context that the AREP program will 
contribute to attract the interest of as many operators as possible and be successful, in line with 
the Authorities’ request for the Bank to provide technical support for selected technical aspects.
3.4 SONATRACH plays a key role in the implementation of the Algerian renewable energy 
program. Algeria’s natural gas export potential is increasingly and dangerously affected by the 
decline/stagnation of natural gas production and the rapid increase of domestic gas consumption.
In this regard, and as part of its 2030 strategy, SONATRACH has developed a long-term vision to contribute to improving the energy mix in the country by developing 1.3 GW solar capacity 
with private investors and solarizing its facilities to cover up to 80% of its site needs and 
consequently export the savings quantity of natural gas. In addition to its solid financial 
capacities, SONATRACH has developed an outstanding experience working with international 
energy private investors and collaborating in PPP projects. In this regard, the Government of 
Algeria has mandated SONATRACH to play a central role and be the implementing agency of 
the AREP by developing utility-scale solar energy generation capacity through a well-structured 
and competitive Independent Power Producer procurement package public-private partnership.
4. Development partners’ activities in the energy sector 
4.1 AREP will build on on-going/or undertaken coordination activities in the country. Since 
Algeria decided to discontinue external public borrowing, cooperation with technical and 
financial partners (TFPs) has been refocused on technical assistance. Coordination has this aspect 
and has not required any formal mechanism. However, coordination meetings between TFPs are 
organized with the support of the European Union (EU) and UNDP, within the “Development 
Cooperation Effectiveness Group”. At sector level, there are thematic groups: (economic 
development, employment, private sector, vocational training, water and sanitation, and climate 
change). In recent years, the United Nations, the World Bank, and the AfDB have been among 
Algeria’s most active partners. Since January 2020, external debt for "strategic" projects is 
allowed (subject to Government prior approval). The practical arrangements for this new 
provision are being prepared by the Algerian authorities.
5. Program rationale
5.1 AREP’s rationale is to roll out a new procurement framework that will enable private 
investment by IPPs (independent power producers) in the Algerian (solar) renewable 
energy sector. AREP aims to promote the development of a transparent and competitive the RE 
sector to boost private sector investment in energy generation and diversify the energy mix. 
5.2 In order to accelerate the implementation of its solar program while benefiting from the 
decrease of solar equipment costs in the international market, Algeria intends to attract 
international private investors to produce electricity from renewable energy sources, through 
competitive tendering. The objective is to encourage competition between IPPs in order to get the 
lowest tariff per kWh. The country also hopes to take advantage of opportunities for industrial 
integration through the development of a national renewable energy industry, a factor of 
economic diversification and job creation. The provisions of Executive Decree No. 17-98 of 26 
taken by the Ministry of Energy in February 2017 define the tendering process for production of 
electricity from renewable energy sources. The decree gives priority to the following two 
tendering methods:
• Call for tenders to investors: this will be launched by the Ministry of Energy for the 
construction and operation of large-capacity renewable energy installations and selling of 
electricity. This mode concerns renewable power installations with an annual energy 
generation exceeding 20 GWh. The sites to be developed will be provided by the Government 
to the selected investors.
• Call for tenders by auction: this will be launched by the Commission of Electricity and Gas 
Regulation (CREG). It will concern the construction and operation of small-capacity 
renewable energy installations with an annual energy generation between 10 and 20 GWh. In 
this case, investors must come with the land site.
6. Justification for SEFA intervention and strategic alignment 
6.1 Linkage to SEFA objectives: this program supports SEFA’s objective to catalyse private sector 
investments in early stage renewable energy (in this case solar energy) markets to stimulate a 
transition to more inclusive and green growth model for Algeria. In line with the SEFA Technical 
Assistance window, the program addresses readiness of solar projects and contributes to develop 
a program to achieve needed scale in the solar energy sector in Algeria. AREP supports the SEFA’s thematic area: green baseload (GBL) that supports the development of clean generation 
capacity, including solar energy.
6.2 Strategic alignment: AREP aligns with the objectives of transforming Algeria into a regional 
energy hub by 2030. The proposal is also in harmony with the Algeria Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (2015),submitted to COP21 in 2015, which commits to expand climate 
resilient green energy development (wind, solar, hydro, geo-thermal and other alternative 
resources) to minimize climate impact and drought risks. The program aligns with the Bank’s 
Ten-Year Strategy (TYS 2013-2022). Specifically, with its gradual transition to green growth 
objective; it underpins two TYS operational priorities: private sector development and 
infrastructure development. It aligns with the New Deal on Energy for Africa and the attainment 
of the High 5 priorities of Light Up and Power Africa and improve the quality of life for the 
people of Africa. Specifically, it supports Flagship 1 (standardized IPP procurement program) 
and Flagship 2 (Renewable energy). It also aligns with the Energy Sector Policy (as it is part of 
the Renewable Energy priority sub-sector and it is linked to the “moving towards a cleaner energy 
path” principle. It aligns to the Private sector Development Policy and Strategy (2013-2017; 
extended until 2020, supporting pillar 1 investment and business climate), as well as with the 
Pillar 2 “Support for transformation of the energy sector” of the Bank’s interim Country Strategy 
Paper 2016/2018 for Algeria (which was extended to 2019/2020), which intends to promote 
energy transition and support renewable sources of energy (especially solar) whether it be through 
advisory, technical assistance or funding. 
B. SEFA INTERVENTION
7. Objective
7.1 AREP is part of a comprehensive RE program that supports Algeria’s ambitious solar 
energy agenda. AREP, for a total amount of USD 995,000 (Table 1) will be complemented by 
the envisaged legal advisory services for IPP/PPP, to be provided by the African Legal Support 
Facility (ALSF) 
Table 1: Overall Program
Components Estimated Cost (USD)
1. Technical feasibility Support 360,000
2. Transaction advisory 550,000
3. Project management assistance 85,000
TOTAL 995,000
7.2 AREP objectives:
(i) Underpin the rolling out of the new procurement framework for IPP projects by improving the 
bankability of the pipeline of selected RE solar PV projects and by supporting the enhancement 
of the procedures, standards and contract templates. This will include technical specifications, 
performance, land site and interconnection preparatory work. 
(ii) Provide hands-on advisory services on project documents and tender documents (Power Purchase 
Agreements (PPA), Concession Agreements, Direct Agreements, Interconnection Agreements 
and Land Agreements, ect.) preparation, negotiation and related legal and regulatory issues, as 
well as, selection and analysis on optimal financial options and modelling.
8. Program implementation arrangements
8.1 The Ministry of Energy and its specialized entities has implemented several power sector 
projects and programs. While the 51%-49% still prevails, iinternational firms keep being 
interested in the Algeria market and particularly in the energy sector. In oil&gas sector, majors 
keep partnering with SONATRACH. The company is a seasoned international energy 
conglomerate and has substantive proven experience in implementing projects with international private and public partners. In 2018, SONATRACH has signed a cooperation agreement with the 
Italian energy company ENI for developing the solar energy. This agreement has made it possible 
to build a 10 MW PV solar farm on the Bir Reba Nord gas field, which is successfully operated 
by ENI. In the power sector, GE entered into a partnership with Sonelgaz to establish the joint 
venture GEAT which constructs gas turbines.
8.2 An executing unit is established in SONATRACH (General Direction of Natural Resources) 
and will be in charge of implementing the project. In addition to SONATRACH staff, this unit 
will be supported by staffs from the Ministry of Energy (General Direction of Energy and General 
Direction of Prospective), SONELGAZ (General Direction of Strategy and Prospective) and 
SKTM. A Steering committee comprising representatives of the Ministry of Energy (Renewable 
Energies and Energy Efficiency Department, Studies and Statistics Department), Ministry of 
Finance and SONATRACH will oversee the implementation of the program. Below is the 
illustration of the implementation arrangement for the SEFA program in Algeria (Table 2).
Table 2: AREP Governance Setting
PROGRAM PARTY KEY ROLE IN THE PROGRAM
ALGERIA 
RENEWABLE 
ENERGY 
PROGRAM
(AREP)
AfDB/SEFA
Oversight of program implementation
Review of the work done by the consultant
Payments for the technical assistance 
Program
Management 
Committee
SONATRACH, 
SONELGAZ, MoE and 
MoF
Plays oversight role and becomes a link between the 
SEFA program and the country’s ecosystem
Project 
Implementation 
Unit (PIU)
SONATRACH Providing the day to day implementation activities for 
the SEFA program
Individual Consultant 
embedded within 
SONATRACH 
Provision of technical assistance to the PIU for smooth 
implementation of the program activities which 
includes capacity building tasks and becomes a link 
between the Bank and the Government
Consulting Firm/Consortium 
Provision of all advisory services and technical 
assistance related to rolling out the new renewable 
energy IPP/PPP procurement framework
8.3 AREP will be implemented by SONATRACH (the implementation entity), which will host 
the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) of the program, in close collaboration with MoE,
SONELGAZ and SKTM. For all consultancy procurement activities, the relevant Bank’s Rules 
and Procedures will apply. Task managers from the Bank and the SEFA secretariat will provide 
oversight role in the implementation of the program. The PIU will be responsible of the day to 
day implementation of the Program. PIU staff will comprise: one project coordinator, one 
financial management officer and one procurement officer (see Annex 2).
9. Grant components/objectives/activities
9.1 AREP is structured in three components: Technical feasibility support, Transaction 
advisory and Project management. Table A3.1, in Annex 3, summarizes AREP’s components 
and its estimated costs. The detailed indicative estimation of the program budget is given in 
Annex 2.
• Key objectives/activities of Component 1: (i) make the land agreement bankable for 
international financial institutions potential financing to encourage operators wishing to 
invest in renewable electricity generation; (ii) identify the physical and technical factors 
(including geotechnical studies, land demarcation, property rights issues, grid access) and
summary E&S studies necessary for the choice of these land sites in order to make them 
eligible and suitable for the establishment of renewable energy plants; (iii) identify and 
evaluate the fiscal regulatory and administrative aspects, related to the acquisition of land and their availability to developers wishing to invest in electricity production from 
renewable sources. If needed, this component may eventually include resource 
assessment, grid interconnection and evacuation studies
• Key objectives/activities of Component 2: (i) Make the contractual, technical and 
financial package of the tender documents ready available for banking with international 
financial institutions; (ii) Define and draft the contractual documents necessary for the 
implementation of electricity production projects from renewable energy sources; in view 
of International standardization and optimization of the specifications document for 
renewable energy projects
• Key activities of Component 3: The Program will finance the hire of one (1) 
internationally recruited individual consultant that will report to the PIU Program 
coordinator and will work closely with the nominated Program Management committee. 
His responsibilities will include, inter alia, (i) Act as the interface with the AfDB; (ii) 
establish and maintain effective communication between the project’s stakeholders; (iii) 
supervise project progress, under the guidance of the coordinator, including assisting the 
processing of hiring the consulting firms to execute activities including in the components 
1) et 2) of the Program, and prepare all required bidding documents and reports; (iii) 
process, under the guidance of the coordinator, all authorized payments made in the 
context of the program; (iv) elaborate and monitor the program budget; (v) ensure 
compliance of all activities financed by the Program with AfDB financial management 
rules as well as in line with the financing agreement; (vi) organize a final workshop that 
will present and disseminate the results of the Program activities
10. Outputs and key activities
10.1 The summary of activities and deliverables of the components: They are presented in the 
Results Log-Frame in Table A3.1 (Annex 3).
11. Risk assessment 
11.1The key following Program risks have been assessed: (i) inadequate program management 
capacity during implementation resulting in procurement delays; (ii) duplication of efforts with 
other development partners; (iii) political and economic “resistance to change” and lack of 
adherence to the necessity of an energy transition; (iv) potential delays and exposures due to 
COVID-19. 
11.2 Some of the risk mitigation measures include: (i) SONATRACH was proposed as 
implementing agency given its proven experience in implementing projects with international 
partners; SONATRACH will establish appropriate design and planning of the program and 
involve all key stakeholders through the establishment of a steering committee ; (ii) close 
consultation and coordination with development partners and with authorities (MoF/MoE) will 
guarantee that there is no duplication ; (iii) due diligence for procurement capacities of the 
implementing partner; and (iv) the recent creation of the National commission for renewable 
energy and energy efficiency demonstrates the Government's commitment to implementing the 
AREP program and that energy transition is a high priority of its development strategy. Risks 
were assessed manageable and the associated mitigation measures have been identified. Details 
of the risks and their mitigation measures are provided on Annex 5.
12. Indicative implementation schedule
12.1 The Grant activities will be implemented over a 24-month timeframe starting in Q2 of 2020. 
This includes 5 months for signing the grant agreement, procurement, and audit, and 18 months 
for implementation of program activities and recording deliverables. The timeline for program 
activities is provided in Table 3. Table 3: Indicative implementation Schedule
12.2 Budget/Cost Structure: The cost of AREP is estimated at USD 1,051,000. The SEFA grant 
covering USD 995,000 (nine hundred and ninety-five thousand USD) and the Algeria 
Government providing USD 56,000 (fifty-six thousand USD), equal to 5.3% of the program 
budget which is in line with the minimum of 5% co-financing requirement for SEFA Component 
III grant recipients. Table 4 shows the cost structure of the program, and further details are 
presented in Annex 2.
Table 4: Project’s Estimated Costs (in USD million)
Components SEFA funding GOA
contribution Total
1
Technical 
feasibility 
Support
Solar sites identification, prioritization and 
preparation: bankability, solar potential 
determination, technical, financial and legal, E&S 
studies/agreements for each selected site.
0,360 0,360
2
Transaction 
advisory
Project documents and tender documents
preparation, negotiation and related legal and 
regulatory issues.
0,550 0,550
Financial options
3
Project 
management 
Program management and miscellaneous (technical 
support) 0,085 0,085
Government contribution (in kind) 0,056 0,056
GRAND TOTAL 0,995 0,056 1,05113. Procurement arrangements
13.1 Acquisition of consulting services financed by the Bank for the Project will be carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” 
(BMP), dated October 2015.
13.2 The Bank undertook an Assessment of Critical Indicators (RACI) for Use of Borrower’s 
Procurement SYSTEM in Bank financed Operations. Public Procurement in Algeria is governed by 
Presidential Decree No. 15-247 of September 16, 2015 regulating public procurement and public 
service delegations “DMP’. The legal framework, the internal controls, the regulatory function and 
the integrity function have been examined and the overall risk for the use of the national procurement 
system in operations financed by the Bank is assessed as "Substantial". Consequently, Bank’s 
procurement system will be used for procurement activities under this Program for the 
Consultancy Services, using the Bank’s relevant standard bidding documents (Table 5).
13.3 Review of the Executing Agency Procurement Capacity: SONATRACH will be responsible for 
the procurement of all cyconsultancyconsultancy services for the project. The procurement 
arrangements for the project are not complex, the resources, capacity, expertise and experience of 
SONATRACH are considered to be adequate to conduct procurements envisaged under the project. 
A capacity building workshop will be organized for the staff in charge of project implementation.
13.4 Procurement of Consulting Services
(a) Individual Consultant. The Program will finance the in hiring of one (1) internationally recruited 
individual consultant that will report to the PIU Program coordinator and will work closely with 
the nominated Program Management committee. His responsibilities will include, inter alia, (i) 
Act as the interface with the AfDB; (ii) establish and maintain effective communication between 
the project’s stakeholders; (iii) supervise project progress, under the guidance of SONATRACH 
management, including assisting the processing for hiring the consulting firm to provide TA for 
the SEFA program in Algeria and prepare necessary reports in line with this; (iii) process, under 
the guidance of the SONATRACH management, all authorised payments made in the context of 
the program; (iv) support the management of the program budget and ensure compliance with 
AfDB financial rules as well as all procurement activities in line with approved Procurement Plan 
and Financing Agreement; (v) organize the trainings and awareness activities, and (vi) organize 
a final workshop that will present and disseminate the new Algerian IPP/PPP procurement 
framework. The TORs of the individual consultant are outlined in Annex 6. The value for this 
TA is approximately, USD 85,000. These amounts could be adjusted at the finalization of the 
Procurement Plan. 
Firm Consultancy Services. The procurement of consulting services, for rolling out IPP 
procurement program and providing advisory services and capacity building, with a total 
estimated value of USD 910,000 shall be procured through open competition followed by a 
short-listing, following the Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) Method. 
13.5 Operating Costs: Operating Costs towards Program management and coordination of Program 
activities in aggregate value of USD 56,000 will be administered through SONATRACH. Most 
of this contribution will be in kind. 
13.6 Summary of the Procurement Arrangements for the Program: The procurement arrangements 
for the various components, elements, and items, under the different expenditure categories to be 
financed by the Grant and procured using BPS, BPM, and or Third Party PMPs, are summarized 
in Table 5. Large-value contracts, each group of similar transactions/contracts, the different 
procurement regimes, estimated costs, oversight requirements, and the timeframe as agreed 
between the Borrower and the Bank, are documented in the Procurement Plan (Annex 8).Table 5: Summary of Procurement Arrangements (in USD ‘000)
BPS BMP
Total ICB LCB Other OCB LCB Other
4. Consulting Services
4.1 Operational support to roll out the new IPP
(Firm)
4.2 Technical Assistance (Individual Consultant)
5. Operating expenses 
 Staff Costs and office space 56
910
85
910
85
56
TOTAL 56 995 1,051
14. Financial management, disbursement, audit arrangements and legal & compliance
14.1 Financial management: SONATRACH is the Executing Agency to implement the Program. A 
short assessment of SONATRACH’s financial management arrangements for the implementation 
of the program indicates that they satisfy Bank’s requirements to ensure that the funds made 
available for the financing of the program are used economically and efficiently and for the 
purpose intended. SONATRACH is a well-established organization that has experience in the 
implementation of Bank financed projects with adequate staff and systems in place to enable 
proper planning, budgeting, accounting and reporting for the use of Bank funds in the 
implementation of the program. 
14.2 Accounting and reporting: Program accounting and reporting in accordance with the Bank’s 
requirements will be done by the program accountant under the Finance Directorate Office of 
SONATRACH using SONATRACH’s financial accounting system. In this regard, 
SONATRACH will designate a qualified accountant to follow the project accounts. 
14.3 Disbursement arrangements: All the four disbursement methods of the Bank will be applicable 
to the program. However, this program will mainly use Direct Payment methods with satisfactory 
performance in accordance with the terms of the contract. Disbursements under the grant, would 
be made in accordance with the Bank’s rules and procedures.
14.4 Audit arrangements: The grant fund will be audited annually by the Inspection Générale des 
Finances (IGF) in line with Government procedures rules & regulations and Bank’s terms of 
reference to review small size operationsfinancial statements. The audit report with the associated 
Management Letter will be sent to the Bank within 6 months after the end of the fiscal year.
14.5 Legal and compliance: 
Legal Instruments: The legal instrument for the financing for the Program will be a Letter of 
Agreement for the SEFA Grant awarded to the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria (the 
Recipient). The Agreement will be signed between the Bank as the Administrator of the 
Sustainable Energy Fund of Africa and the Recipient. 
Conditions associated with the Bank Intervention:
• Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force of the Grant: The Letter of Agreement shall enter
into force on the date of its signature between the Recipient and the Bank.
• Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the SEFA Grant: The obligation of the Bank
to make the first disbursement for the Grant shall be conditional upon entry into force of the 
Protocol of Agreement and fulfilment of the following condition precedent to first disbursement.
(i) Submission of evidence of the recruitment, designation, appointment, or assignment of 
the Project Coordinator for the project implementation unit with qualifications and
defined terms of reference acceptable to the Bank (mean of verification: official letter 
from SONATRACH management addressed to the Bank). C. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
15.1 The Government of Algeria is keen to increase private investment in renewable energy 
projects. This will balance and diversify the energy mix, decrease the required public investment 
financing in the sector and reduce economy’s concentration in fossil fuel-based power. The Government 
wants to undertake this diversification power agenda with the Development Partners, including the 
Bank. 
15.2 The Government is working hard and quickly to roll out its new competitive procurement 
framework for RE generation and it has requested the Bank’s assistance for its implementation.
This was formalized by official communication (dated December 19, 2018). The overall objective of 
the proposed SEFA grant is to complete and roll-out a viable and sustainable procurement framework 
that will enable and stimulate investments through IPPs in the Algerian RE sector. This is fully in line 
and supplementary with Government priorities mentioned above in line with the Bank’s corporate 
objectives (New Deal on Energy and Powering Africa objectives). The proposed operation will focus 
on boosting the agenda of solar PV projects. 
15.3 Recommendation: With the above motives and considerations, SEFA recommends that the 
Technical Committee approve this 1
st phase of renewable energy program for Algeria of USD 995,000 
in the benefit of Algeria for onward transmission to the Vice-president of Power Energy, Climate change 
and green Growth, to whom final approval authority has been delegated. Annexes
Annex 1: Bank’s Portfolio in Algeria (as of September 2019) Annex 2: Tentative Breakdown of Budget for the SEFA AREP program support for Algeria
The following table presents a detailed indicative estimation of the program budget. The program 
components will be procured competitively and implemented through contracting consulting firms for 
activities related to providing technical assistance to support implementation of RE projects in Algeria. 
The breakdown is indicative and specific amounts could change as a result of the competitive 
procurement process.
Table A2.1 Budget 
Program activities Contract Quantity Unit Unit 
Cost
Budget
(USD)
% of 
progr
am
AREP Renewable Energy Program:
Component I: Technical feasibility Support
Solar sites identification, prioritization and 
preparation: bankability, solar potential 
determination, technical, financial and legal, E&S
studies/agreements for each selected site.
360000
Subtotal I 360000 34.2%
Component II: Transaction advisory
Capacity building on key Project documents 
(including CA, PPA, Land Use Agreements, etc.)
preparation, negotiation and related legal and 
regulatory issues
350000
Capacity building on PV project financial/economic 
analysis 200000
Subtotal II 550000 52.3%
Subtotal 910 000 86,5%
Project management and audit Contract Quantity Unit
Unit 
Cost 
(US
D) 
Budget
(USD)
% of 
progra
m
Component III: Project management 
Project management and miscellaneous (technical 
support) 85 000
 Subtotal III 85 000 8,1%
Algeria contribution
Program Coordinator 12 months 900 10 800
Financial Management Officer 12 months 900 10 800
Procurement Officer 12 months 900 10 800
Office space and overheads 24 months 983 23 600
Subtotal IV 56 000 5,3%
Total USD 1 051 000
Of which grant USD 995 000
Table A2.2 Tentative budget breakdown for Program Technical Assistance (individual consultant)
Cost Element Quantity Unit Unit Cost USD) Budget (USD) 
Technical advisor fees 5 months 7500 37 500 
Technical Advisor per diems 56 days 400 22 400 
International flights 4 flights 1 900 7 600 
Miscellaneous expenses related to the consultancy 17 500
Total 85 000
Assumptions
Hired for the duration of 5 months spread out in one year
Expected to be in the country for 3 monthsAnnex 3: Key Activities and Logical Framework of SEFA Grant
Table A3.1: AREP Components
Component Title Component Objectif Specific Activity Estimated 
Cost 
(USD)
1 Technical 
feasibility 
Support
Solar sites identification, 
prioritization and 
preparation: bankability, 
solar potential 
determination, technical, 
financial and legal, E&S 
studies/agreements for each 
selected site.
a. Identify potential sites suitable for the construction of 
large-scale solar power plants;
b. Provide studies demonstrating the technical and 
financial, E&S feasibility of solar power plants on the 
selected sites and that would encourage potentials 
developers to come and invest in the power sector in 
Algeria;
c. Assess the current legal; administrative and regulatory 
framework and identify the measures that would 
make this framework favorable for developers to 
come and invest in the generation of solar energy in 
Algeria;
360.000
2 Transaction 
advisory
Project documents and 
tender documents 
preparation, negotiation 
and related legal and 
regulatory issues.
a. Prepare the bidding documents for the recruitment of 
developers to construct the solar power plants; ensure 
that such documents meet the standards of 
multilateral development banks to enable an open, 
international and competitive selection process; 
b. Propose bankable templates for land agreements, 
concession agreements, and power purchase 
agreements for generation projects of renewable 
energy;
c. Provide financing options that would enable an 
optimal financing plan for such projects 
550.000
Financial options.
3 Project 
management 
Program management and 
miscellaneous (technical 
support)
a. The Program management and miscellaneous will be 
procured competitively and implemented through 
contracting consultancy services for activities related 
to providing technical assistance to support 
implementation of RE projects in Algeria.
85.000
Total 995.000Table A3.2: Logical Framework of SEFA Grant 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION
RISKS/MITIGA
TION 
RESULTS CHAIN Indicator Baseline Target MEASURES
IMPACT
Ensured provision of modern, 
sustainable, clean, quality and 
affordable electricity for the 
population of Algeria
Electricity mix (AREP will contribute to this high-level 
impact objective) 2% (2017) 37% (2030)
SONATRACH and 
SONELGAZ
Annex 5
(below)
OUTCOMES/OUTPUS
Renewable energy business cases 
are demonstrated and prepared for 
scale with appropriate stimulation 
measures and Financial 
Institutions support
New renewable capacity installed (additional) NA 13.5 GW (2030) Program
implementation 
reports from 
SONATRACH
Total volume (additional) of investment mobilized by 
private NA USD 1 billion (2030)
New (additional) jobs created NA
122 000 new jobs including 
potential 22 000 for women 
who represent 18% of active 
population
SONATRACH and 
SONELGAZ
CO2 emissions reduced NA 1.7 million tonnes CO2 per 
annum
SONATRACH and 
SONELGAZ
IPP project procurement 
framework and project 
solicitation
Enhancement of legal documents for the priority solar 
PV projects (PPAs, concessional agreements, etc.) NA as needed (2021)
SONATRACH and 
SONELGAZ
Enhancement of IPP standard tender documents NA as needed (2021)
SONATRACH and 
SONELGAZ
Tender for soliciting project investors under the new 
IPP/PPP procurement framework NA 2 (2021)
Report
SONATRACH
KEY ACTIVITIES
Renewable Energy IPP procurement program
The SEFA program will be led by SONATRACH, supported by the individual consultant working for SONATRACH, together they will:
• Prepare/adjust TOR and launch procurement for the consultancy firm and the individual consultant 
• Follow up on the rolling out of the new IPP/PPP procurement framework 
• Follow up of tender documents and tender process
• Review and validate the reports and documentations submitted by the consultancy firm (quality control)
Financial Inputs:
SEFA: USD 995,000 
GOA: USD 56,000 Annex 4: Procurement Plan
Table A4: Tentative Summary Procurement Plan
Procurement 
System1
Package No.
Package 
Description
Category
2
Lot No.
3
Lot 
Description
4
Estimated 
Amount in 
USD
Procurement 
Method
Pree or Post 
qualification
Procurment 
Oversight
5
Planned SPN 
publication 
date
BP
M
1
Consultancy 
Service 
(Firm) 
Service 1
Consultancy for operational 
support to roll on the new IPP by 
providing: (i) Technical feasibility 
support, as solar sites 
identification, prioritization and 
preparation (ii) Transaction 
advisory for key Project 
Documents (including CA, PPA, 
Land Use Agreement, etc.) 
preparation, negotiation and 
related legal and regulatory issues
and also capacity building on 
Financial, modelling and economic 
analysis.
910,000 QCB
S
Shortlisting Prior 
Review
Mid2020
BP
M
2
Consultancy 
Service 
(Individual) 
Service 2
Technical support to project 
management and miscellaneous 85,000 IC Shortlisting Prior Review
Mid2020
Total 995,000
 
1
Insert Procurement system used under the project (Borrower Procurement System and/or Bank’s Methods & Procedures and/or third Party)
2
Indicate: Goods/Works/Consulting Services/Non-Consulting Services
3
If applicable
4
If applicable
5
Indicate (Procurement Audit/ Post review /Prior Review)Annex 5: Risk Assessment for implementation of SEFA program in Algeria
Table A5: Risk Mitigation Matrix
# Risk Elements Level Mitigation Measures
1 The Covid-19 pandemic could lead 
and/or is associated with: (i) a drop in 
FDI in Algeria, the renewable energy 
sector will certainly be affected; (ii) fall 
in international oil prices, the 
SONATRACH group could find itself 
in lack of liquidity with consequences 
notably on the realization of these new 
projects. Indeed, the oil company 
intends to reduce its budget for 2020 and 
postpone projects that are not urgent. 
This possible impact of the crisis on the 
company's medium-and long-term 
investment programs could impact 
AREP's implementation; (iii) reduced 
attention and capability of 
Government counterparts, 
implementation of the AREP program 
will be affected, linked to reduced 
mobility capabilities and increased 
Government’s attention to essential 
measures aimed at containing the 
contagion.
High The Program is in line with SONATRACH 
objectives in reducing the energy costs associated to 
the production and operation of gas plants. 
Increased renewable energy will allow exporting 
additional amounts of natural gas, this will have a 
positive impact on SONATRACH financial
sustainability. 
Impact investors and MDBs could provide additional 
investments to off-set the reduced private investment 
appetite in the Algerian solar projects. 
2 Lack of country ownership, political 
will and willingness to support 
successful implementation of the 
program
Middle The program is a result of the request from the 
government to support the renewable energy sector. 
Discussions have been done with the government to 
come up with the program that suits the current 
country needs. This is evidenced by the Aide 
Memoire signed with the government on the 
activities to be financed by the SEFA program.
3 Proposed IPP procurement framework, 
regulation regime are not accepted by 
stakeholders and there is a limited 
acceptability of the proposal including 
the IPPs 
Low The design of the IPP procurement framework will 
closely in consultation with the relevant key 
stakeholders. Establishment of the RE IPP 
procurement framework and related regulatory 
framework will be done through consultative process 
with the key stakeholders including government and 
private sector. 
4 Corruption risks Low To avoid any potential for corruption, all services 
will be procured through international competitive 
bidding process while payments will be made 
directly to the service provider. With the process 
SEFA/AfDB will provide close oversight in relation 
to the TA support in Algeria.
5 Duplication of efforts by other 
development partners Middle
Consultations with various development partners 
have been undertaken during the project appraisal to 
identify the areas for complementarity and avoiding 
duplication of resources. This program has covered 
the gaps identified from other efforts. The key 
development partners in the energy sector in Algeria 
and whom have been consulted include the USAID, 
Word Bank, Power Africa, JICA, UNDP, Norwegian # Risk Elements Level Mitigation Measures
government, EU, and AFD. The Bank has been 
participating the donors working group in Algeria 
which is convened quarterly.
6 Procurement delays High The assessment of the capacity for the government to 
undertaking SEFA project implementation has 
revealed that there is lack of capacity from the 
government side. Having this in mind the project will 
recruit an external/international expert to coordinate 
and take up procurement issues for the SEFA 
program in Algeria.
7 Political and Economic Instability in 
Algeria
High In the "Specifications of the Invitation to Tender" 
section, it is expected that a PPA will be drawn up, 
taking into account, in particular, the management 
of the following risks: 
- Risk in the development and construction and 
operation of a solar power plant 
- Risk of technological change 
- Risk of tax changes
- Risk of change of law
- Foreign exchange risk.
8 SONELGAZ opposition to AREP 
because they do not manage the 
program 
Low SONELGAZ is part of the technical and 
management committees that prepared and will 
implement AREP. 
9 Algerian reluctance to allow private 
external borrowing to finance the solar 
IPP projects 
Medium External borrowing for "strategic" projects is now 
allowed (subject to Government prior approval). 
The practical arrangements for this new provision 
are being prepared by the Algerian authorities.Annex 6: Indicative Terms of Reference for an Individual Consultancy
These terms are indicative, and will serve as a basis for discussion with the Government of Algeria who 
will adjust and validate them.
Algeria Renewable Energy Program (AREP): “Rolling out the new Independent Power 
Producers (IPPs) procurement framework”
Location: Alger, Algeria
BACKGROUND
The African Development Bank (AfDB) aims to reduce poverty and improve living standards across 
Africa by mobilizing resources in and outside the continent, and providing financial and technical 
assistance for development projects and programs in Africa. The Power, Energy, Climate and Green 
Growth Sector Complex (PEVP) was created to fulfil the objectives of “Light Up and Power Africa” -
principally achieving universal access to energy by 2025 across Africa.
The AfDB through its trust fund, the Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA), is providing technical 
assistance to the government of Algeria to promote the development of a transparent and competitive 
(solar) renewable energy sector to boost private sector investment in energy generation and diversify the 
energy mix.
Under this auspice, The Algeria Renewable Energy Program (AREP) aims to boost Algeria’s plans 
(National Renewable Energy Development Strategy 2015-2030) to untap the high solar energy potential 
(2,000 kWh/m2 annual average irradiation), diversify the energy mix and attract private investments in 
the power sector. Algeria aims to add 13.5 GW of solar energy capacity by 2030. AREP supports 
Algeria, to deploy this huge utility-scale solar energy generation capacity through a transparent, wellstructured and competitive selection of Independent Power Producers (IPPs). AREP’s specific objective 
is to provide technical and financial assistance to complete and roll-out the new established procurement 
framework that will enable and stimulate investments by IPPs (independent power producers) in the 
Algeria renewable energy sector.
SONATRACH has been mandated by the Government of Algeria to promote the development and 
operation of solar power plants through an IPP framework with the participation of competitively 
selected private operators. This terms of reference seeks to recruit a suitable candidate who will be 
embedded with SONATRACH to provide necessary support related to implementation of the AREP 
program. The envisaged include among others, working for the government to assist and advise on 
procuring consultants related to provision of technical assistance related to the rolling-out IPP 
procurement program, organisation of necessary meetings and workshops, and preparation of reports 
and review of documents prepared by the firm proving technical assistance for AREP.
OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE OF WORK 
The objective of the consultancy services is to assist the coordination of AREP implementation and 
complimentary TA support activities to advise and assist the SONATRACH rolling-out the new IPP 
procurement framework. The assignment will include: (i) provision of advice and technical support for 
ensuring and accelerating the rolling-out of the new IPP procurement framework, and (ii) setting up the 
AREP capacity building program in the area the IPP procurement, specifically on socio-environmental 
and selected legal issues. 
The main duties of the consultant will consist in:
1. Act as AREP focal point to the Ministry of Finance (MoF), the national oil and gas company 
SONATRACH, the Ministry of Energy (MoE) and the State-owned Electricity Utility 
(SONELGAZ) on AREP implementation.
2. Act as a focal point and ensure the coordination of AREP activities with the interventions 
undertaken by the African Legal Support Facility (ALSF) and the Bank’s Algeria Institutional 
Project for PPPs. 
3. Design, consult and implement the AREP hands-on capacity building program, which will 
include modules on: (i) environmental and social studies, and; (ii) capacity building on selected 
legal and regulatory issues.4. Providing technical support for the rolling out of the new IPP procurement plan in Algeria.
5. Provide inputs on periodic reports on the program and related complimentary activities.
6. Provide inputs or the preparation of TOR for the consultancy firm to be hired under AREP.
7. Provide guidance and support for the preparation of the IPP procurement guidelines and 
procedures.
8. Review reports of the consulting firm(s) and provide support for the implementation of agreed 
recommendations
9. Prepare and organize training and build internal capacity in the area mentioned above (bullet 3).
EXPECTED OUTPUTS 
The Consultant will deliver the following outputs: 
An Inception Report, incorporating the following: action-oriented quick diagnostics of the existing 
situation in each of the areas covered under the TOR; recommendations on the way forward for each 
AREP component and complimentary activities against the background of expected project outcomes; 
and a time-bound action plan for the remainder of the assignment period. 
Quarterly Progress Reports on progress achieved under each activity against the agreed work plan, issues 
needing to be addressed, lessons learnt during the reporting period, suggestions for adjustments in the 
work plan by activity for the remainder of the assignment period. 
A Final Report (not later than one month before the completion of the assignment) including all findings 
and achieved results on the completion of the assignment. 
EXPECTED OUTCOMES 
The main expected outcome of the consultancy will be to have successfully rolled out the new IPP 
procurement framework for the selected priority solar projects and successfully completed the handson capacity building in the areas covered by AREP capacity building program. 
PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE 
The assignment shall commence in Q2 2020 and extend over a period of 18 months. The assignment is 
envisaged to require 5 working-month spread through the entire period the assignment. The consultant 
is expected to be resident in Algeria for an aggregated total of three months; the rest of the time the 
consultant will operate remotely from home, in a part time basis. The final implementation plan of all 
the activities under the assignment should be aligned with the SONATRACH planned outcome under 
the program, and will be firmed up in the Inception Report.
RESTRICTIONS 
In addition to the standard conflict of interest restrictions specified in the consulting contract, all 
materials created under this Contract will remain the sole property of the SONATRACH and the Bank. 
Re-use of the materials will require the formal, written approval of the Bank. The Consultant shall have 
no material interest in any of the outputs of this assignment. 
On the commencement of the assignment, the Consultant will sign a statement of confidentiality that 
will bind the Consultant to nondisclosure of any sensitive information that the Consultant may become 
knowledgeable of during the course of the assignment. 
REPORTING
The Consultant will report to the Project Coordinator of AREP and will work closely with 
SONATRACH, MoF, MoE and AfDB assigned task managers within the four institutions.
QUALIFICATIONS AND EXPERIENCE REQUIRED
1. Hold at least a Master’s degree in Energy, Economics, Management or similar disciplines;
2. Have a minimum of 10 years of relevant professional experience, especially in IPP procurement 
in the RE energy sector in Africa and elsewhere; 
3. Recent references of similar works to this Assignment;
4. Excellent organization, research and report writing skills;
5. Excellent analytical, written, and verbal communication skills;6. Excellent interpersonal relationship skills with high-level government officials is key;
7. Self-motivated and pro-active; strong managerial skills; 
8. Ability to work collaboratively with multiple individuals and groups;
9. Previous professional experience in working with public sector in Africa is an asset; and
10.Language requirements: Excellent English.
TIMEFRAME AND DURATION OF THE ASSIGNMENT
o The assignment period is expected for 12 months extended over a period of 18 months from the 
commencement date of the contract. 
o The commencement date is expected to be 1 June 2020. 
o The Schedule for the Assignment is expected to be firmed at the Inception Report phase. 
LOCATION OF THE POSITION
Part of the work (aggregated to eleven months) will be carried out at the SONATRACH premises in 
Algeria, and 1 months home-based.
REMUNERATION 
The remuneration will be based on the Consultant experience and the African Development Bank’s 
Guidelines on Individual Consultants Remuneration.Annex 7: Indicative Terms of Reference for the Recruitment of a Consultancy Firm
These terms are indicative, and will serve as a basis for discussion with the Government of Algeria who 
will prepare/adjust and validate them.
Algeria Renewable Energy Program (AREP): “Rolling out the new Independent Power 
Producers (IPPs) procurement framework”
A consulting firm (the “Consultant”) will provide technical and advisory support to the Government of 
Algeria in the implementation of Independent Power Producers (IPP) procurement framework to allow 
private IPPs to come and invest up to in feasible and financially profitable solar energy project.
The Consultant will support the rolling-out on the new IPP procurement framework by:
1. Technical assistance for the preparation of land concession agreements for the solar sites 
projects which includes: solar potential determination, technical, financial and legal 
studies/agreements for each selected site;
2. Make the land agreement bankable for international financial institutions potential financing to 
encourage operators wishing to invest in renewable electricity generation; 
3. Develop templates of standardized contractual documents to address the problem of 
predictability and transparency that have arisen in IPPs; 
4. Building necessary capacity to the key institutions in the government of Algeria to operationalize 
the IPP procurement framework.
BACKGROUND 
The African Development Bank (AfDB) aims to reduce poverty and improve living standards across 
Africa by mobilizing resources in and outside the continent, and providing financial and technical 
assistance for development projects and programs in Africa. The Power, Energy, Climate and Green 
Growth Sector Complex (PEVP) was created to fulfil the objectives of “Light Up and Power Africa” -
principally achieving universal access to energy by 2025 across Africa.
The AfDB through its trust fund, the Sustainable Energy Fund for Africa (SEFA), is providing technical 
assistance to the government of Algeria to promote the development of a transparent and competitive 
(solar) renewable energy sector to boost private sector investment in energy generation and diversify the 
energy mix.
Under this auspice, The Algeria Renewable Energy Program (AREP) aims to boost Algeria’s plans 
(National Renewable Energy Development Strategy 2015-2030) to untap the high solar energy potential 
(2,000 kWh/m2 annual average irradiation), diversify the energy mix and attract private investments in 
the power sector. Algeria aims to add 13.5 GW of solar energy capacity by 2030. AREP supports 
Algeria, to deploy this huge utility-scale solar energy generation capacity through a transparent, wellstructured and competitive selection of Independent Power Producers (IPPs). AREP’s specific objective 
is to provide technical and financial assistance to complete and roll-out the technical, legal and 
institutional framework that will allow private IPPs to come and invest up to in feasible and financially 
profitable solar energy projects.
SONATRACH has been mandated by the Government of Algeria to promote the development and 
operation of solar power plants through an IPP/PPP framework with the participation of competitively 
selected private operators.
AREP is structured on two technical components and one related to the project management issues: (i) 
solar sites identification, prioritization and preparation, which includes: solar potential determination, 
technical, financial and legal studies/agreements for each selected site; (ii) Capacity building on Power 
Purchase Agreement (PPA) preparation, negotiation and related legal and regulatory issues; and (iii) 
project management and coordination.
This terms of reference seeks to recruit a suitable internationally renowned firm to provide necessary 
support related to implementation of the AREP program. These terms of reference seek to recruit a qualified consulting firm (or consortium) to provide 
necessary technical assistance in the following aspects
OBJECTIVE OF THE ASSIGNEMENT AND SCOPE OF SERVICES 
The objective of the consultant is to provide technical assistance activities in relation with AREP’s 
components.
Component 1: Technical assistance for the preparation of land concession agreements for renewable 
power generation projects sites.
The main duties of the Consultant will consist in:
1. Make the land agreement bankable for international financial institutions potential financing to 
encourage operators wishing to invest in renewable electricity generation; 
2. Identify the physical and technical factors necessary for the choice of these land sites in order to 
make them eligible and suitable for the establishment of renewable energy plants; 
3. Identify and evaluate the regulatory and administrative aspects, related to the acquisition of land and 
their availability to developers wishing to invest in electricity production from renewable sources.
It is therefore expected to deliver the following outputs:
- Technical specifications of the land eligible for the construction of photovoltaic solar power plants.
- Specifications and procedures for the evaluation of the producible for a photovoltaic solar 
technology. The producible depends among other things on the solar radiation in its different 
components and on the meteorological conditions (temperature, humidity, wind, aerosolsalinity......).
- Sol specification studies: Norms and standards.
- Hydrogeological specification studies to confirm that the area is not floodable: Norms and 
standards.
- Specifications of connection studies and static and dynamic stability studies of the electrical 
network.
- Specifications of meteorological studies that may be required by insurance companies to assess, 
locally, the risks of violent phenomena (high winds, sand winds, hail falls.).
- Recommendations regarding security devices (fence, surveillance camera, patrol path, defences) 
required by insurance companies.
- Quantity and quality of water for cleaning by installed solar panels or by MWp.
Component 2: Preparation of the contractual package, foreseen in the bidding documents, in particular, 
the specifications, the agreements, the PPA intended for the projects of electricity production from 
renewable energy sources as well as the financial documents (financing agreement, etc.) in order to 
ensure optimal financial arrangements to make these projects bankable.
The main duties of the Consultant will consist in:
1. Make the contractual package of the tender documents available for banking with international 
financial institutions; 
2. Define the contractual documents necessary for the implementation of electricity production projects 
from renewable energy sources; 
3. International standardization and optimization of the specifications document for renewable energy 
projects
4. Advice on quantifying the environmental impact of renewable electricity production projects, for 
their eligibility for green financing;
5. The attractiveness of investors;
6. The definition of the key elements necessary for the success of the project (profitability of the RE 
project, risk studies...);
7. The establishment of financial mechanisms towards investors for the success of the RE project;
8. The impact of the industrial component in the evaluation of renewable energy projects and in 
particular the cost per KW/h.
9. Regarding the "Specifications of the Call for Tenders", it is expected to determine:- Selection criteria and requirements: Selection criteria for developers to be retained following a 
call for expressions of interest; Bidder selection criteria; technology selection/specification 
criteria for solar power plant components, norms, standards, certifications; EPC selection criteria; 
O&M selection criteria; Construction and operation norms and standards, and ESIA framework 
specification.
- Elaboration of a PPA considering, in particular, the following risk management and points: Risk 
in the implementation, construction and operation of a solar power plant; Risk of technological 
change; Risk of fiscal changes; Risk of law changes; Currency risk; Injection management rule 
on the electricity grid Performance measurement norms and standards; Requirement on the 
performance of the power plant; Specifications and requirements of measuring devices;
Requirements on the storage of operating data; Penalties towards the producer; Penalties towards 
the buyer; Management of green certificates to be monetized; Conflict management rule; 
- The development of an Operation and Maintenance contract 
- Insurance and Insurers' Requirements
10. Regarding the "Financial structure/economic model" component, it is expected to determine:
- Different financial arrangements with advantages and disadvantages;
- A detailed economic model determining the economic profitability of projects with scenarios and 
sensitivity study of the parameters (including the variation of the cost per KWh)
- The economic model reporting the National Integration Rate (labour payroll of project 
construction, personnel payroll of project company, payroll of operations) 
- Advantage/ disadvantage BOO - BOT takeover - duration of the PPA
- Business model
Capacity Building Activities 
- Undertake capacity building, advisory services and legal aspects related to IPP procurement. 
DELIVERABLES
Component 1:
- Deliverable n°1: Identification of the technical criteria of the renewable energy potential with all 
the related criteria necessary for the bankability of the field agreement;
- Deliverable n°2: Identification of the administrative and regulatory criteria necessary for the 
implementation of land grant agreements; 
- Deliverable n°3: A model field agreement that can be banked with international financial 
institutions.
Component 2:
- Deliverable 1: Preparation of the Terms of Reference accompanying the bidding documents.
- Deliverable 2: Development of the model contract for the conditions of purchase and sale of energy.
- Deliverable 3: the incentives to be put in place for the success of the call for tenders and the 
association agreement determining the relations between the partners concerned (the producer, the 
buyer, the Network Operator, the System Operator, the Regulator, the insurer, the project company... 
etc...)
- Deliverable 4: Financing agreements and appropriate financing arrangements;
- Deliverable 5: the return of the contractual package (the bidding documents) for the construction of 
large-capacity photovoltaic solar power plants.
- Deliverable 6: Detailed economic model determining the economic profitability of projects with 
scenarios and sensitivity study of the parameters (including the variation of the cost per KWh).
CONSULTANT QUALIFICATION & EXPERIENCE REQUIREMENTS
The Consultant must be registered in a Member Country of the African Development Bank, and shall 
have been in existence for at least five years as a firm and must have:• Experience in conducting feasibility studies for renewable energy projects in Africa;
• Experience in establishing credit enhancement instruments in developed and frontier markets to 
facilitate infrastructure and energy (with particular emphasis on renewable energy) investments;
• Experience in capital issuance and bond raising for infrastructure and energy projects in Africa;
• Deep understanding of African financial sector and capital markets – previous experience of 
undertaking debt capital markets transactions in Africa, particularly in the energy sector, is preferred;
• Understanding and experience of the insurance industry, including the pricing of credit guarantees 
and risk mitigation measures to reduce the frequency in which guarantees are called; 
• Understanding and experience in utilizing blended finance solutions to catalyze and crowd-in private 
sector investment; 
• Experience in rating infrastructure and energy (particularly renewable energy) projects and 
requirements for securing investment grade rating; 
• Evidence of a strong network of local and international institutional investors, DFIs, impact 
investors, international donors, and other stakeholders such as regulators and government agencies;
• Ability to commence activities within a short time period following conclusion of the contract.
The Consultant shall also provide a list of the key team members that will be assigned to the Assignment 
(the “Proposed Team”), further providing the CVs of the designated (i) IPP procurement expert, (ii) 
Legal expert, and (iii) renewable energy expert. The Team Lead for the Assignment may be any one of 
the Designated Experts. 
The Designated Experts are expected to have the following qualifications:
IPP Procurement Expert and team leader: The expert shall have at least a master’s degree in a 
relevant subject such as economics, finance, management or business/public administration or an MBA. 
The expert shall have at least fifteen (15) years’ relevant experience in management consulting, which 
would include developing and managing IPP procurement services preferably in Africa and/or 
elsewhere in the energy sector. She/he shall have experience of working in Africa and with multi-lateral 
development agencies. The candidate must be fluent in English.
Legal expert: The expert shall have a Master degree in Law, a minimum of 15 years of professional 
experience in legal services in the power sector, and proven experience in implementing IPP activities, 
preferably in Africa. The candidate must be fluent in English.
Renewable Energy Expert: The expert shall have an advanced degree in infrastructure finance and at 
least 15 years’ experience developing energy projects, especially renewable energy projects in Africa.
S/he shall demonstrate strategic and cooperation skills and have managed projects in emerging 
economies. The candidate must be fluent in English.
In addition, the Proposed Team must possess the following qualifications: 
• Previous experience in, or working for, a Multilateral Development Finance institution organization 
is a must;
• Proven ability in report-writing, analytical skills and capacity to deliver outputs in a timely manner;
• Client and results-oriented with strong analytical and communication (verbal and written) skills, 
sense of accuracy and attention to detail.
LANGUAGE 
All reports and documents will be in English (some documents determined at the inception report will 
be translated to French).
DURATION OF SERVICES
The assignment should be completed within 24 calendar months from commencement of service 
(January 2020). However the total consultant team’s professional time input shall not exceed 15 manmonths. The schedule for the completion of the assignment’s outputs/deliverables shall be agreed during 
the inception mission and detailed in the inception report to be delivered within a month of 
commencement of service. RESOURCES PROVIDED 
SONATRACH shall be responsible for all in-kind basic logistics, including office space in Alger at 
SONATRACH premises. 
RESTRICTIONS 
In addition to the standard conflict of interest restrictions specified in the consulting contract, all 
materials created under this Contract will remain the sole property of the SONATRACH and the African 
Development Bank. Re-use of the materials will require the formal, written approval of the Bank. The 
Consultant shall have no material interest in any of the outputs of this assignment. On the 
commencement of the assignment, the Consultant will sign a statement of confidentiality that will bind 
the Consultant to nondisclosure of any sensitive information that the Consultant may become 
knowledgeable of during the course of the assignment. 
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
The Consultant will work under the general supervision of the SONATRACH and AFDB. All 
deliverables/outputs would be subject to initial review and approval by designated committee and by 
SONATRACH and AFDB designated staffs. The Consultants shall submit all models to the Bank.Annex 8: Procurement methods and procedures
Bank Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM): The following contracts will be carried out using 
the BPM in line with the Bank’s Procurement Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded 
Operations dated October 2015, utilizing available Bank’s Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs). 
Refer to the procurement plan for specific procurement method under each category.
• Consulting Services: Each Contract for Consulting Services valued equal or above UA50, 
000.00 will be carried out using Open Competitive Bidding (OCB) under the BPM. Consulting 
services procured under this method, would include: Consultancy services for operational support 
to roll out new IPP procurement framework, including the enhancement of the procedures, 
standards, contracting templates and operational manuals with an estimated cost of USD 910, 
000.00. This consultancy will be selected with due consideration of both quality and price (QCBS) 
following a shortlist of 6 firms.
• Consultancy services for both procurement and financial audit: for an estimated amount of 
USD15,000.00, will be selected with due consideration for price only (LCS), following a shortlist 
of 6 firms, owing to the fact that the services required are standard in nature and there are adequate 
firms on the market to provide required competition.
• Selection of individual consultants for capacity building and training: with an estimated 
cost of USD75, 000.00 will be carried out using the Individual Consultant selection method of 
the Bank considering Consultant’s Qualification (CQS). 
Advertising: For consultancy services’ contracts valued at more than UA 200,000 (for firms), and 
individual consultants valued at more than UA 50,000, advertisement for the procurement must be 
placed in the UN Development Business Journal and the Bank’s website. The Recipient may also choose 
to publish in other specialized journals due to the specific nature of the required services. When the 
amount of the contract is less than UA 200,000 for firms and less than UA 50,000 for individual 
consultants, the Recipient may limit the publication of the request for expressions of interest (REOI) to 
national or regional newspapers. However, any eligible consultant, being regional or not, may express 
his desire to be short-listed.
Bank’s oversight of Borrower’s procurement: The framework for the review of Borrowers 
procurement actions, documents, bid evaluation and contract award recommendations, depends on 
whether the BPS, the BPM or Third Party PMPs, are being used. It comprises:
• BPS audits Reports
• Prior and post reviews as well as IPRs for BPM; and
• Reports from co-financiers and UN Agencies and Programs as may be needed.
Oversight under BPS: Under BPS, procurement oversight will be carried out according to national 
procurement laws and regulations. National oversight institutions comprising the national Public 
Procurement Oversight Body (FPPPA) and the national Supreme Audit Institutions (SAI) namely: will 
be conducting their own audits as per national laws and regulations. Monitoring transactions or groups 
of similar transactions under the project will, however, be also carried out by independent auditors, 
relying on the national audit reports as input to their independent reviews. The TORs of such audits are 
included in the PIM and their costs financed under the project. The Borrower shall, based on these, 
compile and submit annual audit reports to the Bank. 
Oversight under BPM: Procurement undertaken through Bank PMPs shall be subject to prior or post 
review, as well as IPRs. However, under constrained situations such as in FCS enclaves, Bank PMPS 
may be followed even for low value but high risk transactions, which will be subject to prior review 
while remaining transactions shall be post reviewed. The decision as to whether a procurement process 
shall be subject to prior or post review is determined at the level of the transaction or group of similar 
transactions. It is a risk-based assessment which drives the FfP decision for any particular procurement 
transaction based on the EA and the project level assessments taking into account the market and country 
circumstances.Category Threshold (million UA)
Consulting Services (firm) >0.070
Consulting Service (individual) >0.020
In addition to the prior review of certain transactions by the Bank, in the case of FCS, the capacity 
assessment of the EA has recommended 1 (one) procurement supervision missions annually, to 
undertake post review of the Borrower’s procurement actions.
Procurement Plan: The Borrower, during project preparation and appraisal, is required to develop a 
detailed Procurement Plan (PP) covering the entire scope of implementation of the project, and which 
has provided the basis for the procurement arrangements in this project appraisal report (PAR). The 
initial PP has been agreed between the Borrower and the Bank on 15th November, 2018 and is available 
at SONATRACH office. It will also be available in the Project’s database and in the Bank’s external 
website. The PP will be updated by the Borrower annually or as required to reflect the actual program
implementation needs and improvements in institutional capacity. Any revisions proposed to the 
Procurement Plan shall be submitted to the Bank for its prior no objection. The Borrower shall 
implement the PP in the manner in which it has been agreed with the Bank. The Bank shall review the 
procurement arrangements proposed by the grant recipient in the Procurement Plan during Negotiations for 
its conformity with the Grant Agreement and its Rules. The Procurement Plan shall cover the period of 18 
months of the program implementation. The grant recipient shall update the Procurement Plan on an annual 
basis. Any revisions proposed to the Procurement Plan shall be furnished to the Bank for its prior approval.
Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (PRCA) Action Plan: The Bank and the Borrower 
(SONATRACH) have discussed and agreed on a Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (PRCA) 
action plan which proposes a series of actions and measures to be carried out during the program 
implementation in order to mitigate the risks identified following the assessments of procurement risks at 
the country/sector/project levels and procurement capacity and the level of the executing agency (ies). The 
PRCA action plan will be monitored during the project cycle and adjusted accordingly to ensure proper 
execution of the project and procurement arrangements.
Procurement review: The following documents are subject to review and approval by the Bank before 
promulgation: (i) General Procurement Notices (GPNs); (ii) Requests for Expressions of Interest 
(REOI); (iii) Requests for Proposals (RFPs); (iv) Technical Evaluation Reports; (v) Combined 
evaluation Report and minutes of contract negotiations including Draft initialled contracts.
Procurement Plan review: The Bank shall review the procurement arrangements proposed by the grant 
recipient in the Procurement Plan during negotiations for its conformity with the Grant Agreement and its 
Rules. The Procurement Plan shall cover the period of 24 months of the program implementation. The grant 
recipient shall update the Procurement Plan on an annual basis or as needed always covering the next 18 
months period of program implementation. Any revisions proposed to the Procurement Plan shall be 
furnished to the Bank for its prior approval.