File Name: GEO-NRER-2013-EN
Year: 2013
Country Name: Georgia
Country Code: GEO
Category: NRER
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2013
Start Year: 2013
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

HydropowerInvestment
PromotionProject (HIPP)
RENEWABLE ENERGY ROAD
MAP FOR GEORGIA
DRAFT, August 2013RENEWABLE ENERGY ROAD
MAP FOR GEORGIA
AUGUST 5, 2013
USAID HYDROPOWER INVESTMENT PROMOTION PROJECT
(HIPP)
CONTRACT NUMBER: EEM-I-00-07-00005-0
DELOITTE CONSULTING LLP
USAID/CAUCASUS OFFICE OF ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTDan Potash Deloitte Consulting LLP dpotash@deloitte.com
Jake Delphia Deloitte Consulting LLP jdelphia@deloitte.com
Mari Ioseliani
Deloitte Consulting
Overseas Projects LLC
mioseliani@dcop-hipp.ge
Elene Ghubianuri
Deloitte Consulting
Overseas Projects LLC
eghubianuri@dcop-hipp.ge
This document was prepared by
Authors Organization Contact Details
Reviewer Organization Contact Details4.1 Gaps concerning Renewable Energy regulation.....................................11
4.1.1 World Bank Table of Indicators for Investing in
RE and HIPP View of Georgia................................................12
4.2 Renewable Energy Legal Framework Needed in Georgia ......................13
6.1 Five-Year Road Map .............................................................................16
6.2 Next Year Road Map.............................................................................16
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0 BACKGROUND............................................................................................2
2.0 RENEWABLE ENERGY POTENTIAL IN GEORGIA ...................................5
3.0 WORLDWIDE BEST PRACTICES...............................................................8
4.0 RE CURRENT LEGAL FRAMEWORK IN GEORGIA................................10
5.0 EU REQUIREMENTS.................................................................................14
6.0 ROAD MAP FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY IN GEORGIA .........................16ACER Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators
BSTP Black Sea Transmission Project
EC Energy Community
ENTSO-E European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (formerly the UCTE)
ESCO Electricity System Commercial Operator
ESP Energy Service Providers
EU European Union
FiT Feed-in Tariff
FCA Forward Capacity Auction
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEL Georgian Lari (the currency)
GEMM Georgian Electricity Market Model
GNERC Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulation Commission
GoG Government of Georgia
GSE Georgian State Electrosystem
IOU Investor Owned Utility
ISO Independent System Operator
KPI Key Performance Indicator
kV Kilovolt
kWh Kilowatt-hour
LSE Load Serving Entity (same as a DSO, Distribution Syste erator)
LTPP Utility Long Term Procurement Planning
MoE Ministry of Energy
MENRP Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Protection
MoESD Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development
MoF Ministry of Finance
MOO Must Offer Obligation
MV Medium Voltage
MWh Megawatt-hour
NRA National Regulatory Authority or Agency
PU Public Utility
RA Resource Adequacy
RE Renewable Energy
REAP Renewable Energy Action Plan (or NREAP, National Renewable Energy Action Plan)
RES Renewable Energy Sources
RMR Reliability Must Run
ROI Return on Investment
SEE South East Europe
SHPP Small Hydro Power Project
SO Service Obligation
TEAIS Turkish Electricity Transmission Company.
TSO Transmission System Operator
USAID United State Agency for International Development
Definition of AbbreviationsW Watt
Wh Watt-hour
This document was compiled by a USAID-funded advisory project, Hydropower
Investment Promotion Project. The HIPP project supports the Government of
Georgia to attract investment from the private sector in modern, efficient hydropower
plants. Since March, 2010, HIPP has supported market-based initiatives to promote
and secure international investments into Georgia’s small and medium-sized
hydroelectric power market.
This document concerns the issue of renewable energy planning and
implementation, in the context of Georgia implementing a competitive power market
model (“Georgian Electricity Market Model,” or GEMM). Renewable Energy (“RE”) in
this discussion means generation of electricity from large and small hydroelectricity,
wind, solar, biomass, and geothermal.The primary focus of this document concerns
grid-connected renewable power projects.
Georgia is introducing a competitive power market and therwise enhancing and
reforming its electric power sector for four main reasons:
To secure domestic power supply for Georgia’s population and industry
To avail significant private investment for export-oriented hydropower plants
located in Georgia
To engage in beneficial electricity trade with Georgia’s immediate neighbors:
Turkey, Azerbaijan, Armenia, and Russia.
To harmonize and connect with the European Union for mutually beneficial
electricity trade.
In January of 2013, Georgia applied to become a member of the European Energy
Community. Georgia has been an observer of the treaty since December 2007.The
Energy Community consists of countries that have agreed on a common, stable
regulatory and market framework in order to:
Attract investment in power generation and networks in order to ensure stable
and continuous energy supply that is essential for economic development and
social stability;
Create an integrated energy market allowing for cross-border energy trade
and integration with the EU market;
Enhance the security of supply;
Improve the environmental situation in relation with energy supply in the
region;
Enhance competition at regional level and exploit economies of scale.
Georgia’s application is subject to negotiation expected to begin in later part of 2013,
and should end with an agreed upon set on legal and policy actions that Georgia
must undertake in order to join the Energy Community.
1.0 Background
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·The issue of renewable energy implementation figures into many, indeed, virtually all
planning dimensions in the power sector worldwide and especially in the EU and
Georgia. It affects many different issues such as:
Creating major new transmission linkages, since major renewable resources
are often located far from load centers;
Managing the intermittent nature of major renewable resources, including
arranging for backup replacement generation;
Integrating and paying for the financial impact of renewable energy that is
more expensive and has a high up-front cost; and,
Capturing and monetizing the environmental benefit of carbon avoidance.
The end product for this report is a proposed Road Map for Renewable Energy – a
suite of targeted, practical actions – that can serve as a point of departure for
stakeholders. The responsibility of completely implementing renewable energy falls
across several Georgian agencies, which need to work cooperatively and need to
respect the goals and constraints of eachother and each stakeholder. Especially as
it relates to permitting there are important boundaries and interests with respect to
environmental protection, labor, and consumers.
In a deregulated environment, when bringing in new renewable generation capacity,
it is critically important to gain the benefits of competitive pressures to lower costs,
while adhering to policy goals for renewables. The impact of deregulation and crossborder interdependence has a potentially big effect, due to renewable resources in
countries outside the EU, and that may count towards meeting EU Member States’
goals for renewable energy production.
This portends a good opportunity for countries blessed with high amounts of
renewable energy resources, like Georgia, and that are hoping to serve the EU.
Since 2003, the EU has been making rules to create a common electricity market
including cross-border trading. This has required that each EU Member Country,
and other bordering countries, meet strict technical, legal, regulatory and financial
standards.
One of the most significant requirements in the EU “Third Package” is the 20/20/20
goal, shown in Figure 1.
1 These goals are EU-wide and will shortly extend to Turkey.
In 2011, Turkey joined the European Network of Transmission System Operators for
Electricity and harmonized its legislation with EU directives to allow cross-border
trading. Assuming that Georgia similarly legislates and conforms to the EU rules,
there is an attractive economic opportunity for Georgia to be a significant regional
energy exporter of renewable energy.
1 See: http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/package/index_en.htm
·
·
·
·Georgia is strategically located to access neighboring and regional power markets.
In Figure 2, “Electricity Markets,” Georgia is shown in bright green, north of
Azerbaijan and Armenia, and northwest of Turkey. Georgia’s immediate neighbors
could potentially find great value from Georgia’s hydroelectric resources. Turkey’s
electricity is largely fueled by natural gas and coal. Azerbaijan’s power sector is
largely run on oil and natural gas. Armenia is run primarily on nuclear and natural
gas; Nuclear serves about 35% of the total system energy. Armenia recently put in to
place two new gas-fired combined cycle units, which displaces old theremal power
units.. From a utility planning viewpoint, Georgia’s regiona ibution offers
valuable fuel diversity and cost reduction, especially as fossil fuel prices rise.
Also, the priority of renewable energy development in Europe may confer on
Georgia’s hydropower plants special higher value, because of the need caused by
wind and solar intermittency, with some level of flexibility of delivery.
The main problem with overall investment planning in the power sector, but
especially with regard to renewable energy generation, has to do with the priority and
sequence of decision: whether to secure transmission capacity before securing a site
and a PPA to build generation, or whether to secure a ion and a PPA
before securing transmission capacity. Policy makers around the world are wrestling
with this issue, especially so as to induce the higher amount of renewable generation
that is often located far from load centers.
Figure 1: Renewable Energy Goals in Europe
Figure 2: Electricity Markets
20% reduction in EU greenhouse gas emissions from 1990 levels
Raising the share of EU energy consumption produced from renewable resources to 20%;
20% improvement in the EU's energy efficiencyIn order to create a Georgian competitive market for electricity, more reforms are
needed, with concomitant investment in transmission resources, and which offer
economic choices and flexibility for producers and consumers. These additional
reforms will require changes concerning technical matters, new laws, and regulatory
and financial improvements. Although the challenges are daunting, there are wellestablished formats and structures being developed worldwide, and specifically by
the European Union. There now is a body of experience from countries that have
made the requisite changes in their power sectors, and have joined the EU common
market structure, such as in Bulgaria.
Georgian policy-makers need to take near-term and medium-term actions to induce
the investment in Renewable Energy sought. This document outlines more detail
about renewable energy planning in the power sector. It provides the current status
regarding each issue in Georgia, the relevant worldwide best practices and EU
requirements, and a suggested Road Map for Renewable Energy delineating
activities for Georgian policy-makers, regulators, and power systems operators.
Relative to existing demand, there is significant potential form RE in Georgia from
hydro. The analysis indicates that added new hydro will provide excess power that
may be exported.
The following chart shows that in 2013, current hydro and current thermal generation
is about equal to Projected Demand at 10 billion kWh per year. Note that the effects
of imports, exports, and transmission losses, total to net out at approximately no
effect. Projected Demand is the demand of distribution companies and bulk
customers. We assumed a 3.5% growth rate of demand.
2.0 Renewable Energy Potential in GeorgiaHowever a problem with hydro, relative to serving domestic Georgian demand, is
that hydro fluctuates seasonally, as shown in the following chart.
As a result of the seasonality of natural hydro flows, Georgia has to import power in
winter, and has excess capacity so as to export in the summer. This is shown in the
graph below.
Besides hydroelectric projects, there is also good potential for others types of
renewable energy. The following chart shows the potential of other types of
renewable energy in Georgia, indicating that resources are significant relative to
existing demand. This is especially important because of the seasonality of hydro,
demonstrated above.Clearly there is good potential for RE in Georgia, for domestic use and enough for
export. Another consideration in the application of RE is of course price. While the
cost of wind and solar may exceed average cost, Georgia has many hydro sites that
offer compelling economics.
The following chart illustrates that latest new hydro (deregulated HPPs) have a
delivered energy prices about 20% lower than existing thermal projects running on
subsidized natural gas. These results are possible because the plants have relatively
low capital costs (due to they are run-of-the-river design not having a large dam )
and have relatively high capacity factors.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Annual Energy Production
Billion of kWh
Geothermal
Biomass
Solar
Wind
2013
Actual
Energy
Demand in
Georgia
Source: Estimates of Georgian
Energy Academy, Fall 2007
Renewable Energy Potential of Georgia (excluding hydro)Policy-makers and power sector officials are continually devising innovative ways to
encrouage, reward, or mandate more producton and use of renewable energy. There
are essentially (only) two ways to create a greater amount of renewable energy as a
portion of the supply portfolio, involving: 1) price, or 2) volume.
The volume way is to mandate that a greater share of renewable energy be used,in
terms of a percentage of total energy. The price way is to give as price preference so
that renewable energy has relatively more value. There are advantages and
disadvantages to each of the two overall approaches, and the approaches may be
used in combination, along with other inducements.
These approaches are discussed briefly below;
a) RPS, Renewable Portfolio Standard, require an amount of renewable, allsource renewable or by technology, diversity of supply.
An RPS may be done on a regional or national basis, and in the case of the
EU it is done a continental basis. Usually there is a definition on renewable
energy that includes wind and solar and small hydro, but usually excludes
large hydro. Note that an RPS defines renewable energy production b
the amount of energy produced, not based on the installed capacity. This is
because solar and wind have relatively low capacity factors, in the range of
20% and 30%, respectively, for wind and solar. The RPS approach is
consistent with power sector best practices that seek to balance all resources
•Feed in Tariff
•Green Tags
•Cap and Trade
•Renewable Portfolio
Standard
•Must-take Power Purchase
Obligation
•Public Service Obligation
3.0 Worldwide Best Practices
Price
Measures
Volume
Measures
Ways to increase
production of
renewable energyand to avoid overdependence on certain technologies or too much on one or
a few power plants.
b) Must-take Power Purchase Obligation
In a single buyer environment, the single buyer, or some centralized buyer
(like ESCO) is obligated to take and pay for RE from eligible projects. This
approach was more workable when the amount of renewable energy was
essentially negligent as component of overall power supply. Now it is widely
being abandoned as the percentage of renewable energy increases, and a
blanket obligation is too inflexible and may be deleterious to ratepayers.
c) Public Service Obligation
In a bilateral contracts environment, when a distribution company is obligated
to purchase a share of the energy from RE projects. This may be more
beneficial than must-take power purchase obligation because the support
obligation for RE could show up clearly on customers’ billing statement, as is
done in the EU. And it is more consistent with a bi-lateral contracting market
structure.
d) FiT, Feed-in tariffs, floors, ceilings, RFP’s for capacity, capacity limitations,
trade off cost versus diversity of supply
A Feed-in-Tariff is a pre-set price for power, usually with the same definition as given
above for RPS. FiT is simple in principle but can be devilish to implement. An
instantly presenting difficulty is what price to set – each technology generally needs
a different price and each location needs a different Some countries have
made FiT’s based on different underlying financing. Ultimately a FiT can be so
specific that it effectively becomes a type of cost-of-service regulation, and which
defeats the purpose. Secondly an overall problem with the Feed-in-Tariff is that it is
hard to preempt a windfall and excess development, as has happened in Germany,
Italy, and Spain. Since ESCO buys power from new RE for ten years using a formula
based on replacement of Gardabani electricity production costs, there is not too
much risk of excessive payments to RE with locked-in contracts.
e) Green tags, (relates to Guarantee of Origin) adding a premium payment.
This is an approach that provides a tradable and verifiable mechanism to give
a premium payment to renewable energy producers. It is ctive tool
because it separates out, and gives flexibility for monetizing the value of
renewable energy production. The “brown energy” can sold where it has the
most value and the “green component” can be sold where it has the most
value. Thus the green tag modality has the most compatibility with a market
approach, and maximizing consumer economic value.f) Cap and trade, trading certificates, tax benefits
The cap and trade approach refers to artificially creating a fixed amount of
some allowance, such as allowance to emit greenhouse gases. Then such
rights to emit can be sold or traded. This allows free approach to reducing
emissions based on new technologies or selling to another party with a clever
idea or market mechanism to absorb the allowance.
Tax benefits refer some kind of offset against other taxes owed: corporate or
income taxes. These offsets can arise from investment tax credits for making
a certain kind of investment, accelerated depreciation benefits, or a tax credit
based on production of energy from renewable facilities. In general, tax
benefits are a useful investment motivation in a country with high tax rates
and a culture of actually paying taxes. Therefore, in many countries tax
benefits are not an effective policy tool.
Some other worldwide best practices can relate to link wable energy facilities
to job creation, and requiring manufacturing to be set up locally, buying local content,
and customs duties relief.
a) 2008 Georgia Energy Policy (latest most relevant)
i) Government resolution “Renewable Energy 2008” – establishes a
standard form and process for renewable energy project development.
This Resolution sets aside winter season (time of peak demand) so that
new hydroelectric plants can be used only for domestic Georgian use.
ii) Sets forth a standard application process for developers to follow for
proposing and implementing projects.
iii) Provides for developers to gain exclusive rights to a project site, and
requires them to post a bank guarantee to back up the commitment to
install the power plant on a date-certain basis.
iv) This policy did not draw investment as anticipated, because developers
could not get comfortable with many different elements of the off-take
risks.
v) No licensing under 13 MW for SHPP (“Small Hydro Power Project”).
b) Electricity Market Rules (Approved 2006, last amended April, 2013)
i) Total deregulation for SHPP under 13 MW
ii) Right to retail sales for SHPP
iii) Preferential price scheme when selling to ESCO for SHPP
4.0 RE Current Legal Framework in Georgiac) Law of Georgia on Electricity and Natural Gas
i) One of the objectives of the Law is to encourage the priority use of
indigenous hydro, other renewable, alternative and gas resources.
ii) One of the Ministry of Energy’s main functions will be urage the
priority use of indigenous hydro, renewable, alternative and gas resources,
which is already a priority under the State Program Renewable Energy
2008.
d) Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulation Commission
(GNERC) has important responsibilities including licensing, power sales
contract compliance with Market Rules, and importantly, consumer protection
from inappropriate or excess charges from any generation source and any
investror including those in renewable energy. The main functions of the
GNERC may be found in Article 4 of the Law on Electricity and Natural Gas.
These functions are the following:
i) The establishment of rules and conditions for granting generation,
transmission, dispatch, distribution, as well as natural gas transportation
and distribution licenses, also the granting, modification and revocation of
licenses in compliance with the Law of Georgia on Licenses and Permits,
this Law and licensing rules;
ii) The setting and regulation of tariffs for electricity generation, transmission,
dispatch, distribution, transit, import and consumption, a system
commercial operator service and System Capacity Reserve to be
purchased under the mandatory rule by the system commercial operator,
also the setting and regulation of tariffs on natural gas transportation,
distribution delivery and consumption, excluding tariffs on natural gas sold
at gas filling stations, pursuant to this Law, main directions of the state
policy in the energy sector, the administrative legal acts adopted based on
them and the established methodology.
iii) Within its competence, the settlement of disputes aris ween
licensees, small hydropower stations, importers, exporters, suppliers and
consumers, also the commercial system operator;
iv) The establishment of control over the meeting of licen g conditions
within the electricity and natural gas sectors of Georgia and application of
relevant administrative sanctions for violation of the conditions in keeping
with law;
Gaps: There is no Law of Georgia on “Renewable Energy Sources” which has
been adopted as of yet. An inadequate draft was circulated and it is our
understanding that it is being wholly revamped.
While hydro power investment has been forthcoming, that has been based on
supportive legal framework and policy security indicated by GEMM 2015.
e)
4.1 Gaps concerning Renewable Energy regulationThe only document regulating renewable energy related issues (Renewable Energy)
is Government Resolution of 2008. This Resolution is a secondary legislation of
Georgia.
Based on investor workshops and individual contacts carried out by HIPP project in
2010-2012, some gaps were identified, based on the concerns voiced by investors,
namely:
Renewable Energy related issues are not covered by the primary legislation;
Amount of requested bank gauarantee is too high;
No state guarantees are provided;
No support mechanisms in place to develop Renewable Energy;
No action plan approved by the GoG;
No preferential tariff exists for Renewable Energy;
Lack of priority access to the interconnection line to Turkey
In order to fill these gaps, it is important that the primary legislation be in place.The
HIPP findings are consistent with the World Bank 2012 Report “Assessing the
Investment Climate for Climate Investment,” which listed the following indicators as
critically important in attracting renewable energy:
1 Existence of RE Policy and Law
No
Weak
2
2 Existence of RE Target No
3 RE Purchase/Off-take Obligation No
4 Availability of Tradable Instruments for RE No
5 Preferential Tariffs for Solar/Wind/Biomass/Small Hydro No
6 Grants/Subsidies/Incentives related to Capital / Investment
Tax Credits
No
7 Incentives Linked to Generation/Production Tax-credits No
8 Income Tax Holidays/Exemptions No
9 Trade-related Incentives No
10 Customs Duty Exemptions No
11 Absence of Local Content Requirements No
12 Other Tax Exemptions (VAT, Excise etc.) Yes
3
Clearly, according to the World Bank Criteria, Georgia has significant work to do in
regard to the legal and policy support for RE.
2 A Government resolution was issued in 2008, establishing a development process specifically for certain hydropower
investments, setting forth some limitations on sales during winter months, bank guarantees as a placeholder to hold the
investment. It does not cover access to the grid, power purchase obligation, feed in tariff.
3
There are VAT exemptions for equipment that was financed under concessional terms, and for sales of electricity from newly
created power plants.
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
4.1.1 World Bank Table of Indicators for Investing in RE and HIPP View of Georgia
No.
World Bank Indicators for Creating a Positiv e Inv estment
Climate and Sector-Specific Indicators for Solar PV, Wind,
Biomass and Small Hydro Status in Georgia as per
HIPP Judgment
RE Policy
RE LawIt is anticpated the primary legislation will be a standalone law concerning renewable
energy to be finalized in 2013, (“RE Law”).
RE Law and related policy will be set forth according normative acts of Georgia.
Normative Acts are divided into legislative normative acts of Georgia and sub
legislative normative acts, which, together, form the legislation framework.
Legislative normative acts are primary legislation while sub legislative normative acts
represent secondary legislation.
The types of primary legislation in Georgia are:
a. The Constitution of Georgia; the Constitutional Law of Georgia;
b. An Organic Law of Georgia;
c. Laws of Georgia, Decrees of the President of Georgia, lations of the
Parliament of Georgia.
Sub legislative normative acts of Georgia are the Orders of the Ministers,
Resolutions, Regulations, etc. For example, resolutions of GENRC are sub
legislative normative acts. Legislative normative acts have prevailing legal force over
sub legislative normative acts. A sub legislative normative act has to specify the
legislative normative act that serves as the basis of which the sub legislative
normative act was issued.
The procedure for the adoption of the primary legislat is the following: once the
Law is drafted it has to be circulated among several Ministries. The Ministries are
given time to review the draft and comment on it. Then the final draft is sent to the
Cabinet of Ministers. When the draft is ready at the Cabinet of Ministers, it is
submitted to the Parliament of Georgia. Then the Parliament Committees start
reviewing the draft Law. Once the internal reviews are finished the hearings take
place. After the third reading of the Law, the Law is nt to the President of Georgia
for its signature. The President has a right to veto the draft law or make changes and
send it back to the Parliament within 7 days. Parliament may accept the changes
and submit the Law back to the President for signature within 7 day term. When the
Law is signed during 24 hours it is published in the Official Gazette –
“Sakanonmdeblo Matsne”. The Law enters into force on the day of its publishing or
another date specified.
The Parliament sessions last for three months. Autumn sion starts in September
and finishes by the end of third week of December and spring session starts in
February and finishes by the end of third week of June. It is also possible to hold
extraordinary sessions but the latter depends on the urgency and state interest in the
Law which has to be adopted.
For RE, below are presented the relevant issues, and recommended handling, which
falls either into primary or secondary legislation.
4.2 Renewable Energy Legal Framework Needed in GeorgiaTargets Amounts or
percentage supply from RE
Will be an obligation under
the RE Law
National Action Plan for
developing for RE
Will be an obligation
under the RE Law
Action Plan itself
Municipal Action Plans for
promotion of Renewable
Energy
Public Service
Obligationsevel
Public Service Obligations,
that energy purchasers get a
minimum amount of supply
from RE
Would be a GoG
resoultion or from GNERC
Supporting schemes, such as
allocating state-owned land to
projects, Feed-in Tariff
Should be Action Plan
Expression of Interest/MOU
procedures
GoG Resolution
Guarantee of Origin Would be a GNERC
resolution
Responsible authorities /
administrative procedures,
i.e., roles of GoG ministries
Action Plan, GoG
resolution
Priority access to grid Obligation under RE Law Covered in Market Rules,
need sto be amended; a
GNERC responsibility
Reporting Obligation under RE Law May be done by Analytics
Department in MoE
Georgia requested to join the Energy Community in January 2013. Discussisons
were held and now GoG is waiting for the Energy Community to provide more
specific guidance in the form of an “Energy Road Map.” The Energy Road Map will
concern all aspects of legal and regulatory energy framework (including RE), such as
generation, tranmission, energy for transport, energy efficiency, and other topics.
The following points are key elements of the Energy Community, with which Georgia
will have to comply, as it relates to RE.
a) Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, 23 April
2009, on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources.
i) Requires the EU as a whole to achieve 20% usage of renewable energy
by 2020. This is an RPS requirement as noted above. As Georgia will
begin negotiations with Community, each country’s target depends on
individual country case and data (GDP, natural resources, etc.). Therefore
each country’s target is the subject of negotiation.
RE Issue Primary Legislation Secondary Legislation
5.0 EU Requirements
?
? ?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
? ?
?ii) Calls for each country to adopt a National Renewable Energy Action Plan.
iii) Joint cooperation between EU states and states outside EU. Between EU
states, there can be statistical transfers between Member States, for the
purpose of calculating the share of energy from renewable sources.
Notes that this statistical transfer may ultimately have an important benefit
for Georgia due to its abundant hydro. Even without Georgia being a full
member of the EU, the directive states that “One or more Member States
may cooperate with one or more third countries on all types of joint
projects regarding the production of electricity from renewable energy
sources.”
iv) Ensure that origin of electricity produced from renewable energy sources
can be guaranteed.
v) Ensure access to the grid and priority or guaranteed transmission for
renewable energy generation to reach market
vi) Priority dispatch of renewable energy
vii) Transmission system provide cost and timing to proposed renewable
projects
viii)Biannual reporting on progress on renewable sources to be submitted until
December 31, 2021.
b) Directive 2009/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, 23 April
2009, to improve the and extend the greenhouse gas emissi llowance
trading scheme
i) The purpose of the directive is to “prevent dangerous anthropomorphic
interference with the climate system.”
ii) Affirms the 20% target of using renewable energy
iii) Establishes the concept of tradable renewable energyneeding
definitive“certificates of origin.”
c) European Parliament legislative resolution of 17 December 2008 states that
“Imported electricity, produced from renewable energy sources outside the
Community, may count towards Member States' targets.”Renewable energy planning requires expertise in the spheres of legal, financial and
economic matters. As it regards secondary legislation necessary to implement EU
framework with respect to, the MoE and GNERC must each have specialized expert
knowledge on EU legislation as each must complete diff gislation
compliant with EU energy acquis. More information on this will be known upon
completion of the final Energy Community roadmap agreed between the GoG and
the EU.
The Road Map presented below is meant to indicate general priorities. In practice,
some tasks may proceed on a parallel execution.
Some near term actions 2014-2015 for Renewable Energy are:
a) MoE drafts primary legislation in consultation with key stakeholders. Most
critical issues are:
i) Need to define “renewable energy” by technology.
ii) Government obligations, such as National Renewable Energy Action Plan
iii) Guarantee of Origin that GNERC would administer
iv) Priority dispatch, curtailment limitations, access to the export line to Turkey
6.0 Road Map for Renewable Energy in Georgia
6.1 Five-Year Road Map
6.2 Next Year Road Map
PSO Obligation.
Examine Heating
and Cooling;
Transport Sector
(biofuels)
National
Renewable
Energy
Action Plan
RE Capacity
Building and
Educational
Programs
Long-term
technology
review and
support
Financing
Sources &
Methods; PPP /
Microfinance
Revise
Electricity and
Natural Gas Law
& Regulation
- Grid Access
Prepare
Renewable
Energy Law
Anticipating
EC Roadmap
Renewable
Energy Law
Near-term Measures Longer-term Measuresv) The categorization of large hydro and small hydro should be established
(i.e., above 100 MW is large hydro and 100 MW and below is small hydro.
b) GNERC sets up application process and registry for Guarantee of Origin
c) MoE conduct long-range market study of economic opportunity to add modest
hydro storage so as to develop flexible dispatchable hydro power
d) GNERC explore end-user green energy option
e) MoE explore public private partnerships so investors can join project at lower
risk later; develop a planning database of projects in the pipeline
f) MoE setting up a RPS, in totality for renewable and by technology
g) MoE begin drafting Action Plan consistent with EU Directives
h) GNERC review framework for licensing RE:
i) Assurance that only power plants are built under market-based, armslength, freely-contracted PPA’s, or for overall system reliability under
appropriate process , to protect Georgian ratepayer. This is to prevent
“sweetheart” deals negotiated not transparently.
ii) One regulatory permit, i.e. consider a “one-window” framework for
permitting that establishes a unified organization for application, project
selection, auctioning sites, and coordinating permitting.
iii) A decision within a specific time frame.
iv) Ensure that there is a full opportunity for open participation in workshops
by general public and by special interest groups.
i) GNERC and MoE should correlate the process for energy project permitting
with other laws and amend laws regarding, for example, environment,
construction, labor, and taxation, local content, in order to streamline project
permitting and accelerate bringing projects online. Strengthen the
requirements for performance if a developer is awarded rights to a site.
j) MoE undertake optimization and management of energy production,
accounting for the needs of other water users: agriculture and water supply.
k) MoE assess linkages to university programs and/or other opportunity for
specialized training in renewable energy technologies and hydroelectric plant
operations, to retain and employ local Georgian skilled professionals, evaluate
and possibly set up educational Centers of Excellence, akin to the Azerbaijan
State Oil Academy.
l) MEPNR carry forward the previously done analyses of carbon credits as a
potential financing tool for HPP investments in Georgia and of the EU as a
potential market for Georgian hydropower which indicates the following
necessary and useful tasks.
i) Develop a clear road map for developers to use in monetizing carbon
credits. There is some evidence that a developers have not been able to
navigate the steps needed in a timely manner with the appropriate parties.
ii) Training on: transaction structuring, EU Emissions trading schemes,
compliance markets, voluntary markets, working with the EnergyCommunity, accessing KfW Carbon Fund and other sources, and
implications of bi-lateral and third-country trading.
iii) Support projects with an information hub, and project tracking support,
making a cell within the existing Climate Change Division of the MEPNR
as a “one-stop shop.” This would include a contact information network for
ensuring that all possible sources of carbon revenue are tapped.USAID Hydropower Investment Promotion Project (USAID-HIPP)
Deloitte Consulting Overseas Projects - HIPP
11 Apakidze StreetTiflis Business Center