File Name: GEO-NEP-2014-EN
Year: 2014
Country Name: Georgia
Country Code: GEO
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2014
Start Year: nan
End Year: nan
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Resolution N14 
July 30 2014 
Tbilisi 
On approving Electricity Tariff Calculation Methodologies 
Under the Article 4 (4) and Article 5 of the Law of Georgia on Electricity and Natural Gas, Georgian 
National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission establishes the following:
1. Tariff Setting Methodology for Electricity Distribution, Pass Through and Consumption Tariffs
shall be approved (Annex N1).
2. Tariff Setting Methodology for Electricity Generation, Transmission, Dispatch and Electricity 
Market Operator Service shall be approved (Annex N2).
3. Regulated assets depreciation/amortization rates of utilities under tariff regulation shall be 
approved (Annex N3).
4. This resolution shall enter into force on the date of its publication.
5. Upon entry into force of this resolution the resolution of June 8 2011 N 11 on adoption of 
Electricity Tariff Setting Methodologies shall be declared invalid.
Chair of Georgian National Energy and Water Supply 
Regulatory Commission 
Irina 
Milorava
Commisioner Maia 
Nadiradze
Commisioner Gocha 
Shonia
Commisioner Sergo MeskhiTariff Setting Methodology
for Electricity Distribution, Pass Through and Consumption Tariffs
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Purpose
1. Purpose of the Electricity Distribution, Pass thourgh and Consumtion Tariff Methodology (thereafter “the 
Methodology”) is to define rules and principles for setting electricity tariff in accordance with the Law of 
Georgia on Electricty and Natural Gas, which should be thereafter used for setting tariffs for electricity 
distribution, pass through and consumption. 
2. Tariff setting based on this Methodology is in accordance with the international practice of incentive 
regulation (marginal price regulation) principles, which stimulates increase of the efficiency of the utilities.
Article 2
Definitions
1. The terms used in this methodlogy have the same meanining as in the Law of Georgia on Electricity and 
Natural Gas.
2. Other terms used in this methodology for the tariff regulation purposes have the following meaning: 
a) Intangible assets– identifiable, non-monetary assets without physical form including patent, trade mark, 
goodwill, software, license and other types of intangible assets;
b) Non Controllable Operational Expenses (ncOPEX)– costs that occur due to external factors and which 
cannot be influenced by the utility;
c) Assets – tangible and intangible assets;
d) Asset replacement costs - total amount of expenses, which needs to be evaluated in order to create 
similar asset;
e) Asset cost – the real value of payments in money or money equivalents or other compensation during 
the creation or the first purchase of an asset;
f) Historic cost asset valuation method – Asset cost evaluation using the price of its creation or the first 
purchase;
g) Reasonable costs – cost incurred in accordance with the minimum cost principles, which is rational and 
nessesary for the effective functioning of the utility;reasonable costs incurred by the utility and define regulatory asset base;
i) Cost cascading method –allocation of the costs of the upper voltage levels of the distribution grid to 
costs of the next voltage levels;
j) Electricity distribution tariff – distribution service price for providing distribution service to the customer 
via the distribution grid; 
k) Electricity pass through tariff – price of the pass through service provided by the distribution licensee 
via the distribution grid for passing through electricity which belongs to other entities;
l) Electricity consumption tariff – price of electricity consumed by the retail customer;
m) Electricity normative loss – allowed technical loss of energy which occurs while transporting energy via 
distribution grids; 
n) Electricity extra normative loss – positive difference between the factual and normative loss rates set 
by GNERC for the distribution grids;
o) Electricity factual loss – difference between the volumes of electricity received and distributed via the 
distribution grids, calculated based on the readings of the metering devices;
p) Efficiency factor (X-factor) - rate of increase of productivity and operational efficiency of utility, which 
includes the general efficiency factor (Xgen.) and individual efficiency factor (Xind.)
q) General efficiency factor (Xgen.)- rate of increase of the concrete sector's efficiency;
r) Individual efficiency factor (Xind.) - rate of increase of the concrete utility’s efficiency;
s) Investment –capital investment which is used for creating, purchasing or/and rehabilitation of 
assets, the useful life of which, is more than one year;
t) Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) – rate of return based on regulatory assets, calculated before 
taxes, according to the capital structure of the company (own and attracted capital);
u) Capital Expenses (CAPEX) - return on Regulatory Asset Base and depreciation/amortization, for the 
purpose of this Methodology;
v) Controllable Operational Expenses (cOPEX)– costs that occur due to internal factors which can be 
controlled by the company;
w) Tangible Assets – major assets used by the company for the regulated activity, including land, buildings, 
machinery, equipment and other main assets the useful life of which is more than one year;
x) Third party- any individual or legal person (including a State, customer, etc.), which provides subsidy to 
the utility, gives grant, pays fees for the connection to the electricity transmission network and/or gives 
tangible and intagible assets to the utility for free.
y) Regulated activity – for the purpose of this Methodology activities of the electricity distribution and pass 
through, regulated by the Commission in accordance with the Law of Georgia on Electricity and Natural 
Gas;
z) Regulatory Cost base (RCB) – allowed income for the utility set by the Commission for the Tariff Year, 
which is necessary for the effective functioning of the utility and includes reasonable costs and rational 
profit;
aa) Regulatory Assets Base (RAB) – tangible and intangible assets used for the regulated activity, that are 
directly related to the regulated activity and are used in tariff calculation(except third-party-funded 
assets);
bb) Building block approach – defining the Regulatory Cost Base by the determination of its components;
cc) Base year - first test year for the tariff regulation period;
dd) Consumer Price Index (CPI) – average annual inflation rate published by the National Statistics Office of 
Georgia;
ee) Operational Expenses – expenses related to the operation and maintenance of the electricity 
distribution griddata for the test year of a utility as well as investment plan for the regulatory periods;
gg) Tariff Regulatory period -time period set by GNERC (3 to 5 years) for which tariffs are reviewed using 
correction factors foreseen in this Methodology;
hh) Tariff Year (t+1) - the calendar year for which the Commission sets tariffs in accordance with this 
Methodology;
ii) Test year (t-1)–the calendar year prior to the tariff calculation year by the Commission;
jj) Utility - distribution licencee who are subject to tariff setting according to this Methodology for
electricity distribution, pass through and consumption;
kk) Tariff calculation year (t)- the calendar year prior to the tariff year;
ll) Depreciation/Amortization – gradual allocation of depreciable amount of the tangible/non-tangible 
asset over its useful life;
mm) Net book value – asset cost minus accumulated depreciation and accumulated revaluation loss.
Article 3
Main Principles
1. This Methodology and the tariffs set on its bases
a. protect consumers from the monopolistic prices;
b. stimulate utility to increase its efficiency via optimization of its costs with the requirement not to 
decrease qualiy of service standards and technical conditions of the utility;
c. support the increase of the utility’s’ returns by means of increased operational and management 
efficiency;
d. support the stable and realible functioning of the utility;
e. ensure that tariffs are transparent, stable and fair for the utility;
f. reflect the state policy with regard to discount tariffs, provided that none of the consumers 
categories shall receive a discount tariff subsidized by licensee, importer, market operator or any 
other category;
g. reflect different costs between the different consumer categories;
h. cover costs of the utility with funds recieved from each consumer category in proportion to costs 
incurred for servicing this consumer category.
2. For the determination of the Regulatory Cost Base structure of a utility, the Commission uses building block 
approach. The following components are used in this method: 
a. Capital expenses;
b. Controllable operational expenses;
c. Non-controllable operational expenses;
d. Costs for filling normative losses in electricity distribution network.
3 Calculation of capital and non-controllable operational expenses is carried out by "cost-plus" method, with 
annually cost audit.up incentives to optimize utility’s costs. Controllable operational costs audit is carried out before regulatory 
period and costs changes are made during tariff regulatory period accordingly to this methodology.
5 In case the result of the cost audit revealed corrective information of the previous year(s) existed before test 
year, which was not identified in the previous year(s) tariff calculations, Commission has authority to use this 
information for correcting the results of the audit. Correction shall to be made by using principles outlined 
in Chapter IV of this methodology.
6 The amount of actual losses and the target parameter estimation model is used to calculate filling of 
electricity normative losses in the distribution grid. 
7 All tariffs set by the Commission are VAT exclusive. 
Article 4
Tariff regulatory and tariff setting period
1. Based on this methodology tariff regulation period is determined individually for specific utilities.
2. Commission sets tariff regulatory period for each year according to the terms and conditions of this 
methodology.
3. The Commission sets for the whole tariff regulatory period the basic components of the Weighted AvarageC
of Capital (WACC) and fixed rate for the efficiency factor (X-factor).
4. Tariffs are set annually by the Commission during tariff regulatory period, and it is valid from January 1 to 
December 31.CHAPTER II
CALCULATION OF THE REGULATORY COSTS
Article 5
Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year
Regulatory Cost Base for the tariff year is calculated according to the following formula: 
RCB(t+1)= CAPEX(t+1) +cOPEX(t+1)+ ncOPEX(t+1)+ CNL(t+1)+ CORR(t+1)(1)
where,
RCB(t+1) - Regulatory Cost Base for the tariff 
year(GEL);
CAPEX(t+1) -Capital Expenses for the tariff year (GEL);
cOPEX(t+1) - Controllable Operational Expenses for the tariff year (GEL);
ncOPEX(t+1) - Non-controllable Operational Expenses for the tariff year (GEL);
CNL(t+1) –Cost of Normative Losses in distribution networks for the tariff year (GEL);
CORR(t+1)- Cost correction factor, which provides the reflection of the difference between 
factual and planned costs of Tariff Year in the Regulatory Cost Base of the Tariff Year, and also received 
income from non-operational activity envisaged in the subparagraph “e” of paragraph 1 of Article 19 of this 
Methodology, based on the principles defined in this Methodology (GEL)Article6
Capital Expenses
Capital Expenses for the Tariff Year are calculated according to the following formula: 
CAPEX(t+1)= RAB(t+1)* WACC + D(t+1) (2)
where, 
CAPEX(t+1) - Capital Expenses for the tariff year (GEL) 
RAB(t+1) -Regulated Assets Base for the tariff year (GEL)
WACC - Rate of returne on the RAB for the tariff regulatory period (%);
D(t+1) - annual depreciation for the tariff year (GEL)
Artilce 7
Regulatory Asset Base
1. In the formation of the Regulated Asset Base, current utility assets and planned investment assets agreed 
with the Commission are involved.
2. For calculating the value of assest, the Commission uses Historic Cost Valuation Method.
3. In case the assets value can not be determined by the method specified in paragrah 2 of this article, 
Commission has the autority to use replacement cost asset valuation method.
4. In case the utility sells regulatory assets to other utility, the Commission does not envisage asset re-sale value 
while calculating relevant tariffs. 
5. Investment cost is used to value planned assets cost, which is agreed with the Commission. (Construction, 
purchase, repair, etc.)
6. The value of RAB is determined by the Net Book Value of the assets that constitute RAB. Year and Tariff Year according to the investment plan of the utility. The investment plan of utility, as well as 
amendments in investment plan before tariff setting or correction, should preliminary be agreed with the 
Commission. The utility should justify the necessity for the planned investment, as well as planned target 
effect and the benefit. The Commission shall approve and consequently reflect in RAB only those 
investments, which it considers as justified and reasonable after the appropriate review and assessment. 
8. If planned investment by the utility (specific investment project) was not carried out based on the investment 
plan provisions agreed with GNERC (was not over till the end of the investment plan year), such investments 
are considered as construction-in-progress and capital expenses on these investments are subject to 
correction, in accordance with this Methodology. 
9. If the utility does not submit the investment plan and does not agree the volume of investment with the 
Commission, the Commission is authorized not to consider the factual uncoordinated investment while 
calculation of tariff. 
10. If the company cannot achieve the targets planned for the investment, including quality of service standards 
set by the Commission, the Commission is authorized to apply penalty mechanisms according to the current 
legislation. If the company reaches the targets, the Commission uses the incentive mechanisms.
11. The RAB shall not reflect:
a) Those investments that were carried or will be carried out by third party financing; companies should 
account for such assets separately;
b) Those investments which are not considered as justified and reasonable by the Commission; 
c) Assets that are not used in regulated activity;
d) construction in progress;
e) Goodwill, except for goodwill which were formed during privatization of the state property.
12. The Commission will consider capitalized cost of the paid loan according to the factual annual interest rate 
for the long term loan taken to finance the construction during the construction process in the cost of asset 
defined in subparagraph D of paragraph 11 of this article, but the rate should not exceed the rate of debt (rd) 
defined in this Methodology.
13. For regulatory purposes the Commission is authorized to consider asset impairment while defining net book 
value of the asset. In addition, the Commission is authorized to reflect asset impairment loss in tariff in some 
cases. Accounting of impairment loss shall be done separately by the utility.
14. RAB value at the end of the tariff year shall be determined based on the following formula: 
RAB(t+1)=TA(t-1)+IA(t-1)-TP(t-1)– RA(t-1,t,t+1)+pINV(t,t+1)-pD(t,t+1)-pTP(t,t+1)+pDTP(t,t+1) (3)
Where,
RAB(t+1) - value of RAB at the end of the tariff year(GEL);
TA(t-1) -value of tangible assets at the end of the test year (GEL);
IA(t-1) -value of intangible assets at the end of the test year (GEL);
TP(t-1)- value of assets, financed by third party, at the end of the test year (GEL);the Tariff Calculation Year and Tariff Year, and value of the impairment loss during test year (GEL)
pINV(t, t+1)- value of planned assets envisaged by invetsment plan approved by the Commission for the
calculation year and the Tariff Year (GEL) 
pD(t,t+1) -annual depreciation/amortization for the tariff calculation year and tariff year charged to 
tangible and intangible assets (GEL)
pTP(t,t+1)-assets cost financed by third party during tariff year and tariff calculation year (GEL)
pDTP(t,t+1) -annual depreciation/amortization of the assets, created by third party financing, during tariff 
calculation year and tariff year (GEL)
Artilcle 8
Depreciation/Amortization
1. The Commission shall apply the Straight-line method of depreciation/amortization.
2. For the assets which were purchased or created after January 1, 2014,”Regulated Asset 
depreciation/amortization Rates for Regulated Utilities” shall be used approved by the commission. 
3. With regard to assets purchased or created before January 1, 2014 GNERC is authorized to use 
depreciation/amortization rates defined in the tax code. 
Article 9
Weighted Average Cost of Capital
1. Rate of Return on RAB is defined based on Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) method.
2. Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) is fixed during the regulatory period. 
3. The pre tax Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) for each regulatory period is calculated as follows:
𝐖𝐀𝐂𝐂 𝒑𝒓𝒆−𝒕𝒂𝒙 = 𝒈 ∗ 𝒓𝒅 +
(𝟏−𝒈)∗𝒓𝒆
(𝟏−𝑻)
 (4)
where,g -share of loans(%)
rd -cost of debt (%)
re -cost of own capital (%)
T -profit tax (%)
4. Cost of debt and own capital is calculated based on the following formula:
rd = rrf + DP (5)
re = rrf+ β × (rm-rrf) (6)
Where, 
rrf - risk free rate (%)
DP - debt premium (%)
rm - market risk (%)
β - relative sectorial risk factor 
5. The share of loans (g) of the total capital is 60 percent.
6. Risk free rate (rrf), relative sectorial risk factor (β), market risk premium (rm-rrf), and the debt premium (DP)
are fixed for each tariff regulatory period. The commission will determine the long-term risk-free interest 
rate based on the annual income for the long-term international state bonds before the expiration date, and 
the market risk premium and the debt premium will be determined on the basis of expert opinion.
Article 10
Operational Costs
1. For the purpose of this Methodology operational costs consist of two components: – controllable and nonparticular: 
i. service and maintenance costs 
ii. administrative and general expenses
3. Operational costs cover maintenance cost of fix assets financed by third party, including current repair, 
service and maintenance as well as other costs.
4. Operational costs cover reimbursement of the short-term loan interest borrowed for financing working 
capital, which should not exceed average annual interest rate on the short term loans issued by commercial 
banks to legal entities.
5. For calculating operational costs for the Tariff Year, operational costs for the Test Year, which are justified, 
reasonable and fair, are considered.
6. In case the utility does not have factual data for test year, the Commission is authorized to request from the 
utility technical and economic forecasting data for the Tariff Year by the tariff application. The Commission 
is authorized to consider only the data which is justified, reasonable and fair.
7. For tariff calculation for the Tariff Year the Commission uses audited factual financial and technical data, that 
should be submitted according to the Commission approved form and should be verified by the head of the 
company or duly authorized person. 
8. Within its mandate the Commission is authorized to verify the correctness of the submitted documentation, 
assess fairness and reasonableness of the costs submitted. For this purpose the Commission is authorized
to assess operational costs for the test year based on operational cost analysis of the preceding year.
9. If in addition to the regulated activity as defined by this Methodology, the utility carries out other nonregulated activities, costs associated with that activity shall not be reflected in tariff calculation. 
Article 11
Controllable Operational Expenses
i. Controllable Operational Expenses include all costs over which the utility has the ability to make a decision 
and therefore may affect them (salaries, on-going repair works, outsourcing, office maintenance, insurance 
costs, security costs, business trip, etc.)
ii. The base of Controllable Operational Expenses of the utility shall be audited Controllable Operational 
Expenses of the Base Year; audited Controllable Operational Expenses for every Tariff Year of Tariff 
Regulatory period is changing according to the Consumer Price Index and Efficiency Factor and it is 
calculated by following formula: 
cOPEX (t+1) = cOPEX(t–1)* (1 + CPIt – Xt) * (1 + CPI(t+1) – X(t+1)) (7)cOPEX (t+1) - Controllable Operational Expenses for the tariff year (GEL);
cOPEX(t–1)- Controllable Operational Expenses for the test year (GEL);
CPIt- average annual rate of inflation, during tariff calculating year, which is calculated in accordance with 
paragraph 3 of this Article. (%);
X(t)- efficiency factor during tariff calculation year (%);
CPI(t+1)- average annual rate of inflation, during tariff year, which is calculated in accordance with paragraph 4 of 
this Article, (%);
X(t+1) - efficiency factor during tariff year (%).
iii. For the inflation (CPIt) rate of the Tariff Calculation Year (t) a percentage change of annual average value of 
year (t-2) compared to annual average value of year (t-3) is taken. 
iv. For the inflation rate (CPIt+1) of the Tariff Year (t+1) a percentage change of annual average value of year (t1) compared to annual average value of year (t-2) is taken.
Article 12
Non-controllable Operational Expenses
1. Non- controllable Operational Expenses include all costs which are triggered by outside factors and utility 
cannot affect them. This includes taxes, fees, regulation fee, market operator tariff etc.Consumer Price Index and is calculated as follows:
ncOPEX (t+1) = ncOPEX(t–1)* (1 + CPIt) * (1 + CPI(t+1)) (8)
where:
ncOPEX (t+1) –Non-controllable Operational Expenses for the tariff year (GEL);
ncOPEX(t–1)- Non- controllable Operational Expenses for the test year (GEL);
CPIt- average annual rate of inflation during tariff calculating year, which is calculated in accordance with the 
paragraph 3 of Article 11. (%);
CPI(t+1)- average annual rate of inflation during tariff year, which is calculated in accordance with the paragraph 
4 of Article 11.(%).
Article13
Electricity Normative Loss
1. The electricity normative loss rate is set by according to the rule envisaged in the relevant normative act and 
is effective during the regulatory period. 
2. The electricity normative loss rate set by the Commission is fixed during regulatory period, except in cases 
specified by law.4. The commission sets normative loss rate with its separate resolution. 
5. The cost of normative loss shall be reflected in tariff only in those cases where this service includes such cost 
by law. 
6. If factual loss rate in distribution grid exceeds the approved rate, the difference shall not be reflected in tariff 
calculation and will not be reimbursed.
7. If factual loss rate is less than approved normative rate, the utility shall keep the profit from the difference. 
8. When distribution grid services envisage the obligation for filling the normative losses, the cost of energy to 
compensate for the normative loss is calculated based on the following formula: 
CNL(t+1)=Pave( t+1)* Eloss(t+1) / 100
(9)
Where,
CNL(t+1 ) – normative loss value for the ditrubution grid for the tariff year (GEL)
Pave(t+1) – average weighted cost of energy to be purchased to compensate the normative losses for 
the tariff year (tetri/kWh), 
Eloss (t+1) – volume of normative losses for the tariff year (kWh)
9. Weighted average cost of energy to be purchased for the tariff year by distribution licensee to recover 
electricity normative losses includes costs related to the electricity purchase cost and is calculated in 
accordance with paragraph 2 of the Article 17.
10. The amount of electricity normative losses in the tariff year is defined considering forecasted amount of 
distributed and passed through electricity in accordance with the paragraph 1 of Article 17.
Article 14
Cost Distribution (Allocation)present unbundled data about costs and revenues for each regulated activity to the Commission for the Test 
Year according to the Commission approved reporting forms.
2. The Commission sets distribution, pass through and consumption tariffs according to the voltage levels of 
the distribution grids of the company. 
3. The Company is obligated to allocate direct cost of the test year to the corresponding voltage levels. Nondirect costs should be also allocated for each voltage level and utility has to prove the reasonability of the 
allocation method. 
4. The Commission is authorized to disagree with the non-direct cost allocation method (considering it unjust 
and unreasonable) and use another method of cost allocation.
5. For calculating the relevant tariff according to voltage levels, the Commission carries out cost allocation 
between voltage levels based on Cost Cascading Method. (Annex #1).
CHAPTER III
TARIFF CALCULATION
DISTRIBUTION, PASS THROUGH AND CONSUMPTION TARIFF CALCULATION
Article 15
Electricity Distribution and Pass through Tariffs
1. For the distribution licensee distribution and pass through tariffs are set for distribution and pass through 
activities. 
2. Electricity Distribution and Pass through Tariffs are set according to the following voltage levels:
a. on 0,2-0,4 kV;
b. on 3,3-6-10 kV;
c. on 35-1110 kV.
3. Electricity distribution tariffs for each voltage level are calculated according to the following formula: 
Ti Distrib = 
𝑹𝑪𝑩i (t+1)
𝑬i Distrib(t+1)
* 100 (10)Ti Distrib_ distribution tariff for i-voltage level (tetri/kWh) 
RCB i(t+1 ) - Regulated Cost Base of the entity for the tariff year of the tariff regulatory period, allocated 
to i-voltage level according to this Methodology(GEL)
Ei Distrib(t+1) – Sum of forecasted amounts of electricity distributed and passed through the distribution 
network for the tariff year according to the each i-voltage level (kWh)
i – Corresponding voltage level of the electricity distribution network.
4. Pass through tariff equals to the distribution tariff.
Article 16
Electricity Consumption Tariff
1. Electricity consumtion tariff includes costs related to the electricity purchase and distribution. 
2. Electricity consumtion tariff is set for each voltage level of the distribution network; it is based on principles 
of this Methodology and this article and is calculated according to the following formula:
Ti Consum(t+1)= Pave(t+1)+ Ti Distrib (t+1)(11)
where,
Ti Consum(t+1) -Electricity consumtion tariff for i-voltage level of the distribution network for the tariff year 
(tetri/kWh) 
Ti distrib- electricity distribution tariff for i-voltage level of the distribution network for the tariff year
(tetri/kWh) 
Pave(t+1) – forecasted weighted average price of the electricity to be purchased in the tariff year by distribution 
lihih ildll f hidihlili(i/kWh)Article 17
Amount of Electricity and Weighted Average Price
1. While calculating the tariffs the Commission utilizes the actual amounts of purchased and distributed 
electricity during the test year, considering the consumption dynamics in the sector and/or the Electricity 
(Capacity) forecasted balance approved for Tariff Year during tariff calculation year. 
2. The utility is obliged to submit the possible amount and price of the electricity to be purchased from 
particular sources according to the paragraph 1 of this article, for the purpose of determining weighted 
average price of the electricity to be purchased in the tariff year by distribution licensee; also other 
forecasted costs related to electricity purchase, such as transmission, dispatch service and purchasing the 
guaranteed capacity. Based on submitted information the Commission sets Weighted Average Price for 
Purchased Electricity by the utility. 
3. Based on submitted information the Commission sets Weighted Average Price for Purchased Electricity by 
the utility for tariff year according to the following formula:
Paver(t+1)=
𝑪𝑶𝑺𝑻𝑬(𝒕+𝟏)+𝑪𝑶𝑺𝑻𝑮𝑪(𝒕+𝟏)+𝑪𝑶𝑺𝑻𝑻(𝒕+𝟏)+𝑪𝑶𝑺𝑻𝑫(𝒕+𝟏)+𝑪𝑶𝑹𝑹 𝑬𝒍.(𝒕+𝟏)
𝑬 𝐑𝐞𝐜𝐞𝐢𝐯.(𝐭+𝟏)
*100 (12)
Where, 
P aver(t+1) - Weighted Average Price for electricity to be purchased for tariff year by the utility (tetri/kWh)
COSTE(t+1) – Total forecasted cost of electricity to be purchased by the utility for the tariff year (GEL)
COSTGC(t+1) - Total forecasted cost of guaranteed capacity fee for tariff year (GEL)
COSTT(t+1) – Total forecasted cost of transmission service provided by transmission licensees (GEL)
COSTD(t+1) – Total forecasted cost of dispatch service provided by dispatch licensee (GEL)
CORR El.(t+1)– Electricity Purchase Correction Factor, which ensures the reflection of the difference between 
planned and actual costs related to the Electricity purchase for Tariff Year;
E Receiv.(t+1) – Forecasted amount of electricity received (metered) on the delivery points of the utility for the 
tariff year (kWh)
 TARIFF CORRECTION
Article 18
Tariff Correction Principles and Main Mechanisms
1. This methodology envisages reflection of the planned figures (RAB, investments, amounts of the electricity 
purchased and distributed (passed through), etc.) in the RCB. Accordingly, the Commission is authorized to 
make tariff correction for each year of the tariff regulatory period based on the Cost Correction Factor.
2. Electricity Consumption Tariff is adjusted based on the correction of the Electricity Distribution Tariff or 
Weighted Average Price for Electricity.
Article 19
Correction of Distribution Tariff
1. Electricity Distribution Tariff for every tariff year is subject to correction and it is based on the following 
factors:
a. factual investment;
b. distributed and passed through electricity volume;
c. cost of electricity normative losses;
d. quality of service;
e. non-operating income.
2. Cost correction factor is calculated according to the following formula:
CORR (t+1) = cRRAB(t+1) + cD(t+1) - cRev(t+1) + cCNL(t+1) - nopREV(t+1)(13), 
Where:
CORR (t+1)– Cost correction factor for tariff year (GEL)
cRRAB(t+1) –Difference between factual and planned return on RAB for test year (t-1), reflected in tariff year 
(t+1) (GEL); 
cD(t+1) – Difference between factual and planed values of depreciation for test year (t-1), reflected in tariff year (t+1) 
(GEL);t-1), reflected in tariff year (t+1) (GEL);
cCNL(t+1)- Difference between factual and planed values of normative losses for the test year t-1), reflected in tariff 
year (t+1) (GEL);
nopREV(t+1) – profit from the selling of retired assets and from non-regulated activities using assets from RAB, positive 
difference between the utility’s income from the connection of the new customers to the distribution network and 
the costs related to them, also received funds for financing the operating costs from the third party for the test year 
(t-1) (GEL).
Article 20
Correction of Capital Costs
1. If factual investment made by the utility during the tariff regulatory period differs from the amount of planned 
investment, then the tariff correction is carried out according to the factual investment, taking into 
consideration the principles described in the Article 7 of this methodology. 
2. Correction of Capital Costs for the difference received from the investment amount is calculated according to 
the following formula:
cRRAB(t+1) = [(aRAB(t–1) – pRAB(t–1)) × WACC (t–1)] × (1 + WACC (t–1)) × (1 + WACC t)(14),
Where:
cRRAB(t+1) – Corrected cost or the return for (t+1) period (GEL); 
aRAB(t–1) – Factual cost of RAB for (t-1) period (GEL);
pRAB(t–1) – Planned cost of RAB for (t-1) period (GEL);
WACC – Rate of time value of money, which is equal to WACC (%).
cD(t+1) = (aD(t–1) – pD(t–1)) × (1 + WACC(t–1)) × (1 + WACC t) (15),aD(t–1) - Factual cost of Annual depreciation for (t-1) period (GEL);
pD(t–1) - Planned cost of Annual depreciation for (t-1) period (GEL);
WACC - Rate of time value of money, which is equal to WACC (%).
Article 21
Correction of the Revenues from Electricity Distribution and Pass through
1. If factual distributed and passed through electricity of utility differs from the planned amounts during tariff 
regulation period for each year, then correction of RCB of utility is calculated according to the following formula:
cREV(t+1) = [(aE(t–1) – pE(t–1)) × T(t–1) ] × (1 + WACC (t–1)) × (1 + WACC t) (16),
Where:
cREV(t+1) – Corrected cost of Revenue for (t+1) period (GEL);
aE(t–1) – Factual amount of distributed and passed through electricity for (t-1) period (GEL);
pE(t–1)– Planned amount of distributed and passed through electricity for (t-1) period (GEL);
T(t–1)– Tariff for (t-1) period (GEL);
WACC – Rate of time value of money, which is equal to WACC (%).by the reason of the utility, the Commission will not use correction mechanism defined in the Paragraph 1 of this 
Article.
Article 22
Correction of the Cost of Normative losses
1. If factual distributed and passed through electricity of utility differs from the planned amounts during tariff 
regulation period for each year, the Commission provides determination of the losses for factual distributed and 
passed through electricity and makes corrections of the Cost of Normative losses according to the following 
formula:
cCNL(t+1)=[(aELoss(t-1) × aPave(t–1) –pELoss(t-1) ×pPave(t–1))] × (1 + WACC (t–1))×(1+WACC t) (17),
cCNL(t+1)–Corrected cost of Electricity Normative Losses for (t+1) period (GEL);
aELoss(t-1)– Corrected amount of Electricity Normative Losses, which is calculated according to the Paragraph 2 of this 
article (kWh);
pELoss(t-1)– Planned amount Electricity Normative Losses for (t-1) period (kWh);
aPave(t–1)– Factual weighted average price of purchasing electricity for (t-1) period (GEL);
pPave(t–1)–Planned weighted average price of purchasing electricity for (t-1) period (GEL);
WACC –Rate of time value of money, which is equal to WACC (%).
2. Corrected amount of Electricity Normative Losses for the test year is calculated according to the following 
formula:Where:
aELoss(t-1) – Corrected amount of Electricity Normative Losses for (t-1) period (kWh);
aE(t-1) – Factual amount of distributed and passed through electricity for the (t-1) period (kWh);
L –Rate of Normative Losses set by the Commission for the regulatory period (%).
Article 23
Correction of Weighted Average Price of Electricity
1. If during the regulatory period factual weighted average price of purchased electricity differs from the planned 
price, the Commission is authorized to make correction of Weighted Average Price of Electricity for each year of 
the tariff regulation period using the principle of the time value of money envisaged in this Methodology.
2. The Correction of Weighted Average Price of Electricity is based on the following factors:
a. amount and cost of purchased electricity
b. cost of purchased guaranteed capacity, transmission and dispatch service.
3. The Correction of Weighted Average Price of Electricity is made in case the change between factual and planned 
data is not due to the utility. 
CHAPTER V
TARIFF SETTING AND APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES 
Article 24
Accounting and Reporting
1. For regulatory purposes the utility is obligated to carry out its accounting and reporting based on the Unified 
System of Accounts (USOA) according to the current legislation. 
2. If utility carries out more than one regulated activity as well as non–regulated activity, it is obligated to 
account its revenues, costs and financial results separately for each regulated activity. according to the conditions of this Methodology. 
Article 25
Required Documents for Tariff Calculation
1. The utility has to submit tariff application to the Commission for the purpose of tariff setting for the tariff 
calculation period.
2. Tariff application and data templates, also the list of documentation to be filled with tariff application is 
determined according to the individual legal-administrative act of the Commission. 
3. Together with tariff application the utility must submit the following audited documentation complied with 
IFRS:
a) balance sheet 
b) Profit and Loss Statement 
c) Cash Flow Statement
4. The Commission is authorized to request from the utility other additional information which it finds 
appropriate. 
5. The responsibility on the accuracy of the information contained in the tariff application lies on the party 
submitting the application.
Article 26
Tariff Setting Timeline and Procedures
1. The utility should submit tariff application to the Commission no later than 150 days prior to expiry date of 
the tariff period.
2. The Commission reviews the tariff application for compliance and completeness within three days upon 
submission. 
3. If the Commission finds tariff application incomplete or it does not correspond with the approved form, it 
sets the deadline in written form of no more than 45 days for amending this. This period shall be extended
only once at the request of the applicant, for no more than 15 days.
4. If the tariff application is not submitted in time defined in paragraph 3 of this Article, it remains unconsidered 
according to the decision of the Commission. If unconsidered tariff application was submitted due to with the law.
5. The Commission is authorized to make a relevant decision and review the utility’s tariffs on its own initiative. 
In this case the provisions of submitting necessary information and documentations are determined by the 
decisions by the Commission.
6. Upon acceptance of properly submitted application and in case of paragraph 5 of this Article, the Commission 
starts public administrative proceedings and the notice shall be published on the Commission web site.
7. Tariff application is reviewed according to public administrative proceeding rule under Georgian legislation. 
Therefore, tariff application and enclosed documents (except for Personal information relating to identifiable
entities, as well as commercially confidential information considered by the Commission) are public and shall 
be available to any interested party.
8. All the interested parties are authorized to get familiar with materials presented to the Commission and 
provide their comments.
9. Comments on the tariff application shall be submitted in written form and shall include justified 
argumentations. In addition, the interested party is entitled not to indicate his identity while submitting own
comments. The copy of the comments shall be sent to the provider of the tariff application and comments 
shall be discussed on the public hearing of tariff application. 
10. The Commission is authorized to request additional information or different types of conclusions from the 
utility while reviewing tariff application. 
11. In the process of reviewing the tariff application before reaching the final decision, the Commission is 
authorized to organize meetings and/or public hearings for the review of the tariff application.
12. Applicant shall be notified about the time and venue of the public hearing seven days in advance. CHAPETR VI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
Article 20
Transitional Provisions
1. For the first regulatory period the components of the WACC is determined as follows:
a. Risk-free rate (rrf) – 7.50%;
b. Debt Premium (DP) -3.50%;
c. market risk premium (rm- rrf) - 7.25%;
d. sectorial risk coefficient (β) -1.00
2. For the first Regulatory period (from January 1, 2015) general efficiency factor (Xgen) equals to the 2%, and 
individual efficiency factor (Xind) is equals to 0.
3. For that utility whose tariff is set till August 31, 2014, the first regulatory period is applied from the 
September 1, 2014 till December 31, 2017. Correction principles and mechanisms defined in this 
Methodology will be applied only for the regulatory period from January 1, 2015 till December 31, 2017. 
4. Corrections defined in the Chapter IV of this methodology will be carried out from the second calendar year 
of the first regulatory period annually (expect of the corrections defined in the sub-paragraph e) of Paragraph 
1 of Article 19). 
5. Tariff correction by service quality factor shall be carried out after appropriate rule will enter into the force
by the Commission.
Annex N1
Cost Cascading Method
Cost Cascading (allocation) mechanism of allocating different voltage levels to the consumers (2nd stage of cost 
allocation), according to the energy consumption by voltage levels: 
G1 – Energy supply from Generation to the first level
G2 – Energy supply from Generation to the second level
G3 – Energy supply from Generation to the third level;
L1 – Total losses on the first level;
L2 – Total losses on the second level;
L3 – Total losses on the third level;
C11 – Delivered energy to the first level consumers (consumption on the first level);
C12 – Energy supply from first level to the second level;
C1 = C11 + C12, Total delivered energy from the first level (G1 - L1);
C22 – Delivered energy to the second level consumers (consumption on the second level);
C23 - Delivered energy to the second level from the third level;
C2= C22+ C23, Total delivered energy from the second level (G2 + C12 - L2);
C33 - Delivered energy to the third level consumers (consumption on the third level);
S11 = C11/ C1 - Energy share consumed by first level consumers in the total delivered energy from this level
S22 = C22/ C2 - Energy share consumed by second level consumers in the total delivered energy from this level
S33 = C33/ C3 - Energy share consumed by third level consumers in the total delivered energy from this levelCost Cascading (allocation) mechanism is based on energy consumptions on separate voltage levels
S1 = S11 × Cost1 ,
Allocated share of loss value (and other costs) to the first level consumers is defined as first level cost (Cost1) to be 
allocated to the same level consumers, so S11 factor is multiplied by first level cost. 
S2 = S22 × Cost2 + S22 × ((1 - S11) × Cost1),
Allocated share of loss value (and other costs) to the second level consumers consists of two components. 
The first one defines the share of the second level cost (Cost2) to be attributed to the same level consumers, so S22 
factor is multiplied by the cost allocated to the second level.
And the second component determines the share of the first level cost (Cost2) to be attributed to the second level 
consumers. For this purpose, the residual share of the first level cost (not attributed to the first level consumers) is 
taken, from which the part is attributed to the second level that corresponds to the consumed energy share by the 
second level consumers in the total delivered energy from the same level.
S3 = S33 × Cost3 + S33 × ((1 - S22) × Cost2) + S33 × ((1 - S22) × (1 - S11) × Cost1),
Allocated share of loss value (and other costs) to the third level consumers consists of three components. 
The first one defines the share of the third level cost (Cost3) to be attributed to the same level consumers, so S33 
factor (that equals to 100%) is multiplied by the cost allocated to the third level.
And the second component determines the share of the second level cost (Cost2) to be attributed to the third 
level consumers and is residual share of second level cost (not attributed to the second level consumers), that is 
totally attributed to the third level (as S33 = 100%).
And the second component determines the share of the first level cost (Cost1) to be attributed to the third level 
consumers. For this purpose, the residual share of the first level cost (not attributed to the first level consumers) is 
taken, from which the part is attributed to the third level consumer which was not attributed to the second level 
consumers. 
In order to identify total energy delivered from each voltage level (C1, C2 and C3) it is necessary to know the amount 
of total loss according to voltage levels (L1, L2 and L3). In case when information about losses is total and its 
allocation by voltage levels is not available, then the regulator shall allocate the losses to voltage levels with 
maximum possible approximation based on available data.Tariff Setting Methodology for Electricity Generation, Transmission, Dispatch and 
Electricity Market Operator Service
CHAPTER I. GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Article 1
Purpose
1. Purpose of the Tariff Setting Methodology (thereafter “the Methodology”) for Electricity 
Generation, Transmission, Dispatch and Electricity Market Operator service is to define 
rules and principles for calculating tariff for Electricity Generation, Transmission, Dispatch 
and Electricity Market Operator service in accordance with the Law of Georgia on Electricty 
and Natula Gas.
2. Based on this Methodology annual Tariff setting is in accordance with the “Cost Plus” 
regulation principle which stimulates stable functioning of the utility, recovery of reasonable 
costs and gain fair profit.
Article 2
Definitions
1. The terms used in methodlogy have the same meanining as in the Law of Georgia on 
Electricity and Natural Gas.
2. Other terms used in methodology for the tariff regulation purposes have the following 
meaning: 
a) Intangible assets – identifiable, non-monetary assets without physical form including 
patent, trade mark, goodwilll, software, licence and other types of nonmaterial assets;
b) Assets – tangible and intangible assets;
c) Asset replacement costs - total amount of costs, which is needed to create the similar 
asset of the evaluated asset.
d) Asset cost – the real value of payments in money or money equivalents or other 
compensation during the creation or the first purchase of an asset;
e) Historic cost asset valuation method – Asset cost evaluation using the price of its 
creation or the first purchase
f) Electricity generation tariff of guaranteed capacity source– Electricity price produced 
by guaranteed capacity source, in which costs related to electricity production are 
reflected except for the costs reflected in the guaranteed capacity costs;
g) Guaranteed capacity cost – set tariff for providing state’s Unified Electricity System 
with guaranteed capacity by guaranteed capacity sourcewhich provides the source;
h) Reasonable costs – cost incurred in accordance with the minimum cost principles, which 
is rational and nessesary for the effective functioning of the utility. 
i) Cost audit – regulations mechanisms, by means of which the commission or/and neutral 
third party set reasonable costs incurred by the utility and define regulatory asset base;
j) Cost cascading method –allocation of the costs of the upper volage levels of the 
distribution grid to the costs of the next voltage levels;
k) Electricity market operator service tariff –the price of incurred service by the electricity 
market operator for qualified enterprises in accordance with the current legislation;
l) Electricity transmission tariff– price of the transmission service provided by the 
transmission licensee via the transmission grid for transmitting electricity to the 
consumer;
m) Electricity dispatch tariff – the price of dispatching service provided by the dispatch 
licensee;
n) Electricity Generation tariff –price of electricity produced by the Generation licensee in 
which operating and capital costs are reflected related to electricity production by the 
generation licensee;
o) Investment –capital investment which is used for creating or rehabilitation of assets the 
useful life of which is more than one year;
p) Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) – rate of return on Regulatory Assets Base, 
calculated before taxes, according to the capital structure of the company set by 
commission (own and attracted capital);
q) Capital Costs (CAPEX) - return on Regulatory Asset base and 
depreciation/amortization, for the purpose of this Methodology
r) Tangible assets – major assets used by the company for the regulated activity, including 
land, buildings, machinery, equipment and other main assets which useful life is more 
than one year;
s) Third party- any individual or legal person (including a State, customer, etc.), which 
provides subsidyto the utility, gives grant, pays fees for the connection to the electricity 
transmission network and/or gives tangible and intagible assets to the utility for free.
t) Regulated activity – for the purpose of this Methodology activities of the electricity 
generation, transmission, dispatching, electricity market operator service, providing 
guaranteed capacity by the guaranteed capacity source and electricity generation 
regulated by the Commission in accordance with the Law of Georgia on Electricity and 
Natural Gas;
u) Regulatory Cost base (RCB) – Allowed income for the utility set by the Commission for 
the Tariff Year, which is necessary for the effective functioning of the utility and includes 
reasonable costs and rational profit;
v) Regulatory Assest Base (RAB) – tangible and intangible assets used for the regulated 
activity, that are directly related to the regulated activity and are used in tariff 
calculation(except for the assets created by the third party);
w)Building block approach – defining the Regulatory Cost Base by the determination of 
its components.with this Methodology;
y) Operational costs –Operating and other costs related to the production, transmission 
and dispatching licensees and electricity market operator activity;
aa) Test year (t-1)–the calendar year prior to the tariff calculation year by the Commission;
bb) Tariff application – application form designed and approved by the commission, which 
includes financial and technical data for the Test Year of a company as well as investments 
made during the Test Year;
cc) Utility – production, transmission and dispatching licencees, also electricity market 
operator who are subject to tariff setting according to this Methodology in accordance with 
the current legislation for their regulated activities;
dd) Tariff calculation year (t)-the calendar year prior to the Tariff Year;
ee) Fixed operational costs – the operational costs of guaranteed capacity source which 
does not depend on electricity production by the guaranteed capacity source;
ff) Depreciation/amortization – systematic allocation of depreciable amount of the
tangible/intangible asset over its useful life;
gg) Variable operational costs – the operational costs of guaranteed capacity source 
which depends on the electricity production by the guaranteed capacity source or the volume 
of produced electricity (including fuel cost, chemical reagents, etc);
hh) Net book value - asset cost minus accumulated depreciation.
Article 3
Main Principles
2. This Methodology and the tariffs set on its bases
a) protect consumers from the monopolistic prices; 
b) support the stable and realible functioning of the company;
c) ensure that tariffs are transparent, stable and fair for the companies;
d) reflect different service costs between the customer categories; 
e) cover costs of the company with funds recieved from each customer category in 
proportion to costs incurres for servicing this customer category. 
3. For determination of RCB structure "building blocks" approach method is used. RCB 
defined by this methodology consists with the following components:
A) Capital expenses;
B) Operation expenses.
3. Calculation of Capital and Operation expenses is carried out by "cost-plus" method, with annual 
cost audit.
4. In case if result of the cost audit revealed corrective information of the previous years existed 
before test year, which was not identified in the previous year(s) tariff calculations, Commission 
has authority to use this information for correcting the results of the audit. Correction shall to be 
made by using principles outlined in Chapter IV of this methodology.
5. All tariffs set by the Commission are calculated without Value Added Tax (VAT).Article 4
Tariff Setting Period
1. Accoridng to this Methodology tariffs are set from January 1, 2015.
2. GNERC is authorized to set tariffs annually for specific utilities on an individual bases and is 
valid from January1 till December31.
CHAPTER II
REGULATORY COST BASE 
Article 5
Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year
Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year is calculated according to the following formula: 
RCB(t+1)= CAPEX(t+1) +OPEX(t+1)+ CORR(t+1) (1)
Where,
RCB(t+1) - RCB for the Tariff Year(GEL);
CAPEX(t+1)-Capital Costs for the Tariff Year(GEL);
OPEX(t+1)- Operating Costs for the Tariff Year(GEL);
CORR(t+1) - Cost correction factor, which provides the reflection of the difference between 
actual and planned costs in the cost base of the Tariff Year, and also received income 
from non-operational activity envisaged in the subparagraph “c” of paragraph 1 of Article 
19 of this Methodology, based on the principles defined in this Methodology (GEL)
Article 6
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures for the Tariff Year are calculated according to the following formula: 
CAPEX(t+1)= RABstart(t+1)* WACC + D(t+1) (2)CAPEX(t+1)- Capital Costs for the Tariff Year(GEL) 
RABstart(t+1-RAB for the beginning of Tariff Year(GEL)
WACC - Rate of return on the RAB for the tariff (%);
D(t+1) - annual depreciation for the Tariff Year(GEL)
Artilce 7
Regulatory Asset Base
15.For calculating the value of Regulated Assest Base, GNERC uses Historic Cost Valuation 
Method.
16.In case if the assets value can not be determined by the mothod specified in paragrah 1 of 
this article, Commission has the autority to use replacement cost asset valuation method.
17.In case if the utility sells regulatory assets to other utility, GNERC does not envisage asset 
re-sale value while calculating relevant tariffs. 
18.The RAB includes the existing asset value including actually made investments. 
19.The RAB shall not reflect:
a) Those investments that were carried out by third party financing, companies should 
account for such assets separately;
b) Those investments the company does not consider justified and reasonable; 
c) Assets that are not used in regulated activity;
d) construction in progress.
e) Goodwill, except goodwill which were formed during privatization of the state 
property.
20. The Commission will consider capitalized cost of the paid loan according to the
factual annual interest rate for the long term loan taken to finance the
construction during the construction process in the cost of asset defined in
subparagraph D of paragraph 5 of this article, but the rate should not
exceed the rate of debt (rd) defined in this methodology.
21.Value of regulated assets base of utility is determined on the basis of the net book value 
engaged in this base.net book value of the asset. Thereby, the Commission is authorized to reflect asset 
impairment loss in tariff in some cases. Accounting of impairment loss shall be done 
separately by the utility. 
23. RAB value at the beginning of the Tariff Year shall be determined based on the following 
formula: 
RAB start(t+1) = RAB end(t-1) + INVt- Dt (3)
where,
RABstart(t+1) - value of RAB at the beginning of the Tariff Year(t+1) (GEL);
RABend(t-1) - value of RAB at the end of the Test Year (t-1) (GEL);
INVt- actually made investments approved by GNERC for the Tariff Calculation Year(t)
(GEL);
Dt -depreciation for the Tariff Calculation Year.
Artilcle 8
Depreciation and Amortization
4. GNERC applies the straight line method for determining the depreciation/amortization rates. 
5. For the assets which were purchased or created after January 1, 2014,”Regulated Asset 
depreciation/amortization Rates for Regulated Utilities” shall be used approved by the 
commission. 
6. With regard to assets purchased or created before January 1, 2014 GNERC is authorized 
to use depreciation/amortization rates defined in the tax code. 
Article 9
Weighted Average Cost of Capital
1. Rate of Return on RAB is defined based on Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) 
method.
2. The pre tax Weighted Avarege Cost of Capital (WACC) for the Tariff Year is calculated as 
follows:
𝑾𝑨𝑪𝑪𝒑𝒓𝒆−𝒕𝒂𝒙 = 𝒈 ∗ 𝒓𝒅 +
(𝟏−𝒈)∗𝒓𝒆
(𝟏
𝑻)
 (4)where,
WACC pre-tax - pre tax Wighted Average Cost of Capital (%)
g- share of attracted capital (%)
rd- cost of borrowed capital (%)
re- cost of own capital (%)
T- profit tax (%)
3. Cost of attracted capital and own capital is calculated based on the following formula:
rd = rrf + DP (5) 
re = rrf+ β × (rm-rrf) (6)
where,
rrf- risk free rate (%)
DP- debt premium (%)
rm- market risk (%)
β- sectoral risk factor.
4. The share of loans (g) of the total capital is 60 percent.
5. The commission will determine the long-term risk-free interest rate based on the annual 
income for the long-term international state bonds before the expiration date, and the market 
risk premium and the debt premium will be determined on the basis of expert opinion.
Article 10
Operational costs
1. Test Year data is used for calculation of operational costs for the Tariff Year.
2. For calculating operational costs for the Tariff Year operational costs for the Test Year which 
are justified, reasonable and fair is considered.
3. In case the utility does not have factual data for test year, the Commission is authorized to 
request from the utility technical and economic forecasting data for the Tariff Year by the 
tariff application. The Commission is authorized to consider only the data which is justified, 
reasonable and fair.
4. Operational costs should ensure the recovery of costs associated with the regulated activity, 
in particular: c) administrative and general expenses 
5. Operational costs covers maintenance cost of fix assets financed by third party, including 
current repair, service and maintenance as well as other costs. 
6. Operational costs covers reimbursement of the short-term loan interest that was borrowed 
for financing the working capital, which should not exceed average annual interest rate on 
the short term loans issued by commercial banks to legal entities.
7. For tariff calculation for the Tariff Year the Commission uses audited factual financial and 
technical data, including factual data for specific fuel cost, which should be submitted 
according to the Commission approved forms and the validity and accuracy of which should 
be verified by the head of the company or duly authorized person. 
8. Within its mandate the Commission is authorized to verify the correctness of the submitted 
documentation, assess fairness and reasonableness of the costs submitted. For this 
purpose the Commission is authorized to assess operational costs for the test year based
on operational cost analysis of the preceding year.
9. If in addition to the regulated activity as defined by this Methodology, the utility carries out 
other non-regulated activities, costs associated with that activity shall not be reflected in 
tariff calculation. 
Article 11
Electricity normative loses
Cost of electricity normative loses in electricity transmission tariffs are envisaged in case if the 
service provided by the utility envisages such cost according to current legislation. Cost Distribution (Allocation)
6. If the utility carries out more than one regulated activity as well as non-regulated activity, it is 
obligated to present to the Commission unbundled data about costs and revenues for each 
regulated activity for the Test Year according to the Commission approved reporting forms. 
7. The Commission sets transmission tariffs according to the voltage levels of the transmission 
grids of the utility.
8. Transmission licensee is obliged to allocate direct cost of the test year to the corresponding 
voltage levels. Non-direct costs should be also allocated to each voltage level and the 
licensee has to justify the reasonability and fairness of the allocation method.
9. The Commission is authorized to disagree with the non-direct cost allocation method 
(considering it unjust and unreasonable) and use another method of cost allocation.
10.For calculating the relevant tariff according to voltage levels, the Commission carries out cost 
allocation between voltage levels based on Cost Cascading Method. (Annex #1).Article 13
Amount of Electricity
For calculating tariffs the Commission utilizes forecast balance of approved electricity (capacity) or 
factual data of the Test Year.
Article 14
Electricity Generation Tariff
For calculating generation tariff of power plant for the Tariff Year RCB is divided by the electricity 
amount delivered at the bus-bar and is calculated according to the following formula:
Tgeneration (t+1)=
𝑹𝑪𝑩(𝒕+𝟏)
𝑬 𝑫𝒆𝒍𝒊𝒗𝒆𝒓𝒆𝒅 (𝒕+𝟏)
X 100 (7)
Where,
Tgeneration (t+1) - Tariff for the electricity delivered at the power plant bus-bar for the 
Tariff Year (t+1) (tetri/kWh)
RCB(t+1) – Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year (t+1) (GEL);
EDelivered(t+1) – Electricity amount delivered at the power plant bus-bar for the Tariff 
Year (t+1) (kWh)
Article 15
Guaranteed capacity cost and electricity generation tariff of guaranteed capacity 
source 
1. For the guaranteed capacity source (generation licensee) two-step tariff is set which 
includes guaranteed capacity cost and electricity generation tariff of guaranteed 
capacity source.
2. Guaranteed capacity cost and electricity generation tariff of guaranteed capacity 
source is calculated based on the same principles and includes the same 
components as electricity generation tariff under the provisions in this article.
3. Guaranteed capacity cost provides the recovery of those fixed operational costs and 
capital expenses which are not directly related to electricity generation. 
4. Guaranteed capacity cost is determined for each guaranteed capacity source on a 
daily basis.
5. Guaranteed capacity cost is calculated based on the following formula: 𝑵(𝒕+𝟏)
where,
Q (t+1) - Guaranteed capacity cost for the Tariff Year (t+1) (GEL/day);
OPEX fix (t+1) - Fixed operational expenses of the utility for the Tariff Year (t+1)
(GEL);
CAPEX (t+1) – Capital expenses for the Tariff Year (t+1) (GEL);
N(t+1) - Planned number of standby days of guaranteed capacity source for the 
Tariff Year (t+1).
 
6. The number of standby days of guaranteed capacity source does not include the 
period (days) of planned repair and non-operating days which are planned by the 
utility and agreed with the dispatch licensee.
7. Electricity generation tariff of guaranteed capacity source reflects the costs directly 
related to electricity generation (including fuel cost, chemical reagents, and other 
costs defined by the legislation).
8. Electricity generation tariff of guaranteed capacity source is calculated according to 
the following formula:
 Tvar(t+1)=
𝑶𝑷𝑬𝑿 𝒗𝒂𝒓(𝒕+𝟏)+𝒄𝑬𝑿𝑪(𝒕+𝟏)+𝒄𝑬𝑭𝑭(𝒕+𝟏)
𝑬 𝒅𝒆𝒍𝒊𝒗𝒆𝒓𝒆𝒅 (𝒕+𝟏)
X100 (9)
 Where,
Tvar(t+1) - Electricity generation tariff of guaranteed capacity source (tetri/kWh);
OPEXvar(t+1) – Variable Operational Expenses of the guaranteed capacity source for the 
Tariff Year (t+1) (GEL);
cEXC(t+1) - Profit or loss resulted by the difference between planned and actual amounts 
of foreign currency exchange rate versus GEL at the moment of purchasing fuel (gas, masut, 
coal) for electricity generation by TPP and fuel purchasing price, which is calculated according to 
the rule described in paragraph 9 (GEL);
cEFF(t+1) - Profit or loss resulted by the difference between planned and actual amounts of 
specific cost of fuel (gas, masut, coal) for electricity generation by TPP, which is calculated 
according to the rule described in paragraph 10 (GEL);
EDelivered(t+1) - Electricity amount delivered at the power plant bus-bar (kWh);
9. Profit or loss resulted by the difference between planned and actual amounts of foreign 
currency exchange rate versus GEL at the moment of purchasing fuel (gas, masut, coal) for 
electricity generation by TPP and fuel purchasing price, which is calculated according to the 
following formula:(10)
where,
aV(t-1) - Actual amount of purchased fuel for the test year (t-1)(m3);
aP(t-1) - Actual contract price for fuel purchase (1000 m3in foreign currency) for the test year (t-1)
(GEL);
pP(t-1) – Planned contract price for the fuel purchase (1000 m3in foreign currency) for the test 
year (t-1) (GEL);
pEXC(t-1) – Planned exchange currency rate for the test year (t-1);
aEXC(t-1) – Actual exchange currency rate for the test year (t-1);
WACC - Rate of time value of the money, which is equal to WACC;
10. Profit or loss derived from the difference of planned and actual values of specific cost for 
fuel (natural gas, masut, coal) necessary for generating electricity by the TPP is calculated as 
follows: 
cEFF(t+1)=[aE(t-1) × pP(t-1) × pEXC(t-1) × (aEFF(t-1) - pEFF(t-1))] × (1 + WACC (t–1)) × (1 + WACC t) 
(11)
where,
aE(t-1) - Actual amount of delivered electricity at the bus-bar for the test year (t-1)(m3);
pP(t-1) - – Planned contract price for the fuel purchase (1000 m3in foreign currency) for the 
test year (t-1) (GEL);
pEXC(t-1) – Planned exchange currency rate for the test year (t-1);
pEFF(t-1) - Planned specific cost of fuel for the test year (t-1) (m3/kWh);
aEFF(t-1) - Actual specific cost of fuel for the test year (t-1) (m3/kWh);
WACC - Rate of time value of the money, which is equal to the WACC (%).Article 16
Electricity Transmission Tariff
1. Electricity transmission tariffs are set for transmission activity for electricity transmission 
licensee.
2. Electricity transmission tariffs are set according to the following voltage levels of electricity 
transmission grid:
a) For 500 kv voltage;
b) For 400 kv voltage;
c) For 220-110-35 kv voltage;
d) For 6-10 kv voltage.
3. Transmission tariff for the Tariff Year is calculated according to the following formula: 
T i Transm(t+1) = 𝑹𝑪𝑩𝒊(𝒕+𝟏)
𝑬𝒊 𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒏𝒔𝒎𝒊𝒔𝒔𝒊𝒐𝒏(𝒕+𝟏)
(12)
where,
T i Transm(t+1) - transmission tariff of i-level voltage (GEL/kWh);
RCB i (t+1) - regulatory cost base value of transmission licensee on i-level voltage for the Tariff 
Year (t+1) (GEL);
E iTransm(t+1) - Total amount of transmitted electricity in delivery points via transmission grid on ilevel voltage, and while calculating the tariff of a new 400 kv transmission line for cross-border
transit the total amount of exported electricity via this line (kWh);
i – corresponding level of transmission grid voltage.
3. For calculating the tariff envisaged in the paragraph 1 of this article, the Commission is 
authorized to consider received or receivable revenues from electricity transit through the territory 
of Georgia by the transmission licensee. In such case, the regulatory cost base of transmission 
licensee is reduced with received or receivable revenues from electricity transit.
Article 17
Electricity Dispatch Tariff
Dispatch tariff for the Tariff Year is calculated according to the following formula:
T dispatch(t+1) = 𝑹𝑪𝑩(𝒕+𝟏)
𝑬 𝒅𝒊𝒔𝒑𝒂𝒕𝒄𝒉(𝒕+𝟏)
x 100 (13)
Where,RCB (t+1) - Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year (t+1) (GEL);
E dispatch(t+1) - Amount of consumed (metered) electricity by the qualified enterprises in delivery 
points (kWh).
Article 18
Electricity Market Operator Tariff
1. Electricity Market Operator service tariff is defined for the service for which qualified 
enterprises pay service fee to electricity market operator according to current legislation, 
which is calculated according to the following formula:
 
Top(t+1) = 𝑹𝑪𝑩(𝒕+𝟏)
𝑬 (𝒕+𝟏)
x 100 (14)
where,
Top(t+1) - Electricity Market Operator tariff for the Tariff Year (t+1) (tetri/kWh);
 RCB (t+1) - Regulatory Cost Base for the Tariff Year (t+1) (GEL);
E (t+1) - The amount of electricity for the Tariff Year for which Electricity Market Operator 
provides service for qualified enterprises during the tariff calculation year (kWh)
2. RCB of the Electricity Market Operator, based on the functional characteristics of the utility, 
is calculated according to this methodology by following formula:
RCB(t+1) = (D(t+1) +OPEX(t+1)) × (1+k) (15), 
where, 
RCB(t+1) - RCB for the (t+1) Tariff Year(GEL);
D(t+1) – depreciation for tariff year (GEL);
OPEX(t+1) - Operating Costs for the Tariff Year (GEL);
k – Profit rate related to cost, it is taken no more than 3 percent, which is defined by 
the Commission annually 
3. Income received from import-export activity by the Electricity Market Operator, and also 
taxes and expanses received from this activity according to the current legislation, is not 
considered while calculating Electricity Market Operator tariff.Tariff Correction
Article 19
Tariff Correction Principles and Main Mechanisms
1. This methodology envisages the reflection of planned indicators (operational costs and 
electricity amounts) in the RCB while calculating tariff. Therefore, the Commission is 
authorized to carry out the tariff correction with Cost Correction Factor for the Tariff Year, 
which is based on the following:
a) operational costs
b) amount of electricity
c) profit from non-operational activity.
2. Cost Correction Factor is calculated as follows: 
CORR(t+1) = cOPEX(t+1) - cREV(t+1) - nopREV(t+1) (16)
where,
CORR(t+1) - Cost Correction Factor for the Tariff Year (t+1)(GEL);
cOPEX(t+1) - difference between planned and actual operational costs for the test year(t-1), 
reflected in the Tariff Year (t+1)(GEL);
cREV(t+1) - Difference between planned and actual revenues for the test year(t-1), according to 
the correction principles in the article 20 of this Methodology, reflected in the Tariff Year 
(t+1)(GEL);
nopREV(t+1) - profit gained by the utility from the utilization of assets in non-regulated activities 
reflected in RAB and selling of assets out of service, also positive difference from the connection 
of new consumers to the electricity transmission line of the utility, and also funds received for 
financing operational costs from the third party in the test year (t-1)(GEL).
Article 20
Correction of operational costs
1. If actual operational costs incurred by the utility for the Tariff Year differs from the operational 
costs envisaged while setting relevant tariff, then the Commission ensures the correction of 
RCB according to the following formula:
cOPEX(t+1) = [(aOPEX(t–1) – pOPEX(t–1)) × (1 + WACC (t–1)) × (1 + WACCt) (17)cOPEX(t+1) - Corrected amount of operational costs for the period of (t+1) (GEL);
aOPEX(t–1) - Actual amount of operational costs for the period of (t-1) (GEL);
pOPEX(t–1) - Planned amount of operational costs for the period of (t-1) (GEL);
WACC – Rate of time value of the money, which is equal to the WACC (%).
2. While correcting operational costs of the Electricity Market Operator, the Commission does not 
consider time value rate and it is calculated based on the following formula:
cOPEX(t+1)= aOPEX(t–1) – pOPEX(t–1) (18)
Article 21
Revenue Correction with Actual Amount of Electricity
1. If the actual delivered, transmitted and dispatched electricity by the utility differs from the 
planned amounts, the Commission provides the correction of RCB according to the following 
formula:
cRev(t+1)= [(aE (t–1) – pE (t–1)) × T(t–1)] × (1 + WACC (t–1)) × (1 + WACC t) (19)
where,
cRev(t+1) – Corrected cost of revenues for the period of (t+1) (GEL);
aE (t–1) - Actual amount of delivered, transmitted and dispatched electricity in the grid for the period 
of (t-1) (GEL);
pE (t–1) - Planned amount of delivered, transmitted and dispatched electricity in the grid for the 
period of (t-1) (GEL);
T(t–1) - tariff for the period of (t-1) (GEL);
WACC – Rate of the time value of the money, which is equal to the WACC.
2. Correction mechanism defined in the paragraph 1 is applied to that amount of electricity 
transmitted to the network by TPP, which is not guaranteed capacity source. 
3. The Commission does not consider correction mechanism defined in the paragraph 1 of this 
article if actual amount of the delivered and transmitted electricity shortage in the grid with respect 
to the planned is due to the utility.
4. While correcting the amount of electricity and the guaranteed capacity for which the Electricity 
Market Operator tariff is calculated under current legislation, the Commission does not use time 
value rate and it is calculated according to the following formula:
cRev(t+1)= (aE(t1) pE(t1)) × T(t1) (20)CHAPTER V
TARIFF SETTING AND APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURES 
Article 22
Accounting and Reporting
4. For the regulated purposes the utility is obligated to carry out its financial accounting and 
reporting based on the Uniform System of Accounts approved by the Commission,
according to current legislation. 
5. If the utility carries out more than one regulated activity as well as non–regulated activity, it 
is obligated to unbundle its revenues, costs and financial accounts for each regulated 
activity. 
6. The utility should submit information about assets created by the consumer financing 
separately as requested by this Methodology. 
Article 23
Required Documents for Tariff Setting
6. For the purpose of tariff setting for each Tariff Calculation Year utility has to submit the tariff 
application in the Commission. 
7. Tariff application and data forms, as well as a list of documents to be submitted along with 
the tariff application are determined by individual administrative - legal act of the 
Commission.
8. Along with the Tariff application the utility shall also submit the following documents 
prepared and audited in accordance with the IFRS: 
a) Balance Sheet 
b) Profit and Loss Statement 
c) Cash Flow Statement 
9. The Commission is authorized to request from the utility other additional information if finds 
appropriate. 
10. The responsibility on the accuracy of the information contained in the tariff application lies 
on the party submitting the application. Tariff Setting Timeline and Procedures
1. The utility is obliged to submit tariff application to the Commission no later than 150 days 
prior to the expiry of the existing tariff.
2. The Commission reviews the compliance of tariff application with the approved form and its
completeness within three days upon submission.
3. If the Commission finds tariff application incomplete or it does not correspond with the 
approved form, it sets the deadline in written form of no more than 45 days for amending 
this. This period shall be extended only once at the request of the applicant, for no more 
than 15 days.
4. If the tariff application is not submitted in time defined in paragraph 3 of this Article, it remains 
unconsidered according to the decision of the Commission. If unconsidered tariff application 
was submitted due to legislation, sanctions shall be imposed on the company in accordance 
with the law.
5. The Commission is authorized to make a relevant decision and review the utility’s tariffs on 
its own initiative. In this case the provisions of submitting necessary information and 
documentations are determined by the relevant decisions of the Commission.
6. Upon acceptance of properly submitted application and in case of paragraph 5 of this Article, 
the Commission starts public administrative proceedings and the notice shall be published 
on the Commission web site.
7. Tariff application is reviewed according to public administrative proceeding rule under
Georgian legislation. Therefore, tariff application and enclosed documents (except for 
personal information relating to identifiable persons, as well as commercially confidential 
information considered by the Commission) are public and shall be available to any 
interested party.
8. All the interested parties are authorized to get familiar with materials presented to the 
Commission and provide their comments.
9. Comments on the tariff application shall be submitted in written form and shall include 
justified argumentations. In addition, the interested party is entitled not to indicate the identity 
while submitting own comments, the copy of comment shall be sent to tariff applicant, and 
the opinions are reviewed at the public hearing of tariff application.
10.In the process of reviewing the tariff application, the Commission is authorized to request 
submitting of additional documentation or different types of conclusions from the utility.
11.In the process of reviewing the tariff application before reaching the final decision, the 
Commission is authorized to organize meetings and/or public hearings for the review of the 
tariff application.
12.Applicant shall be notified about the time and venue of the public hearing seven days in 
advance. CHAPETR VI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
Article 25
Transitional Provisions
1. The values of the components of Weighted Avarege Cost of Capital (WACC) are defined as 
follows:
1. Risk free rate rrf- - 7.50 %
2. Debt premium (DP) - 3.50 %
3. Market risk premium (rm- rrf) - 7.25%
4. Sectorial risk factor (β) – 1.00
2. For the utilities, tariffs of which are set by the Commission including August 31, 2014, tariffs 
shall be set from September 1, 2014 including December 31, 2015 under this Methodology;
3. Corrections envisaged in the Chapter 4 of this Methodology shall be carried out from 2016 
(except for the corrections by profits gained from non-operational activities envisaged in 
subparagraph “C” of paragraph 1 of article 19 of this Methodology) on yearly basis.
Cost Cascading Method
Cost Cascading (allocation) mechanism of allocating different voltage levels to the consumers 
(2nd stage of cost allocation), according to the energy consumption by voltage levels:
 
G1 – Energy supply from Generation to the first level
G2 – Energy supply from Generation to the second level
G3 – Energy supply from Generation to the third level;L2 – Total losses on the second level;
L3 – Total losses on the third level;
C11 – Delivered energy to the first level consumers (consumption on the first level);
C12 – Energy supply from first level to the second level;
C1 = C11 + C12, Total delivered energy from the first level (G1 - L1);
C22 – Delivered energy to the second level consumers (consumption on the second level);
C23 - Delivered energy to the second level from the third level;
C2= C22+ C23, Total delivered energy from the second level (G2 + C12 - L2);
C33 - Delivered energy to the third level consumers (consumption on the third level);
S11 = C11/ C1 - Energy share consumed by first level consumers in the total delivered energy from 
this level
S22 = C22/ C2 - Energy share consumed by second level consumers in the total delivered energy 
from this level
S33 = C33/ C3 - Energy share consumed by third level consumers in the total delivered energy from 
this level
Cost Cascading (allocation) mechanism is based on energy consumptions on separate voltage 
levels
S1 = S11 × Cost1 ,
Allocated share of loss value (and other costs) to the first level consumers is defined as first level 
cost (Cost1) to be allocated to the same level consumers, so S11 factor is multiplied by first level 
cost. 
S2 = S22 × Cost2 + S22 × ((1 - S11) × Cost1),
Allocated share of loss value (and other costs) to the second level consumers consists of two 
components.
The first one defines the share of the second level cost (Cost2) to be attributed to the same level 
consumers, so S22 factor is multiplied by the cost allocated to the second level.
And the second component determines the share of the first level cost (Cost2) to be 
attributed to the second level consumers. For this purpose, the residual share of the first 
level cost (not attributed to the first level consumers) is taken, from which the part is attributed to 
the second level that corresponds to the consumed energy share by the second level consumers 
in the total delivered energy from the same levelAllocated share of loss value (and other costs) to the third level consumers consists of three 
components. 
The first one defines the share of the third level cost (Cost3) to be attributed to the same level 
consumers, so S33 factor (that equals to 100%) is multiplied by the cost allocated to the third 
level.
And the second component determines the share of the second level cost (Cost2) to be 
attributed to the third level consumers and is residual share of second level cost (not 
attributed to the second level consumers), that is totally attributed to the third level (as S33 = 
100%).
And the second component determines the share of the first level cost (Cost1) to be 
attributed to the third level consumers. For this purpose, the residual share of the first level 
cost (not attributed to the first level consumers) is taken, from which the part is attributed to the 
third level consumer which was not attributed to the second level consumers. 
In order to identify total energy delivered from each voltage level (C1, C2 and C3) it is necessary 
to know the amount of total loss according to voltage levels (L1, L2 and L3). In case when 
information about losses is total and its allocation by voltage levels is not available, then the 
regulator shall allocate the losses to voltage levels with maximum possible approximation based
on available data. Regulated assets depreciation/amortization rates of utilities under 
tariff regulation
1. The following rates of regulated assets depreciation/amortization are used for the assets created or 
purchased by the utilities under tariff regulation after January1, 2014:
I Common assets
Annual rate of 
Depreciation/
Amortization (%)
Useful life
(year)
1 Transport facilities 3.3 30
2 Operational buildings 1.8 55
3
Administrative building 1.5 65
4 Substation Building 2.2 45
5 Warehouse areas 5.0 20
6 Furniture and moving inventory 10.0 10
7
IT and office equipment 20.0 5
8
Instruments / Equipments 10.0 10
9 Light vehicles 12.5 8
 10 Heavy vehicles and special techniques 8.3 12
11 Intangible Assets 20.0 5
II Stations 
Annual rate of 
Depreciation/
Amortization (%)
Useful life
(year)
12 TTP
12.1 Condensing power plants 4.0 25
12.1.1 Thermotechnical part 4.0 25
12.2 Gas turbine 3.3 3012.3 
Fuel preparation and etc.)
4.0 25
12.4 Environmental Equipment 6.7 15
12.5 Building (Chimney, Scatter Refrigerator,
Fuel Storage and etc.)
2.2 45
13 HPP
13.1 Accumulative structures 1.7 60
13.2 Dam, Head building, diversion and other 
hydrotechnical buildings 2.2 45
13.3
Other equipments and facilities of HPP
3.3 30
14 Wind Power Plant 4.0 25
15 Solar Power plant 4.0 25
16 power unit 4.0 25
17
Protective, metering devices, remote control, 
telecommunication, remote meters and automated 
devices
4.0 25
18
Power units of power plants, including transformers,
Commutation and Distribution facilities 2.2 45
19 Other Electric facilities of Power Plant 4.0 25
III Grid Components
Annual rate of 
Depreciation/
Amortization (%)
Useful life
(year)
20.1 Overhead lines (500 -400 - 330 - 220 - 110 kV) 2.2 45
20.2
Power units of substations, including 
transformers, Commutation and Distribution 
facilities
2.5 40
20.3
Protective, metering devices and protection from 
over voltage , remote control, telecommunication, 
and automated devices 4.0 25
20.4 Other 4.0 25
21 35–10–6–3.3 kV21.1 Overhead lines (35–10–6–3,3 kV) 2.9 35
21.2 Underground lines ( 35–10–6–3,3 kV ) 2.5 40
21.3
Power units of medium voltage substations, 
including transformers, Commutation and 
Distribution facilities 2.9 35
21.4
Protective, metering devices and protection from 
over voltage , remote control, telecommunication, 
and automated devices 4.0 25
22 To 1 kV
22.1 Overhead lines (to 1 kV) 2.9 35
22.2 Underground lines (to 1 kV) 2.5 40
22.3
Protective, metering devices and protection from 
over voltage , remote control, telecommunication, 
and automated devices 2.9 35
23 Meters 5.0 20
24
Converters , HVDC, Compensatory Devices 4.0 25
25 Telephone lines 2.9 35
26
Stationary Crane, freight elevators, outdoor 
lighting and other ancillary equipments 3.3 30