File Name: GEO-NREPl-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Georgia
Country Code: GEO
Category: NREPl
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2018
Start Year: 2018
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Draft National 
Sustainable Energy 
Action Plan of GeorgiaList of abbreviations...........................................................................................................................3
1. Executive Summary .............................................................................................................5
2. Introduction ........................................................................................................................9
2.1. National Sustainable Energy Action Plan (NSEAP) Objectives ................................................9
2.2. Methodology Used in Preparing the Sustainable Energy Action Plan ...................................10
3. Georgia’s Development Policy and Energy Sector Overview................................................11
3.1. Georgia 2020: Social-Economic Development Strategy of Georgia.......................................13
3.2. Energy Sector Overview.....................................................................................................15
3.2.1. Electricity Sector.................................................................................................16
3.2.2. Natural Gas ........................................................................................................22
c) Natural Gas Market Stability ...................................................................................................25
3.2.3. Oil......................................................................................................................26
3.2.4. Coal....................................................................................................................27
4. Renewable Energy Potential & Its Utilization......................................................................28
5. Legal Framework on Energy ...............................................................................................31
6. Global Agenda for Sustainable Development and Georgian Path from 2015 ........................41
7. Overview of National Energy Efficiency Targets & Energy Efficiency Policy Measures...........51
7.1 Horizontal measures...............................................................................................................57
7.2. Energy Efficiency Measures in Buildings .................................................................................61
7.3. Energy Efficiency Measures in Public Bodies...........................................................................62
7.4. Policy Measures Addressing Energy Efficiency in Industry .......................................................65
7.5. Energy Efficiency Measures in Transport ................................................................................66
7.6. Energy transformation, transmission, distribution, and demand response...............................69
8. Overview of National Renewable Energy Targets & Renewable Energy Policy Measures ................71
9.1. National Overall Target for the Share of Energy from Renewable Sources ...............................71
9.2. Renewable Energy Policy Measures........................................................................................71
9. National Sustainable Energy Action Plan Summary (2018-2030).....................................................75
10. Conclusions and Recommendations............................................................................................79List of abbreviations
ASECCM Automated System of Electricity and Capacity Control and 
Metering 
BAU Business As Usual
CCGT Combined Cycle Gas Turbines
CO2 Carbon Dioxide
COP21 The 21st session of the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC
DCFTA Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area
DSM Demand-Side Management
DSO Distribution system operator
EE Energy Efficient
EED Energy Efficiency Directive
EEO Energy Efficiency Obligation
EnPC Energy Performance Contracting
EPBD Energy Performance in Buildings Directive
ESCO Electricity System Commercial Operator
EU European Union
EU-GEORGIA AA/DCFTA EU-GEORGIA Association Agreement / Deep and Comprehensive Free 
Trade Areas
EUR Euro
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEL Georgian lari
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GWh Giga watt hour
GNERC Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory 
Commission
GSE Georgian State Electrosystem
HPP Hydropower Plant
HLPF High-Level Political Forum INDC Intended Nationally Determined Contribution
ktoe Kilotons of oil equivalent
kW Kilowatt
LED Light Emitting Diode
LEDS Low Emission Development Strategy 
mln. Million
MW Megawatt
NEAP National Environmental Action Programme
NEEAP National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
NREAP National Renewable Energy Action Plan
PJ Petajoule - (1015) joules
RES Renewable energy sources
SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System
SE4ALL-EECAA Sustainable Energy for All in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central 
Asia
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SFM Sustainable Forest Management
SME Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise
TPES Total primary energy supply
TSO Transmission System Operator
TWh Terawatt Hour
VNR Voluntary National Review
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USD United States DollarThe UN adopted 2030 Agenda with its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and their targets 
promote eradication of poverty and hunger; combat inequalities within and among countries; 
building peaceful, just and inclusive societies; protection of human rights, gender equality and 
empowerment of women and girls; ensure lasting protection of the planet and its natural 
resources.The goals are interconnected – often the key to success on one will involve tackling issues 
more commonly associated with another.
Sustainable Development Goal 7 is to ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern 
energy for all. Focusing on universal access to energy, increased energy efficiency and the increased 
use of renewable energy through new economic and job opportunities is crucial to creating more 
sustainable and inclusive communities and resilience to environmental issues like climate change.
The Sustainable Energy for All (SEforALL) is a global initiative led by the UN Secretary General. It was 
a precursor to SDG 7 and now serves to catalyse faster and bolder action to implement it and support 
the Paris Climate Agreement. In particular, the SEforALL pursues three key development objectives 
for the energy sector by 2030: ensuring universal access to electricity and modern cooking solutions; 
doubling the rate of improvement of energy efficiency; and doubling the share of renewable energy 
in the global energy mix. These objectives have been endorsed by the UN General Assembly, which 
declared 2014–2024 the Decade of Sustainable Energy for All.
Even though a lot has been done for improved functioning of the Georgia’s energy sector, its 
transition to a sustainable development, providing enhanced energy efficiency, wider use of 
renewable energy sources and better energy access to attain the SEforALL objectives and SDG 7 
targets, Georgia still faces various challenges related to sustainable development which require 
concrete actions to effectively adapt its national energy policies.
Elaboration of the draft National Sustainable Energy Action Plan (NSEAP), which identifies best 
practices, measures and procedures necessary for a sustainable energy transition, with a particular 
focus on the cross-cutting nature of energy efficiency, renewable energy and energy access, outlines 
concrete actions for the Government and other stakeholders to be implemented in the short- and 
medium-term in line with the country’s commitment to achieve SDG7 objectives will be a step 
forward to achieve sustainable development goals related to energy for Georgia. 
Georgia’s energy system is in a state of active development. Reforms are particularly influenced by the 
EU-Georgia Association Agreement signed in 2014, under which Georgia tookan obligation of 
implementing the EU directives in energy sector and will have to comply with the requirements of the 
third energy package.1
Based on energy balance data, in 2017, fossil fuels accounted to up 70% of primary energy consumption 
in Georgia. Almost all fossil fuels (95%) are imported from neighboring countries which means that energy 
security and independence are important for the country – especially since there are strained 
relationships within the region. Moreover, there is a tendency of an increase in fossil fuels consumption 
 
1 European Union (30 August 2014) Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic 
Energy Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Georgia, of the other part. Official Journal of the 
European Union L261/4 Available at http://eeas.europa.eu/georgia/pdf/eu-geaa-dcftaen.pdf, py , y g
products. Further development of these sectors will require sustainable increased energy supply.
In this context energy efficiency is an essential component of sustainable development of Georgia’s 
energy sector as internationally recognized the most cost-effective way of reducing dependency on 
fossil fuels. 
In Georgia, energy intensity as a function of GDP (Fig.3), which is used to measure energy efficiency across 
countries, is too high though compared to other countries the Georgian economy does not have much 
energy intensive industry. This indicates that there is potential for energy efficiency improvements.
According to the 2017 Energy Balance of Georgia2renewable energy accounted for 88% of the Georgian 
energy production, and 26% of total primary energy supply (TPES) made up of hydro - 17%, biofuels 
(mainly wood) and waste – 8% and Geothermal, solar, etc. – 1%. It is worth noting that biomass, mostly 
the firewood, has major share in primary energy consumption and is increasingly causing forest 
degradation. Additionally, wind energy production began in 2017. One of the key priorities of the energy 
policy of Georgia is a full satisfaction of customer demand for electricity with the maximum possible 
utilization of local hydropower resources. Additionally, the utilization of the country’s local indigenous 
renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, and geothermal, has become one of the major areas of 
Georgia’s energy sector development.
The Sustainable Development Goal for energy (SDG 7) has three principal objectives: ensure universal 
access to modern energy services; significantly increase the share of renewable energy in the global 
energy mix; and double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency.
The elaborated NSEAP integrate all directions, measures and activities specified in sub-sectoral strategies 
and action plans, such as National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, National Renewable Energy Action Plan, 
etc. 
In the field of energy efficiency, Georgia’s indicative national energy efficiency targets for 2021, 2025, and 
2030 are laid out in Table8 , with 2021 and 2025 as interim target deadlines, and 2030 as an additional 
indicative target deadline for longer-term projections. The dates of 2021, 2025, and 2030 as the target 
dates were chosen to be consistent with the planning horizon of the EU and Energy Community – as well 
as with Georgia’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution for reduction of greenhouse gases against 
the BAU scenario for the UNFCCC.
By 2025, Georgia intends to achieve a 14% reduction in primary energy consumption as compared to the 
BAU. NSEAP states that achievement of targets in EE is partly dependent on the planning and 
establishment of a number of horizontal instruments. Such measures include: Financing schemes for 
energy efficiency and training and education, including energy advisory programmes; Consumer 
information programmes and training; Public awareness and capacity building programmes.
NSEAP tackles energy waste in buildings, public bodies, industry, transport, and energy sector. It also
provides specific energy efficiency measures for each sector and their investment needs. (Detailed
information on planned measures and necessary financial resources for their implementation could be
 
2Geostat (2017) Energy Balance of Georgia, 2017. Available at 
https://www.geostat.ge/en/modules/categories/86/energy-balance-of-georgia-2017seen below in Chapter 7, Overview of National Energy Efficiency Targets & Energy Efficiency Policy 
Measures)
In 2016, transport accounted to 35.2% of all energy consumed in Georgia and implementation of energy 
efficient improvements in this sector will generate up to 64% of the energy savings by 2021. The measures 
in transport sector involve the following key aspects: Vehicle improvement measures (fuel switching and 
better management of the existing fleet); Public awareness campaigns on eco-driving and to encourage 
efficient transport modes would increase the efficiency of driving habits; Investments in intra-city urban 
mobility (modal shifts from passenger cars to public transport, walking, and cycling). 
In industry sector which in 2016 which accounted for 14% of energy used in Georgia and consumption is 
expected to grow by 2030 as a result of economic development. Industry specific measures envisaged in 
NSEAP would account for up to 24% of targeted energy savings by 2021. These include work to improve 
the data availability and investment project in cement industry. Horizontal measures envisage the 
introduction of incentive-based and mandatory schemes to stimulate better energy performance in 
industry; creation of energy audit and management systems and certification schemes for the sector; and 
bringing in financing schemes for energy efficiency.
Draft NSEAP outlined energy efficiency measures in buildings are closely linked with public sector 
measures. The measures cover standards for labelling schemes in appliances as well as consumer 
information programmes and training, includes also green procurement methods and regulation for 
efficient lighting. All measures are closely related to implementation of EED and EPBD. 
Draft NSEAP proposed energy efficiency improvements for energy supply include improvements the 
efficiency of gas and hydropower plants, as well as of the transmission and distribution system. Among 
proposed measures are: introduction of efficient wood burning stoves for rural households and solar hot 
water systems.
As estimated the implementation of horizontal and sector specific energy efficient measures will result 
in total energy savings equal to 2, 568 GWh by 2021.
In renewable energy field in order to meet the target of 30% of energy consumed coming from renewable 
energy for 2020 and implement the EU Renewable Energy Directive, a number of policy and investment 
measures were specified in draft NSEAP, as described in more details in below in Chapter 8 (Overview of 
National Renewable Energy Targets & Renewable Energy Policy Measures). 
For the purposes of establishing what measures and investments would be necessary to achieve this 
target, scenarios were developed for the following sectors:
• Electricity production from renewable energy;
• Heating and cooling from renewable energy and;
• Transport from renewable energy – focused mostly on switching to electric vehicles
The measures in renewable energy field include:
➢ Promotion of solar hot water heaters
➢ Promotion of electric vehicles
➢ Ongoing support for hydropower production
➢ Ongoing support for wind production
➢ Ongoing support for solar power production
➢ Support for micro-generation (less than 100 kW) from renewable sourcespgp, y 
of Forests, and support for the use of residues
➢ District heating and cooling infrastructure development
➢ Communications and capacity building of technical experts
Estimated total contribution (electricity generation) expected from renewable energy sources to meet the 
indicative 2020 targets in electricity in 2020 will amount to 9,345 GWh;
Estimated total contribution (final energy consumption) expected from renewable energy sources to meet 
the indicative 2020 targets in heating and cooling in 2020 will amount to 6,022 GWh and in transport will 
amount to 556 GWh.;
The National Sustainable Energy Action Plan of Georgia (2018- 2030) Summary Table (Table 27) provides 
information on all 48 proposed measures in energy efficiency and renewable energy field, estimated 
energy savings and indication of necessary investments for the implementation of the measures as well 
as relevance of each measure to a certain SDG. Total cost of implementation of proposed measures is 
estimated to be €3,168,306,000, including €2,033,112,000 for energy efficient measures and 
€1,135,194,000 for measures in renewable energy field. Primary Energy savings or renewable energy 
generation by 2021 is expected to amount to 12,701 GWh
Indeed elaboration of the first NSEAP is a step forward in identification of best practices, measures and 
procedures necessary for a sustainable energy transition, with a particular focus on the cross-cutting 
nature of energy efficiency, renewable energy and energy access, outlining concrete actions for the 
Government and other stakeholders to be implemented in the short- and medium-term in line with the 
country’s commitment to achieve sustainable development goals related to energy for Georgia. 
Of course, in author’s opinion this document is far from being comprehensive and leaves room for further 
improvements for which a set of recommendations have been elaborated and which would be reflected 
in second NSEAP. The need to improve access to sustainable, affordable and environmentally sound energy services and 
resources was one of the main reasons to urge countries around the world to increase the awareness on 
the importance of addressing energy issues and to promote action at the local, national, regional and 
international levels. In response, Economic Commission for Europe launched UNDA project Sustainable 
Energy for All (SE4All) in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia. Project aims to strengthen the 
national capacity of economies in transition to develop National Action Plans for Sustainable Energy for 
all, namely in following areas: (1) ensuring universal access to modern energy services (2) improving 
energy efficiency and (3) increasing the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix.
While Georgia has huge renewable energy potential, country is high dependent on imported fossil fuels. 
Imported energy resources accounts more than 70% of total primary energy supply. On the other hand, 
it is worth to note that in 2016 Georgia become full member of European Energy Community and based 
on its accession protocol, recently, Georgia is in the process of harmonization European third energy 
package with its energy legislation. Hence, Georgia’s energy policy and strategy is to support renewable 
energy and energy efficiency programs in order to achieve sustainable economic development in the 
country.
Over last decade, reforms in the Georgian energy sector accompanied with energy infrastructure 
developed guarantees energy security of the country as well as supports rational use of energy resources, 
promotion of renewable energy resource and energy efficient and environmentally friendly, clean
technologies in all sectors of the economy. However, there is still lack of sufficient support mechanisms 
and level playing field that will promote large scale development in this regard.
Georgia as the country with transition economic, faces various challenges related to sustainable 
development which requires concrete actions for adaptation national effective measures into energy 
policy. The study was conducted through a comprehensive desk review together with stakeholder 
consultations covering ministries, energy companies, civil society organizations and IFIs active in Georgia.
The activities under the study include a baseline status analysis of Georgia’s energy sector on energy 
production and consumption. They cover assessment of existing best practices in sustainable energy, 
together with identification of challenges and implementation of measures to overcome these challenges.
2.1. National Sustainable Energy Action Plan (NSEAP) Objectives
The following are objectives for development of NSEAP for Georgia:
- To identify best practices, measures and procedures necessary for a sustainable energy 
transition, with a particular focus on the cross-cutting nature of energy efficiency, renewable 
energy and energy access;
- To outline concrete actions for the Government and other stakeholders to be implemented in 
the short- and medium-term in line with the country’s commitment to achieve Sustainable 
Development Goal (SDG) 7 objectives. 2.2. Methodology Used in Preparing the Sustainable Energy Action Plan
An interactive and participatory approach was adopted for the NSEAP development. A desk review of 
national policy documents, reports and roadmaps was undertaken covering access to energy, renewable 
energy and energy efficiency. Consultative meetings with appropriate Government organizations 
(Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development, Ministry of Environmental Protection and 
Agriculture, Georgian National Energy and Water Regulatory Commission, Statistical Office of Georgia, 
SDGs Council in Georgia) and energy experts and professions working on various aspects of sustainable 
energy were organized to review the initial findings (in terms of interventions and bottlenecks). Annex 1-
List of Stakeholders consulted
The elaborated NSEAP will integrate all directions, measures and activities specified in sub-sectoral 
strategies and action plans, such as National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, National Renewable Energy 
Action Plan, etc. Based on the findings, the draft National Sustainable Energy Action Plan was elaborated, 
which then will be presented to the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia for 
adoption.Georgia’s land area is 69,700 square kilometers. Its capital is city of Tbilisi with around 1.2 million 
population. Georgia has a mild climate, with an average maximum temperature of 33°C in July and an 
average minimum of –3°C in January, although in some places the temperature reaches 40°C in summer 
and in other places –20°C in winter. A map of Georgia is presented in Figure 1.
Population of Georgia in 2019 is 3.7235 million which is a dramatic reduction from previous estimates of 
4.49 million3. Georgia is a middle-income country with 4046.8 US$ GDP per capita (GEOSTAT, 2017). The 
Georgian economy has been developing with a steady growth rate – though this has been undermined by 
the global financial and economic crisis and conflict with Russia.
Figure 1. Map of Georgia
For the period 2010-2015 real GDP in domestic currency has increased by 37%. Economic reforms and 
rapid growth in recent years, have not fully addressed the major economic challenges faced by the country 
– poverty and unemployment. While the national unemployment rate makes 13.9% (GEOSTAT, 2017), 
youth unemployment reaches 40% in some of the regions. According to World Bank, poverty declined 
from 35% in 2006 to 17.1% in 2016. However, Georgia has not yet achieved the economic standards of EU 
countries. Development of Georgia’s GDP and its actual growth rate is shown in Table 1. 
Table 1. Gross Domestic Product 4
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018* 2019*
GDP at current prices, billion GEL 29.2 31.8 34.0 37.8 41.1 9.7
GDP at constant 2010 prices, billion GEL 25.6 26.3 27.1 28.4 29.7 6.6
 
3 https://www.geostat.ge/en/modules/categories/316/population-and-demography
4
Source: Geostat; www.geostat.geGDP deflator, percent 3.8 5.9 4.2 6.1 3.6 2.4
GDP per capita (at current prices),GEL** 7 837.4 8 524.3 9 129.0 10 152.0 11 013.9 2 617.2
GDP per capita (at current prices) USD** 4 438.3 3 754.9 3 857.3 4 046.8 4 345.5 981.0
GDP at current prices, billion USD 16.5 14.0 14.4 15.1 16.2 3.7
*Adjusted data will be published on Nov.15,2019
** Per capita indicators for quarterly and annual figures were revised in line with updated data from 2014 
general population census
Georgia’s main economic activities include agriculture (grapes, fruit, tea, and hazelnuts), mining 
(manganese, copper, and gold), industrial sector (beverages, wine, spirits, and spring water; metals, 
machinery, chemicals, and aircraft) and tourism. Agriculture remains important, as more than 50% of the 
population lives and works on the land and agricultural goods account for about 20% of exports. While 
other sectors have grown significantly during last years, agriculture has not and its share in total GDP has 
declined (Figure 2). Recently, Georgia’s economy is highly dependent on imported fossil fuels, while 
dominated by industry activities.
Figure 2: Share of GDP in 2017Socialeconomic Development Strategy Georgia 2020 reflects the priorities and problems that need to 
be resolved in order to achieve long-term, sustainable and inclusive economic growth. 
Georgia 2020 strives to achieve the following forecast results by 2020:
Table 2.
Indicator Current rate Forecast rate
GDP per capita (GEL, nominal) 5811.7 13,000
GDP per capita (GEL in constant prices) 5811.7 9,200
Gini coefficient 0.41 0.35
Inflation (%) 2.4 3.0
Unemployment (%) 15.0 <12
Taxes (% of GDP) 24 25
Exports (goods and services, % of GDP) 45 65
Current account deficit (% of GDP) >10 6
Public debt to GDP ratio (%) 34 <40
A two-legged long term growth strategy (Georgia 2020 and sectoral development policies) aiming to 
achieve a profound transformation of the country’s macroeconomic framework. Goals of these two 
strategic plans are:
Fostering inclusive economic growth through: Reduced unemployment; Improved labor and living 
conditions; Establishment of social protection system; Human capital development
Fostering exports through selected key sectors with high growth and export potential: Tourism; Hydro 
Power; Agriculture; Transport
MAIN AXES OF GEORGIA 2020 STRATEGY ARE: 
• Private sector competitiveness- Improvement of investment and business environment; 
Innovation and technologies; supporting the export growth; development of infrastructure and 
full use of transit potential;
• Human capital development- Development of workforce that meets labor market requirements, 
Improving the social assistance system, Ensuring the accessible and quality healthcare
• Access to finance- mobilization of investment resources; Developing financial intermediation
Georgia has undergone though a remarkable period of economic transformation led by major institutional 
and structural reforms. The reforms succeeded in building smart and low regulations, business friendly 
tax system, private sector driven and corruption free country. 
Energy Sector targets under Georgia 2020 strategy are presented below: Target Baseline 2017 2020
Electricity Production (TWh) 9.7 14 18
Access to Electricity (According Doing Business Report) 50 35 25
With the achieved success Government of Georgia initiated new economic program -Action plan for 2016-
2020- “Four Point Reform Plan” 5. The Plan embarks on four strategic directions:
1. Economic Reforms – Growth oriented reforms to provide the country with proper legal base and 
institutional development that are of significant importance for encouraging economic prosperity. 
Entrepreneurship facilitating jobs creation by improving business and investment environment 
further, including, inter alia, by implementation of tax reform and supporting entrepreneurship;
2. Education Reform – supporting skills development through education reform targeted at bridging 
the gap between skills demand and supply. Promotion of vocational education, fundamental reforms 
in general and higher education systems will guarantee increased overall skill level of the local labor 
force leading to increase in employment and wages, thus, increasing the pace of local economic 
development.
3. Spatial Development Reform – investing in core infrastructure development supporting expansion
of the east-west and south-north trade corridors. The objective of the plan is to utilizing Georgia’s
potential of a transit country between Europe and Asia, as well as its touristic potential, thus creating
economic opportunities for our citizens. Given better infrastructure and regional development, which
will break down transportation and communication barriers, will provide faster growth of investments
and create favorable conditions for overall economic growth.
 4. Open Governance – enhance the principles of inclusive decision making process, where voices of 
opposition, civil society and private sector are heard and by improving and modernizing public 
services, including by introducing “single Window Principle” for all government services. Transparency 
and open governance will guarantee higher integration of public and private sectors. This will increase 
the level of trust of the society towards public institutions and public administration.
These reforms through productivity growth will accelerate growth potential and foster convergence to 
higher income levels.
Figure 3 shows GDP intensity comparison of Georgia with some EU countries. GDP intensity measures 
indicates how much energy is needed to generate 1 unit (in this case USD) of GDP. Even though compared 
to other countries, Georgian economy does not have much energy intensive industry. Country’s GDP 
intensity is still much higher than, for instance Turkey’s, which has much more energy intensive economic 
structure. This indicates, that there is a potential for energy efficiency improvements.
 
5
Freedom, rapid development & welfare; Government Program 2018-2020; 
http://gov.ge/files/67105671057044492018-2020programafinalengl.pdfFigure 3: GDP intensity comparison of Georgia with some EU countries
3.2. Energy Sector Overview
In 2016, Georgia’s total primary energy supply (TPES) accounted for 4789.5 ktoe, where about 78% of 
energy resource, mostly oil products and natural gas were imported. In 2017 total primary energy supply 
amounted to 4736.9 ktoe.
On the other hand, total final energy consumption in the same years was 4330.5 ktoe dominated by oil 
products and natural gas with share of 64%. The transport sector was the biggest consumer, followed by 
residential at 29.4% and industry at 13.9% of the total final energy consumption (see Figure 5 and Figure 
6). In 2017 total final energy consumption was 4363.4 ktoe.
Figure 4: Total Primary Energy Supply by Source6
 
6
https://www.iea.org/statistics/?country=GEORGIA&year=2016&category=Energy%20supply&indicator=TPESbySource&mode=c
hart&dataTable=BALANCESy g(pg) 
energy consumption and supply patterns. The main drivers of structural and regulatory changes in 
Georgia’s energy markets were the EU-Georgia Association Agreement signed in June 2014, and Georgia’s 
membership of the European Energy Community, which began in October 2016. These developments will 
lead to changes in the electricity, natural gas, and crude oil markets, as well as energy efficiency and 
environmental regulations. Most of these regulatory changes are expected to be implemented by 2023.
 Total Final Energy Consumption by Source, 2016 7 Total Final Energy Consumption by Sector ,2016 8
Figure 5: Total Final Energy Consumption by Source Figure 6: Total Final Energy Consumption by Sector
3.2.1. Electricity Sector
The power system in Georgia is characterized by relatively stable seasonal supply and consumption 
patterns. Due to abundant hydro resources, hydropower dominates the electricity generation in Georgia
Currently, 87 small, medium and large scale hydro power plants are operating with total of 3260.07 MW 
installed capacity and 9949,3 mln. kWh annual generation (2018). 
However, In spring-summer period electricity production peaks, though consumption decreases, creating 
imbalance between supply and demand. The electricity shortages in winter is compensated by thermal 
power plants and electricity imports. To meet increasing energy demand, overcome the winter deficit and 
to decease the dependence on imported energy resources additional generation units are being 
developed. In total, 139 renewable energy projects are under development. The total installed capacity 
of these projects is 3218 MW and approximate electricity generation is around 13891 mln. kWh. Out of 
which, 24 Projects are on Construction and Licensing stage, with installed capacity of 235 MW, annual 
 
7
https://www.iea.org/statistics/?country=GEORGIA&year=2016&category=Energy%20consumption&indicator=TFCbySource&m
ode=chart&dataTable=BALANCES
8
https://www.iea.org/statistics/?country=GEORGIA&year=2016&category=Energy%20consumption&indicator=TFCShareBySecto
r&mode=chart&dataTable=BALANCESgjy y g
capacity and annual generation of 11 126 mln. kWh.
The first wind power plant “Kartli” was taken into operation in 2016. Total installed capacity is 20,7 MW 
and total annual generation equals 84,3 mln kW/h (2018). In 2017, share of the electricity generated by 
HPPs in the total generation was 80,4%. The share of the electricity generated by wind power plant being 
put in operation at the end of 2016 amounted to 0,8%, though not yet enough to cover the country’s 
consumption-generation gap.
As for thermal power, there are four gas-fired thermal power plants and one coal-fired thermal power 
plant with total installed capacity of 924,4 MW.
Additionally, Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development has planned to construct another 230 
MW thermal power, equipped with combined cycle gas turbine, and decommission Mtkvari Unit 9 by 
2025. 
➢ Electricity Market
The structure of the electricity market, reflecting amendments made to Georgian legislation in previous 
year is provided on Fig 7. Electricity trade at wholesale level is mainly carried out on the basis of the direct 
contracts. Electricity sale will take place through generators, importers, whereas the electricity is 
purchased by the distribution licensees (in terms of supply), direct customers, exporters, electricity 
generators (in cases of plant losses) and the dispatch licensee (for the purpose of ensuring electricity 
(capacity) transit with the view to cover losses related to the purchase of the electricity). For the purpose 
of electricity trade at the wholesale market, registration with the Electricity System Commercial Operator 
(ESCO) as a qualified enterprise is necessary.
 
Figure 7: Structure of the Electricity Market in Georgia
For the regulatory purposes, electricity generators are classified as:
a) Regulatory power plants to which the Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory 
(Commission) sets fixed tariffs;
b) Partially deregulated power plants to which the Commission sets marginal (upper margin) tariffs;y ;
d) Guaranteed capacity sources (Thermal Power Plants) to whom the Commission sets guaranteed 
capacity fee and marginal tariffs (upper margin) of the electricity generation.
For the power plants with installed capacity exceeding 15 MW, the Commission issues electricity 
generation license, whereas power plants up to 15 MW (small power plants) are exempted from licensing 
procedures. The list of guaranteed capacity sources is defined by the Government of Georgia individually 
according to the time periods during which those guaranteed capacity sources can provide guaranteed 
capacity to the system and they are used for ensuring sustainable, secure and reliable functioning of the 
integrated electricity system of the country.
The electricity import and export activities are deregulated and do not require licensing. The price of the 
electricity export activities is free (without tariffs), whereas the price for the electricity import is set 
according to the marginal tariff formula set by the Commission.
In terms of purchase and selling electricity the Electricity System Commercial Operator (ESCO) is entitled 
to purchase and/or sell electricity through direct contracts or standard terms and conditions of the 
balance electricity direct contracts, for the purpose of meeting (balancing) qualified enterprises’ demand. 
At the same time, ESCO organizes guaranteed capacity trading, registers companies as participants to the 
wholesale trade, makes amendments to the registration data and revokes registrations. The market 
operator possesses and exploits the Automated System of Commercial Metering (ASCM) that 
encompasses unified base and gets metering data from Automated System of Electricity and Capacity 
Control and Metering (ASECCM) automatically. It is intended for receiving, checking, collecting, grouping 
and summing up data for the wholesale electricity trade.
The Transmission System Operator (TSO) and the Transmission and Distribution licensees carry out 
network and system services. The TSO (the Dispatch Licensee) has signed contracts with the Transmission 
Licensees on conveying rights of operating and developing transmission network to it. The TSO manages 
system mainly through Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System (SCADA) and at the same time 
uses upper level Automated System of Electricity and Capacity Control and Metering (upper level 
ASECCM).
The Distribution licensees carry out network services, including wheeling, through networks under their 
ownership or under the third person’s ownership. The distribution licensees provide network services to: 
retail customers that purchase electricity from small power plants based on direct contracts, direct 
customers connected to the distribution network and so called distributed generation – power plants that 
are connected to the distribution network.
Electricity is sold by the distribution licensees at the electricity retail market on the basis of household 
tariffs set by the Commission. At the same time, they ensure network and system service of retail 
customers. According to the current legislation sale of the electricity to the retail customers can be carried 
out by the small power plants, though their participation at the retail market is quite rare, as far as small 
power plants have possibility to sell generated electricity at wholesale market for the price higher than 
weighted average price of the household tariffs that does neither incentivize them, nor customers to trade 
on the basis of direct contracts.
After amendments in the Georgian Law on Electricity and Natural Gas, the Law incorporated provisions 
that micro power plants, with installed capacity up to 100 kW, may be included in the net-metering policy 
only in the case that production takes place at the point of consumption. There is no additional procedure y g, gy 
(Capacity) Supply and Consumption Rules” defines net-metering policy, micro generation connection 
procedures, and compensation mechanisms in detail. Customer submits the application and DSO takes 
over the application and carries out all related works without customer involvement. The timeframe of 
micro generator connection after application is strictly defined from 20 up to 40 days depending on the 
capacity and connection voltage level. The rules are published and available for customer on the 
Commission’s website. 
The net excess energy provided onto the grid by the micro generator is carried over to next month’ bill as 
kWh credits that can be consumed by the consumer in that particular month. In case there is still surplus 
generation after some time the consumer has the right to claim financial remuneration that equals the 
opportunity cost (average wholesale energy price) of a supplier (i.e. DSO).
In 2018, the electricity wholesale supplier has entered the electricity market, which has been granted the 
status of qualified enterprise. Its function is the procurement of electricity from the generation license 
holder, small power plant, importers and electricity supply for direct consumers and export;
During last decade significant increase in the electricity consumption has been observed. In 2017 the 
electricity consumption has increased by 7.7% The electricity consumption in Georgia during 2007-2017 
has been increasing by 4.4% in average (see Figure 8).
Figure 8. Electricity generation (bus bar delivery) and consumption
In the electricity generation structure increase of the electricity shares generated (delivered on a bus bar) 
by thermal and hydro power plants is more or less stable. Electricity generated by the thermal power 
plants in 2016-2017 has constituted 18.8% of the total generated electricity. The share of the electricity 
generated by HPPs in the total generation has been 80.4%.
The share of the electricity generated by the wind power plant being put into the operation by the end of 
2016 has been 0.8%. Figure 9. Structure of the electricity delivered on a busbar by the power plants
In 2017 the electricity imports exceeded exports by 2.2 times (see Figure 10) and reached to 1,497.2 mln 
kWh that exceeds the same indicators of the previous year by three times and indicators of 2015 by two 
times. 
With regards to exports, 685.7 mln kWh electricity has been exported from Georgia that exceeds 
indicators of the previous year by 22.7%. The dramatic increase of imports has been caused by the 
decreased water inflow and stopping of Enguri HPP for two weeks. Besides, for the purpose of meeting 
internal consumption and filling the deficit that has resulted from decreased hydro generation, thermal 
generation was substituted by import based on its competitive price.
Figure 10: Electricity import and export by yearsgg y y g
substitution of import in a short-term perspective and thermal generation in a long-term perspective. The 
dynamics of the electricity generation and consumption per month is provided on Figure 11. As it can be 
observed from the Figure, hydro and thermal generation capacities are not enough to meet the demand 
in autumn and winter periods. Respectively, electricity import becomes necessary for satisfying the 
demand. On the other hand, abundant water resources in second half of spring period and summer makes 
it possible to meet the electricity demand and export the rest of the electricity. 
Figure 11: Electricity generation and consumption per months in 
2018
Based on analysing results of the electricity supply and consumption balance 2017, one can state that 
important attention shall be paid to the construction of new generation units through utilizing local energy 
resources. Respectively, hydrocarbon resources and renewable resources shall be utilized together with 
hydro resources to a maximum extent, including wind and solar energy resources. 
The signing of the Association Agreement and Georgia’s accession to the energy community in October 
2016 imposed some important obligations on the country to reform its energy markets. For the electricity 
market, 2018 was a turning point. Among the key obligations the country committed to under the energy 
community accession protocol were the adoption of: (i) Directive 2009/72/EC, concerning common rules 
for the internal market in electricity and (ii) Regulation (EC) No 714/2009, on conditions for access to the 
network for cross-border exchanges in electricity. Provisions from both of these documents have to be 
incorporated into Georgian legislation by the end of the year. This entails some crucial steps to ensure 
non-discriminatory access by any third party to the electricity market. To meet this obligation, Georgia 
will have to:
1. Unbundle vertically integrated companies in distribution and generation according to provisions 
of EU directive 2009/72/EC
2. Create a functional trading mechanism to ensure access of third parties to the market. This will 
most probably entail set-up of a day-ahead market.
Large and 
Medium 
Power 
Plants 
71.2%
Small 
Power 
Plants
4.4%
Wind
0.5%
Thermal 
Power 
Plants
23.9%
Figure 12. Structure of the generation capacitiesThe electricity market concept design constitutes the vision of the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable 
Development of Georgia regarding the general structure, organization, and functioning of the electricity 
market in Georgia (hereinafter—the Market). 
This Market Concept, in defining a new structure of the Market, includes transitional measures for phased 
implementation to the market structure envisaged herein. The transitional measures of this Market 
Concept are outlined for and are binding during the Transitory Phase lasting from 1 January 2019 until 31 
December 2022. 
The overarching design target of the Market Concept is to establish Organized Electricity Markets. The 
Organized Electricity Markets encompass the competitive markets for electricity, being a Day- Ahead 
Market (DAM), Intra-Day Market (IDM) and Balancing Market. The envisaged design is in line with 
Georgia’s international commitments as a Contracting Party of the Energy Community and is also aligned 
to the Energy Community target model. In addition to the establishment of Organized Electricity Markets, 
the Market Concept also aims to promote further regional integration between Georgia and its 
neighbouring countries based on market-based solutions supported by relevant international agreements 
with these countries.
3.2.2. Natural Gas
➢ Natural Gas Sector
Natural gas remains one of the substantial energy sources of Georgia by means of which 33.1%1 of final 
energy consumption of Georgia is satisfied. In 2017 the demand for natural gas increased by 3.6% compared to the previous year., which mostly was caused by the increased demand at household sector -
result of current gasification process. In 2018 - 81,895 new consumers were connected to the natural gas 
distribution network and the total number of the consumers comprised 1,239,022 by the end of 2018.
10
Natural gas is used mainly for cooking, heating of water and apartments. 
 
9 http://www.gse.com.ge/sw/static/file/The-Concept-Design-approved-ENG.pdf
10 Source: Geostat ; www.geostat.ge
0.284 0.318 0.327 0.31 0.331
0.289 0.282 0.305 0.331 0.297
0.209 0.209 0.204 0.208 0.221
0.129 0.115 0.095 0.089 0.083 0.085 0.072 0.065 0.058 0.063
0.004 0.004 0.004 0.004 0.005
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Natural Gas Oil products Electricity Biofuel Coal Geothermal, solar and other
Figure 13: Energy Balance of Georgia ggpg
GOGC carries out natural gas 
import on the basis of 
agreements made between 
the parties followed by 
wholesale supply of natural 
gas to the so-called social 
(power generation sectors 
and household) and 
commercial consumers.
Transit of gas in Georgia is 
provided by 
two gas pipelines - the South 
Caucasus Pipeline (SCP) and 
the North-South Main Gas 
Pipeline (NSMP). 
The South Caucasus Pipeline also known as Baku-Tbilisi-Erzerum Gas Pipeline transits gas produced from 
Shah Deniz field from Azerbaijan to Turkey. The pipeline length is 692 km, the length of the Georgian 
section is 249 km. The design throughput of the pipeline is 20 billion cubic meters per year. SCP mainly 
lies parallel to BTC pipeline. 
The North-South Main Gas Pipeline (NSMP) transits Russian gas to Armenia. The length of the Georgian 
section of NSMP is 234 km and its design throughput is 12 billion cubic meters per year. 
The natural gas transportation system in Georgia is operated by Georgian Gas Transportation Company 
LLC (GGTC) which is the state-owned enterprise and the natural gas transportation licensee.
➢ Natural Gas Market
The structure of the natural gas market of Georgia remains unchanged. The companies affiliated to Socar 
are still holding dominated positions and participating in the wholesale and retail markets. Natural gas 
organized market does not exist in Georgia. Due to this reason selling and purchasing of natural gas take 
place only through bilateral agreements. At present the natural gas market of Georgia is concentrated at 
the wholesale and retail levels. Therefore, one of the challenges is an access to the natural gas for the 
deregulated customers on a competitive price.
The protocol concerning the Accession of Georgia to the Treaty Establishing Energy Community envisages 
reforming of the natural gas sector including the natural gas market by 2021. The EU Third Energy Package 
focuses on customer rights for them to have possibility to choose the supplier on the competitive market 
and as a result, purchase natural gas in a competitive price through healthy competition. 
Together with other factors, competition on the market is hard to exist without sufficient number of 
suppliers. In order to reach the above-mentioned goal, non-discriminatory and fair conditions on the 
natural gas market for accessing suppliers shall be introduced.
Figure 14: Balance of Natural Gas In 2018 the regulatory framework of natural gas sector was updated, in particular, the amendments were 
made to the primary and secondary legislation in the reporting year:
1. Pursuant to the amendments to the Law of Georgia on Electricity and Natural Gas, the issue regarding 
the notification the Commission about commencement of the activities by the supplier was resolved. 
Before the above-mentioned amendments, natural gas suppliers were entitled to carry out activities 
without notifying the Commission. Due to this fact, the Commission was unable to fully record the 
regulated utilities (suppliers) on the market. In addition, the Commission became obliged to approve 
Uniform System of Accounts (USoA) for the natural gas transportation licensees and distribution licensees 
before December 31, 2021.
2. Under the Resolution №22 of August 31, 2018 the Commission approved Natural Gas Network Rules. 
The rules define the procedures, conditions and principles for managing the transportation system, 
distribution network and using the network, the relationships between existing companies in the natural 
gas sector and the persons using their services. The rules resolved the issues such as the connection to 
the transportation system, the relationship between the system user and the transportation licensee. In 
addition, the qualitative characteristics of natural gas were determined that should be met by the natural 
gas injected in the transportation system, etc.
The network rules envisage the requirements necessary for 
accessing the natural gas systems and determines 
transparency standards that is one of the basic 
preconditions for development of competition. The development of a new model of the natural gas 
market significantly depends on efficient implementation of the requirements set by the abovementioned document.
➢ Natural Gas Market and Its Participants
The natural gas market with its nature and characteristics can be divided into two levels. Despite the fact 
that it is not defined by the legislation, the wholesale and retail levels of the natural gas market (trading) 
can be distinguished. At the wholesale level the suppliers 
import natural gas (or purchase small amount of extracted 
natural gas) and resell it to other suppliers while at the 
retail level suppliers supply natural gas directly to the enduse customers. The above-mentioned fact does not 
exclude the activity of one supplier at both levels of the 
market. In 2018, 33 suppliers carried out activities on the 
market - two of them were active only on the wholesale 
market, 25 only on the retail market and 6 - at both levels 
of the market.
Physical delivery of natural gas to the end-user customers 
is provided by natural gas transportation (whose basic 
function is to transport natural gas from the source of its 
extraction or import to the residential areas) and 
distribution licensees.
Figure 15: Natural Gas Market Structure y 
➢ Functional, legal and ownership unbundling 
Pursuant to the current legislation natural gas distribution and supply are considered as different 
activities, however, the distribution licensees are not prohibited to carry out supply activities and 
therefore, they also represent natural gas suppliers within their scope..
According to the EU Third Energy Package, ownership unbundling is obligatory for the natural gas 
transportation licensee (Georgian Gas Transportation Company LLC). However, two alternatives are also 
considered which can be chosen by the country. Though the effective status of the transportation licensee 
in Georgia is very close to the definition of the Independent System Operator (based on the lease
agreement owns the natural gas transportation system of Georgia). However, in order to achieve full 
compatibility, it is necessary to be functionally fully independent from the system owner, not to carry out 
the natural gas supply and address other less important issues.
➢ Main characteristics of natural gas market
The natural gas market with its nature and characteristics can be divided into retail and wholesale 
markets. 
a) Wholesale Market
The Republic of Azerbaijan still remains as the main supplier of natural gas for Georgia, from where the 
country received natural gas necessary to satisfy its needs. Georgia remains the transit country of natural 
gas from Russia to Armenia. Accordingly, Georgia receives a fee for transit from Russia to Armenia. In 
addition, Georgia received natural gas from South Caucasus Pipeline (SCP) as a transit fee. Local extraction 
remains insignificant.
In 2018 four suppliers imported natural gas to Georgia to satisfy 99.8% of country’s demand. Also 4 
more suppliers (from which one of them is also importer) delivered natural gas to the market from local 
extraction.. HHI is 5,050 among natural gas suppliers of Georgia that indicates the highly concentrated 
market. Such condition is particularly characteristic to the countries with the developing markets.
b) Retail Market
Natural Gas is consumed by retail customers (connected to the distribution network) and direct customers (connected to transportation system). About half of the total consumption of direct 
customers is composed by consumption of TPPs. The gas filling stations are also among the largest 
consumers. They account for significant part of retail consumption.
c) Natural Gas Market Stability
Natural gas market stability is of crucial importance for Georgia’s power security. Natural gas averaged 
consumption grows approximately by annual 7%. Moreover, the natural gas sector embraces extreme 
seasonal factors. Namely, in winter season (October-March) the consumption constitutes about 75% of 
total consumption. Naturally, based on the existing consumption structure and for improving power 
security system it is necessary to build a gas storage tank. Construction works for Samgori South Dome 
Underground Storage with total volume 500 Mm3 will finish by end of 2023. Total value of the project will 
exceed 250 million USD.pjggppy ppp
will be satisfied in winter period. Moreover, if supplier countries cease gas supply to Georgia, Georgian 
consumers will receive natural gas from the gas storage tank.
3.2.3. Oil
Oil products account for more than 30% of energy consumption in Georgia. The country is almost 100% 
dependent on foreign imports of crude oil and refined petroleum products required to satisfy its domestic 
demand. Imports are mainly carried out from Romania, Azerbaijan, the Russian Federation, Bulgaria, 
Greece and Turkmenistan. Even though oil production in Georgia is insignificant, due to its geostrategic 
location, Georgia has a long history of serving as a transit corridor for oil transportation
from the Caspian Sea to the western energy markets.
Currently, the territory is divided into license blocks, where different companies selected through 
international tenders extract oil. They have concluded production sharing agreements with the 
government. GOGC as a national oil company (NOC) cooperates with the companies, monitors their 
activities and manages state share of oil. 
Six investor companies carry out oil production activities in Georgia, they are Ninotsminda Oil Company, 
Schlumberger Rustaveli Company Limited (Georgia), Frontera Resources Georgia, VPI Georgia Satskhenisi 
Georgia, Norio Khevi Georgia and Georgian Oil and Gas Corporation, which extracts oil with its own 
resources. 
Seven investor companies carry out only exploration works, they are GOG Limited, Elenito, Marexin, 
Georgia New Ventures Inc., Norio Oil Company, West Gulf Petroleum Engineering Company and Coalition 
Energy Limited Company. 
For the last ten years the average annual production totals to 43.6 thousand tones.
➢ Oil Production
Oil and gas production industry is governed by the Law of Georgia "On Oil and Gas" and bylaws issued 
based on it. On the basis of this Law, GOGC has the status of the National Oil Company (NOC) and it 
performs functions assigned by the legislation which implies participation in drafting and negotiating the 
agreements between the State and Investors and their approval; acting as a commercial partner from the 
Georgian part in the agreements; regulatory evaluation of mining work plans and technological schemes
for exploitation of mineral resources; administering the state share of produced oil and gas; creation of 
the joint coordination committee with the Investor for management of the agreement; implementation 
of operating and commercial rights and obligations of the state party in the agreements; implementation 
of other sectoral functions assigned by the state including maintenance of wells located on a non-licensed 
area on behalf of the state and other oil operations. 
GOGC represents the owner of sectoral state property (wells, special equipment, railway dead-end, oilaccumulation system, warehouses etc.) and has a right to transfer it into the ownership of respective 
license-holder Investors. 
In addition to performance of NOC functions, GOGC performs sectoral economic activities, in particular, 
it has the oil primary treatment enterprise with 50 000 ton tank farm where services are provided for 
treatment of crude oil to stock-tank condition and its storage until the sale. Figure 16: Crude oil production 2013-2017 11
➢ Oil Transportation
The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) and the Western Route Export Pipeline (WREP) transport oil through the 
territory of Georgia. BTC pipeline exports oil extracted from the Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli field to the Ceyhan 
port in Turkey. The pipeline is also used to transport oil from Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan. BTC is the 
second longest pipeline in the world. The total length of the pipeline is 1.768 km with 229 km in Georgia. 
The pipeline has eight pumping stations, two of which are located in Georgia. BTC is capable of 
transporting 1,2 million barrels of oil per day (around 58 MTA). The pipeline is operated by BP and owned
by the International Consortium BTC Co.
Western Route Export Pipeline (WREP) also known as the Baku-Supsa Pipeline is the first investment of 
International Oil Consortium in Georgia, which has been in operation since 1999. The length of the WREP 
is 830 km. Its diameter is 530 mm. The pipeline transports crude oil from Azeri-Chiragi-Guneshli oil field 
to the Supsa terminal in West Georgia. where it is transported to Turkey by tankers. The pipeline is capable 
of transporting up to 120 000 tons of oil per day. The Georgian part of WREP is owned by GOGC and 
operated by BP. 
3.2.4. Coal
Coal deposits in Georgia are mainly located in three regions: Tkibuli-Shaori, Tkvarcheli and Akhaltsikhe. 
Available coal supplies are of two types: coal and brown coal (lignite). Total volume of Industrial coal 
supplies (category A, B and C1) equals to approximately 372 million tons.
The Tkibul-Shaori field is considered large, with an industrial stock of about 280 million tons. It does not 
cox independently, but in combination with Tkvarcheli coal transforms into metallurgical cox. Currently 
imported high calorie coal is used for its enrichment. Industrial stock of Tkvarcheli field is relatively small 
- about 21 million tons. Akhaltsikhe Lignite coal deposit has a relatively higher industrial stock of about 71 
million tonnes. Currently, coal in Georgia is used for industrial, commercial as well as residential purposes.
 
11 Source: Geostat; www.geostat.ge➢ Hydro
Natural abundance of river networks contributes to Georgia’s energy potential. “According to “Hydro Project”, 
319 out of total amount of rivers have significant hydropower potential, with potential capacity of 15.63mln 
kW and average annual generation of 135.8 bl. kWh, as a whole. 208 out of these rivers are small and medium 
sized rivers with potential capacity of 14.78GWh and 129.5TWh. The rest 111 rivers have potential of 851 
thousand kW (7% of total capacity of the rivers). The energy of total surface waters of Georgia accounts for 
228.5 TWh, with corresponding capacity of 26.1 GWh”12.Of this potential approximately 22% is currently 
utilised in terms of capacity and 17% in terms of production. 
Currently, 87 small, medium and large scale hydro power plants are operating with total of 3260.07 MW 
installed capacity and 9949,3 mln. kWh annual generation (2018). In total, 139 renewable energy projects are 
under development. The total installed capacity of these projects is 3218 MW and approximate electricity 
generation is around 13891 mln. kWh. Out of which, 24 Projects are on Construction and Licensing stage, with 
installed capacity of 235 MW, annual generation of 1,065 mln. kWh. 24 Projects are on Construction stage, 
installed capacity equals 376 MW, annual generation of 1700 mln. kWh. 91 Projects on the Feasibility Study 
Stage with 2607 MW installed capacity and annual generation of 11 126 mln. kWh.
➢ Solar Energy
Considering geographical location of Georgia, solar radiation effectiveness and duration is quite high. In 
majority of Georgian regions annual duration of sunny days varies within 250-280 days, which (considering 
ratio between the day and night hours) equals 1900-2200 hours a year. Annual solar radiation varies according 
to regions between 1250-1800 kWh/m2. Overall, solar potential of Georgia is estimated at 108 MW, equivalent 
to 34 ths. tones of heat 13.
Maximum solar radiation reaches 10kWh/m2in summer and 4-4.5kWh/m2in sunlit days of winter. Annual 
maximum for solar radiation was seen in Rodionovka – 2633 hours, while the minimum was observed in 
Sairme- 1147 hours.
At present approximately up to 50,000 solar collectors are being installed for hot water supply, mostly used 
to deliver hot water for bathroom and kitchen, heating of swimming-pools. Small-sized PV systems are quite 
well-spread within population, mostly with the capacity between 20-2000 watts. Through recent netmetering project which enables customers to satisfy own energy demand, deliver excess energy to the 
network and make respective settlement, by the end of 2018, about 70 subscribers with total installed 
capacity of about 750 KW14 were engaged in the project.
By 2020 solar PV plants with total installed capacity of about 150 MW will be constructed and connected 
to the grid.
 
12 https://www.elynspublishing.com/journal/article/renewable-energy-potential-and-its-utilization-in-georgia; Renewable 
Energy Potential and Its Utilization in Georgia: Demur Chomakhidze and Maia Melikidze
13 Mirskhulava D, Chomakhidze D, Arveladze R, Eristavi E, Tsintsadze P. Energy Strategy of Georgia, Bakur Sulakauri, Tbilisi, 
2004:297. [in Georgian]
14 GNERC Annual Report 2018; http://gnerc.org/files/wliuri%20angariSi/2018%20w-report%20-
%2015.05.2019.pdf; Average annual wind speed in Georgia is 0.59.2 meters/second. In some regions it exceeds 15 m/sec. The 
average annual electricity generation potential of wind in Georgia is estimated to be 4 TWh with an 
installed capacity of 1,500 MW.15 Several studies of wind power have identified the areas for potential wind 
farm construction with total installed capacity up to 1450 MW
In 2016 the first wind farm with the installed capacity 20.7 MW, and annual generation of 88 GWh was 
put into operation.
➢ Biomass and biofuels
a) Biomass supply
Georgia faces an imminent crisis in supplying its regions with heating energy. The fuel wood that 
constitutes about 12% of country’s total energy balance, and about 35% of domestic primary energy, is 
utilized in a highly unsustainable way. The Forestry Agency of the Ministry of Environment estimates the 
annually available renewable wood resource at 600,000 m3, while the total consumption was estimated 
at 2.5 million m³ in 2014. 
It is noteworthy that in the time period between 2014 (the baseline year) and 2016 (the last year for which 
the energy balance was available, fuel wood production and consumption dropped by 911 GWh 
(approximately 17%) or approximately 400,000 m3to 2.1 million m3. 
There are significant volumes of solid woody biomass residues currently not utilized which can be used 
for heating through production of upgraded solid biofuels (briquettes, pellets and chips) to satisfy heating 
needs – particularly outside the capital. This includes agricultural (theoretical potential 7-8 PJ equivalent 
annually) and forestry waste as well as waste from tree trimming in the cities, and from other 
underutilized sources. These sources can be summarised as follows:
b) Biomass residues: 
The theoretical potential is approximately 1 million m3 of biomass residues. There is approximately 3.02 
million ha of agriculture land. Nearly 0.8 million ha of this is arable land and 0.33 million ha is used for 
perennial crops. Pasturelands (1.8 million ha), and meadows (0.14 million ha) make up the remainder of 
the agricultural lands. 16
c) Residential waste: 
Approximately 900,000 tonnes of waste per year accumulate in the Tbilisi and Kutaisi waste disposal sites 
according to municipal data. An estimated 90 million m³ biogas could be obtained by re-treating these 
residues; this would equal 64 million m³ of natural gas. Approximately 160 million m³ of biogas can be 
 
15 Ministry of Energy (2013) HPP Potential: http://www.energy.gov.ge/energy.php?lang=eng&id_pages=60
16 Current land policy issues in Georgia - J. Ebanoidze, Association for the Protection of Landowners' Rights, Tbilisi, 
Georgiaggy ,/yqg g
Therefore, the technical potential of the major biomass sources in Georgia amounts to 12.5 TWh/year. 
The achievable potential is estimated at 3-4 TWh/year. 
This estimate does not incorporate the potential of farming energy crops. For comparison, one can note 
that total annual electricity generation in Georgia is in the range of 8,000 GWh. Apart from firewood, 
which is used for cooking and heating, and a few donor supported biogas initiatives, the biomass potential 
remains untapped.The Law on Electricity and Natural Gas 17 is the key piece of legislation regulating the country’s energy 
sector since 1997. The objectives of the law include stimulating the use of local hydro energy and other 
renewable energy sources. This Law has been amended several times since 2006 and currently 
incorporates some EU principles – notably reflecting the principles of deregulation and liberalisation of 
the energy market. 
“The Main Directions of the State Energy Policy of Georgia” has been adopted on June 2015,18 The Energy 
Policy develops a long-term comprehensive state vision, which is the basis for the development of short, 
medium- and long-term strategies, with a special emphasis on the utilization of Georgia’s renewable 
energy resources. Energy efficiency is also incorporated into the document.
Since 2015 the Ministry of Energy (now Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia) 
approves a “Ten-year network development plan of Georgia for 2015-2025” on annual basis This is the 
time-bound program designed for reinforcement of national transmission system infrastructure, 
addressing the existing problems, responding to the future challenges and implementing the 
opportunities. One of the core subjects identified in the document is an integration of renewable energy 
sources into the network, which still remains a major challenge for the wind and solar based electricity 
generation.
For the purpose of supporting the construction of new generation, units the Government of Georgia has 
adopted state programs and several sub-laws.
The National Environmental Action Programme (NEAP) of Georgia 2012-16 19 assumes that Georgia is on 
a fast track for economic development. Economic growth is the basis for the country’s welfare which may 
bring considerable pressure on natural resources and the environment. Therefore, sustainable economic 
development is important for the country from the perspective of environmental protection and rational 
use of natural resources. The NEAP sets long term (20-year) goals and short term (5-year) targets in 11 
thematic environmental areas including climate change. Climate change mitigation is among the short 
term targets – Target 3: the creation of favourable conditions for the reduction of GHG emissions. The 
proposed measures related to this National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) are: the elaboration of 
Low Emission Development Strategy (LEDS) (ongoing) and the Promotion of EE in the Transport and 
Building sectors.
Draft State Strategy for the Development of Solid Biofuels in Georgia has been elaborated and is subject 
of the government approval and adoption in the near future.
The major goal of the strategy is the facilitation of the utilization of solid biomass residues in Georgia, 
through the encouragement of the production and utilization of the modern solid biofuels. The main 
directions of the strategy include:
• Sustainable management and provision of supply of solid biomass residues from forest, 
agriculture, industry and other sources; 
• Support of the advancement of the new technologies and business processes for the production 
of the solid biofuels;
 
17 Available in its updated form at: http://www.energy.gov.ge/legislation.php?lang=eng&id_pages=33
18 Available at: http://www.energy.gov.ge/ministry.php?id_pages=12&lang=eng
19http://www.preventionweb.net/files/28719
neap2.eng.pdfGeorgia joined the Energy Community as a full-fledged member in the course of 2017, following the 
ratification of the accession agreement by the Georgian Parliament.
As a full member of the Energy Community Treaty, Georgia plans to follow the provisions of the EU 
Directives and transpose the acquis communautaire according to the Energy Community work program. 
Georgia (via the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development) is also developing a new Law on 
Energy and Water Supply which is expected to be approved in the near future. This law will become a key 
part of legislation regulating the energy sector. However, it is expected that it will predominantly govern 
natural gas and electricity markets.Table 4: Overview of policies and regulations related Sustainable Development Goal 7 
Name of Legislation 
/ Policy Brief
Responsible 
institution
Status of 
adoption / 
implementation
Law on Energy 
Efficiency
Implement the EU’s Energy Efficiency Directive (EED - 2012/27/EU), help Georgia to meet its 
commitments under the Energy Community Treaty and the EU Association Agreement, and 
achieve the goals set out in the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP).
Specific elements of the law which are relevant include:
• Establishment of an EE Agency to facilitate investment and carry out Monitoring, 
Reporting and Verification (including for EE in buildings, energy labelling and ecodesign 
requirements)
• Establishes the NEEAP as the document for establishing EE targets at a national level
• Requirement of public bodies to purchase EE equipment where feasible (Responsibility of 
the State Procurement Agency)
• Requirement of annual EE plans in municipalities (Responsibility of municipalities though 
the EE Agency would help)
• Plan for establishment of a web-based MRV system (Responsibility of the EE Agency)
• Establishment of the legal basis for energy performance contracts
• Requirement for setting up of certification programmes for energy auditors and for 
publication of information on them (Responsibility of the Georgian Accreditation Center 
to approve certifying organisations)
• A requirement that 1% of central-government owned and occupied buildings with a total 
useful floor area over 500 m2 should be renovated each year to meet EE standards (the 
list would be published in secondary legislation and the EE standards would be part of 
Energy Performance in Building secondary legislation) (Responsibility would be the EE 
Agency)
• Language to encourage end-user energy efficiency amongst consumers via awareness 
raising, financial measures, and training.
MoESD with 
overarching 
responsibility, 
though different 
articles have specific 
responsibility
Expected 
adoption in 2019
Law on Energy 
Performance of 
Buildings
To approximate the Energy Performance in Building Directive. This includes specific relevant 
provisions to:
• Require private buildings sold or rented and all public buildings with more than 500 m2 
(lowered to 250 m2 on 30 June 2023) and visited often by the public and to have energy 
performance certificates
Ministry of Economy 
and Sustainable 
Development of 
Georgia
Expected to be 
adopted by the 
end of 2019Name of Legislation 
/ Policy Brief
Responsible 
institution
Status of 
adoption / 
implementation
• Set minimum energy performance standards for primary energy consumption for new 
buildings or buildings which undergo major renovations – to a cost-effective level.
• Require that all new buildings shall satisfy the requirements of Nearly Zero Energy 
Buildings unless it is not cost-effective to do so.
• Requires regular inspections of boilers
• Encourages public education on the topic of EE in buildings and review of financing 
measures to encourage EE
Various secondary legal acts are also required for the full implementation of the EPBD
Law on 
Environmental 
Protection 20
Use of natural resources with consideration of environmental principles and sustainable 
development. Specifically, Article 51 of the law relates to the Protection of Climate against the 
Global Changes
1. The purpose is to protect the climate of the earth against the global changes, the subject of 
the activity is obliged to observe the limits to the emission of gases which cause the 
greenhouse effect as well as to take measures for mitigating their emissions.
2. The emission of the gases, which causes the greenhouse effects is regulated on the basis of 
the integrated control of the pollution of the environment.
3. The legal rules of the protection of climate against the global changes shall be provided by 
law of Georgia in the framework of Georgia’s jurisdiction.
Ministry of 
Environmental 
Protection and 
Agriculture of 
Georgia
Existing
10 Dec 1996
The Forest code of 
Georgia 21
Rules for conducting tending, protection, restoration, and the use of the Georgian Forest 
Fund’s resources.
The Draft forest code is expected to limit access to wider population to the forests. This may 
influence biomass production, both positively and negatively.
National Forestry 
Agency
22 June 1999
A New Forest 
Code is in the 
Parliament.
Law - Waste 
Management Code
22
Facilitate waste prevention and its increased re-use as well as environmentally safe treatment 
of waste. A number of specific provisions are potentially relevant including:
• The burning of waste outside permitted incinerators shall be prohibited
Ministry of 
Environmental 
Protection and 
26 Dec 2014
 
20 http://www.vertic.org/media/National%20Legislation/Georgia/GE_Environmental Protection.pdf
21 http://biomass.ge/sites/default/files/annex_1_acccc200835_georgianforestcode.pdf this is the old one 
22 http://environment.cenn.org/app/uploads/2016/06/Waste-Management-Code
FINAL2015.pdfName of Legislation 
/ Policy Brief
Responsible 
institution
Status of 
adoption / 
implementation
• The Ministry shall develop a Strategy on management of biodegradable municipal 
waste Including targets and measures for the reduction of the amount of 
biodegradable municipal waste going to landfill.
• The requirement that legal and natural persons that produce more than 200 tonnes 
of non-hazardous waste or 1,000 tonnes of inert waste or any amount of hazardous 
waste annually, shall prepare a company waste management plan and have an 
environmental manager
Agriculture of 
Georgia
Law of Georgia on 
Environmental 
Impact Permits 23
Facilitates protection of the environment and natural resources from irreversible quantitative 
and qualitative changes, and their rational use. Defines the cases where an environmental 
impact assessment is required. This is not expected for this project but it should be doublechecked.
Ministry of 
Environmental 
Protection and 
Agriculture of 
Georgia
14 Dec 2007
Law on Renewable 
Energy 24
To define open issues and approximate the Renewable Energy Directive. Relevant provisions 
of the draft include:
• Requiring that targets are set within the Renewable Energy Action Plan
• Promotion of the installation of renewable energy sourced for new buildings and 
settlements amongst local self-governing units
• Definitions of what constitutes renewable energy (including biomass)
• Requirement of RE in new or substantially refurbished buildings starting in 2025 and 
for public buildings starting in 2022
• For biomass stoves, the Government should promote those conversion technologies 
that ensure achievement of a conversion efficiency of at least 85% for residential and 
commercial applications and at least 70% for industrial applications.
• For solar hot water, the Government should promote the use of certified equipment 
and systems based on European standards where these exist, including eco-labels, 
energy labels and other technical reference systems established by the European 
standardisation bodies.
Ministry of Economy 
and Sustainable 
Development, with 
some delegated 
responsibilities to 
GNERC and / or local 
authorities.
Expected to be 
adopted by the 
end of 2019
 
23 http://environment.cenn.org/app/uploads/2016/10/The-Law-of-Georgia-on-Environmental-Impact-Permit.pdf
24 http://hydropower.ge/user
upload/6.HIPPReportonRESLaw.pdfName of Legislation 
/ Policy Brief
Responsible 
institution
Status of 
adoption / 
implementation
• Requires the setting up of training / information distribution to the public on RE, 
setting up of certification programmes for RE installers (small-scale biomass boilers 
and stoves, solar photovoltaic and solar thermal systems, shallow geothermal 
systems and heat pumps), and may have lists of certified installers
• The Government shall ensure that guidance is made available to planners and 
architects, as well as to all relevant actors, so that they are able properly to consider 
the optimal combination of renewable energy sources, of high-efficiency technologies 
and of district heating and cooling when planning, designing, building and renovating
industrial or residential areas.
• The Government with the participation of local self-government and regional 
governmental authorities shall develop suitable information, awareness-raising, 
guidance or training programmes in order to inform citizens of Georgia of the 
benefits and practicalities of developing and using energy from renewable sources.
• Sets up the legal basis for certificates of origin
Draft 25 Main 
Directions of the 
State Energy Policy 
of Georgia
The aim is to develop a long-term comprehensive state vision, which will later become the 
basis for the development of short, medium and long term strategies for 2030, with a special 
emphasis on the utilization of Georgia’s renewable energy resources. The Energy Policy of 
Georgia defines nine strategic energy policy directions of which three are related to 
sustainable energy:
• Utilization of Georgia’s renewable energy resources;
• Develop and implement an integrated approach to energy efficiency in Georgia;
• Gradual approximation and later harmonization of Georgia’s legislative and 
regulatory framework with the EU Energy acquis.
The development of renewable energy resources is key to tackling climate change and 
deploying cleaner sources of energy as well as decreasing Georgia’s dependence on imported 
energy. Attracting investments in RES sector is a strategic goal for Georgia. With regards to its 
integrated approach to energy efficiency, the Energy Policy of Georgia considers the decrease 
of energy intensity through various measures of demand-side management (DSM). To 
Ministry of Economy 
and Sustainable 
Development
2015 - ongoing
 
25 http://www.energy.gov.ge/projects/pdf/news/Sakartvelos%20Energetikuli%20Politika%20Proekti%20Araofitsialuri%20Inglisuri%20Targmani%20796%20geo.pdfName of Legislation 
/ Policy Brief
Responsible 
institution
Status of 
adoption / 
implementation
facilitate DSM corresponding legislative framework as well as energy efficiency programs need 
to be created, measures on introduction and development of energy efficient technologies 
and equipment planned and implemented.
Law on the System 
of Protected 
Territories 26
Encourages the activities aimed at preserving those areas, which are valuable for agricultural, 
industrial, transportation, energy purposes, as well as natural resources
Ministry of 
Environmental 
Protection and 
Agriculture of 
Georgia, the Central 
Department of 
Protected Territories, 
State Reserves and 
Hunting Areas
March 1996
Action Plans and Strategies
Social-economic 
Development 
Strategy of Georgia 
2020 27
The third main principle of the Strategy is based on rational use of
Use of natural resources, ensuring environmental safety and sustainability and avoiding 
natural disasters during the process of economic development. Specific indicative statements 
include the following:
• Energy efficiency will be enhanced and relevant legislative mechanisms will be drawn 
up in accordance with international and European norms in order to preserve the 
country’s energy resources. The efficient use of energy is important as a means of 
increasing the country’s energy independence and rational use of resources, and can 
potentially decrease future costs.
• Building natural gas infrastructure/metering in regions Government of Georgia will 
continue building natural gas infrastructure in villages, introducing individual meters 
and building electricity infrastructure in villages that have no electricity. This will lead 
to lessened consumption of natural resources for heating/fuel and improved social 
conditions in the regions.
Government of 
Georgia
2014 - 2020
 
26 http://www.elaw.org/content/georgia-law-system-protected-territories-english
27 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/cps-geo-2014-2018-sd-01.pdf Name of Legislation 
/ Policy Brief
Responsible 
institution
Status of 
adoption / 
implementation
Ten-year network 
development plan 
of Georgia for 2018-
2028 28
Reinforcement of national transmission system infrastructure, addressing the existing 
problems, responding to the future challenges and implementing the opportunities, including 
the Integration of renewable energy sources into the network
Georgia State 
Electrosystem 2018-2028
National Energy 
Efficient Action Plan 
(NEEAP) of Georgia
Includes Georgia’s indicative national energy efficiency targets for 2021, 2025, and 2030. 
Specific measures listed in the NEEAP which are relevant for the project include:
• Adoption and implementation of the EPBD / energy efficiency standards in buildings 
(policy measure triggering investments)
• Implementation of EE measures in schools, kindergartens, and other public buildings 
(to be funded through IFI / lending + donor grants)
• Support for efficient biomass stoves (to be funded through donor grants)
• Support for solar hot water heaters (to be funded through donor grants)
Ministry of Economy 
and Sustainable 
Development – with 
specific 
responsibilities for 
measures as 
appropriate.
Expected 
adoption in early 
2019 for the 
period impacting 
2019 - 2021
Ministry of Energy 
Medium-term 
Action Plan
Development of Action Plans for the utilization of electricity from renewable and alternative 
energy sources and the creation of the legislation to support energy efficiency measures –
described in more detail elsewhere in this table. Specific relevant actions include:
• The RE action plan is focused on electricity generation form renewables/renewable 
heating and cooling / and renewables in transport has been developed as of energy 
community guidelines and national targets defined. document is draft but expected 
to be approved by the end of the year.
• Similarly the NEEAP is in the final stage of inter-ministerial consultation process.
Both action plans set requirements for establishing the relevant regulatory frameworks, 
adjustment of institutional settings and establishing support schemes for support of efficient 
biomass stoves and solar hot water heaters.
The Energy Performance in Buildings Law has been drafted and submitted to the Parliament in 
the Fall of 2018.
The Draft EE Law, RE Law and overall Law on Energy and Water supply are finalized and will be 
submitted to the parliament in March 2019.
Ministry of Economy 
and Sustainable 
Development
2017 - 2020
 
28 http://www.gse.com.ge/sw/static/file/TYNDP
GE-2018-2028GEO.PDFName of Legislation 
/ Policy Brief
Responsible 
institution
Status of 
adoption / 
implementation
The National 
Environmental 
Action Programme 
(NEAP) of Georgia -
3rd National 
Environmental 
Action Program of 
Georgia 2017-2021 
(NEAP 3) 29
Outlines a number of relevant activities to be carried out in the period of 2017 – 2021, 
including:
• Revision of the forest code
• Promotion of access to alternative fuel sources (biomass) for population and public 
entities
• Preparation of Low Emission Development Strategy (LEDS) which includes various 
measures related to energy efficiency
• And other climate change commitments (Biennial Update Reports, National 
Communications, Climate Change Strategy, etc.)
Ministry of 
Environmental 
Protection and 
Agriculture of 
Georgia
2017 – 2021
State Strategy for 
the Development of 
Solid Biofuels in 
Georgia
The main goal of the strategy is to promote the use of solid biomass in Georgia by stimulating 
the production and use of modern solid biofuel. The strategy defines basic directions and state 
measures in support of UBF production and consumption in Georgia. Main directions of the 
strategy include:
• Sustainable management and provision of supply of solid biomass residues from 
forest, agriculture, industry and other sources;
• Support of the advancement of the new technologies and business processes for the 
production of the solid biofuels;
• Encouragement of the sustainable production and demand for the energy received 
from biomass residues.
The following topics are discussed in the strategy: definition of the responsible body, 
necessary changes in the legal framework (RE legislation, Taxation, tax incentives for UBF 
business, waste management); standardization (introduction of standards for biomass and 
fuels), as well as for appropriate manufacturing and consumption technologies; stimulation of 
demand; Innovative and logistic support, awareness raising and enhancement of knowledge & 
skills; seek financing from IFIs and climate funds; Creation of sustainable production processes.
Ministry of 
Environmental 
Protection and 
Agriculture of 
Georgia
Draft prepared 
in 2017. 
Currently is 
under review
Strategy for 
Agricultural 
development in 
Fostering the competitiveness of agriculture; ensuring the sustainable management of natural 
resources, and climate action; and achieving a balanced territorial development of rural 
economies and communities including the creation and maintenance of employment.
Ministry of 
Environmental 
Protection and 
Adopted in 2015
 
29 http://mepa.gov.ge/En/Files/ViewFile/1605Name of Legislation 
/ Policy Brief
Responsible 
institution
Status of 
adoption / 
implementation
Georgia 2015-2020
30
Agriculture of 
Georgia
Rural Development 
Strategy of Georgia 
2017-2020 31
Includes the objective of the improvement of the management of water, forest and other 
resources and the promotion of sustainable systems of waste management in rural areas.
Ministry of 
Environmental 
Protection and 
Agriculture of 
Georgia
Adopted in 2016
Low Emission 
Development 
Strategy (LEDS) 32
Outlines a number of activities to reduce net greenhouse gas emissions – including those 
included in the NEEAP related to efficient biomass heaters and solar hot water heaters.
Ministry of 
Environmental 
Protection and 
Agriculture of 
Georgia overall –
with various 
ministries for 
implementation
Draft published, 
Sep.2017
Intended Nationally 
Determined 
Contribution (INDC)
33
Georgia plans to unconditionally reduce its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 15% below the 
Business As Usual scenario (BAU) for the year 2030. The 15% reduction target can be increased 
up to 25% in a conditional manner, subject to a global agreement addressing the importance 
of technical cooperation, access to low-cost financial resources and technology transfer. The 
25% reduction below BAU scenario would also ensure that Georgian GHG emissions by 2030 
will stay at 40% below the 1990 levels.
Ministry of 
Environmental 
Protection and 
Agriculture of 
Georgia overall –
with various 
ministries for 
implementation
Submitted to 
UNFCCC at the 
end 2015
 
30 http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/wp-content/uploads/laws/8466.pdf
31 http://enpard.ge/en/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/Rural-Development-Strategy-of-Georgia-2017-2020.pdf
32 http://www.decisionwaregroup.com/assets/wi-172_2017-09-14-georgia-s-low-emission-develdevelopment-strategy_eng.pdf
33 https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Georgia%20First/INDC_of_Georgia.pdfgpg
from 2015
The UN General Assembly adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development on September 2015. 17 
Sustainable Development Goals and 169 associated targets balance three dimensions of sustainable 
development– economic, social and environmental. 2030 Agenda is the sole global agenda that unites every 
country to achieve sustainable development with the core principle of “leaving no one behind”.
The Administration of Government of Georgia (AoG) expressed high level political support to prioritizing 
SDGs. The Government of Georgia (GoG) started nationalizing SDGs in 2015 and undertook important steps 
in this direction. The same year, the AoG was granted coordination functions of the implementation of 
SDGs. Georgia currently has all 17 goals, 95 targets and 215 indicators nationalized 34. The GoG aims to 
nationalize all 169 targets till 2030.
The Sustainable Development Goals Council was established for monitoring and efficient coordination of 
SDG implementation.
Incorporation of SDGs in national policy documents started in 2018. This will be an inevitable component in 
transferring SDGs into the daily agenda of public institutions.
Integration of nationalized SDGs into development planning of Georgia is very high:
The 37 national strategies cover 93 % of nationalized SDG targets; The process of defining adjusted SDG 
targets, development of relevant indicators has drawn on a set of strategic and multi-sectoral development 
documents, especially: EU–Georgia Association Agenda; Social and Economic Development Strategy 
“Georgia 2020”; National Strategy for the Protection of Human Rights in Georgia; Public Administration 
Reform Roadmap and its Action Plan 2015-2016.
Government Policy Priorities in pursuit to SDGs- 4 point reform plan of the Government of Georgia: 
Economic reform; Education reform; Spatial development: Regional and Infrastructural Development; 
Governance reform. 
The Council has four thematic Working Groups: 
on Social Inclusion; Economic Development; 
Democratic Governance and Sustainable 
Energy and Environmental Protection. The AoG 
performs the functions of Secretariat of the 
Council.
The national document – SDGs Matrix was 
elaborated which includes all the necessary 
information that will guide lead government 
institutions in the process of implementing the 2030 Agenda. Namely, the Matrix reflects global and Georgiaadjusted targets, as well as indicators that should be achieved by 2030 and baseline indicators to measure 
the achievement of the targets.
The High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) has a central role in overseeing follow-up and review of the progress 
made on SDGs at the global level. Georgia submitted its first Voluntary National Review (VNR) to the HLPF 
 
34Source: Presentation “Nationalization of SGDs in Georgia. 3-year summary” Administration of the Government of Georgia; achieving sustainable development, the process of establishing institutionalized coordination and 
nationalization mechanism and future plans. Georgia was due to submit its next VNR in 2019, describing 
detailed progress of all SDGs compared to relevant indicators, but the date of submission was postponed to 
2020. The Council and Working Groups in the process of elaboration of the first progress report will use 
innovative Electronic Monitoring System (EMS). The EMS provides for effective and transparent monitoring 
of the national agenda of UN Sustainable Goals. The electronic monitoring tool will support the distribution 
of up-to-date information about the performance of public institutions on subsequently all relevant targets 
of the SDGs.
Table 5: SDG 7
GOAL 7. ENSURE ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE, RELIABLE, SUSTAINABLE AND MODERN ENERGY FOR ALL
Global Target Georgia Adjusted Target Global Indicator
Lead Ministry 
/Agency
7.1 By 2030, ensure universal access 
to affordable, reliable and modern 
energy services
7.1 By 2030, Georgia achieves 
significant progress in ensuring 
nationwide access to affordable, 
reliable and modern energy services
7.1.1: Percentage of population 
with access to electricity
7.1.2: Proportion of population 
with primary reliance on clean fuels 
and technology
Ministry of Economy & Sustainable Development
7.2 By 2030, increase substantially 
the share of renewable energy in the 
global energy mix
7.2 By 2030, increase substantially 
the share of renewable energy in the 
energy mix of Georgia
7.2.1: Renewable energy share in 
the total final energy consumption 
7.3 By 2030, double the global rate 
of improvement in energy efficiency
7.3 By 2030, significantly increase 
the rate of improvement in energy 
efficiency in Georgia
7.3.1: Energy intensity measured in 
terms of primary energy and GDP 
7.a By 2030, enhance international 
cooperation to facilitate access to 
clean energy research and 
technology, including renewable 
energy, energy efficiency and 
advanced and cleaner fossil-fuel 
technology, and promote 
investment in energy infrastructure 
and clean energy technology 
7.a By 2030, enhance international 
cooperation to facilitate access to 
clean energy research and 
technology, including renewable 
energy, energy efficiency and 
advanced and cleaner fossil-fuel 
technology, and promote investment 
in energy infrastructure and clean 
energy technology in Georgia
7.a.1: Mobilized amount of United 
States dollars per year starting in 
2020 accountable towards the $100 
billion commitment Access to electricity- According to database from Sustainable Energy for All Global Tracking Framework, 
led by World Bank, International Energy Agency and the Energy Sector Management Assistance 
Program, almost 100% of Georgian population has access to the electricity35However, according to the 
information from the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia, all households in 
urban areas have access to electricity while in rural areas there are few villages where households lack 
access to electricity.
Modern Energy for Cooking
According survey - “Energy Consumption in Households”, conducted in 2017 by National Statistics 
Office of Georgia, about 80% of rural population uses natural gas for cooking, while these figure is 
almost 3 times lower among rural households, as about 40% of rural population uses firewood and 
agricultural waste, followed by 27% of those who use LPG.
Energy Source Urban Rural 
Natural Gas 77.8 27.8
LPG 6.3 27
Firewood, agricultural waste 9.3 39.9
Coal 0.1 0.1
Electricity 6.5 5
Other 0 0.2
100% 100%
Table 6. Distribution of Households (%) in Urban and Rural Areas by Used Energy Forms for Cooking36
As fuel wood which is largely used by population in rural areas both for heating and cooking is mostly burnt 
in primitive inefficient wood stoves, the introduction of energy efficient wood stoves will not only reduce 
fuel wood consumption thus improving access and affordability to this source of energy, but also improve 
comfort level and decrease indoor air pollution in the houses, which is connected to SDG 3. 
Considerable work has been done by the Government of Georgia to nationalize Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) with special emphasis on ensuring that all SDGs have gender-sensitive indicators and that 
gender equality policies reflect commitments made in the nationalized SDGs and their targets. Achievement 
of gender equality (SDG 5) and the SDGs will not be possible without women’s economic empowerment, 
the Government Action Plan on Human Rights 2018-2020 37 incorporates issues such as: economic 
 
35 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS?locations=GE 
36 Source: National Statistics Office Publication; “Energy Consumption in Households” 2017. p.39. www.geostat.ge
and upgrade technology for 
supplying modern and sustainable 
energy services for all in developing 
countries, in particular least 
developed countries, small island 
developing States and landlocked 
developing countries, in accordance 
with their respective programmes 
support.
and upgrade technology for 
supplying modern and sustainable 
energy services for all 
efficiency as a percentage of GDP 
and the amount of foreign direct 
investment in financial transfer for 
infrastructure and technology to 
sustainable development services to resources etc.
Access to energy can increase opportunities for women, enabling them to work from home and thereby 
generate an independent source of income. Impacts will initially be greatest at the household level, with 
society-wide implications emerging over time. The more empowered women become, the more likely they 
are to push local initiatives that directly benefit them from an energy-access perspective, since they are 
often the ones to gain most from the use of cleaner, easier-to-obtain fuels for cooking and lighting. Access 
to energy reduces the importance of physical gender differences in the labour force, increasing access to 
the professions for women. Public outdoor lighting would increase security for women and girls, in the 
evening.
The country's energy potential affects its economy at both the macro and micro levels. Accordingly, it 
reflects both on the economic performance of the country as a whole and on the well-being of each of its 
residents.
In the macro aspect, there is a strong link between consumed or produced energy and the country's 
economic development. From a micro perspective, energy can be a source of health improvement, 
productivity growth, additional income, and a reduction in labor costs for each individual household. Hence, 
gender-based energy consumption priorities may be identified, as the main household energy users are 
usually housewives.
It is obvious that the improved energy situation for each family directly affects the well-being of the woman 
as a housewife. This is especially true in Georgia, where the majority of women are housewives while the 
rest are employed, but still take their part in a daily housekeeping activities. Consequently, access to energy 
sources is vital for both categories, so that their free time and money can be spent more efficiently. 
At this stage, gasification procedures are under intense development. Between the years of 2019-2021, the 
LLC "Georgian Gas Transportation Company” shall ensure 58 849 customers across 233 settlements with 
the natural gas supply through the gasification project and construction work developments, which will 
allow housewives to replace widely used bio fuel (wood) with natural gas. (Decree N 791 of the Government 
of Georgia of April 5, 2019 – On Facilitating Natural Gas Supply for the Population of Georgian between 
2019 – 2021). 
It is also very important for families to have uninterrupted power supply, which is directly related to the use 
of family equipment and information sources. In this regard, the decree N751 of the Government of Georgia 
dated April 4, 2019 - on allocation of funds from the Highland Settlement Development Fund, according to 
which 2 000 000 GEL will be allocated to the Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure of Georgia 
for the purpose of providing solar panels to municipalities that are left without electricity. 
The below table shows the number of employees in the energy sector. The table noticeably indicates the 
growing number of women employed in the energy sector.
Table 7: Number of employees in the energy sector by sexall, reflects the increased attention on water and sanitation issues in the global political agenda. Fresh 
water, in sufficient quantity and quality, is essential for all aspects of life and sustainable development. The 
human rights to water and sanitation are widely recognized by Member States. Water resources are 
embedded in all forms of development (e.g. food security, health promotion and poverty reduction), in 
sustaining economic growth in agriculture, industry and energy generation, and in maintaining healthy 
ecosystems.
Coordination between the water, energy, food and environment sectors is challenging even at the national 
level. But the complexity increases substantially in transboundary river basins where the impacts spread 
from one country to another and trade-offs and externalities may cause friction between the riparian 
countries. 
Improved water, energy and food security on a global level can be achieved through a nexus approach —
an approach that integrates management and governance across sectors and scales. A nexus approach 
can support the transition to a Green Economy, which aims, among other things, at resource use efficiency 
and greater policy coherence.
The nexus assessments undertaken under the Water Convention are intended to provide a picture of the 
interdependencies across water, ecosystems, energy, food and other areas such as climate change and 
biodiversity in terms of uses, needs, economic and social benefits, potential synergies, conflicts and tradeoffs, and also to identify possible policy responses.
The nexus assessment of the Alazani/Ganykh Basin 38 elaborated by UNICE “Reconciling resource uses in 
transboundary basins: assessment of the water-food-energy-ecosystems nexus” aimed at supporting 
transboundary cooperation between Georgia and Azerbaijan in the areas of water, energy, food and 
environmental policies by strengthening the knowledge base for integrated policy development and 
decision-making. The pilot nexus assessment of the Alazani/Ganykh River Basin includes the preliminary 
identification of possible solutions to improve the management of the basin’s land, water, energy and 
environmental resources. These potential solutions have been classified under five headings: institutions, 
information, instruments, infrastructure, and international cooperation and coordination.
The nexus assessment of the Alazani/Ganykh Basin findings and recommendations, include:
• The sustainable use and management of the Alazani/Ganykh Basin’s resources is essential for the 
development of the riparian regions in Georgia and Azerbaijan. The basin has productive
agricultural land, attractive landscapes, and abundant and good quality water resources. The agriculture 
and tourism sectors, which rely on those resources, are expected to drive development in the
riparian regions. Improving energy access and affordability in rural areas contributes to improving rural 
livelihoods.
• The basin’s resources are increasingly under pressure. Economic development is driving water 
demand and water transfers to supply cities outside of the basin, raising pollution levels from 
agriculture and households, and increasing the exploitation of hydropower potential. Despite reduced 
levels of poverty, poverty is still an issue, and it is driving erosion and sedimentation owing to excessive 
logging for fuelwood and poor maintenance of river banks and irrigation infrastructure. In addition to 
erosion processes, flooding of agricultural plots also takes place.
• There are multiple linkages in the Alazani/Ganykh Basin between the different basin resources.
Energy-land and land-water linkages are particularly strong. But second degree linkages are also 
relevant – for example, lack of modern fuels in the upper basin leads to deforestation for fuelwood 
 
38http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/water/publications/WAT_Nexus/Nexus_assessment_Chapter_5_Alaza
ni-Ganykhgewebfinal.pdf; populations (through flooding) as well as energy production through siltation of reservoirs and the 
impact of floods.
Therefore, understanding the consequences of different policy options requires looking at the chain of 
indirect impacts across sectors, and quantifying them whenever possible.
• Possible solutions to support the sustainable use and management of the basin resources. They 
include solutions related to institutions, information, instruments, investments, and international 
cooperation and coordination. Often, coherent packages of measures will need to be devised, for 
example, with regard to agricultural support or the promotion of fuel switching. A nexus perspective 
should inform the selection of measures, for example, in the development of sustainable and multipurpose renewable energy sources.
• Management of the nexus requires stronger transboundary governance. The two countries are 
currently negotiating a transboundary agreement for the Kura Basin to which the Alazani-Ganykh 
belongs. Finalizing that agreement represents a valuable opportunity for engaging different waterusing sectors in cooperating at the transboundary level. 
• More intense transboundary cooperation on the integrated management of basin resources will 
bring additional real benefits. It will allow Georgia and Azerbaijan to exploit complementarities in their 
resource bases (e.g. Georgian forests, Azerbaijani gas) to optimize resources development as well as 
risk management at the basin scale (e.g. coordinated hydropower development, coordinated flood 
management) to effectively protect the resource base for regional economic development, and to 
generate new economic opportunities (e.g. through more intense energy trade). There are certainly 
opportunities for the two countries to learn from each other, for example, Georgia would benefit from 
Azerbaijani experience in promoting the switch from fuelwood to modern fuels, and Azerbaijan could 
learn from the Georgian experience in economic valuation of ecosystem services.
• Ultimately, stronger and more coherent national policies are needed to “manage the nexus”. To a 
large extent, the dynamics between the resources and sectors at the transboundary level are explained 
by national developments. Intersectoral planning needs to be strengthened, which will require 
improved information exchange, but also mechanisms to take into account cross-sectoral impacts 
when carrying out sector planning. The preparation of the National Water Strategy of Azerbaijan and 
the updating of the Georgian Water Law provide an opportunity to strengthen intersector coordination 
of water-user sectors. Similarly, the development of the new Energy Strategy for Georgia represents 
an opportunity to consider the chain of impacts on other sectors (agriculture, forest, tourism, urban 
development) of different energy policy options. 
Agenda 2030 requires substantial and coordinated efforts across and within all national institutions and 
bodies. The following ministries play the strongest role of integrating the agenda by contributing to the
implementation of the majority of the nationalized SDG targets:
➢ Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development;
➢ Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories, Labour, Health and Social 
Affairs;
➢ Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture;
➢ Ministry of Education, Science, Culture and Sport.
➢ Ministry of Regional Development & Infrastructure
In May 2019, UN Development Programme (UNDP) led assessment of how Georgia's national and subnational policies are aligned with the SDGs was presented. The analysis reviewed 55 different sectoral 
strategies and Georgia’s Association Agreement with the European Union (EU) to assess how well SDG 
targets are reflected in national plans, and how well national priority goals are funded.very high.
Long-term strategies, including the AA cover, 77% of the nationalized SDG targets. The findings were broadly 
positive in terms of strategic alignment: 37 national strategies cover fully 93 percent of the SDG targets that 
Georgia has adopted as national priorities. It’s revealing, however, that the EU Association Agreement 
makes a huge contribution to the country’s alignment with SDG targets, covering fully 63 percent of all 
targets. This underlines the complementarity of the SDGs and the European integration agenda, and also 
suggests a need for the refinement of sectoral strategies. Alignment work is needed in particular for four 
SDGs: gender equality (#5); reduced inequalities (#10); peace, justice and strong institutions (#16); and 
partnerships for sustainable development (#17).
In terms of spending, some priority areas are faring better than others. Peace (#16), education (#4) and 
infrastructure (#9) have generous budgets, whereas poverty (#1), gender equality (#5) and environmental 
protection and climate change (#6, 12, 13, 14 and 15) are significantly less well-funded.
As concluded in the assessment “the potential acceleration points are targets of Economic growth and 
Access to energy. Targets that could provide strong enabling role are Equal access to resources and 
Sustainable tourism. They are highly influential in achieving other targets, but many of these are not well 
integrated across the government.
The potential weak points are targets related to Agricultural productivity and the Employment 
targets(especially youth employment). Environmental and Pollution targets are also underperforming. All 
of these have strong linkages with other targets. If not addressed, they can pull the entire development 
agenda of Georgia backwards”.
Planetary SDG targets should be integrated into economic, social and other policies. A ‘new growth’ model 
which considers climate change and environment should be discussed.
Georgia has also developed Georgia’s 
Intended Nationally Determined 
Contribution (INDC) which was submitted to 
the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) at the COP21 in 
Paris at the end of 2015. Georgia plans to 
“unconditionally reducing its GHG emissions 
by 15% below the Business as Usual Scenario 
(BAU) for the year 2030. This is equal to 
reduction in emission intensity per unit of 
GDP by approximately 34% from 2013 to 
2030. The 15% reduction target will be 
increased up to 25% in a conditional manner, 
subject to a global agreement addressing the 
importance of technical cooperation, access 
to low-cost financial resources and technology transfer. This is equal to reduction of emission intensity per 
unit of GDP by approximately 43% from 2013 to 2030. The 25% reduction below BAU scenario would also 
ensure that Georgian GHG emissions by 2030 will stay by 40% below the 1990 levels” 40 covering following 
 
39http://www.ungeorgia.ge/eng/publications/joint_publications_reports_strategic_documents?info_id=678#.XTPxpP
ZuLA0
http://www.ungeorgia.ge/docs/5458MAPS_brochure_OneUN.pdfmeasures. 
Georgia also submitted a forest related annex as part of the INDC document describing that the Georgian 
Government prioritizes three options for climate change mitigation activities in the forestry sector: (a) 
establishing Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) practices; (b) conducting afforestation / reforestation 
and assist natural regeneration; and (c) expanding the protected area.
Georgia is making strides toward low emission sustainable economic development. The country’s mid-term 
(5-year) climate objectives, as laid out in the 3-d National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP) of Georgia 41, 
include implementing measures for adaptation to climate change and reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions.
In order to fulfill its obligations under the Paris Agreement, the MEPA has planned the development
of a ‘Climate Action Plan 2021-2030’ (CAP) before 2020 and its implementation in the following years. As 
one of the first steps, a revision of the Georgian INDC is planned to be conducted based on which, the new 
NDC will be developed and submitted to the UNFCCC secretariat by 2019.
The EU-Georgia AA is another key document shaping the Climate Change commitments at the
national level. Specifically, the AA stresses the need for cooperation on the following areas: mitigation of 
climate change, adaptation to climate change, carbon trade, integration into industrial policy on climate 
change issues and the development of clean technologies. 
The agreement explicitly mentions the cooperation on the preparation of the Low Emission Development
Strategy (LEDS), as well as Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA), and the measures aimed at 
promoting technology transfer based on the technology needs assessment.
The preparation of LEDS started in 2013 and was completed in 2017. It aims to (a) provide an integrated 
comprehensive pathway for long-term sustainable development; (b) take into account the country’s 
development objectives and unique circumstances; (c) promote transformational development; (d) help the 
country meet international climate change commitments; and (e), help the country to access financing from 
both public and private sources. 
Two major international processes – the new international climate agreement under the United Nation 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (Paris Agreement), and adoption of Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) by the United Nations General Assembly as part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, represented the main international context of the Georgia’s LEDS process. 
Furthermore, at European level, the LEDS process could contribute toward fulfilling certain part of the 
commitments undertaken under the Association Agreement, and specifically for the area of energy, under 
the Energy Community.
Georgia needs to make strong and determined steps towards shifting the economy to a low emission 
development pathway in order to fulfil its INDC commitment by 2030. Furthermore, at
Within the framework of this initiative, the following NAMAs have either been implemented or are under 
preparation: Adaptive Sustainable Forest Management in the Borjomi-Bakuriani Forest District; the Efficient 
Use of Biomass for Equitable Climate-Proof and Sustainable Rural Development; Energy Efficient 
Refurbishment in the Georgian public building sector; and Vertically Integrated Nationally Appropriate 
Mitigation Action (V-NAMA) with a focus on the urban transport sector. 
 
41 https://mepa.gov.ge/En/PublicInformation/66acknowledge the significance of GHG emissions and stress the need to implement mitigation measures. It 
is highly expected that Georgia’s contribution to global greenhouse gas emissions will increase driven by 
the increasing trends of the projections of population and economic 
development.
However, by joining the Paris Agreement, Georgia is going to contribute to 
the international
commitment by reducing its national GHG emissions.
The importance of actions addressing climate change effects at the 
national level is acknowledged
in the Social-economic Development Strategy of Georgia “Georgia 
2020”.The document declares that “it will be necessary to attract 
environmental investments from the international funds of the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (Green Climate Fund (GCF), Global Environmental Facility (GEF)) in order to meet the requirements 
of the Convention. This will facilitate the process of introducing energy-saving, environmentally-friendly 
modern technologies in Georgia”. 
The Agricultural Strategy for 2015-2020, among other activities, integrates climate change-related aspects 
and aims to introduce climate-smart agricultural practices in the country. It is expected that the soon-to-be 
implemented Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), will further facilitate the integration of climate 
change issues in sectoral policies
Georgia strongly supports the EU initiative - Covenant of Mayors (CoM). By joining the municipalities and 
cities of Georgia to the CoM, vertical coordination dialogue has advanced between both the central and 
local governments with regard to climate change mitigation. The intensification of the dialogue has a dual 
effect for better coordination. On one hand, the local governments have been exchanging knowledge on 
translating national climate goals to their action plans and on the other hand, the mitigation targets and 
needs raised by the municipalities and cities have been included in national climate-related strategies. For 
instance, the Sustainable Energy (and Climate) Action Plans (SE(C)APs) prepared under the CoM have been 
translated into the development of GHG emission scenarios, such as business as usual and alternatives. 
Currently, there are 23 signatories, from which 12 signatories committed to 20% emissions reductions by 
2020, and 11 signatories are committed to 30% emissions reductions by 2030. Ten signatories have 
submitted their Sustainable Energy Action Plans (SEAP) showing emission reductions mostly from the 
transport and public sectors. The new initiative offered by the commission regarding the CoM for climate 
and energy is open for the cities of Georgia in order to strengthen climate actions towards developing 
adaptive capacity and enhancing mitigation measures vis-a-vis promoting secure, sustainable and 
affordable energy.
To achieve long-term benefits, it should be highlighted that climate change mitigation and adaptation does 
not only serve environmental goals. This is an integrated process that improves the efficiency of the 
economy as well. Energy efficiency, the diversification of energy sources, and shifting to alternative energy 
sources are cost intensive. Although, in the long run, these measures will provide better energy 
independence and lower operational costs for the whole economy. Climate change also has serious negative 
effects on Georgia’s critical economic sectors as mentioned above and may lead to significant economic 
losses. According to expert opinion, the estimated economic losses without adaptation measures during 
2021-2030 could be about GEL 25-30 billion, while adaptation measures could cost up to GEL 2.5-3 billion. 
Therefore, the implementation of adaptation measures is a key area under the given climate change trends. 
Another important arena are the mitigation measures planned within the framework of the LEDS for the 
following sectors: energy, industry, transport, residential, agriculture, LULUCF (Land Use, Land Use Change 
and Forestry) and waste. The implementation of the SEAPs within the CoM will also significantly contribute implement any adaptation or mitigation measures, it is necessary to track climate change process in Georgia 
related to permanent studies and analyses. The UNFCCC requires from each party to communicate regularly 
all possible information on processes related to climate change. Therefore, the preparation of NDCs and 
biannual update reports is essential procedures for the country. In order to address the above described 
cross-sectoral challenges, the following long-term goal and short-term targets have been defined below:
LEDS is directly related to SDG 13 which calls for an urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
along three lines: 
• Target 13.1: Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural 
disasters in all countries. 
• Target 13.2: Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning. 
• Target 13.3: Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate 
change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning. 
The most important cross-sectoral linkages of SDG 13 include the following sectors: 
• Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience: Agriculture and food security, forestry, health, water 
resources, biodiversity, spatial planning, land management, urban planning, rural development, 
tourism, and disaster risk reduction. Climate Change Mitigation: energy, transport, buildings, 
industry, waste, water, agriculture, and forestry. 
• Climate Change horizontal issues: education, R&D and innovation, communication strategies of 
relevant sectors, reforms of administration, and gender. 
• Linkage with other SDGs: SDG 13 is interconnected with almost all, but the most pronounced 
connection is demonstrated with SDG 7: Affordable and clean energy, SDG 11: Sustainable cities 
and communities, SDG 3: Good health and well-being, SDG 12: Sustainable Consumption and 
Production and SDG 15: Life on Land. Policy Measures
Georgia’s indicative national energy efficiency targets for 2021, 2025, and 2030 are laid out in Table 8. The 
country intends to use 2021 and 2025 as interim target deadlines, with 2030 as an additional indicative 
target deadline for longer-term projections.
Table 8: Georgia’s indicative energy efficiency targets for 2021, 2025, and 2030 versus the Business As Usual Case
Year 2014 2021 2025 2030
Category
Primary 
Energy 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
(GWh)
Primary 
Energy 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
(GWh)
Primary 
Energy 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
(GWh)
Primary 
Energy 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
(GWh)
BAU 54,894 46,758 63,185 57,426 85,542 70,201 101,810 83,710
Savings from EE measures - - 5,436 2,568 10,856 6,167 14,584 9,253
With measures 54,894 46,758 57,748 54,857 74,687 64,034 87,226 74,457
% energy reduction from 
the BAU 0% 0% 9% 4% 13% 9% 14% 11%
Note: Figures for energy consumption in 2014 come from Geostat’s Energy Balance (published in 2015). The final energy 
consumption figures for 2014 do not include 27 GWh of non-energy use consumption of oil products in the energy 
sector.
The BAU estimates of primary and final energy consumption are based on modelling in MARKAL carried out 
by the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development (see major assumptions below). Savings from 
measures represent the sum of savings elaborated upon later in this document.
As can be seen from Table 8, energy efficiency measures would have a significant impact on Georgia’s 
energy consumption as well as the efficiency of energy production – particularly on electricity production
from natural gas-fired power plants. 
The BAU scenario was developed using MARKAL modelling software using inputs developed by the Georgian 
Government as part of the LEDS project. The critical assumptions underlying the Business As Usual scenario 
are as follows:
• The current population is assumed to be 3,720,400 people – and would remain constant at this 
level.
• GDP growth is projected to be 5.6% through 2030.
• Per capita GDP is projected to grow from ~EUR 3,450 in 2015 to ~EUR 7,660 in 2030. 
• The number of households is projected to remain steady at 955,000 through 2030.
• Growth of energy consumption in industry is projected to grow by 5.6% per year through 2030.
The assumptions for GDP and population for 2015 and the target years are shown in Table 7. Projections of 
primary energy demand according to sector through 2030 are shown in Figure 1742
 
42 It should be noted that USAID is planning to engage an expert to analyse the demand forecast for electricity 
including examining the underlying drivers of the electricity growth to develop a baseline electricity growth curve for 
the next 10-15 years.Name of the variable Units 2015 2020 2025 2030
Population growth % 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
Population # 3,720,400 3,720,400 3,720,400 3,720,400
GDP growth % 2.9% 5.6% 5.6% 5.6%
GDP 1000 EUR € 12,796,355 € 16,469,572 € 21,627,280 € 28,400,206
Figure 17: Primary energy demand according to sector – 2014 to 2030 44
The impact on energy consumption has been calculated through the use of individual models for each 
measure – wherein a BAU case was developed in terms of final energy use and primary energy use, and 
then the energy efficiency case was developed which entailed a number of potential changes including:
• Switching to energy sources which use less primary energy input from non-renewable fuels for 
the same amount of final energy – such as switching from electricity for hot water heating to solar 
resources – wherein there is no savings of final energy demand, but there is savings of primary 
energy as the primary energy to create electricity is reduced. 
• Improvement of distribution/ transmission/ transformation efficiencies – such as reducing 
electricity losses or natural gas losses on their respective networks, or improving the efficiency of 
natural-gas fired power plants by switching to combined-cycle plants.
• Improving the efficiency of end-use equipment – such as introducing efficient lighting, efficient 
wood-stoves, improving the efficiency of vehicles, efficient pumps and boilers in industry, etc.
• Switching to more efficient transport means – such as switching from personal cars to buses or 
metros. 
• Reduction of end-user demand – such as reduction of heating losses in building envelopes, 
reduction in the use of motorized transport (switching to walking/cycling), improving maintenance 
of industrial firms, etc.
For electricity, the conversion factor for converting final energy savings into primary energy savings were 
based on levels of efficiency and losses for electricity production projected over the time period. The 
primary energy to be consumed is the final energy divided by the conversion efficiency. The following 
methodological issues are relevant:
• For efficiency measures related to primary energy production/transformation or transmission:
the conversion factor used was before the losses in the transmission and distribution – with the 
 
43 Source: Calculations using the assumptions in the MARKAL model
 -
 50,000
 100,000
 150,000
Primary energy demand 
(GWh)
Primary energy demand according to sector -
2014 to 2030
Agriculture
Electric (only)
Generating Plants
Transportation
Industrialfired power plants (i.e. the conversion factor used was Conversion Factor #1 below)
• For most end-use efficiency measures resulting in reduction of electricity demand: the conversion 
factor used was the average conversion efficiency of primary energy to final energy for natural gasfired power plants (Conversion Factor #3) – with the assumption that the reduction in demand 
would result in less natural-gas fired power plant energy production which is the marginal electricity 
resource typically used.
• For end-use measures in the industry sector and building sector resulting in reduction of 
electricity demand: the conversion factor used was the average conversion efficiency of primary 
energy to final energy for all power plants (Conversion factor #5) – assuming that the power 
production displaced would be a mix of natural-gas fired plants and hydro-plants.
• For end-use measures resulting in reduction of natural gas demand: Conversion factor #6 was used 
which reflects the losses in the distribution grid.
• For all other fuels (diesel, gasoline, wood, etc.): a conversion factor of 100% was used.
The calculation of primary energy from final energy is given by the following equation:
Primary energy = Final Energy / Conversion factor
Table 10: Average conversion efficiencies and losses for electricity production/distribution and for natural gas 
distribution
Conversi
on factor 
#
Label Units 2015 2020 2025 2030
1
Average conversion efficiency of 
natural gas-fired power plants
MWh (grid)/MWh 
(primary) 32.9% 35.1% 35.8% 36.7%
2
Average network transmission and 
distribution losses MWh (final)/MWh (grid) 7.5% 8.5% 8.5% 8.5%
3
Average conversion efficiency of 
primary energy to final energy for 
natural gas-fired power plants
MWh (final)/MWh 
(primary) 30.5% 32.1% 32.8% 33.6%
4
Average conversion efficiency of all 
power plants MWh(grid)/MWh(primary) 72.9% 78.1% 85.6% 87.0%
5
Average conversion efficiency of 
primary energy to final energy for all 
power plants
MWh (final)/MWh 
(primary) 67.4% 71.5% 78.3% 79.6%
6
Average end delivery of the natural 
gas network (1 - % losses) MWh (final)/MWh primary 91.3% 93.4% 94.7% 95.6%
7 All other fuels MWh (final)/MWh primary 100% 100% 100% 100%
Note: Additional information on the calculation of Conversion factors 1, 2, 4, and 6 are included in Annex 6.
The BAU only includes a limited transition to CCGT plants (as described in Measure E-1’s assumptions and in Annex 6 
under “Thermal power plants – BAU” – taken from the MARKAL model.interventions for particular measures .
The dates of 2021, 2025, and 2030 as the target dates were chosen to be consistent with the planning 
horizon of the EU and Energy Community – as well as with Georgia’s Intended Nationally Determined 
Contribution for reduction of greenhouse gases against the BAU scenario for the UNFCCC.
The achievement of the indicative targets depend on three factors:
1. The implementation of an ambitious policy agenda for energy efficiency:
a. Implementation of an overall project identification, technical assistance, and grant 
distribution scheme via a designated national body –with the exact scope to be decided 
by the Government 
b. Incentivizing energy efficiency in industry 
c. In buildings, implementation of the EPBD including energy audit rules (H-9) and building up 
expertise 
d. In industry, building up knowledge amongst decision-makers (H-3), establishing energy 
audit rules and expertise amongst auditors The introduction of green public procurement 
practices A regulatory mechanism to increase the share of the market for efficient light 
bulbs and industry investments); and
e. A technical inspection programme of vehicles 
2. The availability of technical assistance for implementation: Many measures are contingent upon 
the availability of technical assistance within the various sub-sectors to assist private and public 
sector actors in planning energy efficiency investments. 
3. The availability of investment funds for implementation: Furthermore, the availability of lending 
funds at a reasonable rate – and for some measures grants – will prove to be crucial for widespread 
uptake of measures.
It can be noted that the savings are fairly well spread across the sectors, with the primary energy sector and 
transport sectors having a large impact on primary energy savings. Savings targets were not calculated for 
most horizontal measures, as their impact will be mostly related to stimulation of investment in other 
sectors. 
Table 11: Expected energy and GHG savings by measures according to sector
Sector
2021 2025 2030
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated 
per year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated 
per year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated 
per year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Horizontal 
measures
221 193 61,200 1,298 1,348 387,188 3,288 2,993 969,178
Building sector 
measures
34 24 8,464 305 239 83,571 175 139 48,719
Public sector 
measures
78 32 17,080 231 96 50,989 374 161 84,923
Industry sector 
measures
614 614 216,836 744 744 262,964 1,190 1,190 420,578
Transport sector 
measures
1,645 1,645 316,256 3,537 3,535 662,293 4,377 4,375 831,672transformation, 
transmission, 
distribution, and 
demand response 
measures
2,844 61 1,512,807 205 2,165,603 5,179 394 2,350,819
Total savings 5,436 2,568 2,132,643 10,856 6,167 3,612,608 14,584 9,253 4,705,889
Table 12: Estimates of key national energy production and consumption figures in 2021, 2025, and 2030
Estimate of energy consumption
GWh –
2021
GWh – 2025 GWh – 2030
Total primary energy consumption 67,656 85,542 101,810
Electricity transformation input (thermal power generation) 6,503 6,600 6,962
Electricity generation output (thermal power generation) 2,409 2,460 2,647
CHP transformation input - - -
CHP transformation output – thermal - - -
CHP transformation output – electrical - - -
Energy transformation losses 4,094 4,141 4,315
Electricity distribution and transmission losses 1,385 2,096 2,451
Natural gas distribution losses 953 1,039 1,183
Additional losses 1,103 8,065 10,151
Total final energy consumption 60,121 70,201 83,710
Final energy consumption – Commercial 6,295 7,147 8,307
Final energy consumption – Residential 18,527 21,356 24,327
Final energy consumption – Industry 10,928 13,263 16,877
Final energy consumption – Transport 22,181 26,160 31,884
Final energy consumption – Other sectors 2,190 2,276 2,315
Note: Primary energy consumption and final energy consumption per sector were calculated using the MARKAL model. 
Expected energy distribution and transmission losses for electricity and distribution losses for natural gas are described 
in Annex 6 of NEEAP. 
The Table below shows the key priority policy measures to be implemented by the Government of Georgia 
– which are directly related to facilitating investment in EE. The most critical measures as far as energy 
saving and /or facilitation of market development have a light blue background.No. Title of the energy saving measure 2019 2020 2021 2022
Horizontal measures to be implemented 
H-1 Alternative policy measures - Financing schemes for energy efficiency
H-3
Alternative policy measures – Training and education, including energy advisory 
programmes
H-8 Consumer information programmes and training
T-2 Public awareness - Information campaign for transport
H-2 Alternative policy measures – Incentivising / mandating energy efficiency in industry
H-7 Energy audits and management systems, boiler inspections in the industry sector*
Industry policy measures
H-6 Qualification, accreditation, and certification schemes – Industry*
Public sector and Building policy measures
H-4 Standards and norms and labelling schemes in appliances*
H-5 Qualification, accreditation, and certification schemes – Buildings*
H-9
EPBD Transposition and Enforcement: Standards and norms and energy performance 
certification schemes in buildings*
B-1
Regulations leading to improved efficient lighting systems in residential and commercial 
buildings
P-1 Develop a national energy efficiency information system for publicly owned buildings*
P-8 Energy efficient procurement*
Transport sector policy measures
T-1 Vehicle improvement - Mandatory periodic roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles*
T-8 Vehicle improvement - Increase of hybrid and electric vehicles**
Primary Energy sector policy measures
E-2 Policies and investments to rehabilitate hydropower assets
E-3 Optimization of reserves and seasonal operational regimes
E-5
Regulations on the rules of calculation of normative electricity losses - stimulating 
investments**
E-6
Regulations on the rules of calculation of normative natural gas pipeline losses - 
stimulating investments**
Policy development and adoption
Policy implementation
Priority measures for energy saving / facilitation of market development
* Policy required as part of Energy Community Membership / EU accession
** Policies already in placeThe primary and final energy savings expected for 2021, 2025 and 2030 are provided in Table 14. The 
primary energy savings are linked to final energy savings in that primary consumption is calculated based 
on final consumption divided by a conversion factor. The factors used are specific to each measure and 
described in the assumptions in the measure descriptions in NEEAP, Section 3 45. 
Table 14: Overview of the estimates of primary and final energy savings
Primary energy savings (GWh) Final energy savings (GWh)
2020 5,436 2,568
2025 10,856 6,167
2030 14,584 9,253
7.1 Horizontal measures
Energy efficiency obligation scheme/ alternative measures
Overall theoretical target of the Energy Efficiency Obligation scheme/alternative measures
Article 7 of the EED requires EU member states to set up an energy efficiency obligation (EEO) scheme or to
achieve the same amount of savings with alternative measures. The EEO scheme requires energy 
distribution companies to achieve yearly energy savings of at least 1.5% of annual sales to final consumers. 
For Energy Community Contracting Parties, the target for EEOs was set at 0.7% each year from 1 January 
2017 to 31 December 2020 over the most recent three-year period prior to 1 January 2016. A country can 
opt to introduce the above 0.7% target gradually (i.e., 0.5% in 2017 and 2018; 0.7 % in 2019 and 2020), and 
such and other alternative calculation measures should be notified by 15 October 2017.
Georgia has opted to utilize alternative policy measures in combination with various investment/technical 
measures within the different sectors in order to achieve these targets. Therefore, the EEO target will not 
be used for Georgia’s NEEAP. For reference, however, information has been included to demonstrate that 
the planned achieved savings of the NEEAP will far surpass those of the EEO. Table 14 shows the theoretical 
EEO targets for each year starting in 2019 and going to 2021. 
Table 15: Energy Efficiency Obligation Scheme targets for Georgia
Savings per year - EEO according to 
EnC adoption of the EED (MWh) 0.50% 0.50% 0.70% 0.70% Total Cumulative
2017 75,587 75,587 75,587
2018 75,587 75,587 151,175 226,762
2019 75,587 75,587 105,822 256,997 483,759
2020 75,587 75,587 105,822 105,822 362,819 846,578
Annual average 90,705
NEEAP target for savings in 2021 3,766,712
 
45 Section 3-Policy measures implementing the EED, p.23. Georgia's First National Energy Efficiency Action Plan Instead of implementing an EEO scheme, Georgia plans to implement a set of alternative policy measures 
linked with technical/investment measures which reduce final energy consumption. As an alternative (or 
supplement) to setting up an energy efficiency obligation scheme, the Article 7 of EED allows to take other 
policy measures to achieve energy savings among final consumers. 
The alternative measures included in the Republic of Georgia’s first NEEAP are as follows: 
• Financing schemes for energy efficiency
• Incentivising / requiring energy efficiency in industry
• Training and education, including energy advisory programmes
• Standards and norms and labelling schemes in appliances 46
The above measures will not achieve the entire direct savings equivalent to the impact of the EEO scheme, 
however they will make it possible to achieve savings through the specific technical/investment measures 
described later in this section which are linked to these alternative measures. Savings in sector-specific 
measures will more than make up for the lack of savings achieved by a lack of an EEO scheme. 
Since the alternative policy measures described are to be linked to other sector-specific technical / 
investment measures, energy savings have not been calculated for any of them except for the measure 
related to standards and norms and labelling schemes in appliances. The lack of energy savings calculations 
for the first three measures ensures that there is no double-counting in the presentation of potential 
savings.
 
46 This measure is linked to Directive 2010/30/EU but Georgia is not yet an EU Member State – though it is a
Contracting Party to the Energy Community. Therefore, for classification purposes the measure is considered as an No. Title of the energy 
saving measure End-use targeted Duration (years)
2021 2025 2030
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year (tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year (tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year (tonnes 
CO2eq)
H-1
Alternative policy 
measures - Financing 
schemes for energy 
efficiency
EE measures in all sectors 
to be defined by charter 
and operational manual
2
Supports the establishment of Enabling Environment for implementation of other Sustainable Energy Measures 
H-2
Alternative policy 
measures –
Incentivising / 
mandating energy 
efficiency in industry
All industry, but 
particularly large 
industrial sites or large 
sectors in Georgia
2
H-3
Alternative policy 
measures – Training 
and education, 
including energy 
advisory programmes
Commercial/business and 
state entities –
particularly related to 
commercial and industrial 
sector
2
H-4
Standards and norms 
and labelling schemes 
in appliances
Existing buildings, 
appliance replacement, 
vehicles, and industrial 
equipment
3 0.6 0.4 144 16.0 12.5 4,391 54.8 43.6 15,270
H-5
Qualification, 
accreditation, and 
certification schemes -
Buildings
Buildings 2
Supports the establishment of Enabling Environment for implementation of other Sustainable Energy Measures
H-6
Qualification, 
accreditation, and 
certification schemes -
Industry
Industry 2
H-7
Energy audits and 
management systems, 
boiler inspections in 
the industry sector
All industry 3 73.3 64.8 19,515 353.7 496.6 106,497 928.0 850.2 256,005trainingmedia
H-9
EPBD Transposition 
and Enforcement: 
Standards and norms 
and energy 
performance 
certification schemes 
in buildings
New buildings, significant 
reconstruction of existing 
buildings (including 
appliances and systems 
for lightning, heating, 
cooling), and existing 
buildings being rented, 
sold, or public.
6 59.3 57.6 19,043 420.7 411.5 139,880 1,028.0 1,010.9 350,675
Total 133.1 122.9 38,701 790.3 920.7 250,768 2,010.8 1,904.7 621,949Policy and investment measures linked to buildings and to public bodies are closely connected. This is 
because public sector measures are often linked to EE in buildings and also because the policy framework 
bringing about investments in the private building sector and public sector are closely linked as given in 
Figure 18 below.
Figure 18: Public sector and building policy measures
Addressing the requirements of the recast EPBD (2010/31/EU)
In 2014 Georgia signed the Association Agreement with the EU. 47 The Agreement recognizes Georgia’s 
commitment to implementing and promoting energy efficiency in the buildings sector under the EPBD. 
Annex XXV of the Agreement states that the EPBD 2010/31/EU provisions shall be implemented in 
accordance with the timeline agreed by Georgia in the framework of the Energy Community Treaty.
Georgia is obligated to align its national laws with the EU legislation and is at the beginning of the EPBD 
transposition process. Support for reforms in the field of energy outlined in the EU-Georgian Association 
Agreement for building sector improvement is currently being planned within the framework of the 
Danish Neighbourhood Program launched by the Government of Denmark and Ministry of Economy and 
Sustainable Development of Georgia.
Denmark is already supporting energy efficiency in Georgia with the multi-donor fund “The Eastern 
Europe Energy Efficiency and Environmental Partnership” (E5P) offering a combination of grants and loans 
for investments in energy efficiency. 
The Danish Neighbourhood Program objectives for Georgia envisage:
• The development of the energy efficiency buildings codes by 2019;
• The showcasing of energy efficiency demonstration projects.
It is expected that new codes will provide minimum energy performance indicators that with the aid of 
demonstration projects will help Government of Georgia to demonstrate compliance for public sector 
buildings with the new energy performance and owners and users of public buildings will benefit from 
reduction of operational costs of buildings.
 
47 Official Journal of the European Union L26/4 (30 August 2014) Association Agreement between the European 
Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Georgia, of the No.
Title of the 
energy saving 
measure 
End-use targeted Duration 
(years)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated 
per year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
B-1
Regulations 
leading to 
improved 
efficient lighting 
systems in 
residential and 
commercial 
buildings
Existing and new 
buildings - Practically all 
types of buildings except 
those owned by the 
public and by industries -
which are covered in 
other measures
3 33.8 24.2 8,464 304.8 238.8 83,571 175.0 139.2 48,719
Total 33.8 24.2 8,464 304.8 238.8 83,571 175.0 139.2 48,719
7.3. Energy Efficiency Measures in Public Bodies
As per the Energy Community’s adoption of the EED, Contracting Parties to the Energy Community must ensure that, as from 1 December 2017, 1% of the total floor 
area of heated and/or cooled buildings owned and occupied by their central government is renovated each year to meet at least the minimum energy performance 
requirements set out in the recast EPBD. The 1% rate is to be calculated on the total floor area of buildings with a useful floor area over 500 m2that do not meet 
the national minimum energy performance requirements. That threshold will be lowered to 250 m2 as of 1 January 2019. Georgia has commitment to carry this out 
each year starting from 15 March 2021. However, as noted, the number of buildings and useful floor area are not yet known in Georgia. Additionally, the national 
minimum energy performance requirements have not been yet established. No. Title of the energy 
saving measure End-use targeted Duration (years)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
P-1
Develop a national
energy efficiency 
information system 
for publicly owned 
buildings
- All types of publicly owned 
buildings and energy consumers 
in them. 
- Consumption/ production of 
energy on municipal level
- Potentially other sub-sectors 
of the public sector (vehicles,
waste management processes, 
etc.)
2 Supports the establishment of Enabling Environment for implementation of other Sustainable Energy Measures
P-2
Pilot project for low 
energy public sector 
buildings
Existing public administrative 
building(s) 1 0.1 0.1 22 0.1 0.1 22 0.1 0.1 22
P-3
Efficient lighting 
systems in public 
buildings
Existing and new buildings -
Practically all types of 
governmental and municipallyowned buildings except for 
schools and kindergartens 
which are covered in separate 
measures.
2 4.1 1.3 827 7.0 2.3 1,417 6.9 2.3 1,417
P-4
Improvement of the 
energy efficiency in 
central governmentowned and occupied 
public buildings
Public buildings owned by the 
central government. This does 
not include schools which are 
handled as separate measures. 
It would include office 
buildings, sports centres/ 
recreation halls, police 
buildings, museums, social 
homes, and potentially military 
buildings and prisons.
2 Supports the establishment of Enabling Environment for implementation of other Sustainable Energy MeasuresP-6
Improvement of the 
energy efficiency of 
non-central 
government-owned 
public buildings -
kindergartens
Existing kindergartens 2 1.5 1.2 383 10.1 8.5 2,811 18.3 15.6 5,154
P-7
Improvement of the 
energy efficiency of 
non-central 
government-owned 
public buildings - nonkindergartens
Public buildings owned by the 
non-central government 
(predominantly municipalities). 
This does not include 
kindergartens which are 
handled as a separate measure. 
It would include office 
buildings, sports centres/ 
recreation halls, retirement 
homes, and libraries.
11
Supports the establishment of Enabling Environment for implementation of other Sustainable Energy Measures
P-8
Energy efficient 
procurement
All types of end use in public 
sector, such as heating, 
ventilation and air conditioning, 
lighting, office equipment, 
means of transportation, etc.
5
P-9
Improvement of 
efficiency in streetlighting/outdoor 
lighting
Street-lighting 4 62.8 20.4 12,546 187.2 61.3 37,639 304.5 102.2 62,731
Total 78.5 31.9 17,080 230.6 95.9 50,989 374.4 160.8 84,923A number of measures can be carried out in the industry sector – which are described below. They are 
directly linked with the following measures (see Error! Reference source not found.):
• H-2: Alternative policy measures – Incentivising / mandating energy efficiency in industry – which 
will stimulate interest and improve the financial case for investment even beyond the strong 
financial parameters present. The energy savings from investments described in this section 
(except for I-2) are attributed to H-2.
• H-3: Alternative policy measures – Training and education, including energy advisory programmes 
– which will educate industry’s decision-makers on investment options;
• H-6: Qualification, accreditation, and certification schemes, and potentially to energy efficiency 
investment schemes – Industry – which will increase the level of certified expertise in the industry 
sector to better enable investment planning and implementation.
• H-7: Energy audits and management systems, boiler inspections in the industry sector – which will 
require energy audits/energy management in large industries and encourage them in SMEs
Figure 19: Measures in the industry sector
The implementation of these measures would involve the following key aspects:
• Improvement of the statistical data on industry production and energy consumption
• A programme of technical assistance for the period 2019 – 2022.
• Energy audits from the horizontal measures (H-7) would also be linked to investments in this 
sector – which has technical assistance requirements.
• Investment from industry – via a credit line, bank financing, or other financing sources of a total 
of approximately EUR 58 million over the period of 2019 through 2021. This number is mostly due 
to investments in the cement industry. However, the potential for investment in other industries 
is also likely to be significantly larger..Table 19: Overview of individual measures in the industry sector
No.
Title of the 
energy saving 
measure 
End-use targeted Duration 
(years)
2021 2025 2030
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
I-1
Industry data 
disaggregation 
Improved 
baseline 
information
1 Supports the establishment of Enabling Environment for implementation of other Sustainable Energy Measures
I-2
Conversion of 
wet-cement 
process to dry 
cement process
Cement sector 
production 
process
2 613.5 613.5 216,836 744.0 744.0 262,964 1,190.0 1,190.0 420,578
Total 613.5 613.5 216,836 744.0 744.0 262,964 1,190.0 1,190.0 420,578
7.5. Energy Efficiency Measures in Transport
Main policy measures addressing energy efficiency in transport
The package of measures outlined below involve the following key aspects:
• Vehicle improvement measures would result in fuel switching to natural gas (and potentially electricity) and better management of the existing fleet –
including due to introduction of technical inspections.
• Public awareness campaigns on Eco-driving and to encourage efficient transport modes would increase the efficiency of driving habits.
• Investments in intra-city urban mobility would result in modal shifts from passenger cars to public transport, walking, and cycling. Additionally, 
improvements in the road infrastructure would improve efficiency of movement of traffic.
The three major policy/information measures are expected to achieve significant energy savings results whilst other technical measures are generally independent 
of policies at a national level.1. Assistance to municipalities for urban infrastructure and transport planning including feasibility studies for major infrastructure projects such as 
tramlines, bike lanes, etc.
2. Assistance to the national government in implementing the programme for mandatory periodic roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles, as well as in 
planning major national infrastructure projects and evaluating – amongst other aspects - how they may impact energy consumption.
Table 20: Overview of individual measures in the transport sector
No. Title of the energy saving 
measure 
End-use 
targeted
Duration 
(years)
2021 2025 2030
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated 
per year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated 
per year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated 
per year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
T1
Vehicle improvement -
Mandatory periodic 
roadworthiness tests for motor 
vehicles
Passenger 
transport 
within cities -
public 
transport, 
private 
vehicles, and 
freight vehicles
2 317.1 317.1 76.5 770.6 770.6 186.3 907.2 907.2 220.4
T-2
Public awareness - Information 
campaign for transport
Passenger and 
freight 
transport 
throughout 
Georgia
2 184.4 184.4 45,314 412.6 412.6 102,409 481.6 481.6 120,986
T-3
Urban mobility - Improvement 
of buses/ minivan transport 
systems
Passenger 
transport 
within cities -
public transport
3 734.8 734.8 168,111 1,186.8 1,186.8 271,818 1,597.4 1,597.4 365,924
 
48 EBRD is currently planning a significant programme of technical assistance linked to investment for municipalities which could address item 1 above. The Asian Development 
Bank is also active in providing technical assistance in the sector.T4modal shifts from cars to public 
transport/ walking/ bicycling
transport 
within cities
4 249.3 248.7 59,877 839.0 837.4 202,617 982.1 980.4 238,687
T-5
Urban mobility - Improved road 
infrastructure and traffic 
management within cities
Passenger 
transport 
within cities
2 96.8 96.8 23,290 146.3 146.3 35,389 171.7 171.7 41,796
T-6
Urban mobility - Gondola 
system development & bus 
rapid transit
Passenger 
transport 
within cities -
public transport
2 1.2 1.3 273 1.2 1.3 273 1.2 1.3 273
T-7
Urban mobility - Improvement 
of the metro system in Tbilisi
Passenger 
transport 
within Tbilisi 
(metro)
1 Supports the establishment of Enabling Environment for implementation of other Sustainable Energy Measures
T-8
Vehicle improvement - Increase 
of hybrid and electric vehicles
Passenger 
transport
8 55.0 55.0 14,057 173.5 173.5 44,345 229.0 229.0 58,529
T-9
Vehicle improvement - Renewal 
of the public transport fleet
Passenger 
transport 
within cities 
(public 
transport)
8 6.8 6.8 5,256 6.8 6.8 5,256 6.8 6.8 5,256
Total 1,645 1,645 316,256 3,537 3,535 662,293 4,377 4,375 831,672gy ppy 
No.
Title of the 
energy saving 
measure
End-use 
targeted
Duration 
(years)
2021 2025 2030
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated per 
year 
(tonnes 
CO2eq)
Primary 
energy 
savings 
(GWh)
Final energy savings 
(GWh)
GHG 
emissions 
abated 
per year 
(tonnes
CO2eq)
E-1
Natural gas 
savings 
through 
replacement of 
old Thermal 
Power Plants 
(TPP) with new 
technologies 
Improved 
energy 
efficiency and 
energy 
savings of 
power sector
2 1,019 - 205,995 2,269 - 458,608 2,269 - 458,608
E-2
Policies and 
investments to 
rehabilitate 
hydropower 
assets
Power 
production 2 23 - 7,109 194 - 61,182 376 - 120,108
E-3
Optimization of 
reserves and 
seasonal 
operational 
regimes
Power 
production 1 Supports the establishment of Enabling Environment for implementation of other Sustainable Energy Measures
E-4
Reduction of 
losses in 
electricity 
transmission 
networks and 
grid integration 
of new 
generation
Energy 
transmission 13 1,021 - 357,368 1,174 - 411,047 1,174 - 411,047
E-5
Regulations on 
the rules of 
calculation of 
normative 
electricity 
Electricity 
distribution 4 181 - 50,611 223 - 66,820 266 - 81,000E-6
Regulations on 
the rules of 
calculation of 
normative 
natural gas 
pipeline losses 
- stimulating 
investments
Gas supply 5 536 - 860,733 660 - 1,058,909 660 - 1,058,909
E-7
Efficient woodburning stoves 
for rural 
households
Residential 
heating 4 61 61 26,108 205 205 88,113 394 394 169,699
E-8
Solar hot water 
heating
Residential 
hot water 4 4 - 4,883 16 - 20,923 40 - 51,448
Total 2,844 61 1,512,807 4,741 205 2,165,603 5,179 394 2,350,8198. Overview of National Renewable Energy Targets & Renewable Energy 
Policy Measures
9.1. National Overall Target for the Share of Energy from Renewable Sources
Table 22: National overall target for the share of energy from renewable sources in gross final consumption of 
energy in 2014 and 2020 49
(A) Share of energy from renewable sources in 
gross final consumption of energy in 2014 (S2014, 
%)
2014 27.9%
(B) Target of energy from renewable sources in 
gross final consumption of energy in 2020 (S2020, 
%)
2020 30.0%
(C) Expected total adjusted energy consumption 
in 2020 (ktoe) 2020 4,545
(D) Expected amount of energy from renewable 
sources corresponding to the 2020 target 
(calculated as B x C) (ktoe)
2020 1,364
For the purposes of establishing what measures and investments would be necessary to achieve this 
target, scenarios were developed for the following sectors:
• Electricity production from renewable energy
• Heating and cooling from renewable energy and
• Transport from renewable energy – focused mostly on switching to electric vehicles
In order to meet the target of 30% of energy consumed coming from renewable energy for 2020 and 
implement the Renewable Energy Directive, a number of policy and investment measures should to be 
undertaken.
9.2. Renewable Energy Policy Measures
Table 23: Measures proposed for the implementation by the National Renewable Action Plan 
Name and 
reference of the 
measure
Type of 
measure
Expected result Existing or 
planned
Start and end 
dates of the 
measure
Promotion of 
solar hot water 
heaters
Investment
This measure is also included as 
energy efficient measure and will 
involve the active promotion of solar 
hot water heaters as a replacement 
for natural gas and other forms of 
water heaters
Planned 2018 – 2020
Promotion of 
electric vehicles Investment This measure will involve the establishment of infrastructure for Planned 2018 – 2020
 electric vehicles for public transport, 
and incentivising the private sector 
and population to adopt electric 
vehicles
Ongoing support
for hydropower 
production
Regulatory / 
investment
This measure involves the continued 
support for new hydropower 
production via agreements with 
power producers
Ongoing 2018 – 2020
Ongoing support 
for wind 
production
Regulatory / 
investment
This measure involves the continued 
support for new wind production via 
agreements with power producers
Ongoing 2018 – 2020
Ongoing support 
for solar power 
production
Regulatory / 
investment
This measure involves the continued 
support for new solar power 
production via agreements with 
power producers
Ongoing 2018 – 2020
Support for microgeneration (less 
than 100 kW) 
from renewable 
sources
Regulatory / 
investment
This measure involves the continued 
support for new micro-generation of 
renewable energy power production 
via agreements with owners
Ongoing 2018 - 2020
Ongoing support 
for geothermal 
heat production
Regulatory / 
investment
This measure involves the continued 
support for expansion of the use of 
existing geothermal production –
including feasibility studies (costbenefit analyses, resource 
assessments) and investments.
Ongoing 2018 – 2020
Improved 
management of 
solid biomass 
resources -
Development of a 
new Forest Code, 
inventory of 
Forests, and 
support for the 
use of residues
Regulatory / 
investment
This measure involves the 
development of improved forestry 
management practices and 
potentially support for the use of 
biomass residues for heating, hybrid 
electricity production, etc.
Planned 2018 – 2020
District heating 
and cooling 
infrastructure 
development
Investment
This measure involves the 
development of feasibility studies 
and potentially investment in 
renewable energy based district 
heating and cooling – currently 
underway in Borjomi / Akhaltsikhe
Existing / 
Planned 2018 – 2020
Communications 
and capacity 
building of 
technical experts
Capacity 
building
This measure involves capacity 
building of technical experts and 
continued communications activities 
with the general public about 
renewable energy
Planned 2018 - 2020renewable energy technology in Georgia to meet the indicative 2020 targets and the indicative interim trajectory 
for the shares of energy from renewable resources in electricity 2018-2020
2014 2018 2019 2020
MW GWh MW GWh MW GWh MW GWh
Hydro 2,807.6 8,221.1 3,244.3 8,234.0 3,345.8 8,707.4 3,410.2 9,019.6
< 1 MW 5.6 15.3 6.3 16.8 6.5 17.8 6.6 18.2
1 MW - 10 MW 122.5 346.1 153.9 501.9 160.2 537.4 197.6 709.9
> 10 MW 2,679.5 7,859.7 3,084.1 7,715.3 3,179.1 8,152.3 3,206.1 8,291.5
Of which pumping - - - - - - - -
Geothermal - - - - - - - -
Solar: - - 1.5 2.4 4.7 7.5 14.7 23.7
photovoltaic - - 1.5 2.4 4.7 7.5 14.7 23.7
concentrated solar power - - - - - - - -
Tide, wave, ocean - - - - - - - -
Wind: - - 20.7 88.0 45.7 167.2 79.8 301.8
onshore - - 20.7 88.0 45.7 167.2 79.8 301.8
offshore - - - - - - - -
Biomass: - - - - - - - -
solid - - - - - - - -
biogas - - - - - - - -
bioliquids (1) - - - - - - - -
Total: 2,807.6 8,221.1 3,266.5 8,324.3 3,396.2 8,882.1 3,504.7 9,345.2
Of which CHP: - - - - - - - -
(1) Taking into account only those complying with the sustainability criteria (cf. Article 5(1) of Directive 
2009/28/EC last subparagraph).
Table 25: Estimation of total contribution (final energy consumption) expected from each renewable energy 
technology in Georgia to meet the indicative 2020 target and the indicative interim trajectory for the shares of 
energy from renewable resources in heating and cooling 2018-2020 (ktoe)
2014 2018 2019 2020
Geothermal (excluding low temperature 
geothermal heat in heat pump applications)
8 10 13 16
Solar 7 9 10 11
Biomass: 465 488 488 488
solid 465 488 488 488
biogas - - - -
bioliquids (1 ) - - - -
Renewable energy from heat pumps:
— of which aerothermal - - - -
— of which geothermal - - - -
— of which hydrothermal - - - -Of which DH ( 2 ) - - - -
Of which biomass in households 
( 3 )
465 488 488 488
(1) Take into account only those complying with the sustainability criteria (cf. Article 5(1) last subparagraph of 
Directive 2009/28/EC)
(2) District heating and/or cooling from total renewable heating and cooling consumption (RES-DH)
(3) From the total renewable heating and cooling consumption.
(5) Direct use and district heat as defined in Article 5(4) of Directive 2009/28/EC.
Table 26: Estimation of total contribution expected from each renewable energy technology in Georgia to meet 
the indicative 2020 targets and the indicative interim trajectory for the shares of energy from renewable resources 
in the transport sector 2018-2020 (6) (ktoe)
2014 2018 2019 2020
Bioethanol/bio-ETBE - - - -
Of which Biofuels (1) - - - -
Article 21(2) - - - -
Of which imported (2) - - - -
Biodiesel - - - -
Of which Biofuels (1) - - - -
Article 21(2) - - - -
Of which imported (3) - - - -
Hydrogen from renewables - - - -
Renewable electricity 28.41 34.36 35.06 38.26
Of which road transport - - - 2.19
Of which non-road transport 28.41 34.36 35.06 36.07
Others (as biogas, vegetable oils, etc.) - - - -
Of which Biofuels (1) Article 21(2) - - - -
Total 28.41 34.36 35.06 38.26
(1) Biofuels that are included in Article 21(2) of Directive 2009/28/EC.
(2) From the whole amount of bioethanol/bio-ETBE.
(3) From the whole amount of biodiesel.
(6) For biofuels take into account only those compliant with the sustainability criteria (cf. Article 5(1) last 
subparagraph).All directions, measures and activities specified in NSEAP in the field of energy efficiency have been 
defined with the consideration of Georgia’s indicative national energy efficiency targets for 2021, 2025, 
and 2030 (see Table8), with 2021 and 2025 as interim target deadlines, and 2030 for longer-term 
projections. The dates of 2021, 2025, and 2030 as the target dates were chosen to be consistent with the 
planning horizon of the EU and Energy Community – as well as with Georgia’s Intended Nationally 
Determined Contribution for reduction of greenhouse gases against the BAU scenario for the UNFCCC.
By 2025, Georgia intends to achieve a 14% reduction in primary energy consumption as compared to the 
BAU. NSEAP states that achievement of targets in EE is partly dependent on the planning and
establishment of a number of horizontal instruments, like financing schemes for energy efficiency and 
training and education, including energy advisory programmes; Consumer information programmes and 
training; Public awareness and capacity building programmes.
NSEAP tackles energy waste in buildings, public bodies, industry, transport, and energy sector. It also
provides specific energy efficiency measures for each sector and their investment needs. 
As estimated the implementation of horizontal and sector specific energy efficient measures will result 
in total energy savings equal to 2, 568 GWh by 2021.
In renewable energy field in order to meet the target of 30% of energy consumed coming from renewable 
energy for 2020 and implement the EU Renewable Energy Directive, a number of policy and investment 
measures were specified in draft NSEAP, as described in more details in Chapter 8. The following sectors
were covered: electricity production from renewable energy; heating and cooling from renewable energy 
and transport from renewable energy – focused mostly on switching to electric vehicles.
As estimated the implementation of the proposed measures in renewable energy field will result in 
primary energy savings or renewable energy generation up to 12,701 GWh by 2021. 
The National Sustainable Energy Action Plan of Georgia (2018- 2030) Summary Table (Table 27) provides 
information on all 48 proposed measures in energy efficiency and renewable energy field, estimated 
energy savings and indication of necessary investments for the implementation of the measures as well 
as relevance of each measure to a certain SDG. Total cost of implementation of proposed measures is 
estimated to be €3,168,306,000, including €2,033,112,000 for energy efficient measures and 
€1,135,194,000 for measures in renewable energy field. National Sustainable Energy Action Plan of Georgia 
2018-2030
# Measure Responsible
State Body
Targeted 
Sector
Investment required
by 2030 in EUROs
Results Expected 
GWh Primary energy saved or RE 
generated Relevant SDG
State Other Total 2021 2025 2030
1
Financing schemes for energy efficiency
MoESD and 
MFO All € 
1,453,000 - € 1,453,000 Creation of enabling environment SDG 7, SDG 11
2
Incentivizing / mandating energy efficiency in 
industry
MoESD and 
MFO Industry € 
1,076,000
€ 
148,560,000
€ 149,636,000 Creation of enabling environment SDG 7, SDG 9, SDG 11
3
Training and education, including energy 
advisory programmes
MoESD and 
MoES All € 960,000 - € 960,000 Creation of enabling environment SDG 1, SDG 4, SDG 5, SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 10
4
Standards and norms and labelling schemes in 
appliances MoESD Buildings € 791,000 € 
169,277,000 € 170,068,000 0.6 16.0 54.8 SDG 3, SDG 7, SDG 11
5
Qualification, accreditation, and certification 
schemes - Buildings MoESD Buildings € 593,000 - € 593,000 Creation of enabling environment SDG 4, SDG 5, SDG 7, SDG 9, SDG 11
6
Qualification, accreditation, and certification 
schemes - Industry MoESD Industry € 620,000
- € 620,000 Creation of enabling environment SDG 4, SDG 5, SDG 7, 
SDG 9, SDG 11
7
Energy audits and management systems, 
boiler inspections in industry MoESD Industry € 264,000
€ 3,519,000 € 3,783,000 73.3 353.7 928.0 SDG 7, SDG 9, SDG 12
8
Consumer information programmes and 
training MoESD All € 
1,014,000 € 400,000 € 1,414,000 Creation of enabling environment SDG 4, SDG 5, SDG 7 
9
Standards &norms and energy performance 
certification in buildings MoESD Buildings € 
1,055,000
€ 
260,396,000 € 261,451,000 59.3 420.7 1,028.00 SDG 7, SDG 11, SDG 
12
10 Regulations for efficient lighting in residential
&commercial buildings
MoESD and 
Municipalities Buildings € 66,000 € 30,772,000 € 30,838,000 33.8 304.8 175 SDG 7, SDG 9 , SDG 11, SDG 12
11 National energy efficiency information system 
for public buildings
MoESD Buildings € 44,000 € 1,055,000 € 1,099,000
Creation of 
enabling 
environment
SDG 7, SDG 11, SDG 
12
12 Pilot project for low energy public sector 
buildings
MoESD and 
Municipalities Buildings € 12,000 € 35,000 € 47,000 0.1 0.1 0.1 SDG 7, SDG 9, SDG 11, SDG 12, SDG 13
13 Efficient lighting systems in public buildings
MoESD and 
Municipalities Buildings € 134,000 € 71,000 € 205,000 4.1 7 6.9 SDG 3, SDG 7, SDG 11, SDG 1215 Improvement of the energy efficiency in 
schools
MoESD and 
MoES Buildings € 
3,753,000 € 12,497,000 € 16,250,000 9.9 26.2 46.6 SDG 3, SDG 7, SDG 11, 
SDG 12
16 EE Improvement of municipal owned public 
buildings - kindergartens
MoESD and 
Municipalities Buildings € 824,000 € 4,973,000 € 5,797,000 1.5 8.5 18.3 SDG 3, SDG 7, SDG 11, SDG 12
17 EE Improvement in other municpal-owned 
public buildings (non-kindergartens)
MoESD and 
Municipalities Buildings € 66,000 € 643,000 € 709,000
Creation of 
enabling 
environment
SDG 3, SDG 7, SDG 11, 
SDG 12
18
Energy efficient procurement
MoESD and 
MFO All € 
4,943,000 € 527,000 € 5,470,000
Creation of 
enabling 
environment
SDG 3, SDG 7, SDG 9, 
SDG 11
19 EE Improvement in street-lighting/outdoor 
lighting
MRDI and 
Municipalities
Street 
Lighting € 14,000 € 81,969,000 € 81,983,000 62.8 187.2 304.5 SDG 7, SDG 9, SDG 11
20 Industry data disaggregation Geostat Industry € 0 € 0 € 0 Creation of enabling environment -
21
Conversion of wet-cement process to dry 
cement process
MoESD Industry € 0 € 48,775,000 € 48,775,000 613.5 744 1,190.00 SDG 9, SDG 12
22 Mandatory periodic roadworthiness tests for 
motor vehicles MoESD Transport € 
1,319,000 - € 1,319,000 317.1 770.6 907.2 SDG 3, SDG 11, SDG 
13
23 Information campaign for transport MoESD Transport € 364,000 € 60,000 € 424,000 184.4 412.6 481.6 SDG 3, SDG 9, SDG 11, 
SDG 13
24 Improvement of buses/ minivan transport 
systems
MoESD and 
Municipalities Transport - € 1,114,000 € 1,114,000 734.8 1,186.80 1,597.40 SDG 3, SDG 9, SDG 11, SDG 13
25 Encouraging modal shifts from cars to public 
transport/ walking/ bicycling
MRDI and 
MoESD Transport - € 618,000 € 618,000 249.3 839 982.1 SDG 3, SDG 11, SDG 13
26 Improved road infrastructure and traffic 
management within cities
MRDI Transport - - - 96.8 146.3 171.7 SDG 3, SDG 11, SDG 
13
27 Gondola system development & bus rapid 
transit MoESD Transport - - - 1.2 1.2 1.2 SDG 11
28 Improvement of the metro system in Tbilisi Tbilisi city hall Transport - - - Creation of enabling environment SDG 9, SDG 11
29 Increase of hybrid and electric vehicles MoESD Transport € 
24,989,000
€ 
746,092,000 € 771,081,000 55 173.5 229 SDG 3, SDG 7, SDG 9, 
SDG 11, SDG 12
30 Renewal of the public transport fleet
MoESD and 
Municipalities Transport - € 16,140,000 € 16,140,000 6.8 6.8 6.8 SDG 3, SDG 11, SDG 13
31
Natural gas savings through replacement of 
old Thermal Power Plants (TPP) with new 
technologies 
Energy -
€ 
100,000,000 € 100,000,000 1,019 2,269 2,269 SDG 7, SDG 9
32 Policies and investments to rehabilitate 
hydropower assets
MoESD Energy € 66,000 € 95,818,000 € 95,884,000 23 194 376 SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 934
y 
networks and grid integration of new 
generation
energy 
companies
Energy -
€ 
184,754,000 € 184,754,000 1,021 1,174 1,174 SDG 7, SDG 9
35
Regulations on the rules of calculation of 
normative electricity losses - stimulating 
investments
GNERC Energy - € 43,496,000 € 43,496,000 181 223 266 SDG 7
36
Regulations on the rules of calculation of 
normative natural gas pipeline losses - 
stimulating investments
GNERC Energy - € 4,410,000 € 4,410,000 536 660 660 SDG 7
37 Efficient wood-burning stoves for rural 
households
MEPA Biomass 
and waste - € 8,535,000 € 8,535,000 61 205 394
SDG 3, SDG 7, SDG 11, 
SDG 12, SDG 13, SDG 
15
38 Solar hot water heating MRDI Energy - € 15,836,000 € 15,836,000 4 16 40 SDG 3, SDG 5, SDG 7, 
SDG 11, SDG 13
39
Promotion of solar hot water heaters
MoESD Buildings € 2,328,000 60.5
SDG 3, SDG 4, SDG 5, 
SDG 7, SDG 11, SDG 
13
40 Promotion of electric vehicles MoESD Transport € 2,584,000 85 SDG 3, SDG 11, SDG 
13
41 Ongoing support for hydropower production MoESD Energy € 984,782,000 6438 SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 9, 
SDG 13
42 Ongoing support for wind production MoESD Energy € 70,500,000 293 SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 9, 
SDG 13
43 Ongoing support for solar power production MoESD Energy € 4,903,000 8
SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 9, 
SDG 13
44 Support for micro-generation (less than 100 
kW) from renewable sources MoESD Energy € 24,517,000 25.5 SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 13
45 Ongoing support for geothermal heat 
production MoESD Energy - 442 SDG 7, SDG 8, SDG 9, SDG 13
46
Improved management of solid biomass 
resources - Development of a new Forest 
Code, inventory of Forests, and support for the 
use of residues
MEPA Biomass 
and waste € 5,480,000 Creation of enabling environment SDG 7, SDG 11, SDG 12, SDG 13, SDG 15
47 District heating and cooling infrastructure 
development
MRDI and 
Municipalities Buildings € 
40,000,000.00 Creation of enabling environment SDG 3, SDG 7, SDG 9, 
SDG 11, SDG 13
48 Communications and capacity building of 
technical experts - All € 100,000 Creation of enabling environment SDG 4, SDG 5, SDG 8Despite the fact that Georgia’s Energy Sector, mainly the Electricity part, is relatively Green – produced 
from source of renewable energy, there are many issues and gaps for sector development in a sustainable 
manner, moreover increase of the consumption and to meet the demand through the sustainable way is 
even more challenging. 
The key issues and gaps to be addressed are identified and summarized as follows: 
GAPs
• Primary legislative acts as well as national action plans are drafted but deadlines for adoptions 
are not met 
• Secondary legislation necessary for implementation of primary legislations are not yet prepared 
• Insufficient institutional and human capacities for implementation of NSEAP commitments
• Luck of technical norms and standards
• Absence of relevant accreditation and certification systems
• Limited access to financing of NSEAP measures 
• Low awareness at decision maker and public level 
Recommendations
- To ensure timely approval of the developed draft regulatory documents additional consultative 
meetings with national decision makers should be organized with participation of international 
stakeholders 
- To attract TA for gap analysis and elaboration of required secondary legislation as well as for 
elaboration of necessary technical standards and norms; 
- To conduct institutional mapping and capacity needs analysis for development, coordination, 
monitoring and reporting of NSEAP measures both at national and sub-national level with the 
consideration of recent international experience of countries in transition;
- To establish national accreditation, certification and training system, necessary methodologies 
and curricula;
- To intensify communication and coordination with donors and IFIs focused on implementation of 
Sustainable Developments Goals;
- To ensure allocation of public financing (co-financing) from national and sub-national budget for 
implementation of NSEAP measures.
- For mainstreaming of sustainable energy, conduct continuous tailored awareness raising 
campaigns with involvement of mainstream and social media.