File Name: GMB-CPD-2016-EN
Year: 2016
Country Name: Gambia
Country Code: GMB
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 6-9 September 2016
Start Year: 2017
End Year: 2021
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
11 July 2016
Original: English
1611875 (E) 140716
Second regular session 2016
6-9 September 2016, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Gambia (2017-2021)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale ................................ .................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships ................................ ... 4
III. Programme and risk management ................................ ....... 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation ................................ ............. 7 
 Annex
Results and resources framework for the Gambia (2017-2021) ......................... 9I. Programme rationale 
1. The Gambia has enjoyed two decades of relative peace and a stable political environment, despite 
two failed attempted coups, in 2006 and 2014. The Gambia Human Development Index value increased 
from 0.330 to 0.441 between 1990 and 2014,1reflecting progress towards the achievement of the 
Millennium Development Goals, with goal 22and goal 43achieved by 2015. Its long-term ‘Vision 
2020’, developed in 1996, sets the goal of attaining middle-income status by 2020. Three medium-term 
development plans4have not generated the growth required for the achievement of middle-income 
status, as economic reforms are affected by policy slippages and other shocks.
5 The successor plan 
being formulated is aligned to Vision 2020, the sustainable development goals,6and ‘Agenda 2063’ of 
the African Union. 
2. Poverty, inequality and exclusion are challenges in the Gambia due to: limited productive natural 
resources; limited resilience capacities to climate change and external shocks; disproportionate 
distribution of growth benefits between urban and rural areas;7limited employment opportunities for 
youth and women; restrictive productive assets for women;8limited institutional capacity for oversight; 
and absence of state-supported welfare programmes and social safety-nets. 
3. A poverty headcount in 2010 indicated that 48.4 per cent of the population lived below the poverty 
line of $1.25 per day.9 The multidimensional poverty index, 2013, shows that 57.2 per cent of people 
are poor10 while an additional 21.3 per cent live near multidimensional poverty, with marked disparities 
and inequalities among regions11 and genders. Over 79.5 per cent of the rural population lives below 
the poverty line, against 29.4 per cent for urban population. Inequality, as measured by the Gini 
coefficient, remains high, at 0.46 in 2010,12 and unchanged due to limited comprehensive social 
protection programmes to address inequality. Growth averaged 1.8 per cent over the last five years,13
while the unemployment rate was 29.2 per cent, with women (38.3 per cent) and youth (38 per cent) 
affected disproportionately.14 Low productivity across sectors is due to the high illiteracy rate (48 per 
cent) and limited professional skills,15 resulting in a dearth of employment, income-generating 
opportunities, and distributive income16– which perpetuates exclusion, especially among rural women 
and youth. 
4. The World Bank Country Policy and Institutional Assessment indicated a deterioration of the 
policy and institutional environment with the decline of the rating of the Gambia from 3.5 in 2011 to 
3.1 in 2015.17 The Gambia is on the list of fragile states, 2016,
18 due largely to weak institutional 
capacity for effective economic management19 and limited policy coherence. The midterm review of 
 
1 Human Development Report, 2015.
2 Gross enrolment rate reached 101.2 per cent in 2015: 103.5 per cent for girls and 99 per cent for boys. Millennium Development Goals status report, 2014.
3
Infant and child mortality rates dropped to 34 and 54 per 1000, respectively, against the target of 42 and 67.5 per 1,000 births by 2014. Millennium Development 
Goals status report, 2014. 
4 The most recent national development plan is the programme for growth and employment, 2012-2015, extended to 2016.
5 Real per capita gross domestic product was around $ 271 in 2014, far off track to achieve middle-income status by 2020.
6
Sustainable development goals launched nationally, and initial prioritization of the goals completed through a consultation process (2015 report).
7 Rural poverty rate of 79.5, against urban poverty of 24.4 per cent (Multidimensional poverty study, 2015)
8
In the Gambia, 76.4 per cent of women lack land ownership, against 61.9 for men (Gambia Demographic and Health Survey, 2013) 
9
Fifty-six per cent of the labor force is categorized as working poor (labour force survey, 2012). Source for income poverty: integrated household survey, 2010. 
Poverty declined from 58% in 2003 to 48.4% in 2010.
10 The multidimensional poverty index measures deprivation at household level on dimensions of education, health and living standards. Scoring is based on weighted 
indicators for each dimension, using ten indicators and a cut-off 33 per cent was taken as poverty line. Households with total weighted scores above 1/3, are multidimensionally deprived (poor). Households with a score below 1/3 are non-deprived. 
11 UNDP study on multidimensional poverty, 2015. The two most impoverished regions are Kuntaur (90 per cent) and Janjanbureh (85 per cent). Basse has the largest 
number of poor people. 
12 Integrated household survey report, volume I, 2010. 
13 Gambia Bureau of Statistics, national income accounts data, 2015. 
14 Labour force survey, 2012.
15 Labor force survey, 2012.
16 Programme for accelerated growth and employment, midterm review, 2014 (supported by UNDP). 
17 Country Policy and Institutional Assessment, Gambia report, 2015.
18 World Bank harmonized list of countries in fragile situations, 2016. A recent study by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) indicated that fiscal policies and 
institutions have played a significant role in building resilience in sub-Saharan African countries during 1990-2013. 
19 Economic management challenges have resulted in a widening fiscal deficit, which was around 11 per cent of gross domestic product in 2014, largely financed by the Programme for Accelerated Growth and Employment revealed weak economic management, 
minimal alignment between priority areas and resources allocation, and low outcome-level results; 
further constricting growth, with a negative impact on poverty and employment.20 In 2015, the 
Government recognized the institutional weakness and established the Ministry of Planning and Policy 
to separate the planning functions from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs and create 
coherence between the different arms of the state. 
5. The impact of climate change is high in agriculture, which is still heavily dependent on rainfall.21
The contribution of agriculture to the economy contracted from 29 per cent in the 1980s to 23 per cent 
in 2015, leading to a downturn in economic growth. Climate change also affects the tourism, fisheries 
and forestry sectors, limiting opportunities for economic diversification. Vulnerability to sea-level
rise22 puts pressure on the environment and livelihoods of coastal communities.23 Environmental 
degradation, loss of biodiversity, and deforestation – coupled with limited adaptive capacity – are 
leading the economy along an unsustainable development pathway.24 Limited access of women25 and 
youth to productive resources and decision-making opportunities have affected them 
disproportionately. Livelihood opportunities to the increasing youth population in the rural areas could 
curtail migration to urban areas and other countries.26
6. The United Nations Development Assistance Framework midterm review, 2014, indicated that 
progress had been made in deepening democratic governance but significant challenges remained. The 
slow pace of reforms has constrained citizen participation in decision-making, particularly concerning 
women,27 anti-corruption and accountability, and promotion of rule of law and human rights, while 
hampering implementation of the decentralization policy and strategies for improved economic and 
political governance, as illustrated by the evaluation of the civil service reform programme.28
7. Women and girls suffer disproportionately from deprivation due to social and traditional norms 
and practices, as manifested by a high prevalence of female genital mutilation (76 per cent), child 
marriage29 and female high-school dropout rates30. UNDP advocates strong policy and legislative 
gender equality frameworks and women’s empowerment in decision-making processes.
8. The Independent Elections Commission organizes periodic elections. However, the country could 
benefit from widening the political space and participation. UNDP has shown comparative advantage 
in improving the efficiency of the judiciary through innovative mobile legal aid clinics, decentralized 
legal aid services, and a dispute resolution secretariat for accessible dispensation of justice.31 Support 
for performance audit at the National Audit Office, the Joint Public Accounts Committee and the 
Public Enterprise Committee at the National Assembly have strengthened the accountability 
frameworks, promoting economic governance. 
9. UNDP contributed to addressing challenges identified by the midterm review of the country 
programme action plan, 2012-2016, and the midterm review of the Programme for Accelerated Growth 
and Employment, 2014. UNDP support to policy formulation and its development of sectoral plans 
improved coordination and monitoring of the medium-term planning frameworks. Support to the 
national Millennium Development Goals status reporting and development forums, and strengthening 
 
domestic debt, pushing the country into macroeconomic imbalances. The wage bill and interest payments climbed above 70 per cent of the total budget, reducing 
funds available for development. IMF report, September 2015. The high interest rate of treasury bills (above 20 per cent) has reduced private sector accessibility to 
credit/finance (-7.5 per cent) in 2014. African Economic Outlook, 2015. 
20 Programme for Accelerated Growth and Employment, midterm review, October 2014. 
21 More than 98 per cent of agricultural lands in the Gambia are rain-fed, making the sector highly vulnerable to rainfall variability.
22 It is estimated that a one-meter rise in sea level will inundate about 8.7 per cent of total land area.
23 Common Country Assessment
24 To address this challenge, the Government formulated a national climate change policy in 2015. 
25 Women account for only 9.4 per cent parliament seats, according to the MDG status report, 2014
26 According to Eurostat data, over 12, 000 Gambian migrants requested asylum in 2014. 
27 Women represent 9 per cent in parliament and below 20 per cent in local councils.
28 Terminal evaluation of public service reform and institutional strengthening, 2012
29 Gambia Demographic and Health Survey 2013: Median age for first marriage is 18.6 years. Women 15-19 years old, 23.8 married. 
30 MDG status report of the Gambia, 2014
31 Gambia Ministry of Justice, annual report of the National Agency for Legal Aid and the Alternative Dispute Resolution Secretariat, 2015/2015. statistics, contributed to effective pro-poor policies and strategies formulation.32 Support to the social 
sector public expenditure review led to the preparation of the social protection policy. UNDP and the 
African Union facilitated the development of the African development gender index.33
10. UNDP, in partnership with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights, supported preparation of the Human Rights Commission Act, the Universal Periodic Review 
report, 2014, and national compliance with special procedures. Institutionalization of the value-added 
tax, in partnership with the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, led to an increase in tax 
revenue collection.34 Future support should focus on improving expenditure management, restoring 
macroeconomic stability, and developing policies and programmes to address the needs of rural women 
and unemployed youths. 
11. In collaboration with the Government, UNDP piloted the Songhai project through South-South 
cooperation and replicated the model, where 165 jobs have been created. Forty-five young people were 
trained in self-employed oriented skills, and 256 hectares of land transformed for productive use. Forty 
per cent of the beneficiaries were women.
12. Although the Gambia is one of the least-aided countries,
35 the UNDP comparative advantage in 
economic and political governance, human capital development, poverty eradication and resilience 
development proved effective in mobilizing resources for programming, while effective collaboration 
on policy reform (with the World Bank, the IMF and other United Nations partners) improved 
development effectiveness. Continued support, informed by analytical studies in institutional 
strengthening and development of pro-poor policies and strategies, positioned UNDP as a major 
thought leader in policy dialogue and capacity development, and as a coordinator for international 
agendas such as the sustainable development goals. Lessons learned from past support have contributed 
to the design of the proposed country programme.
13. The proposed programme is underpinned by the logic of accelerating inclusive, sustainable 
economic growth, reinforced by a holistic resilience-building approach that promotes sustainable 
management of the economy, natural resources, and the environment, through capacity-building of 
national institutions and communities, focusing on selected strategic areas with multiplier effects. The 
development of evidence-based policies, rooted in lessons from downstream interventions, will be 
prioritized to promote growth, inclusiveness and empowerment of women, youth36 and the rural poor, 
through skills development, employment creation, income generation and resilience-building, using 
innovative approaches. Important components are governance reform and partnership-building to open 
financial space with renewed inflows of private-sector investment; official development assistance and 
foreign direct investment to supplement domestic resources to accelerate inclusive growth; and 
implementation of sustainable development goals. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
14. UNDP, in alignment with the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, 2017-2021,
and the UNDP strategic plan, 2014–2017, will focus on: (a) inclusive economic growth and poverty 
eradication; (b) governance and human rights; and (c) environment and resilience development. UNDP 
will leverage its comparative advantage by addressing the root causes of vulnerability37 to accelerate 
growth, build resilience and promote good governance while complementing the efforts of the United 
 
32 The national human development report, focused on youth employment, has led to a youth agenda in the policy sphere as well as the review and reformulation of 
the youth policy and strategy of the country.
33 Includes gender equality and women’s empowerment in legal and institutional frameworks.
34 Tax to gross domestic product ratio increased from 15 per cent in 2007 to 17 per cent in 2015 (UNDP 2015), Gambia policy brief on domestic resources 
mobilization, 2015.
35 According to the 2011 report of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the Gambia is among the top ten least-aided countries. Only a few 
donor entities, such as the European Commission, the IMF and the United Nations are resident in country. 
36Youth, according to the national youth policy, are 15-35 years of age. 
37 Weak institutions for economic and social service provisions, weak governance systems, frequent extreme weather events, lack of integrated early-warning and 
disaster risk management system, limited endowment of natural resources, and high population growth.Nations country team. The strategic choices are in line with the broad objectives of the post-2015 
agenda, Agenda 2063 of the African Union, and the Istanbul Programme of Action. The small size of 
the country office and limited resources, both human and financial, dictate that the programme adopts a 
more focused approach
15. The midterm reviews demonstrated that UNDP contributed to the formulation of a climate-resilient 
strategy and adoption of sustainable agricultural practices for small-scale producers, rehabilitation of 
mangrove ecosystems, and coastal protection and early-warning systems for better planning and 
management of climate-related disasters and shocks. UNDP supported the enactment of legislation and 
the formulation of policy frameworks to integrate disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation 
into national policies and promote renewable energy. 
Inclusive economic growth and poverty eradication
16. UNDP will address the poverty, inequality and exclusion nexus, providing both upstream and 
downstream support and building on current programme cycle achievements: evidence-based planning, 
livelihoods and employment promotion; inclusive growth; and social protection. In collaboration with 
the World Bank, the IMF and African Development Bank, UNDP will support the recently created 
Ministry of Planning and Policy and the Gambia Bureau of Statistics. UNDP will work with key 
ministries to align resources with national priorities, and assessment risks to the achievement of 
national development objectives, and will mobilize resources. UNDP will prepare high-quality 
analytical products – the National Human Development Report, the sustainable development goals
status report, and other relevant studies. This will enhance the environment for evidence-based policy 
planning, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation, in line with the sustainable development goals. 
17. The capacity of relevant institutions will be strengthened to design and implement skills and 
entrepreneurship development interventions38 for increased employment and productivity, to 
sustainably lift target groups out of poverty in the Central River and Western Regions. UNDP will 
institutionalize and harness the linkage between skills development and export promotion; and 
strengthen linkages with microfinance institutions to help local communities to produce, add value, and 
support diversification of the economy in partnership with UNCDF. In reducing poverty and inequality, 
UNDP will assist the implementation of the social protection policy and strategy by implementing a 
comprehensive social protection programme targeting the most vulnerable children, women and youth,
in line with the sustainable development goals objective of leaving no one behind. This will contribute 
to the attainment of goals1, 8, 10 and 17.
Governance and human rights
18. This programme will consolidate governance-related reforms, strengthening national institutions to 
promote the culture of democracy, human rights, access to justice, anti-corruption through improved 
accountability and transparency, and the rule of law, using innovative approaches to reach the poorest.
UNDP will focus on the nexus between political and economic governance to achieve improved 
economic management for poverty eradication through bilateral and multilateral relationships, with 
positive consequences for foreign direct investment, business growth and government revenue.
19. UNDP will support access to justice by strengthening capacities of enforcement authorities in 
justice delivery and human rights institutions to provide services, enlarge citizen participation in 
decision-making and elections, and uphold the rule of law, tapping into its global network through 
South-South and triangular cooperation. Building upon lessons learned from the 2012-2016 cycle, this 
programme will deepen the foundations for coordinated delivery of high-quality justice services to the 
poor, focusing on children and women through legal aid and assessments of development results. 
UNDP, in collaboration with United Nations organizations, development partners and civil society 
 
38 Selected interventions from the Empretec and Songhai initiatives will be scaled up to reach more unemployed youths and women.organizations, will strategically leverage its position as a neutral convening entity to dialogue and 
advocate on sensitive issues, governance risks and mitigation strategies. Support to promoting gender 
equity and women’s empowerment will focus on the implementation of policies through a joint Gambia 
Government-United Nations system programme. UNDP will continue to advocate for implementing the 
national human rights commission act and support human rights monitoring mechanisms.
20. The programme will support citizen participation and strengthen capacities of oversight and 
accountability institutions, the National Council for Civic Education, and the Association of NonGovernmental Organizations. Support for implementing the citizen engagement framework will target 
the media and emphasize providing voice to women and excluded groups. Implementation of the 
decentralization policy and strategy will be prioritized for capacity-building. This pillar will contribute 
to the attainment of sustainable development goals 5 and 16.
Environment and resilience development
21. UNDP will support the application of evidence-based policymaking for increased resilience; 
improved absorptive, adaptive and transformative capacities of at-risk communities; and the 
establishment of appropriate, coordinated and timely responses to risks and shocks. UNDP will lead the 
climate change and resilience-building agenda while forging effective partnerships within national and 
international frameworks.
39 The support will enable the Government to implement the national climate 
change policy, 2015, and the Paris Agreement reached at the twenty-first session of the Conference of 
the Parties, and promote natural resources management and the roll-out of the Sustainable Energy for 
All initiative, the disaster risk reduction policy and strategy, 2014-2017, and the renewable energy 
policy. UNDP will strengthen national capacity to assess, respond to and coordinate disaster and 
climate risk management. The programme will support implementation of the national biodiversity 
strategy and action plan, and strengthen protected areas management, sustainable use of natural 
resources and reforestation of degraded lands through the land use policy. 
22. UNDP will support the mainstreaming into development plans of low emissions, climate 
resilience, risk assessment and management; development of early warning systems; and 
implementation of priority mitigation and adaptation measures to reduce vulnerability across key 
sectors. UNDP support will enhance the effectiveness of post-disaster recovery; the rehabilitation of 
degraded ecosystems and watering points; and construction of climate-resilient infrastructure. The 
development of a climate readiness plan will be critical for resource mobilization. UNDP will introduce 
innovative production techniques linked to agricultural value chains to facilitate local communities’ 
adaptation to climate change. The programme will engage the private sector in issues of natural 
resources management.
23. UNDP will provide catalytic support to assist the Gambia in accessing the Green Climate Fund and 
the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to implement its national obligations,40 while strengthening 
dialogue and exploring funding opportunities with Qatar, the European Commission and the 
Government of Japan. South-South and triangular cooperation will be explored for community-based 
poverty reduction, renewable energy and a green economy. The pillar will contribute to the attainment 
of sustainable development goals12, 13, 15 and 17.
24. Building on the experience gained during the Millennium Development Goals period, and 
leveraging its leading role in the Development Partners’ Group, UNDP will strategically support the 
roll-out of the sustainable development goals,41 working with the Government, civil society 
organizations, the private sector, United Nations organizations and development partners. 
 
39 Sustainable development goals, multilateral environmental agreements, the Montreal Protocol and Capacity 21.
40 The obligations include the Rio conventions: the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations Conventions to Combat Desertification and 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
41 Key sustainable development goals to which the country programme will contribute: 1, 5. 8, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16 and 17.III. Programme and risk management 
25. The country programme will be nationally executed in collaboration with key national counterparts 
to ensure ownership, leadership and accountability for the realization of UNDP support for achieving 
development results. Different implementation modalities – national implementation, nongovernmental organizations and direct UNDP implementation, or combinations thereof – will be 
selected to maximize efficiency, flexibility of operations, and effective UNDP contributions to 
development results. Implementing partners will be selected with a view to building sustainability and 
based on comparative advantages and capacity assessments. When required, UNDP will provide 
necessary support to national implementing partners to address capacity gaps. Fast-track procedures 
can be adopted to provide timely response to crisis situations and respond efficiently to emerging 
demands for UNDP support.
26. For both national and direct implementation, and pursuant to Executive Board decision 2013/32, 
cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects. UNDP is committed to implementing harmonized cash transfer principles in 
coordination with relevant United Nations partners. Using these procedures, including macro and micro 
assessment, will mitigate the risk of insufficient implementation capacity.
27. UNDP will ensure that the country office has adequate human capacity, structures, and 
management systems, to implement the country programme successfully. The financial sustainability 
plan will be reviewed regularly for best use of resources and optimal management ratios. The country 
office will effectively collect host government contributions to increase its delivery capacity in 
accordance with government contributions towards local office costs guidelines.42 Staff capacities will 
be developed through continuous training and exchange programmes. The country office will use 
resources such as those of the Regional Service Centre to expand capacity to deliver on its programme, 
and will employ innovative approaches such as attracting young, talented graduates through internships 
to augment staff capacity. 
28. Economic and political dynamics and uncertainties are likely to continue, exposing programme 
implementation to considerable risks, including: limited resource mobilization potential, given donor 
concerns over the governance record of the Gambia; high attrition rates within the Government, and 
brain drain, loss of institutional memory and limited continuity, which exacerbate the already weak 
capacities of implementing partners, and possible disruptions in programme implementation due to the 
planned National Assembly and local elections. The country office will formulate a contingency plan 
to respond to electoral risks and will regularly update the business continuity plan. Based on the 
Gambia Intended National Determined Contribution, UNDP will support policy reforms to reduce the 
impact of climate change. In relation to resource mobilization-related risks, the country office will 
identify new and innovative sources of finance43 and support the Government in identifying domestic 
sources, including through efficiency gains in resource allocation and utilization. The country office
will strengthen project quality assurance and social and environmental safeguards for sustainability, 
and reemphasize integrated, flexible, innovative programme design, systems of data collection, and 
evidence-based results reporting and communication to address lessons learned and scale up best 
practices.
29. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as 
the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned 
to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at country, regional and 
headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the UNDP programme and 
operations policies and procedures, and the internal control framework.
 
42 Government contributions towards local office costs have been collected partially during the current country programme. The country office will put in place a 
mechanism for full payment of future costs in the Gambia. 
43 The country office will work with emerging donors such as China to explore options for cooperation while targeting thematic funds such as the European 
Commission Migration Fund, GEF and the Green Fund.IV. Monitoring and evaluation
30. Guided by a results-based management approach, the country programme monitoring and 
evaluation platform44 will be aligned with the monitoring and evaluation framework of the 
United Nations Development Framework and the national system. Most of the data to monitor 
UNDP support at the outcome level is sourced from national systems.45 UNDP, collaborating 
with partners,
46 will strengthen national statistical capacity. This will enable the country to 
monitor its own national development plan and report on progress towards the sustainable 
development goals and United Nations Development Assistance Framework and country 
programme outcome-level indicators. 
31. The country office will strengthen in-house capacity for data collection, analysis and 
utilization to track the contribution of the programme to transformative change. At l east 5 per
cent of programme resources will be earmarked to cover costs of monitoring, evaluation and 
relevant studies. The UNDP gender marker will be used to monitor country programme 
expenditures and improve planning and decision-making. The new country programme will 
intensify efforts in monitoring and operationalizing real-time, specific, measurable, attainable, 
relevant and trackable gender-disaggregated data collection for continuous assessment of 
UNDP contributions. 
32. A communication strategy linked to the partnership and resource mobilization strategies will be 
formulated to increase the transparency, visibility and impact of UNDP interventions, and thought 
leadership in priority programme areas.
33. United Nations Development Assistance Framework outcome boards will oversee and continually 
track the progress of United Nations and UNDP contributions to achieving outcomes, adjusting the 
strategies of the country programme accordingly. The United Nations inter-agency monitoring and 
evaluation group will monitor overall performance and testing of the theories of change. The country 
office will conduct evaluations to determine progress, identify lessons and challenges, and offer 
solutions. Projects will undergo systematic reviews to ensure environmental and social safeguards.
 
44 Within the country programme and as part of the monitoring and evaluation system, multi-year, issues-based policy research and studies will be commissioned 
through think tanks, universities and the private sector to test underlying theories of change. The findings will contribute to learning and adjustments to the programme 
strategies and outputs.
45 Preliminary assessment of the data for sustainable development goals reporting in the Gambia shows that about 36 per cent of the data was available for monitoring 
Millennium Development Goals progress over the last 15 years. For the already-finalized 100 goals indicators, there is limited up-to-date data. Thirty-two per cent 
have data less than 3 years old (UNDP policy brief: Data gap to implement and monitor SDGs. 2015).
46 World Bank, IMF, African Development Bank and other United Nations organizations.DP/DCP/GMB
16-1
()
National priority or goal: 1 and 3. Accelerating and sustaining economic growth, agriculture and natural resources for food security
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) outcomes 1 and 3.2. By 2021, accelerated inclusive and sustainable economic growth to reduce poverty and 
inequality for the vulnerable groups
Related strategic plan outcome 1. Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods 
for the poor and excluded
UNDAF outcome indicators, 
baselines, and targets
Data source, frequency 
of data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines, and targets)
Major partners, partnerships 
and frameworks
Indicative resources 
by outcome 
(in thousands of $)
Indicator 1.1.1. Real gross 
domestic product (GDP) growth, 
2017-2021 
Baseline: 4.2% (2016)
Target: 7% 
2. Indicator 1.1.2. Percentage of 
population below $1.75 per day 
(‘poverty headcount’)
Baseline: 48.4% (2010) 
Target: 20%
Indicator 1.1.3: Real GDP per 
capita 
Baseline: $271 (2014)
Target: $1,250 (Vision 2020)
 
Indicator 1.1.4: Unemployment 
rate, ages 18-65 
Baseline: National, 29.2%; rural, 
31.1, urban, 28.4%
Male: 20.9%, Female: 38.3%, 2012
Target: 10%
Data source:
National accounts
Annual project reports
Integrated Household 
Survey
National accounts
Labour force surveys
Output 1.1. National and subnational institutions enabled 
to achieve structural transformation of productive 
capacities that are sustainable and employment- and 
livelihoods- intensive.
Indicator 1.1.1. Number of gender-sensitive strategies, in 
place at the national and sub-national levels to generate and 
strengthen employment and livelihoods.
Baseline: 3 sectoral; 0 regional strategies47
Target: 6 sectoral; 4 regional strategies 
Indicator 1.1.2. Number of schemes that expand and 
diversify the productive base.
Baseline: 0 central; 2 urban; 0 rural48
Target: 2 central; 3 urban; 6 rural
Indicator 1.1.3. Number of new jobs and other livelihoods 
generated, disaggregated by sex and age.
Baseline: 700 men; 600 women; 600 youth; Total: 1,100
Target: 2,000 men; 2,000 women; 1,000 youth; Total: 
4,000
Output 1.2. Options enabled and facilitated for inclusive 
and
sustainable social protection. 
Indicator 1.2.2. Proportion of vulnerable children, women 
and youth receiving social protection support, disaggregated 
by sex.
Baseline: 50,000 (29, 000 women, 10,000 youth). 49
Target: 220,000 (100,000 women, 120,000 youth)50
Output 1.3. Capacity of national and subnational-level 
institutions strengthened to deliver improved basic 
Ministry of Youth and Sports 
Ministry of Trade, Industry and 
Employment (MOTIE)
Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Affairs (MOFEA)
Department of Social Welfare
Ministry of Energy (MOE)
Regular 
$8,000
Other 
$6,000
 
47 Data source: Government budget and MOTIE reports. Frequency: annual
48 Data source: Government budget and sectoral reports. Frequency: annual
49 E
titd bd thtitht l5 t f thttl lblthSP lid tlDCP/GMB/3
3 16-1
strategies and plans.
Indicator 1.3.1. Number of national and subnational 
governments with functioning planning, budgeting and 
monitoring systems.
Baseline: 2 51
Target: 6
52
Indicator 1.3.2. Number of national statistical surveys that 
produced informed, gender-sensitive policies and plans. 
Baseline: 2
53
Target: 5
Ministry of Planning and Policy 
MOFEA
National priority or goal: improving governance and fighting corruption
UNDAF outcome 1.2. Institutional reforms implemented to ensure rule of law and guarantee the protection of the human rights of all, including access to justice, gender equality, 
access to basic services, and democratic participation in decision-making processes.
Related strategic plan outcome 2. Citizen expectations for voice, development, the rule of law, and accountability, are met by stronger systems of democratic 
governance
Indicator 1.2.1. Governance index: 
Mo Ibrahim ratings, and World 
Bank country policy and 
institutional assessment (CPIA)
Baseline: Ibrahim Index of African 
Governance (IIAG): 51.6 (2014) 
CPIA: 3.1(2015)
Target: IIAG: 55; CPIA: 3.2 (2021)
Indicator 1.2.3: Voter turnout
Baseline: 70% 
Target: 85%
Indicator 1.2.4: Percentage of 
women serving in local councils, 
national assembly 
Baseline: 9%; Local government 
areas (LGAs): 12%
Target: 20); LGAs: 30%
Data source
Ibrahim Index on 
African Governance
Frequency: annual
Universal Periodic 
review
Frequency: annual
Voter registration 
database and election 
results (Independent 
Electoral Commission)
Output 2.1. Electoral institutions enabled to perform core 
functions for improved accountability, participation and 
representation, including for peaceful transitions.
Indicator 2.1.1. Proportion of eligible registered voters, 
disaggregated by sex.
Baseline: Presidential elections, 82%; National Assembly, 
50%; local government, 12% (2011-2013)54
Target: Presidential, 88%; National Assembly, 65%; local 
government, 40% (2016-2018)
Indicator 2.1.2. Number of women participating as 
candidates in local and national elections.
Baseline: 20/114 for local government, 4/48 for national 
assembly55
Target: 40/114 for local government; 15/55 for national 
assembly. 
Ministry of Justice
Gambia Press Union
National Council for Civic 
Education 
Coalition on Elections
Development partners
Independent Electoral 
Commission
Inter-party Advisory Committee
National Assembly
Association of NonGovernmental Organizations 
(TANGO)
Joint Public Accounts 
Committee
Public Enterprise Committee
Regular 
$5,500
Other
$4,000
 
51 MOFEA and MOTIE
52 Two national institutions (Ministry of Policy and Planning and MOFEA) and four subnational institutions. 
53 Rating scale of 1-5: 1=low; 2=below average; 3=average; 4=above average; 5=high
54 D
tIddt Eltl CiitFlDP/DCP/GMB
3 16-1
Reports by Women’s 
Bureau 
Annual report of the 
National Assembly 
Ministry of Justice 
report
Annual report of the 
National Assembly
system to deliver accessible, efficient and accountable 
justice to all, especially women and vulnerable groups.
Indicator 2.2.1. Number of legal aid centres established.
Baseline: 3 
Target: 5
Indicator 2.2.2. Number of beneficiaries, particularly women 
and vulnerable groups, using legal aid centres, disaggregated 
by sex. 
Baseline: 672 cases, 40% women
Target: 3,000 cases, 60% women 
 
Output 2.3. Frameworks developed for effective and 
transparent engagement of civil society, including 
women’s organizations, in national development.
Indicator 2.3.1. Number of civil society organizations, 
including women’s organizations, using open platforms and 
networks to engage in national and local governance and 
decision-making processes.
Baseline: 2
56
Target: 5
Output 2.4. Strengthened operational capacities of 
oversight and accountability institutions actively engaged 
in the public sphere. 
Indicator 2.4.1. Number of backlogged audit reports and 
performance reports produced by National Audit Office
Baseline: 0 audit reports; 40 performance reports
Target: 0 audit reports; 0 performance reports
National priority or goal: Accelerating and sustaining economic growth
UNDAF outcome 3.3. By 2021, National institutions and community capacities are strengthened for effective disaster risk management, climate change response actions and 
resilience.
Related strategic plan outcome 5. Countries are able to reduce the likelihood of conflict, and lower the risk of natural disasters, including from climate change
Indicator 4.1.1. Number of 
institutions responsible for disaster 
risk management supported with 
human resource capacity-building.
Baseline: 0
Target: 8
National Disaster 
Management Agency 
(NDMA) yearly 
progress reports to
Government
Gambia progress report 
to the UNFCCC; INDC 
report
Output 3.1. Preparedness systems to effectively address 
the consequences of and response to natural hazards.57
Indicator 3.1.1. Number of end-to-end early warning systems 
for man-made and natural hazards.
Baseline: 1
Target: 8
Indicator 3.1.2. Number of contingency plans at national and 
sub-national level to prepare for and recover from disaster 
events with adequate financial and human resources, 
NDMA
National Environment Agency
Gambia Red Cross Society
Concern Universal
MOE
Ministry of Environment 
Ministry of Local Government
Regular
$1,500
Other 
$30,000
 
56 D
tt f TANGOFlDCP/GMB/3
3 16-1
Indicator 4.1.2. Per-capita carbon 
dioxide emission (metric tons) 
Baseline: 0.3
Target: 0.01
Reports from the 
Ministry of 
Environment, Climate 
Change, Forestry, 
Water and Wildlife
Baseline:0
Target: 1 Central, 8 regional plans
Indicator 3.1.3. Existence of clearly defined institutional 
responsibilities and multi-stakeholder coordination 
mechanisms for disaster and climate risk management at 
national and subnational levels.
Baseline: At national level58
Target: National, 8 regional, 48 districts.
Indicator 3.1.4. Percentage of the at-risk population covered 
by national and community level contingency plans for 
disaster events59. 
Baseline: 15% (5% women)
Target: 50% (25% women)
Output 3.2. Gender-responsive disaster and climate risk 
management integrated into the development planning 
and budgetary frameworks of key sectors.60
Indicator 3.2.1. Number of districts with plans or strategies 
for enhanced resilience to climate change impacts.
Baseline: 0
Target:2
Output 3.3. Scaled-up actions on climate change adaptation 
and mitigation implemented.
Indicator 3.3.1. Number of systems in place to monitor, 
report and verify use of climate finance.
Baseline:2
61
Target:5
Indicator 3.3.2. Number of comprehensive plans, strategies, 
policies and programmes implemented to achieve low-
emission and climate-resilient development objectives.
Baseline: 3
62
Target:6
Output 3.4. Inclusive and sustainable solutions adopted to 
achieve increased renewable energy access and efficiency.63
Indicator 3.4.1. Number of new development partnerships 
for improved, efficient and sustainable energy solutions 
targeting underserved communities/groups and women.
Baseline:1
64
 
58 Data source: NDMA and water resources reports. Frequency: annual
59 Evacuation procedures, stockpiles, search and rescue, communication protocols and recovery preparedness plans
60 Water, agriculture, health and education.
61 Data source: NDMA, Department of Water Resources (DWR) reports. Frequency: annual
62 Data source: NDMA, DWR reports. Frequency: annual
63 Off
id blDP/DCP/GMB
3 16-1
Indicator 3.4.2. Proportion of population with access to 
energy.
Baseline: 37%65
Target: 76%
Output 3.5: Capacities of national and subnational 
administrations enabled to enhance conservation, sustainable 
management, and use of natural resources, biodiversity and 
ecosystems.
Indicator 3.5.1. Number of communities benefiting from 
sustainable natural resources management.
Baseline: 5 communities (85% women’s groups)
Target: 8 communities (90% women’s groups).
Indicator 3.5.2: Number of protected areas established and 
managed for biodiversity conservation.
Baseline: 5
Target: 10
Ministry of Environment, 
Climate Change, Water, 
Wildlife and Fisheries
National Environment Agency