File Name: GRD-NEP-2011-EN
Year: 2011
Country Name: Grenada
Country Code: GRD
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2011
Start Year: 2011
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

GRENADATHE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 
OF GRENADA
A Low Carbon Development Strategy 
For Grenada, Carriacou and 
Petite Martinique
NOVEMBER 2011Hon. Tillman
Thomas
Prime Minister
of Grenada
MINISTER FOR
NATIONAL SECURITY,
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION,
INFORMATION,
INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY &
NATIONAL MOBILIZATION
formulated an ambitious National Energy Policy (NEP). This Policy is very urgent and timely
now that the global energy market is again vulnerable to the high volatility of oil prices.
Soaring prices for petroleum and petroleum-related products as a result of the variable
weather patterns in Europe and North America, the forecasted rising demand for these
commodities in the manufacturing sectors in the USA, Europe and the BRIC nations,
renewed concerns over nuclear safety after the Fukushima incident, as well as the political
instability of oil producing and oil exporting countries in North Africa and the Middle East
warrant that Grenada needs to provide suitable options in transitioning to a low carbon
economy based on the utilization of its indigenous alternative sources of energy. The
efficient use of energy must also be considered a priority as Grenada seeks to solve its
energy access problem.
The Grenada National Energy Policy is the guideline and roadmap to the development of
a healthy Energy Mix in Grenada and hence a step forward in resolving energy poverty
which critically acts as a barrier to the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). The principles, objectives and strategies for a sustainable energy policy are
defined by measures, which aim at obtaining energy security, energy independence, energy
efficiency and green energy among other immediate energy issues. These all will serve
to achieve the objective of limiting the environmental health impacts of energy usage.
Thus a 20% reduction in green house gas emissions from fossil fuel combustion by 2020
will be a measurable goal.
To meet the goals and objectives of the Grenada National Energy Policy (GNEP), it will be
imperative to address institutional and regulatory issues by building and managing our
human resources and by establishing sound legislation. The steps undertaken to resolve
our maritime boundary with Trinidad and Tobago and other neighbouring countries and
the creation of legislation and regulations to govern the exploration for and exploitation
of offshore hydrocarbons and onshore geothermal resources are ranked as top priorities.
The Government of Grenada understands that the promotion of our indigenous renewable
energy potential (geothermal, wind, solar, waste to energy) is imperative so that by 2020
at least twenty percent (20%) of all domestic energy usage should be based on renewable
energy sources. Further, emphasis on energy efficiency and conservation in all sectors of
the economy is highly anticipated.
The people of Grenada are greatly indebted to the numerous individuals from private
business sectors, public sectors, NGOs and external agencies that have all contributed to
the drafting of this policy. We are also grateful for the continued assistance provided by
international organizations and by our development partners as we now seek to
implement this ambitious policy.
Hon. Tillman Thomas
Prime MinisterE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
Hon. V. (Nazim)
Burke M.P.
Minister of
Finance, Planning,
Economy, Energy
and Cooperatives
MINISTER FOR
FINANCE, PLANNING,
ECONOMY, ENERGY
& COOPERATIVES
imports almost 100% of the fuel used for transport (diesel and gasoline), electricity
generation (diesel) and cooking (liquefied petroleum gas – LPG). In the summer of 2008,
the global price of oil peaked at US$147/bbl. The variable fuel charge on consumers’
electricity bill soared, pushing the cost of electricity to domestic and commercial
consumers to over US$0.35/kWh and the retail price of gasoline to over US$1.50/litre.
Prices dipped after the summer of 2008 but three years later the price of oil has
returned to and seems destined to stay above US$100/bbl.
Our future economic growth and development are constrained by the high costs
of energy inputs. Manufacturers, hoteliers, taxi drivers, fisher folk, farmers and the
ordinary consumer are all impacted by high energy costs. As Grenadians seek to
improve their quality of life, our demand for electricity and modern energy services
is increasing at a rate of 3-4% per annum. However, continued reliance on imported
sources of primary energy (fossil fuels) that are finite and when combusted are
significant contributors to climate change is no longer defensible.
In August 2008, there was a change in the administration of the Government of
Grenada. The drafting of a sustainable energy policy, owned by all Grenadians, became
an immediate priority. Over the next two years, our Ministry held extensive consultations
with many stakeholders, both local and external, and expert advice was obtained through
the kind assistance of the Organisation of the American States (OAS).
Our tri-island state although small, in terms of landmass, is blessed with abundant sources
of renewable energy – solar, wind and potentially geothermal. Our maritime area may
contain significant quantities of hydrocarbons. By 2030, we have the potential to be
almost 100% “green” in meeting our domestic demand for energy whilst investing the
revenue gained from exploiting our potential offshore petroleum reserves.
This policy document has a 20-year vision and is accompanied by an ambitious but
achievable 10-year action plan with identified projects, some of which have already
started (e.g. the public sector energy conservation programme, the “Energy for the Poor”
programme, the wind energy project in Carriacou and the Mt. St. Catherine geothermal
project). Our Ministry is committed to providing the required institutional capacity,
legislative and fiscal framework to facilitate the implementation of this policy and
action plan.
The energy policy presented in this document is country-driven and reflects the special
challenges faced by and opportunities available to a small island state that is striving to
transition to a secure and sustainable low carbon development path. I commend it to
all Grenadians.
Hon. V. (Nazim) Burke.
Minister of Finance, Planning, Economy, Energy and CooperativesGRENADA 
ENERGY POLICY
OF GRENADA
A Low Carbon
Development
Strategy For
Grenada,
Carriacou and
Petite Martinique
of Grenada, Carriacou and Petite Martinique, recognises that energy is a significant driver
of development, has serious implications for environmental protection, and requires
policy priority in a small island state seeking to define its development path and
guarantee its citizens a sustainable quality of life.
Therefore, the Government of Grenada embarked on a process of national consultation
across the public and private sectors, amongst professional organisations, non-governmental
organisations (NGOs) and community-based organisations (CBOs) over an 18-month
period (January 2009 – June 2010), as well as engaged consultants to develop a
National Energy Policy.
The overarching objective is that the policy should have a distinctive Grenadian
signature and character. It should be able to deliver a sustainable low carbon approach
to development which will cause Grenada to be a model amongst Small Island Developing
States. This document presents an overview of the considerations and objectives which will
shape the energy future and development of Grenada.
Grenada is affectionately known as “The Spice Isle” of the Caribbean and prior to Hurricane
Ivan in 2004, was the largest producer of nutmeg in the Caribbean and the second largest
globally. The island also produces other spices such as cinnamon, clove, and agricultural
products such as cocoa and bananas. Since Ivan, the national economy has been largely
based on services and tourism. The total GDP by economic activity was estimated to be
approximately 1,386 million EC dollars (approximately US $519 M) in 2009 and is projected
to be just over 1,400 million EC dollars (US $524 M) by the end of 20101
.
Electrical power is generated from hydrocarbon sources and is supplied by a single utility
company with a base of 41,000 consumers. Given Grenada’s almost total reliance on fossil
fuels which it sources from a volatile international market, a predisposition for Grenada to
be affected by the will of nature and a recently restructured economy, the Government of
Grenada is committed to ensuring that energy security is managed as a national priority.
The National Energy Policy of Grenada therefore presents the principal policy principles and
objectives of the Government as well as the directives in instruments crafted to ensure that
Grenada transitions to sustainable energy sources and consumption.
Using fossil fuels efficiently, whilst transitioning to renewables, even if hydrocarbons
are found in the country’s maritime territory, the energy policy is based on eight core
principles; (i) ensuring energy security, (ii) achieving energy independence, (iii) maximising
energy efficiency, (iv) promoting energy conservation, (v) pursuing environmental
sustainability through “green energy”, (vi) guaranteeing sustainable resource exploitation,
(vii) minimising energy costs and (viii) energy solidarity.
The ultimate goal of Grenada’s National Energy Policy (GNEP) is to ensure access and
provide affordable, equitable, reliable, clean and sustainable energy sources and services to
drive and secure national development, and improve the quality of life for all of its citizens.E NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
1. OBJECTIVES AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES ......................................1
2. OVERVIEW OF THE ENERGY SITUATION ....................................2
2.1 THE GLOBAL SETTING ..............................................................................2
2.2 THE REGIONAL SETTING ..........................................................................3
2.3 GRENADA’S ENERGY SITUATION ............................................................3
3. GOALS AND POLICIES ..................................................................6
3.1 INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES ............................................................................6
3.2 LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK ..............................................6
3.3 HYDROCARBONS......................................................................................7
3.4 RENEWABLE ENERGY ..............................................................................8
3.5 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION ..........................................10
3.6 POWER SECTOR ......................................................................................11
3.7 TRANSPORT SECTOR ..............................................................................11
3.8 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR ........................................................................12
3.9 HOTEL AND COMMERCIAL SECTOR ......................................................13
3.10 MANUFACTURING SECTOR....................................................................13
3.11 HOUSEHOLD SECTOR ............................................................................14
4. STEPS FORWARD TO GRENADA’S
LOW CARBON DEVELOPMENT ..................................................15
ANNEX I — COUNTRY PROFILE ............................................................................18
ANNEX II — ENERGY SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC ........................................................20
ANNEX III — SWOT ANALYSIS ..............................................................................30
ANNEX IV — NATIONAL SUSTAINABLE ENERGY OFFICE ....................................32
ANNEX V — OFFSHORE HYDROCARBON PROGRAMME ....................................33
ANNEX VI — ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACT ................................................................33
CONTENTSGRENADA
CDM ................................................Clean Development Mechanism
CREDP ....Caribbean Renewable Energy Development Programme
ECERA ..................Eastern Caribbean Energy Regulatory Authority
EC$..............................................................Eastern Caribbean Dollar
EE ............................................................................Energy Efficiency
GEF ......................................................Global Environmental Facility
GoG..............................................................Government of Grenada
GTZ ............Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit
(German Development Agency)
GWh ............................................................................Gigawatt-hour
IRC ..........................................Independent Regulatory Commission
kWh ..............................................................................Kilowatt-hour
kWp ............................................................................Kilowatt-peak
MW ....................................................................................Megawatt
NEP ................................................................National Energy Policy
NSEO ........................................National Sustainable Energy Office
OAS................................................Organisation of American States
OECS ..............................Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
RETs ................................................Renewable Energy Technologies
TOE ..............................................................Tonnes of Oil EquivalentE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
establishing an energy development strategy to foster the sustainable development of Grenada.
The Government’s vision is to ensure access to affordable, equitable, and reliable energy
sources and services to drive and secure national development, and to improve the quality
of life for all of its citizens. The Government is therefore committed to:
◆ Facilitate the integration of renewable energy sources into the national energy mix;
◆ Guarantee the judicious development of the island’s indigenous hydrocarbon resources;
◆ Guarantee social inclusiveness and equity to access to energy; and
◆ Build a more competitive, productive economy.
This document serves as the guideline for the Government to achieve sustainable
energy and low carbon development. Further its purpose is to:
◆ Create an appropriate, enabling and dynamic incentive regime, both regulatory
and institutional, to achieve a more diversified and sustainable energy sector;
◆ Place energy sector management and development within the framework and
principles of sustainable development to facilitate the transition to sustainable
energy production and use; and
◆ Use energy as a tool for sustainable development and build resilience into a newly
restructured economy to guarantee its citizens a sustainable quality of life.
Since the overarching goal of this energy policy is to contribute towards the sustainable
development of Grenada, it is prudent to place this energy policy within the framework
and principles of sustainable energy development and the St. Georges’ Declaration of
Principles for Environmental Sustainability in the OECS.2 Therefore this National Energy
Policy is guided by the following principles:
◆ Energy Security – Ensure affordable and reliable supply of energy sources to
sustain long-term socio-economic development;
◆ Energy Independence – Achieve reduced national reliance on imported energy sources;
◆ Energy Efficiency – Maximize the efficient use of energy resources;
◆ Energy Conservation – Ensure significant energy conservation in the production
and end-use of energy, in particular the consumption per capita;
◆ Environmental Sustainability – Prioritize clean and sustainable energy technologies
to transition to a lower carbon economy and reduce potential environmental or public
health effects associated with energy production and consumption;
◆ Resource exploitation – Avoid the irresponsible exploitation of energy resources
beyond the regeneration capacity;
◆ Energy Prices – Ensure rational and effective market conditions and energy services
to lower energy prices for the consumer; and
◆ Energy Equity and Solidarity – Ensure that all sectors of society have access to
affordable and reliable energy services. This also entails securing and leaving enough
energy resources for the next generations to satisfy their future needs.
For the purposes of this document the energy sector stakeholders are government, householders, the business, industrial and commercial sectors, interested NGOs, professional,
consumer and industry associations, and energy service providers GRENLEC, the petroleum
products importers and distributors and energy service companies.
1
AND GUIDING
PRINCIPLESGRENADA
◆ Global energy consumption is dominated by fossil fuels. It is estimated that
approximately 87.3% of global total primary energy supply (TPES) in 2007 was
supplied by non-renewable energy sources, while the share of renewables (hydro,
geothermal, wind, solar and biomass) was 12.7%, up from 12.5% in 1973,
a limited increase in the energy mix, see Figure 1.
Figure 1. Fuel shares of total final primary energy supply in 1973 and 20073
◆ Moreover, despite the high volatility of oil prices on the global market, current
consumption for 2009 was 84.9 million barrels per day, expected to grow to
86.5 barrels in 2010 and reach 118 million barrels per day by 2030.4
◆ The majority of this growth will take place in China, India and OECD countries.
◆ Soaring oil prices in 2007 and 2008 reached a record high of US$147 a barrel in July
2008 and helped to precipitate a global economic recession, which dampened but did
not stop the historically-sustained growth of energy investment, energy consumption
and CO2 emissions.
◆ Oil prices subsequently collapsed to 91 EC$ per barrel (US $34/bl) by the end of 2008,
but by the end of 2009 had returned to ~216 EC$ per barrel (US $80/bl). In mid-2011,
several of the world’s major economies have shown initial signs of recovery, bringing
with it the likelihood of increasing demand and with that increased oil prices.
2
OF THE
ENERGY
SITUATION
3. International Energy Agency (IEA), 2009. Key World Energy Statistics, 2009.
International Energy Agency, Paris, France, pg. 28. Last accessed March, 2010 at:
http://wwwieaorg/textbase/nppdf/free/2009/keystats2009pdfE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
◆ The Caribbean Community (CARICOM) region is heavily dependent on fossil fuels. It is
estimated that up to 95% of commercial energy consumed in the CARICOM region is
derived from fossil fuels, primarily oil.5
◆ Of the fifteen CARICOM member states6 Trinidad & Tobago produces a large surplus of
oil and gas for export; Belize and Suriname each produce the equivalent of about threequarters of their local petroleum products consumption, and Barbados produces the
equivalent of about one-eighth of its local consumption.
◆ The other CARICOM countries import all of their petroleum products which are supplied
mostly from refineries in Trinidad and Tobago, Curaçao, Puerto Rico and St Croix, and
furthermore entered into regional energy supply initiatives such as the Trinidad and
Tobago-sponsored Petroleum Stabilization Fund (implemented in July 2004) and
Venezuela’s Energy Co-operation Agreement (PetroCaribe), signed in June 2006.
◆ The recent combination of record high, volatile energy prices and the 2007/08 recession
has had a dramatic and negative impact on the economies of most CARICOM states,
many of which depend on extra-regional travel and tourism for a significant portion of
their economic performance.7
◆ Within the OECS, there is a movement towards economic union and where an OECS
driven sub-regional energy policy is being developed to identify opportunities to reduce
costs and achieve economies of scale through coordinated approaches.
◆ Current studies under the aegis of the CREDP, GTZ, OAS, IDB and World Bank are expected to be instrumental in the development of regional strategies and synergies; the
GoG has accentuated the need for inclusion in such studies with a more participatory
role and to ensure a holistic approach.
◆ A World Bank sponsored project to establish the Eastern Caribbean Energy Regulatory
Authority (ECERA) to oversee the electrical energy sectors of the participating countries
has commenced and is also expected to inform policy planning.
◆ Grenada (having a private monopolistic electric utility) has indicated an interest in
joining ECERA. Negotiations and agreement on the terms of the establishment of the
ECERA are still ongoing and it is premature to regard the birth
of this new institution as a fait accompli.
◆ Grenada is committed to regional approaches and will
cooperate whenever national and regional interests converge.
2.3 GRENADA’S ENERGY SITUATION
General information:
◆ Grenada is a tri-island state comprised of the islands
of Grenada, Carriacou and Petite Martinique, covering
133 square miles (344 square km), and located in the eastern
Caribbean. Grenada is an independent nation, governed under
a Westminster-style democracy with a population size of
105,552 and has a per capita GNI (2008) of US $5,710.00.
THE ENERGY
SITUATION
5. Trinidad & Tobago, an oil-producing CARICOM country, uses mostly natural gas for its
electricity production
6CARICOM is comprised of 15 member and 5 associate member statesGRENADA ◆ Grenada is affectionately known as “The Spice Isle” of the Caribbean and prior to
Hurricane Ivan in 2004, was the largest producer of nutmeg in the Caribbean and the
second largest globally.
◆ The total post-Ivan GDP by economic activity was estimated to be approximately
1,386 million EC dollars (approximately US$519M) in 2009 and was projected
to be US$524M by the end of 2010.8
◆ Grenada as a small open economy, still requiring a post-Ivan agricultural recovery, and
relying heavily on dwindling tourism receipts, is also faced with the spiralling market
prices of food and fuel which are both imported.
Energy supply:
◆ Grenada’s current energy situation exhibits an almost complete dependence on
imported petroleum products and an ad hoc approach to energy efficiency.
◆ Excluding wood-fuel and other biomass sources9
, Grenada’s total (primary and
secondary10) energy supply grew from 89,500 TOE in 2006 to approximately 116,000
TOE in 2008. The contribution of renewable energy to this total was negligible.11
TABLE 1.
GRENADA TOTAL ENERGY SUPPLY 2001–2008 IN TONNES
OF OIL EQUIVALENT (TOE)
Fuel 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Gasoline 19,786 17,874 22,280 20,202 20,368 27,518 37,910 36,746
Diesel 34,021 34,853 16,456 8,320 16,086 51,864 62,033 68,597
Kerosene 90 179 90 90 4,217 6,281 5,922 6,281
LPG 5,362 5,430 6,143 4,736 3,754 3,785 3,145 4,250
TOTAL 59,259 58,337 44,969 33,348 44,426 89,447 109,009 115,874
Source: Central Statistical Office
Petroleum product consumption data for 2009 is presented in Annex 2.
8. Source: Central Statistical Department
9. No data on biomass resources (fuelwood, charcoal) are compiled by the government
10Grenada consumes only a small amount of other primary energyas most of its energy is
THE ENERGY
SITUATIONE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
◆ Preliminary seismic data of the geology offshore of Grenada is highly prospective
and strongly suggests that the island’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) may contain
hydrocarbons.
◆ With regard to renewable resources, preliminary geochemical data has indicated that
Grenada may possess geothermal resources of medium enthalpy in the Mount St.
Catherine area and the government has signalled its desire to aggressively pursue
this resource.
◆ In June 2006 Grenada became a signatory to the PetroCaribe Agreement with
Venezuela and is one of thirteen Caribbean signatory countries. Under this agreement
petroleum products are accessible to signatories on a concessionary loan-financed
basis.12 This long term supply agreement with Venezuela’s state company, Petróleos
de Venezuela (PDVSA) meant that Grenada would receive 340,000 barrels of gasoline,
fuel oil and diesel annually.
Energy consumption:
◆ Grenada’s primary energy consumption is dominated by transportation, which took
almost half of all energy consumed in 2008, followed by the power sector, with
approximately 40% of the total consumption.
◆ At the end-use level, approximately 12% of Grenada’s total commercial energy supply
is estimated to be consumed by households for cooking and electricity, about 7% is
consumed by business, industry and the public sector (in the form of electricity) and
approximately 25% is lost, mostly as heat during electricity generation.
Electricity generation and use:
◆ In Grenada the private-public owned Grenada Electricity Services Ltd (GRENLEC) is the
sole provider of electricity and operates diesel power stations at Queens Park (installed
capacity 45.9 MW) and on the islands of Carriacou (3.2 MW) and Petit Martinique
(0.5 MW). The company also maintains 2.8 MW of standby generation capacity at the
St George’s University campus at True Blue.
◆ Peak demand for electricity on GRENLEC’s system
in 2010 was 30.8 MW, all of which was serviced
by a total of 52 MW of diesel power.
◆ Electricity sales in 2010 were 185.79 GWh to
41,222 customers, and demand is expected to
increase at 4% per annum in the business as
usual (BAU) scenario.
◆ In 2008, Grenada’s oil import bill was EC$
$68,768,000 representing 7% of Grenada’s total
import bill and 76% of Grenada’s total annual
export revenues.
◆ In 2008, the price of electricity soared to over 0.81 EC$ (US$0.30/kWh), which is
among the highest in the world, placing severe hardship on householders and making
businesses and industry uncompetitive.
THE ENERGY
SITUATION
diill() id ffdliih iihGRENADA
The GoG recognises that building a dynamic, diversified energy sector will require the
establishment of a new institutional framework. To ensure the proper use and transparency of allocation of public funds to achieve the energy policy goals, an adequate
institutional regime and competent base of professionals, administrative, legal and
financial personnel is warranted. This will result in the rational creation of regulations
and incentives to address needed market conditions for improved energy services to
lower energy prices for the consumer.
Good governance, ensuring that all sectors of society have access to objective information
and means to participate in decision making will lead to continued public support. This
also entails allowing supervision of energy resources destined for the next generations to
satisfy their future needs.
Policies:
◆ Establish relevant government entities with the adequate mandates, authority and
staffing to address objectives of the energy policy. Starting with the establishment of
a National Sustainable Energy Office (NSEO) based on a clear Terms of Reference,
presented in Annex IV;
◆ Put in place a new and efficient institutional architecture to access and manage
development financing mechanisms and international resources destined to
national energy initiatives or projects, in a phased programme, as public financial
resources allow;
◆ Create specialized professional educational programs to capacitate public sector staff
to operate in the energy sector (conventional and renewable energy);
◆ Continuously review and publish changes in technology, efficiencies of operations,
update energy statistics, changes in the costs and conditions in both the renewable
and hydrocarbon markets;
◆ Continuously assess the effectiveness of policy implementation and their impacts on
the socio-economic conditions in Grenada.
3.2 LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
To meet the objectives and goals of this National Energy Policy, the Government aims to
formulate and put in place the adequate set of laws, programs and regulations taking into
account the distinct nature and character of Grenada’s legal regime to shape the energy
future and development of Grenada.
3
AND
POLICIESE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
Policies:
◆ Formulate legislation and contracts governing the energy and related sectors, consistent
with the needs and duties of a modern developmental energy sector;
◆ Continuously review, keep inventory and rationalize existing energy contracts;
◆ Establish a regulatory body for licensing, oversight, regulation and rate setting for the
electricity and transport sector;
◆ Regulations and legislation in relation to the exploration and development of offshore
hydrocarbons and geothermal resources are to be prioritized;
◆ Adequate and timely legislation is to be developed which gives effect to the provisions
of this policy;
◆ Resolutions of contractual and legal issues relating to maritime boundaries with
Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela are to be investigated;
◆ Initiate discussions on the creation and assessment of Joint Development Zones or
Unitization Agreements, as may be appropriate, with countries which share a maritime
boundary with Grenada.
3.3 HYDROCARBONS
The Government of Grenada aims to use a two-pronged approach to reduce the dependence on imported hydrocarbons. The GoG acknowledges the finite nature of its potential
petroleum and natural gas reserves, for which it intends to exploit in the most efficient
way and with a long-term transition vision in mind; using fossil fuel revenues for the
development of strong and comprehensive strategies that promote efficiency and
renewable energy development.
Policies:
◆ To explore and confirm indigenous hydrocarbon reserves and exploit these in the most
efficient way and in compliance to the principles of this Energy Policy;
◆ Use, if deemed financially and socio-environmentally viable, hydrocarbon reserves as
a means to generate revenues as an export commodity to allow for the long-termGRENADA
prevent energy supply disruptions;
◆ Ensure that significant onshore and offshore hydrocarbon projects are subjected to full
and rigorous Environmental and Social Impact Assessments;
◆ Build up the necessary national human and technical capacity to contain and clean up
oil spills in case of calamities;
◆ Incorporate into its offshore regulatory framework any lessons learned from the
Deepwater Horizon incident in 2010, in the Gulf of Mexico, recognising the potential
disastrous results of a similar incident occurring in the waters of the eastern Caribbean.
◆ Seek to join with other territories in the region in order to create economies of scale for
viable production and access to cleaner energy supply alternatives (including e.g. low
sulphur diesel (<50 ppm sulphur) originating from regional located refineries);
◆ Reject any kind of fossil fuel based power plant development (in particular coal-fired)
not in line with the principles and objectives outlined in this policy; and
◆ Continue to participate in PetroCaribe and other regional initiatives such as the recently
launched Energy and Climate Partnership of the Americas (ECPA) provided that the
initiatives are and remain compatible with the objectives and principles of the national
energy policy.
3.4 RENEWABLE ENERGY
The Government of Grenada acknowledges the great indigenous renewable energy
potential Grenada possesses and the need to properly assess the renewable energy
resources development potential (including wind, solar, geothermal, and other future alternatives) to allow tailoring specific incentives and regulations to accelerate the introduction
and deployment of renewable energy technologies (RETs). In particulary, the Government
of Grenada aims to prioritize the investigation of Grenada’s geothermal energy potential
that is deemed an attractive renewable energy resource that can change the energy sector
significantly and transition to a lower national carbon footprint. Furthermore, the GOG
recognises the energy, economic and socio-environmental benefits to be derived from
pursuing all available RETs and integrating them into the national energy mix. Some key
objectives for the GoG are:
◆ Prioritize the use of Grenada’s indigenous renewable energy sources to provide
maximum economic performance and growth;
◆ Reduce the national carbon footprint;
◆ Transition the country to a sustainable energy community predicated primarily on
renewable energy sources; and
◆ Position Grenada to create sustainable jobs and build resilience in its economy.
POLICIESE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
◆ Promote and facilitate the introduction of renewable energy technologies in the
country’s energy matrix;
◆ Ensure national energy data, balances, matrixes and statistics are developed, publically
shared and regularly updated;
◆ Compile renewable energy resource potential assessments and make information
publicly available;
◆ Provide fiscal incentives (e.g. tax rebates, subsidies, feed-in tariffs, et al) based on
objective cost-benefit analysis to all sectors of the economy and society (considering
equitable access to such) to encourage increased use of renewable energy and energy
efficiency technology and systems;
◆ Provide networks, channels, and incentives for the development of local expertise to
install, operate, manage and maintain aforementioned systems;
◆ Promote the development of small-scale, grid-integrated
renewable generation capacity and formulate procedures and
standards for system interconnection, reciprocal tariffs and
streamlined project approval processes;
◆ Design and implement an ongoing national programme
(for all age levels) of education and awareness on energy –
environment – society;
◆ Continuously review, with a view to implementing, market
innovations in the area of RETs such as may be appropriate for
Grenada’s circumstances and conditions;
◆ Provide fiscal and other incentives to promote the use of solar
water heating in new and existing homes and the use of small
grid-integrated renewable systems;
◆ Ensure the integration of small renewables systems to the national grid, and including
provisions for reciprocal tariffs with the utility.
Energy resource specific:
◆ Ensure the creation of required legislation for the management of geothermal power
development and use and channel resources to materialize its deployment;
◆ Engage into collaboration with similar ongoing geothermal development activities in
the region to secure required technical assistance and financing;
◆ Assess the potential for a waste to energy facility for Grenada;
◆ Encourage the investigation of the potential to produce alternative liquid fuels
(quasi-biodiesel) from municipal solid waste and agricultural wastes;
◆ Assess the enforcement of mandatory installation of solar water heaters (SWHs) on
all new public-sector buildings, hotels and all other buildings, having a commercial
demand for hot water;
◆ Review the existing state of wind power assessments island-wide and ensure
continuance; and
◆ Maintain and overview and monitoring on-going projects and initiatives for wind power
development and harmonise with the Government’s legal and policy prescriptions.
POLICIESGRENADA
Maximizing the efficient use of energy resources and ensuring significant energy conservation in the production and end-use of energy in all sectors of the Grenadian economy and
society is critical to relieve the continued need and pressure to secure supply of energy
and production capacity expansion and related costs.
Policies:
◆ Ensure the gradual displacement of hydrocarbon imports and usage by reducing the
national energy demand;
◆ Promote and facilitate research and surveys in energy supply and consumption patterns
and more efficient alternatives;
◆ Inform consumers upon behavioural changes that can lead to energy conservation in
the end-use sectors;
◆ Design appropriate energy-efficiency and conservation programmes;
◆ Properly assess the energy and carbon reduction potentials based on objective technical
and behavioural factors;
◆ Provide comprehensive fiscal incentives to encourage the import and use of energyefficient appliances, vehicles, technology in power generation and manufacturing, and
other sectors;
◆ Encourage and facilitate energy-conservation behaviour by all consumers;
◆ Encourage and facilitate the use of energy audits in businesses and households;
◆ Encourage appliance suppliers to import energy efficient appliances and to properly
label them;
◆ Adopt appropriate standards for energy efficient building codes that will inform the
design, construction and outfitting of buildings in Grenada;
◆ Make such standards to be mandatory for all new public sector/statutory construction;
◆ Provide incentives for preferential rates for financing, by the commercial banking sector,
of new (and retrofitted) green homes and buildings;
◆ Provide the public and private sector incentives and institutional capacity to monitor
and analyse cross-sectoral energy efficiency and conservation issues and performance;
◆ Consider tax incentives for industry to use energy-efficient equipment and processes
such as heat recovery;
◆ Establish efficiency standard for commercial and industrial activities;
◆ Provide tax relief/rebates to companies meeting the energy efficiency standards set by
government (e.g. complying to “cradle to cradle” manufacturing processes);
◆ Provide incentives to re-use and recycle as an integral part of companies’ operations
and support cradle to cradle practices as an energy efficiency tool;
POLICIESE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
programmes to promote household energy efficiency and conservation;
◆ Develop and deploy a sustained Energy Efficiency public awareness programme;
◆ Develop and deploy a Public Sector Energy Conservation Programme;
◆ Facilitate the delivery of the above by drafting, reviewing, finalising and enacting
an Energy Efficiency Act based on the foregoing principles.
3.6 POWER SECTOR
The GoG recognizes that electricity is the most widely used energy carrier for most energy
users in Grenada and aims to ensure a reliable and affordable supply of energy sources
and conversion into electricity and its delivery via a robust network that matches the
needs of the multiple sectors of the economy and society.
Policies:
◆ Create a regulatory framework and necessary incentives that will foster/increase/
improve high efficiency of electricity generation, transmission and distribution;
◆ Provide incentives for the introduction by electricity generators of renewable energy
technologies and fuel sources that reduce dependency, increase energy conversion
efficiency and lower greenhouse gas emissions (environmentally-sound);
◆ Provide access to imported fuels at prices that reflect the economic and environmental
costs of their procurement, conversion and consumption;
◆ Provide a regulatory framework that allows for the fair (avoid oligopolies), efficient
and economically viable involvement of private investment in the power sector; and
◆ Provide the appropriate standards, guidelines and regulatory system for the integration
of renewable energy to the national electricity system.
3.7 TRANSPORT SECTOR
The GoG recognizes the need to shift to cleaner and more efficient transport means
and fuels. Being the largest energy consuming sector and highly dependent on
imported transport fuels (gasoline and diesel) it is imperative to address energy
supply and use in the transport sector.
POLICIESGRENADA
◆ Create the appropriate tax regime to encourage importation of fuel efficient vehicles,
the development of the supporting infrastructure and ethanol and other “green fuels”
(e.g. biodiesel, including algal oil);
◆ Ensure the development and introduction of vehicle emission and fuel efficiency
standards;
◆ Consider the introduction of mandatory annual quotas for dealers regarding hybrid,
full electric and other more efficient and alternative vehicles;
◆ Promote alternative public modes of transport (review the national transportation plan
and create a sustainable transportation strategy);
◆ Support pilot projects to assist road and sea fleets in reducing fuel consumption;
◆ Assess the potential for ethanol and biodiesel (from national or regional sources) supply
and use in Grenada and explore the mandatory introduction of standards for ethanol
content in gasoline (e.g. E30) and for biodiesel content in diesel (e.g. B2).
3.8 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
The GoG aims to continue to develop and secure its agricultural sector in particular for the
spices from which it takes its moniker of “The Spice Isle.” It will seek to produce not only
primary agricultural products but will manufacture value added and tertiary goods in an
efficient and sustainable manner, producing high value niche and boutique products for
discerning markets.
Policies:
◆ Promote the use of energy-efficient and low impact production measures (reduce
incidence of pollution from land-base sources);
◆ Promote recycling/harvesting of water for use in agriculture to reduce energy
requirements for water pumping;
◆ Ensure there are righteous cycles and that composting opportunities are created
from which the agriculture sector can benefit to reduce use of energy-intensive of
fertilizers; and
◆ Encourage the alternative use of unnecessary harvesting wastes for energy production.
POLICIESE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
The hotel and commercial sectors are vital to the country’s ability to earn foreign
exchange. Nonetheless, it is recognised that they both are significant consumers of energy,
water and other resources. The GoG aims to ensure that these sectors lead the national
thrust for sustainable energy use, green procurement, and protection of natural resources
from rapid consumption and depletion. Compliance will be secured through the creation
of such incentive and regulatory regimes as may be appropriate for various sectors of
the market.
Policies:
◆ Recognise and promote the greening efforts of such businesses to make them models of
best practice which other local entities can emulate;
◆ Evaluate the mandatory use of solar water heating in all new hotel construction;
◆ Provide incentives for small hotels to become certified by internationally recognized
certification standards; and
◆ Conduct inspections to ensure compliance with policy objectives.
3.10 MANUFACTURING SECTOR
The GoG recognizes the need and potential of promoting the increased application of
energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies in manufacturing activities to trigger
development of new and innovative local businesses, create new markets and employment
opportunities, and use this as a mechanism towards a more competitive and resilient
economy.
Policies:
◆ Provide tax incentives for industry to use energy-efficient equipment and processes such
as heat recovery;
◆ Provide tax relief for companies meeting the energy efficiency standards set by
government;
◆ Give tax rebates for companies which can show “cradle to cradle” manufacturing
processes;
◆ Provide incentives to re-use and recycle as an integral part of companies’ operations;
and
◆ Support cradle to cradle practices
POLICIESGRENADA
Grenada’s household sector will benefit from a diversified supply of energy services, with
lower energy intensity and carbon emissions. Critical to the consumer is the fact that when
fully implemented, new initiatives in energy generation will result in lower prices for
household and domestic purposes. The GoG wants to communicate that consumers also
have a responsibility to be aware of how their energy usage will impact on the environment, domestic and national expenditure and to be conservative and careful in how
energy is used.
Policies:
◆ Develop and implement educational and action-oriented programmes to promote
consumer awareness about household energy efficiency and conservation;
◆ Provide fiscal and other incentives to promote the use of solar water heating in
new and existing homes;
◆ Provide fiscal and other incentives to promote the use of small grid-integrated
renewable systems;
◆ Facilitate the integration of small renewables systems to the national grid, including
provisions for reciprocal tariffs with the utility; and
◆ Develop and support education, awareness and action-based programmes that
encourage energy-saving behaviour at home.
POLICIESE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
4
FORWARD TO
GRENADA’S
LOW CARBON
DEVELOPMENT
objectives are to be achieved every effort will have to be made to accelerate those
activities which are on the critical path. Having charted the destination of sustainable
energy and low carbon development, Government must now take the steps toward that
ultimate goal of “ensuring access to affordable, equitable, reliable energy sources and
services to drive and secure national development, and improve the quality of life for all
of its citizens”.
In that regard to ensure that this policy is adopted and lives through implementation,
the Government has created the 10-year Grenada Energy Development Strategy
(see figure below).
Grenada Energy Development Strategy (2010-2020)
The Grenada Energy Development Strategy lays out the required actions for the next
coming decade with specific priorities summarized as follows:
Grenada’s Low Carbon Development Strategy (2010 – 2020): Key MilestonesGRENADA
Non-technical actions:
a) Establish a National Energy Commission (NEC) comprising representative stakeholders. The role of the NEC will be to review the achievement of the policy targets
and rate implementation achievements, receive comments from stakeholders and the
wider public on aspects of the policy and how their interests are being affected and
feed this information back to government, recommending solutions where necessary.
b) In order to reduce the incidence of resistance to adoption of the policy, Government
will take leadership in delivering and implementing the policy across the government
sector and crafting a Public Sector Energy Programme which will embrace activities
comprising all the objectives of the policy – conservation, efficiency, cost reduction,
energy independence, and sustainability.
c) This policy document will be freely shared with all sectors of society – NGOs and
Civil Society, the Private Sector, Institutions such as the Church, Communities
and Community Based Organisations, Sports and Cultural Groups, Households,
Professional Organisations, so as to encourage the widest possible adoption and
support across the entire society.
d) Urgently develop the fiscal and economic regime and incentives needed to promote
energy investment.
e) Put the necessary institutional structure in place on which the policy will rest
including all the necessary legislation, staffing and the appointment of a person
with the authority to “drive” policy implementation.
f) Develop and implement a national energy efficiency programme, with baseline setting,
targets, monitoring and verification by final quarter of 2012.
g) Prepare a detailed strategy and action plan for the implementation of suggested and
planned actions that to achieve the National Energy Policy goals and objectives
where:
i. Stakeholders’ roles in the elaboration and timelines are defined.
ii. A clear prioritization of activities is provided based on identified
low-hanging fruits.
Furthermore, see below a table/list with specific technical and non-technical actions to
be completed:
Institutional Capacity Development (public and private)
Establish and staff the National Sustainable Energy Office
Establish and Staff the Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
Provide Incentives for Energy Service Companies
Legislative & Regulatory Framework Development
Promulgate an Energy Efficiency Act
Promulgate a Geothermal Act
Revise Offshore Petroleum Act and Regulations
Promulgate an Oil for Development Act
Revise the Electricity Supply Act
Establish and Join the Eastern Caribbean Energy Regulatory Authority
TO GRENADA’S
LOW CARBON
DEVELOPMENTE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
Maximising Energy Efficiency
Launch and Conduct a National Awareness Programme
Conduct and Evaluate Public Sector Conservation Programme
Continuously Review Economic Instruments to Spur Energy Efficiency
Transition to Renewable Energy for Domestic Demand
Complete Feasibility and Construct a 20 MW Geothermal Plant
Construct an Additional 20 MW Geothermal Plant
Construct a 2.5 MW Wind Turbine for Carriacou
Achieve 10% Electricity Generation by Wind & Solar PV
Establish Vehicle Fuel Efficiency Standards
Achieve 20% Market Penetration with Hybrid and Electric Vehicles
Offshore Hydrocarbon Programme Development
Select a Licensing Round Advisory Firm
Resolve Existing Contractual Issues
Conduct a Strategic Environmental Assessment
Complete Seismic Data Surveys and Contract Management Process
Conduct Marketing of Licensing Round & Sale of Data Packages
Development and Conduct of Bid Process
Contract Negotiation and Bid Award for Exploration and Production
Revenue Generation
Source Grant and Concessionary Financing
Generate Carbon Credits from Project Activities
Develop and Submit for Funding Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions
Sale of Offshore Data and Bid Packages
Generate Royalties from Hydrocarbon Sales
Regional and International Initiatives
Participate in Regional and International Sustainable Energy Initiatives
Strengthen Linkage between Energy Policy and Climate Change Negotiations
Review Participation in Petrocaribe
Participate in the Energy and Climate Partnership of the Americas
Contribute to the Development of a CARICOM/OECS Energy Policy
Special Energy Projects
Provide & Subsidise Energy Services to Very Low Income Households
Concluding Vision
This National Energy Policy is intended to set Grenada on a journey to sustainable
development with low carbon strategies as the principal driver.
TO GRENADA’S
LOW CARBON
DEVELOPMENTANNEX 
GRENADA IS A TRI-ISLAND STATE COMPRISED OF THE ISLANDS OF
Grenada, Carriacou and Petite Martinique, covering 133 square miles (344 square km), and
located at Latitude 12 7’ North Longitude 61 40’ West in the eastern Caribbean. Known as
“The Spice Isle,” Grenada is an independent nation, governed under a Westminster-style
democracy. The population numbers 105,552 and has a per capita GNI (2008) of 15,417
EC$ (US $5,710).
The country’s economy is relatively diversified but leaning toward the services sector.
In 2008, the predominant area of activity was the government services sector, with
commerce (wholesale, retail, banking and insurance), construction, communications
and tourism also of significant importance.
In September of 2004, Grenada was devastated by Hurricane Ivan which killed 39 people
and is estimated to have destroyed 90% of the country’s 28,000 houses. Most of the
crops and trees, including the nutmeg trees, were almost completely destroyed. The nutmeg industry is slowly being rebuilt; however it takes over 10 years for a nutmeg tree to
reach full productivity. Current nutmeg production is estimated to be approximately one
tenth of pre-2004 levels. Prior to Ivan, nutmeg was Grenada’s largest single exported
agricultural commodity.
As was the case both across the globe and within the Caribbean region, record high food
and energy prices during 2008 combined with the subsequent global economic downturn,
adversely affected Grenada’s socio-economic performance, and caused a significant
decline in tourism and other sectors. Tourism is the island’s largest revenue earner.
COUNTRY
PROFILEE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
downturn, Grenadas Gross Domestic Product (GDP) declined by over 7% in 2009 and
is predicted to grow by only 0.9% in 2010. Value Added Tax (VAT) was introduced on
February 1st, 2010 and its introduction may be reasonably expected to have an influence
on the price of energy, products and services, although it is too soon to say if and to what
extent energy consumption might be affected. Like other Caribbean countries, Grenada is
waiting to see what the full implications of the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico will be for
the marine environment and the supply of goods. Grenada is also taking a keen interest in
the resulting US moratorium on deep sea drilling and a pending review of their offshore
regulatory regime. Lessons learned will be incorporated into Grenada’s offshore
hydrocarbon programme.
In June 2006 Grenada became a signatory to the PetroCaribe Agreement with Venezuela
and is one of thirteen Caribbean signatory countries. Under this agreement petroleum
products are accessible to signatories on a concessionary loan-financed basis.13 This long
term supply agreement with Venezuela’s state company, Petroleos de Venezuela (PDVSA)
meant that Grenada would receive 340,000 barrels of gasoline, fuel oil and diesel annually.
The Government is resolute that future economic development will rest on both hydro-
}carbon and renewable energy resources and acknowledges that it must make a serious
thrust toward securing these resources. In that regard this policy will speak to an energy
framework that contemplates the exploitation of the renewable energy resources as well
as of exploring and developing hydrocarbons if they are found in commercial volumes. In
that event, emphasis will be placed on oil and gas exportation in so far as resources allow.
Preliminary seismic data of the geology offshore of Grenada is highly prospective and
strongly suggests that the island’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) may contain hydrocarbons. The GoG intends to embark on an exploration and exploitation programme.
In mid-2010, the GoG completed its maritime boundary demarcation negotiations with
Trinidad. Negotiations with its other southern neighbour Venezuela are also to be resolved.
Government recognises the potential for the creation of a Joint Development Zone and
the unitization of offshore hydrocarbon reserves if there are common reservoirs on the
boundaries of these neighbouring States.
With regard to renewable resources, preliminary geochemical data has indicated
that Grenada may possess geothermal resources of medium enthalpy in the Mount
St. Catherine area and the government has signalled its desire to aggressively pursue
this resource. The decision to anchor Grenada’s development on renewable energy
technologies is made both urgent and relevant by the experience of Hurricane Ivan and
other extreme weather events which literally devastated and decimated every aspect of
Grenada’s natural landscape, physical infrastructure, economic activity and way of life.
COUNTRY
PROFILEANNEX I
The Transport Sector
At the end of 2009 there were 26,387 registered vehicles in Grenada, about 40% of which
are cars and 27% SUVs. Gasoline-powered vehicles are dominant, though there is no
specific data on vehicles by fuel type. No ethanol blends are used and there are no
hybrids, natural gas or electric-powered vehicles in the tri-island State.
Though the market for imported used vehicles is significant, the importation of new
vehicles as a proportion of total vehicle imports has been rising, from 61% in 2006 to
77% in 2008.
Figure 2. Share of imported new and used vehicles 2003-2008,
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTICE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
vehicle stock has aged slowly over 2006 – 2008. The number of registered vehicles has
increased by an average of 5% per annum between 2006 and 2009, while over the same
period, imports declined significantly. Other things being equal, an aging vehicle stock
puts upward pressure on fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions, as older
vehicles tend to be less fuel-efficient.
Figure 3. Historical data on registered vehicles and imports
SOURCE: CENTRAL STATISTICAL OFFICE
The Power Sector
Since 1960, public electricity in Grenada has been provided by Grenada Electricity Services
Ltd (GRENLEC). GRENLEC is now a subsidiary of Grenada Private Power Limited, which
holds 50% of GRENLEC’S shares. Of the balance, 40% are held by the general public
(including 11% by the National Insurance Scheme) and 10% by the government. As of the
end of 2008, there were 41,228 domestic and commercial customers connected to the
national electricity grid.
Peak demand for electricity on GRENLEC’s system in 2008 was 29.4 MW, all of which was
serviced by a total of 52 MW of diesel power. Electricity sales in 2008 were 172.5 GWh to
41,222 customers, and demand is expected to increase at 4% per annum in the business
as usual (BAU) scenario.
GRENLEC operates diesel power stations at Queens Park (installed capacity 45.9 MW) and
on the islands of Carriacou (3.2 MW) and Petit Martinique (0.5 MW). The company also
maintains 2.8 MW of standby generation capacity at the St George’s University campus at
True Blue.
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTICANNEX I
TOTAL INSTALLED CAPACITY OF GRENLEC, 2009
LOCATION NAMEPLATE CAPACITY kW
Queens Park 45,890
St George's University 2,800
Carriacou 3,200
Petit Martinique 480
Total 52,370
SOURCE: GRENLEC
In addition to diesel power, approximately 0.1 MWp of photovoltaic generation capacity is
installed island-wide (this is 0.3% of peak demand). There is an established private sector
energy service company (GRENSOL) specializing in grid-connected PV systems and a
1:1 net metering interconnection policy established by GRENLEC with a proviso that independent power production does not exceed 1% of demand. It is likely that the 1% cap
will be exceeded by the Grenada Alternative Solar Project (GRASP), which will result in an
additional 200 households receiving ~ 1.2 kW grid-connected systems by 2012. This 1%
cap (arbitrarily established and imposed by GRENLEC) will be the subject of review and
negotiations with GRENLEC and will also be addressed in a revised Electricity Supply Act.
GRENLEC has provided a schedule of projected capacity that indicates an 11% renewable
energy contribution to installed capacity in 2013 through 2015. In December 2009,
GRENLEC submitted a Grenada Geothermal Development Strategy. If proven feasible,
GRENLEC intends to install a 20MW plant utilizing medium to low enthalpy hot water
and steam extracted from deep wells dug in the Mount St. Catherine region by the final
quarter of 2013. When completed, this project would increase the national renewable
energy contribution to 70% of electrical energy consumed.
Electricity consumption in Grenada is dominated by the commercial sector, which
accounted for 57% of all electricity sold in 2008, followed by the domestic sector, which
consumed 38%. The balance is made up of industrial usage 3% and street lighting 2%.
Per capita consumption by GRENLEC’s customers has been increasing. Post-hurricane Ivan
in 2004, average electricity consumption per household14 increased up to 2008, and then
declined by 4%. Despite the increase in prices in 2008, overall per capita electricity
consumption15 did not decrease.
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTIC
l kh lhhld diidd bl f hhld E NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
GRENLEC’s supply-side energy efficiency results over the period have been mixed: fuel
efficiency has not improved significantly over the past several years, but the company has
successfully reduced its distribution losses from over 13% of net generation in 2000 to
less than 9% in 2008.
St George’s University (SGU) commenced operations in Grenada in 1977. It contributes
10% of the national GDP and accounts for a significant proportion of the country’s total
energy demand. In 2008, SGU consumed 15.1 GWh of electrical energy representing
approximately 8.8% of the national demand. In 2009, SGU’s consumption increased to
17.8 GWh. There is no self-generation at SGU; however, there is a stand-by generator.17
Energy Prices
Fossil Fuel Prices:
The dramatic run-up in fossil fuel prices experienced in 2008 caused a commensurate
increase in energy prices. The cap on retail prices is adjusted monthly by the Energy
Division, Ministry of Finance, using a formula based on the imported price of the fuel.
It should be noted that although there are three “majors” in the retail market (Exxon,
Texaco, SOL/formerly Shell) all of the fuel stations sell their products at the capped price.
The lesson learned is that the introduction of other players in a small market does not
necessarily lead to true competition and reduced prices to the consumer. The caps on
retail prices of gasoline, diesel, kerosene and LPG, in imperial gallons, as of February 2010,
were as follows:
flibldi
Figure 4. Average household and per capita electricity consumption16
SOURCE: GRENLEC
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTICANNEX I
RETAIL PRICES OF FOSSIL FUEL-DERIVED
COMMODITY PRODUCTS
COMMODITY PRICE IN EC $
Gasoline $12.32/IG
Diesel $11.95/IG
Kerosene $ 8.53/IG
LPG (Cooking Gas) 20 lbs cylinder $42.61
LPG (Cooking Gas) 100 lbs cylinder $208.53
Electricity Prices:
Retail electricity prices in Grenada are at the lower end of the scale in the Windward
Islands, but are nonetheless considered high by local businesses, which face competition
from nearby markets in Trinidad, a country that enjoys far lower energy prices and much
greater economies of scale.
The retail price of electricity in Grenada is a combination of fixed and variable charges
per unit, with some additional capacity charges and taxes added.
The domestic electricity tariff is comprised of:
◆ a fixed energy charge, non-fuel Charge, per kWh of EC$ 0.4146;
◆ a fuel surcharge that varies with the price of oil;
◆ an environmental levy of $0, $5 0r $10 per month based on predetermined
consumption bands and;
◆ a government tax which is 5% of the Non-fuel Charge.
The commercial tariff is comprised of
◆ a fixed energy charge per kWh (Non-fuel Charge) of EC$ 0.4471;
◆ the Fuel Charge;
◆ a Floor Area Charge of 20 cents per 50 sq feet of floor area and
◆ the 5% government tax
The industrial tariff is comprised of
◆ a fixed energy charge per kWh (Non-fuel Charge) of EC$ 0.3277;
◆ the Fuel Charge;
◆ a Horsepower Charge of $2.00 per installed horsepower and
◆ the 5% government tax
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTICE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
ELECTRICITY TARIFF
Charge Domestic Commercial Industrial Street Lighting
Customer Customer Customer Customer
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTIC
Applies to
Government
Charges
(GCT)
Environmental
Levy
Fuel Charge
Non-fuel
Charge
Floor Area
Charge (per 50
sq. feet of floor
area)
Horsepower
Charge
Electricity
supplied to a
residential
property
for noncommercial activities
5% of
non-fuel charge
Less than 99
units - $0
99 – 149 units -
$5.00
150 units &
above - $10.00
Calculated
monthly
$0.4146 (cents
per unit)
Minimum -
$4.00
NA
NA
Electricity
supplied for
non-residential
or business
activities
5% of
non-fuel charge
NA
Calculated
monthly
$0.4471 cents
(per unit)
20 cents (per
month)
NA
Electricity
supplied for
industry or
where electric
motors have an
aggregate maximum power
output rating of
5 or more horse
power and are
not normally
used between
6.00 p.m. and
10.00 p.m.
5% of
non-fuel charge
NA
Calculated
monthly
$0.3277 cents
(per unit)
NA
$2.00 (per
horsepower)
Minimum -
Electricity
supplied to
Government,
local
authorities for
street lights.
Private
customers who
apply for street
lights
5% of
non-fuel charge
NA
Calculated
monthly
$0.3745 cents
(per unit)
NA
NAANNEX I
It is notable that only domestic customers are charged the environmental levy.
The fuel surcharge, which all customers pay, is a fuel cost recovery mechanism that was
implemented in response to extreme fuel price volatility that followed the global oil price
shocks of 1973 and 1979.18
The retail price of electricity19 in Grenada has increased significantly since 2004 and
averaged EC$1.06 (39 US cents) per kWh in 2008. After 2005, the fuel surcharge has
accounted for more than half of the total retail price.
Figure 5. Grenada’s Historical average electricity price in EC$/kWh. Source:
Grenada Electricity Services Ltd.
The floor area charge appears to function as a type of demand charge, meant to recover
GRENLEC’s cost of having capacity available, whether used or not at any given time;
to service the instantaneous demand of its commercial customers. As such, this is an
arbitrary device20, as there is no universal correlation between floor area and the power
demand of a commercial enterprise. The horsepower charge, which is charged based on
the installed horsepower (potential power demand) of the facility, has the same function
in the industrial tariff.
Moreover, the Value Added Tax (VAT) was fully rolled out on February 1, 2010 and applies
to the non-fuel charge at a rate of 15% replacing the GCT which was 5%. In the case of
Commercial and Industrial users the increase in the tariff at current fuel prices ranges from
4 to 5%. In the case of the domestic, the first 99 kWh units are exempt and as such it is
only usage over 150 units that would attract VAT and by extension reflect an overall
increase in rates.
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTICE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
be deducted from the VAT collected through the rate charges above. GRENLECs first return
was due on March 21st 2010. At this stage however, issues relating to the mechanics are
not fully ironed out and there is not full national understanding of all elements relating to
the VAT, its collection and returns. The company will discuss any concerns about the VAT
with Government and through those discussions resolve any elements of uncertainty.
Energy Supply Alternatives
Offshore Hydrocarbon Programme
Grenada being in close proximity to the oil producing countries of Trinidad and Tobago and
Venezuela may in fact share subsea hydrocarbon reservoirs. The Government of Grenada is
seeking to structure a strong exploration and production programme for offshore hydrocarbons. Previous attempts to initiate such a programme were constrained by:
◆ unresolved maritime boundaries;
◆ ongoing litigation and;
◆ an incomplete geological data package
The Government has expressed the desire to follow the Norwegian “Oil for Development”
model in an attempt to avoid the “Dutch Disease” if the offshore hydrocarbon exploration
and exploitation programme is successful. An appropriate legislative and institutional
framework will be required to regulate the offshore sector. The Government expects to initiate a competitive licensing round for offshore hydrocarbon exploration and exploitation
rights. Although revenues may be generated by the sale of prospectivity data, if oil and gas
reserves are discovered, it will take at least seven to ten years to develop the infrastructure
to bring these resources to the market (circa 2020).
Geothermal
Grenada is ranked eighth in the Lesser Antilles chain of islands in order of development
potential21 and preliminary geochemical data indicate that Grenada may possess
geothermal resources of medium enthalpy in the Mount St Catherine area.
GRENLEC has recently indicated its interest in geothermal energy development and has
submitted a proposed development strategy to the government. GRENLEC has suggested
that a possible scenario would be the installation of a 20 MW geothermal plant to be
operational by the last quarter of 2013, with a longer term plan to increase geothermal
capacity to 40+ MW. This is a positive development which aligns with Government’s
policy. The company’s capacity projections22 through 2015, short and long term business
plans, future Annual Reports and the company’s formal documentation must now be made
to reflect this stated intention if it is to be regarded and accepted by the wider public as
part of GRENLEC’s intended business approach. It is also expected that GRENLEC will
indicate where its priorities in renewable energy investments will be placed.
To ensure the transition to renewable energy in the electricity sector, the government will
set renewable portfolio standards in a revised Electricity Supply Act.
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTICANNEX I
compatible with the national energy policy. It is anticipated that the commercial framework for the geothermal programme will be structured as shown below.
Figure 6. Envisaged Geothermal Programme Structure.
Solar
Grenada has the highest penetration rate of grid-connected solar photovoltaic (PV)
systems in the Eastern Caribbean. This is mostly due to the work of Grenada Solar Power
Ltd (Grensol), a local company established in 2005 to provide photovoltaic systems to
private customers. Grensol has negotiated a grid interconnection agreement with
GRENLEC that provides for 1:1 net metering provided that the installed capacity of any
individual installation does not exceed 1% of GRENLEC’s peak demand.23 As stated
earlier, this 1% cap is likely to be exceeded in the near future and a Feed-in Tariff will
need to be negotiated/regulated by the GOG and (to be established) ECERA.
To date, Grensol has installed over 40 grid-connected and standalone systems, with
a total installed capacity of approximately 300 kWp. This total represents 1% of
the peak demand in Grenada. It is the largest market penetration of solar PV in the
Eastern Caribbean and has necessitated a re-negotiation of the interconnection policy
with GRENLEC.
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTICE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
solar irradiation
, on the order of 5 to 6 kWh/m2/day. Solar water heating is already in
use for providing hot water to private residences, hotels and other commercial buildings,
but its use falls far short of the widespread penetration achieved in nearby Barbados,
for example.
Wind
No significant wind energy resource development has yet taken place in Grenada. A single
private hotel owner installed an 80 kW wind turbine in 2007, which during 2008 was in
the process of being grid-connected. The process has not been completed because of a
number of technical challenges with the turbine system.
GRENLEC has been carrying out wind speed measurements at two privately-owned sites,
which the company is in negotiations to lease from their owners. The data collected from
the sites so far are reported by GRENLEC to be “promising”, with wind speeds averaging
about 7.6 meters per second at both sites.
GRENLEC’s projections of future generation capacity show 6 MW of wind capacity in place
in 2013. The company is considering wind/diesel/solar hybrid power as feasible options
for providing significant amounts of energy to Carriacou and Petit Martinique. The Government of Grenada has submitted a funding request to the ACP-EU Energy Facility to support
this renewable energy project in the sister islands. The project proposes the installation of
2 MW of name plate capacity wind turbines (Carriacou) use of back-up diesel generators,
battery storage, desalination and ice making/storage (an additional economic benefit to
the indigenous fishing communities) to balance power demand and mitigate the inherent
challenge of the intermittency of wind and solar power. It is intended that both Carricaou
and Petite Martinique will be 75% renewable by the end of 2013. Estimated capital costs
for this project are US$4.5M. This GRENLEC initiative is fully supported by the GOG, which
has submitted a funding request to the EU with GRENLEC as a Partner.
Waste-to-Energy (WTE)
There is significant interest in WTE as an energy option in Grenada. GRENLEC has stated
their interest in developing municipal solid waste as an alternative energy source and have
conducted an analysis of the waste stream and content to inform their plans. Accordingly,
their capacity projections show an addition of 1.5 MW of municipal Waste-to-Energy
capacity in 2013.
In addition, the Grenada Solid Waste Management Authority is very keen to be able to
dispose of municipal solid waste by an environmentally acceptable method that simultaneously produces energy. A recent study25 commissioned by the GSWMA has identified a
potential WTE project with a projected capital cost of US$48M after comparing three
options: (i) mass incineration, (ii) high heating value incineration and (iii) gasification.
The feasibilty of converting MSW and agricultural waste into an alternative fuel
(e.g. natural gas or diesel equivalents) for transportation is also being investigated.
Options may include the conversion of vehicle fleets (e.g. refuse collection vehicles).
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTICANNEX II
GRENLEC has no specific demand-side energy efficiency programme in place to attempt
to reduce per-capita consumption. In 2005, a Cuban Government-sponsored light bulb
replacement programme was implemented in Grenada, to replace household incandescent
bulbs with CFLs. No attempt appears to have been made to measure the specific effects of
this programme on domestic sector consumption and anecdotal reports suggest that the
results were mixed, with quality of the bulbs being a factor.
The Government launched a public sector energy conservation programme in early 2010
and has accumulated baseline data on energy consumption at the Ministry level. The goal
being to reduce energy consumption (electricity and transport) by 10% by Q4, 2012, using
2009 as a base year. The effectiveness of this on-going programme will be reviewed at the
end of 2011.
Energy & Disaster Management
It is recognized that Grenada is vulnerable to natural disasters, such as hurricanes, floods,
storm surges, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and tsunamis. It is further recognized that
as a result of climate change and sea level rise, energy assets located in coastal areas
(e.g. petroleum storage tanks and electricity generating plants) are becoming more
vulnerable. The Government, in association with GRENLEC and other national energy
stakeholders, will conduct risk and vulnerability assessments on all major energy
infrastructure based on the estimated risks of the occurrence of the relevant natural
phenomena. Future planning decisions, including, for example, the placement of
petroleum tank farms, wind farms and other generation, transmission and distribution
facilities will be influenced by this assessment.
ASSESSMENT OF THE ENERGY SECTOR ISSUES INTERNAL TO THE COUNTRY
will reveal the strengths and weaknesses of the sector, while an analysis of the external
environment will reveal the likely opportunities and threats. The SWOT analysis, when
considered with the energy sector situation presented in section 2 allows the identification
of the goals and policy actions that can be employed to promote greater strengths in the
sector, address the weaknesses, capitalize on the opportunities and mitigate the threats to
the long-term development of the sector.
ENERGY
SECTOR
DIAGNOSTIC
ANNEX III -
SWOT
ANALYSISE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
particularly in the form of geothermal, solar and wind
◆ Preliminary seismic data (2444kms of 2D data) and an
analysis of the offshore geology indicate the likelihood
of significant quantities of hydrocarbons offshore.
◆ Has an established network of petroleum suppliers
and distributors
◆ Has a well-established power production and
distribution system with almost all of the population
having access to electricity
◆ 95% of the power company’s diesel plant is less than
20 years old
◆ Relatively low electricity distribution losses
◆ Has private sector and public participation in the ownership of the county’s electric utility, with shares publicly traded on the Eastern Caribbean Stock Exchange
OPPORTUNITIES –
EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT
◆ Existence of proven technologies to exploit renewable
energy resources
◆ Favourable relations with energy rich countries in the
Caribbean and Latin America
◆ Favourable and ongoing relations with multilateral
development institutions
◆ Potential to earn carbon credits for utility-scale
renewable energy projects
◆ PetroCaribe represents a means of financing the
consumption of energy products and services
◆ Major Oil companies will be attracted to the potential
offshore hydrocarbons
◆ There is scope for negotiating a Joint Development
Zone or Unitization Agreement, as appropriate, in order
to protect the environment, maximise offshore hydrocarbon resources, create efficiency in the management
of the resources.
◆ No proven indigenous fossil fuel resources
◆ High and growing energy import bill
◆ High cost of electricity relative to nearby competitive
markets
◆ Lack of a well-defined institutional structure for
planning and implementing renewable energy projects
◆ Lack of a well-organised data-gathering infrastructure
for energy supply and consumption data
◆ Growing stock of older, energy-inefficient motor
vehicles
THREATS – EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT
◆ Continued very high dependence on imported petroleum products
◆ Continued volatility and long-term upward trend of
oil prices
◆ Grenada’s status as a price-taker
◆ Potential impact of natural hazards on the energy sector
◆ Geo-political influences on international energy supply
and demand
◆ Potential impact on local economy of high energy
prices
◆ Potential impact on international economic competitiveness caused by chronically high energy costs
◆ Pressure on financing for renewable energy projects
◆ PetroCaribe has the potential to adversely affect
national debt management strategies and ultimately
impact on sustainable economic development
◆ On-going litigation and dispute resolution can delay
a successful offshore licensing round.
◆ Maritime boundaries are still to be resolved with
southern neighbours – Trinidad & Tobago and
Venezuela.
◆ “Green” image drawbacks due to hydrocarbon
programme
◆ Exporting crude oil does not promote energy security
since resources are being exploited for an international
market and will maintain the need to import refined
secondary fossil fuel productsANNEX IV
for the NSEO of Grenada, Carriacou
and Petite Martinique:
Staff Designation
Director
Petroleum Engineer
Electrical Engineer /
Senior Energy Officer
RE & EE Engineer
Certified Energy Auditor
Economist
Energy Technician
IT Technician
Executive Secretary
Clerk / Typist
Maid
Driver / Messenger
TOTAL
# of staff in an
Ideal Situation
1
2
1
1
1
1
4
1
1
2
1
1
17
Minimum # of Staff
Recommended
1
0
1
1
0
0
2
0
1
0
0
0
6
NATIONAL
SUSTAINABLE
ENERGY
OFFICE
Figure 8. Proposed Organisational Structure and Optimal Minimal Staffing
for the NSEO.ANNEX V-V
E NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OF GRENA
To implement its offshore programme, the Government will take the following steps:
◆ Reach agreements with relevant governments on the delineation of maritime boundaries which could impact on shared reservoirs, joint operating agreements or unitisation
of resources.
◆ Conduct all seismic and other activities preparatory to the development of contracts for
exploratory or production programmes.
◆ Position itself to award contracts for exploration. This shall be achieved by hiring a
consultant and preparing the relevant “data package” for distribution amongst bidders
whose interest and involvement will be invited through a competitive bidding process.
◆ Establish a legislative framework for the offshore hydrocarbon programme.
◆ Ensure that critical Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEAs) and recommended
preventive and mitigation measures are conducted.
◆ Establish an equivalent to the Norwegian “Oil for Development” model to ensure that
the revenues gained from any sales of finite resources are channelled towards the
sustainable development of the island, including the use of renewable energy sources
to meet long term domestic demand.
◆ There is no intention to build a refinery at this time, however, this will be revisited if or
when hydrocarbon reserves are found and quantified. Hydrocarbon resources will be
used to offset national consumption in conjunction with renewable energy resources.
OFFSHORE
HYDROCARBON
PROGRAMME
Energy Efficiency Act
The Government will enact an Energy Efficiency Act, which will contain, inter alia,
the following provisions:
◆ Mandate special commercial building planning regulations – for example: no new hotel
will be granted planning permission without a specified contribution of solar-heated
water, etc;
◆ Require the use of appropriate energy efficiency standards and building codes for
ventilation, cooling, water- and process-heating, lighting and motive power equipment
in institutional, commercial and industrial buildings;
◆ Require all government buildings of a certain size to have periodic energy audits and
compliance audits and their results published;
◆ Mandate the compilation and publication of sectoral benchmarking data
(e.g., kWh per hotel room-night for the hotels sector);
◆ Require certification of energy auditors;
◆ Require commercial banks to provide financial incentives for investments in energy
efficiency to businesses and homeowners. This would be competitive, but based on a
minimum level to start with – e.g., all new home mortgages could include a $5,000
interest-free amount for the purchase and installation of a solar water heater;
◆ Mandate specified fuel efficiencies for imported vehicles;
◆ Require training in ’eco–driving’ practices for public and private sector organisations;
◆ Develop, monitor, publish and update indicators of national energy consumption and
efficiency (egenergy intensity amount of energy required to produce a unit of GDP)
ANNEX VI –
ENERGY
EFFICIENCY
ACT