File Name: HND-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Honduras
Country Code: HND
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 January – 4 February 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
3 December 2021
Original: English
2118013X (E) 081221
First regular session 2022
31 January – 4 February 2022, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Honduras (2022-2026)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Honduras (2022-2026) ..................................................... 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Honduras is a lower-middle-income country with widespread poverty and one of the 
highest inequality rates of the continent (Gini Coefficient: 0.52). Approximately 19 per cent
of the population live in multidimensional poverty and another 22.3 per cent are vulnerable 
to multidimensional poverty.
1
2. Honduras is extremely vulnerable to climate change2and presents widespread food 
insecurity and a weak social protection system. Fifty-eight per cent of Honduran 
households suffer some level of food insecurity. In female-headed households, this rises to 
60 per cent, of which 12 per cent – more than 80,000 households – suffer from severe food 
insecurity3. Honduras is experiencing biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation, which 
exacerbate existing inequalities and create a vicious circle.
3. Under-employment affects 48 per cent of the employed population,
3 particularly
women and youth. Eighty-one per cent of employed men and 77 per cent of employed 
women in Honduras lack social security protection. In rural areas and the poorest quintile, 
those figures exceed 90 per cent.
3 The unemployment rate among women is almost double 
that of men (8.1 per cent versus 4.4 per cent). In rural areas, the female activity rate is 
significantly lower than in urban areas (34 per cent versus 47 per cent). The activity rate 
among women aged 25 or younger (34 per cent) is the lowest of all age groups, and even
lower for women with children under three years old.
3 Regionally, Honduras is the country
with the largest share of its labour force excluded from social protection programmes.
4
4. Despite significant progress, Honduras presents one of the highest homicide rates
globally (37.6 per 100,000 people in 20205compared to 85.5 per 100,000 in 2012 and 
59.1 per 100,000 in 2016). The high levels of violence against women6and gender inequality 
are based in deep-rooted cultural patterns. In 2019, for every man who suffered a sex crime, 
there were seven female victims of the same type of crime. According to the National 
Information Centre for the Social Sector, in 2019, the ratio of women to men for domestic 
violence crimes was 9 to 1. Honduras reduced its homicide impunity rate from 96 per cent in 
2010 to 86 per cent in 2019.7 Nevertheless, impunity for femicides reaches 90 per cent.8
5. Honduran society is fragmented and polarized, and distrust towards national 
institutions and the democratic system abounds.9 The justice system faces serious 
challenges in addressing impunity and guaranteeing universal access.
10 The credibility of 
electoral processes is questioned by some sectors of the population, triggering social and 
political instability. Institutional capacities at the national and local levels are limited, and 
transparency and accountability need strengthening.
11 Citizens face challenges to the full 
enjoyment of their rights, especially groups confronted with exclusion and discrimination, 
such as women, indigenous and Afrodescendent communities, the lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, queer, and intersex community, and people with disabilities.
12
6. Honduras has been affected by the crises caused by the coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19) and tropical storms Eta and Iota. The impact at the socioeconomic level has 
exacerbated existing challenges, especially among vulnerable and excluded populations,
1 UNDP, 2020
2 United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2018
3
Instituto Nacional de Estadística (INE), 2019
4 Regional human development report, 2021
5
Infosegura
6 8.5 femicides per 100,000 in 2019 (Violence Observatory)
7 Alianza por la Paz y la Justicia, 2019
8 Centro de Derechos de Mujeres, 2020
9 Latinobarómetro 2018
10 Rule of Law Index score of 0.40 in 2020. World Justice Project
11 United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework for Honduras, 2022-2026
12 Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), 2020 and women in particular (increased domestic violence and unemployment). The once-stable 
macroeconomic outlook has been weakened. There is an opportunity to rebuild by 
addressing the structural vulnerabilities exposed by these crises. 
7. The strategic vision of the Government is reflected in its Visión de País 2010-2038, the
Plan de Nación 2010-2022, and the Plan Estratégico de Gobierno 2018-2022. In 2019, the 
government showcased its commitment to sustainable development by adopting the Agenda 
Nacional para los Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible.
8. The comparative advantage of UNDP in Honduras rests on its mandate, experience, and 
expertise in sensitive areas encompassing citizen security, climate change, gender, poverty 
eradication, and democratic governance (the rule of law, transparency, and accountability), 
where its credibility, neutrality, independence, trust, convening power, and proximity to the 
authorities are key. These advantages enable UNDP to address complex developmental 
challenges such as poverty reduction and social inequalities by integrating solutions, 
improving knowledge management, implementing public policies, strengthening the social 
protection system, supporting digital transformation (the e-government agenda) and fostering 
innovation (including through new financial instruments and innovative partnerships) to 
strengthen public administration. The experience, presence, capacities and expertise of UNDP 
in building resilience to crises and shocks contributed substantially to early recovery and 
reconstruction efforts following the 2020 crises. Those comparative advantages are related to 
a robust in-situ operational capacity, multidimensional approach, integrative role within the 
United Nations system, resource mobilization capacities, and data generation and analysis. 
UNDP is recognized for its central role in advocacy and promoting an enabling environment 
for development, particularly in pursuit of the Sustainable Development Goals.
9. The independent country programme evaluation, 2020, underlines that UNDP is 
“perceived as a credible provider of development services by both national and 
international stakeholders”, “strongly positioned and involved in highly strategic areas of 
development in Honduras”, “adapting its work to remain relevant to the country evolving 
development context”, and highlights that “UNDP mobilized a higher than expected 
amount of resources as a result of its good positioning in key sectors of interest”. 
10. During the concluding programme, UNDP played a crucial role in supporting
electoral processes. It also supported the National Registry of Persons to deliver a 
transparent, credible citizen’s database and further digital transformation. According to the 
evaluation, the national human development report, 2020-2021 process fostered dialogue, 
deepened the analysis of structural challenges and generated proposals for the future. 
UNDP contributed to the de-escalation of violence by facilitating inter-party dialogue and 
supporting capacities related to citizen security. 
11. To achieve the transformation needed requires generating partnerships with the 
private sector, civil society organizations, international donors and international financial
institutions, academia and others to build consensus and develop long-term strategic 
proposals and road maps.
12. UNDP played an essential role in improving the legal and institutional framework on 
environmental policy related to climate change and the restoration, conservation, and 
sustainable use of natural ecosystems. According to the evaluation, UNDP has increased
income and generated temporary employment opportunities through social and economic 
inclusion and sustainable management practices. However, the evaluation considered
UNDP contributions to disaster risk management “limited”.
13. UNDP has developed South-South cooperation with Bolivia, Colombia, Cuba, El 
Salvador, Guatemala, Peru, and Uruguay in democratic governance, citizen security, and 
climate change adaptation.
14. Areas for improvement identified by the evaluation include mainstreaming gender and
expanding South-South cooperation initiatives. Recommendations include reinforcing engagement with non-state actors, adopting e-governance and e-services solutions, and
strengthening monitoring and evaluation systems. They also include developing a 
multidimensional comprehensive gender strategy, covering different sectors and actions.
15. UNDP will contribute within the wider integrative and collective approach of the 
United Nations system in Honduras to achieve the Cooperation Framework results and the 
Sustainable Development Goals. UNDP will participate through inter-agency outcomes and 
outputs in joint strategies, reinforced coordination mechanisms, and joint approaches, 
sharing expertise and capacities in the field. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
16. The overall vision of UNDP, as stated in the Cooperation Framework, is a sustainable 
and inclusive Honduras – a prosperous and cohesive society with equality, resilience, 
justice, and peace, where human rights are respected.
17. UNDP will support government efforts to achieve the Goals based on the UNDP 
Strategic Plan and aligned with the strategic framework of the Government. The 
multidimensional solutions identified are aimed to generate a catalytic effect on the
transformation of Honduras and pave the way for structural reforms. Solutions will be 
implemented through technical assistance, provision of services, capacity-building, 
knowledge management, data generation and analysis, partnership development, and 
support for intersectoral coordination, advocacy, dialogue, and South-South cooperation. 
18. The four outcomes in this programme are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. UNDP 
will lead risk-informed recovery and reconstruction to promote long-term resilience for 
sustained, gender-inclusive development. It will address the root causes of migration and 
harness migration dynamics. UNDP will scale up successful results by disseminating best 
practices and forging alliances.
19. The guiding principle will be to leave no one behind, particularly women, with an 
intersectional approach (prioritizing vulnerable groups such as youth, indigenous and 
Afrodescendent communities, the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex
community, and people with disabilities) promoting gender equality and women’s
empowerment, human rights, resilience, sustainability, and accountability. UNDP will 
emphasize implementation at the local level, placing communities at the centre of 
development. UNDP will organize an annual event to discuss the progress of the 
programme with government counterparts and other stakeholders. 
20. The UNDP programme contributes directly to the outcomes, outputs, and indicators of 
the Cooperation Framework and adopts its theory of change. The programme emanates 
from the priorities of the country programme, 2017-2021, which were considered 
appropriate by the independent country programme evaluation. UNDP has a unique value 
proposition within the United Nations system in these areas: building on its experience, 
credibility and convening power under the rule of law; taking advantage of its comparative 
advantage to address complex developmental challenges and its experience in digital 
transformation for institutional development; leveraging its experience and presence to 
build resilience and sustainability; and using the lessons learned from ongoing programmes 
to continue reducing violence. UNDP will engage in geographically focused coordination 
mechanisms at the local level, enabled by the Cooperation Framework implementation 
strategy. It has been informed by consultations with a wide range of stakeholders, including 
through the national human development report and Cooperation Framework processes. 
Strengthening the rule of law
21. The UNDP theory of change is: if the justice system: (a) increases its efficiency and 
effectiveness by improving access to justice, knowledge management, and interinstitutional 
coordination, (b) strengthens the efficiency, transparency, and credibility of the electoral 
process through capacity-building of electoral institutions, and (c) promotes a values-based culture, transparency and accountability, and public participation and dialogue, particularly 
to address the underrepresentation of women in the public and political sphere; then, the 
rule of law in Honduras will be strengthened, and institutions will better respond to 
citizens’ needs in a fair and just environment, earning their trust. Strengthened trust will, in 
turn, improve the implementation of public policies under the other outcomes.
22. UNDP will support improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the justice system
by strengthening capacities and coordination between its institutions, particularly the 
Supreme Court, the Public Prosecutor’s Office, and the Ministry of Security. UNDP will 
improve data analysis and statistical capacities, and will adopt a people-centred approach to 
justice with the participation of civil society. A central area of intervention will be access to 
justice through reform of the justice management model. 
23. UNDP will support an efficient, transparent, and credible electoral process and
strengthen the capacities of electoral institutions – namely, the National Electoral Council, 
the Supreme Electoral Tribunal and the Clean Policy Unit – throughout the electoral cycle. 
UNDP will contribute to the implementation of electoral reforms.
24. UNDP will promote transparency and accountability based on best practices in the 
region, encouraging public participation and dialogue. It will foster the inclusion and full 
participation of women, youth, indigenous and Afrodescendent communities, the lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex community, and people with disabilities in 
the political and public spheres at local and national levels. A strengthened rule of law will 
reduce violence and conflict (outcome 4). UNDP objectives are to: (a) expand alliances 
with political parties, academia, civil society (Association for a Fairer Society, Caritas), 
municipalities, and organizations representing these groups (such as Cattrachas); (b) 
support initiatives and mechanisms related to transparency, access to information, and the 
fight against corruption; (c) promote a values-based culture with an emphasis on ethics, 
integrity, and transparency; and (d) support the implementation of policy proposals
generated by the national Human Development Report process and its initiatives,
monitoring them through an existing multi-actor committee. Other organizations such as 
OHCHR and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime will complement UNDP 
action in this area under a common framework provided by the joint work plans.
An efficient and effective public administration
25. The UNDP theory of change is: if public institutions, at the national and local levels,
improve knowledge management, planning, strategic foresight, capacity for dialogue, 
digital transformation, development finance, and capacity to address complex 
developmental challenges such as poverty eradication and inequality, fostering the 
involvement of women, through public policies and strategies; then, the State will have a 
more efficient and effective people-centred administration. 
26. UNDP will support transforming public institutions, at the national and local levels, 
into a modern, professional and efficient administration to address complex challenges such 
as poverty and inequality. The Secretariat of General Coordination of the Government 
(responsible for National Agenda 2030), the National Information Centre for the Social 
Sector and the National Institute of Statistics will be the main counterparts at the national 
level, while the Association of Municipalities of Honduras will be the entry point for local 
interventions. Building the lessons learned through the independent country programme 
evaluation, UNDP will increase its focus on medium-and long-term capacity development
and support initiatives to expand integrated social protection policies, harnessing the 
momentum created by the COVID-19 crisis. UNDP will strengthen social protection 
institutions with capacity-building, improved instruments and improved regulatory 
frameworks, in collaboration with OHCHR, the United Nations Children’s Fund, UNFPA 
and the World Food Programme. Leveraging the integrative and convening role of UNDP, 
the National Agenda 2030 will be positioned as a shared strategic framework for development and poverty reduction. UNDP will engage with the National Congress to 
strengthen institutional capacities and will follow the relevant legislative process.
27. UNDP will develop national and local capacities in knowledge management and the 
generation, use and analysis of data and statistics to identify socioeconomic inequalities, 
facilitate evidence-based decision-making, and inform public policies and plans. UNDP 
will leverage and disseminate information created at the municipal level through the 
national human development report. Leveraging its international corporative resources,
UNDP will identify and support institutions and organizations in developing strategic 
multisectoral and interdisciplinary foresight capacities to exploit emerging opportunities 
against the backdrop of a globalized context of increasing uncertainty. UNDP will support 
development finance through innovative financing mechanisms for sustainable 
development and fiscal policies favouring progressive taxation, in partnership with the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and other financial institutions.
28. Digitization and innovation will be mainstreamed throughout the programme and used 
as a tool for knowledge management, expanding access to public services and structural 
transformation. In coordination with the International Telecommunication Union, which
provides the overall conceptual framework and coordination to the digital cooperation 
agenda of the Cooperation Framework, UNDP will continue reinforcing the digital and 
technological capacities of the State, including support to the e-government agenda. UNDP 
will partner with international financial institutions (Inter-American Development Bank, 
Central American Bank for Economic Integration) to bridge the digital gap and develop 
infrastructure for inequality-reducing digital transformation.
A sustainable and resilient development path
29. The UNDP theory of change is: if national counterparts (a) attain sustainable practices
and incentives under a nature-based, risk-informed and gender-responsive approach by
strengthening key productive value chains and promoting sustainable and inclusive 
businesses; (b) support biodiversity policy and strategic frameworks, forest conservation 
initiatives, and climate change governance; (c) develop environmental services payment 
schemes; (d) advance towards the attainment of nationally determined contributions;
€ develop climate change adaptation plans; (f) provide sustainable livelihoods for the most 
vulnerable populations and involve women as critical agents of development; (g) strengthen 
climate risk prevention and management systems; and (h) support post-disaster recovery 
efforts; then, the sustainability of the development path of Honduras will be enhanced, 
allowing citizens to enjoy environmental, economic, and social rights; and the resilience of 
the population will be strengthened. 
30. UNDP will support the transition towards a sustainable and inclusive economy based 
on sustainable practices. UNDP envisages strengthening value chains (such as coffee, 
cacao, livestock, palm oil, and basic grains) by applying sustainable landscape approaches 
that promote biodiversity and connectivity among protected areas and biological corridors, 
integrating sustainable practices and standards and promoting sustainable production 
certification schemes. UNDP will focus on reducing pollution and improving waste 
management. Building resilience in the most vulnerable communities will be supported 
through improving livelihoods, boosting the productive sector sustainably, ensuring access 
to water, preventing pollution, facilitating market access, and developing inclusive climate 
funding opportunities. Environmentally friendly economic activities, linked to the blueand-green economy, will be fostered. 
31. Indigenous and Afrodescendent communities, often living in areas of high ecological 
value, will be supported. The outcome will contribute to preventing conflict regarding
access to natural resources. Women will be prioritized as beneficiaries in informationgathering. UNDP will establish partnerships with the private sector and strengthen 
sustainable and inclusive businesses by supporting micro, small, and medium-sized 
enterprises, entrepreneurs, and producers’ and women’s associations. These enterprises will be supported in their digital transformation. Forging alliances and advocacy with key 
partners will help innovative legislative frameworks to stimulate sustainable practices. 
32. UNDP will support the efforts of municipalities to improve risk-informed and genderresponsive planning and implementation tools for adaptation to climate change. Payment 
schemes for environmental services will be supported and water resource management 
interventions implemented. The biodiversity policy and strategic framework will be 
supported, including in coastal and marine areas. UNDP will implement reforestation, 
restoration, and forest conservation initiatives, such as strengthening protected area 
management plans. 
33. UNDP will support (a) the achievement of nationally determined contributions
through capacity-building of key actors, such as national institutions, municipalities, and 
the private sector; (b) improvements in monitoring, reporting, and verification mechanisms
for greenhouse gas emissions; and (c) promotion of social inclusion and vulnerable 
minorities in nationally determined contribution processes. 
34. UNDP will support the development and strengthening of legal and institutional 
frameworks for disaster risk reduction and management and improve early warning systems
based on a risk-informed, gender-responsive approach. The Permanent Committee on 
Contingencies will be the main partner addressing climate risk prevention and management. 
Addressing comprehensive management of systemic and complex risks, post-crisis 
preparedness, assessment, planning, and recovery implementation will be promoted 
considering the effects of COVID-19, Eta and Iota, and other potential hazards, such as 
hurricanes, other climate-related threats, environmental degradation, biodiversity loss, and 
conflict. Prevention and mitigation will be promoted at the national and subnational levels 
to reduce vulnerability and encourage risk-sensitive land use and planning mechanisms. 
35. UNDP will work with the Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Food 
Programme, and other United Nations entities to develop joint actions and programmes. 
Beyond the institutional national and local counterparts, UNDP will foster alliances with 
international financial institutions (the Inter-American Development Bank, the Central 
American Bank for Economic Integration, and the European Investment Bank), and the 
international community (including the European Union), through integrated responses.
South-South cooperation with Colombia will allow the sharing of best practices on coffee 
and cacao value chains. Environmental programmes will activate South-South cooperation 
with Guatemala around shared natural resources such as the Montague River.
Violence and conflict
36. The UNDP theory of change is: if national counterparts prevent violence and conflict, 
address root causes through an integrated and multidimensional approach, improve
knowledge management related to citizens’ security, enhance prevention approaches in 
public policies, promote a culture of peace, enable spaces for dialogue at the local level, 
and prioritize the groups most at risk; then, violence and conflict will diminish in 
Honduras, and its population will enjoy a more peaceful society. 
37. Lessons learned from the current programme show that the high levels of violence and 
conflict in the country should be addressed through prevention, and based on a holistic 
analysis of the determinants of violence. UNDP will expand the capacity of institutions to 
use citizen security information management for decision-making, including interinstitutional coordination. National security institutions (such as the Ministry of Security 
and the Public Prosecutor’s Office), municipalities, civil society organizations, and the 
private sector will be strengthened and public policies supported. UNDP will enable spaces 
for dialogue on violence and conflict, especially at the local level. Efforts will prioritize
tackling gender-based violence. UNDP will contribute to the medium- to long-term change 
of social norms and behaviours by promoting a culture of peace, changing social norms and behaviours inherent in a patriarchal society.
13 UNDP will reinforce dialogue and civil 
society participation at the local level around its citizen security interventions. UNDP will 
address violence through an integrated toolbox addressing root causes in areas such as the 
rule of law, governance, poverty, and climate change. Women, youth, indigenous, 
Afrodescendent, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex communities will 
be prioritized. South-South cooperation is envisaged with Guatemala and El Salvador on 
issues such as violence prevention approaches and municipal-level violence profiling.
UNDP will work with OHCHR on the human rights angle; the Office of the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees on the intersection of violence and migration and 
mobility; and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of 
Women on violence against women. The Violence Observatory of the University Institute 
on Democracy, Peace, and Security will be the main partner from academia. Donors such 
as the United States Agency for International Development and the Spanish Agency for 
International Development Cooperation will engage with UNDP on citizen security.
III. Programme and risk management
38. This country programme outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control 
Framework.
39. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in coordination with 
other United Nations entities to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications 
for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
40. The risk management and mitigation strategy identified several risks potentially 
affecting programme implementation. The general elections scheduled for November 2021
– if considered unfair by the population – could undermine the gains obtained through 
support of the electoral process, triggering further socio-political instability and conflict. 
Mitigation measures include continuous support to electoral institutions and a solid 
communication strategy. 
41. The COVID-19 crisis exacerbated challenges, including poverty, inequalities, and 
social exclusion. A new crisis related to climate, health or other issues may arise, 
pressuring the fiscal space to finance social and developmental policies and adding further 
instability to existing vulnerabilities and layers of fragility. Such risks will be addressed by 
strengthening risk prevention and management systems, implementing early warning 
systems, building resilience and reducing the population’s vulnerability, and adopting a 
nexus between humanitarianism, development, and peace.
42. High levels of violence, corruption, impunity, and mistrust towards institutions could 
flare up, causing social and political instability and hampering development efforts towards 
achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Moreover, the limited 
implementation capacity of the public administration could undermine the implementation 
of this programme. To mitigate those risks, UNDP will promote and support integrated and 
progressive policy recommendations developed through the national human development 
report process, strengthen the judiciary, promote the reduction of violence and conflict, and 
develop medium- to long-term institutional capacities at national and local levels, including 
digital transformation.
13 The Spotlight Initiative will be key to approaching social norms and promoting non-violent masculinity.43. UNDP will address potential social and environmental risks and effects through its 
Social and Environmental Standards and Accountability Mechanism. When necessary, a 
project-level grievance redress mechanism will be accessible to address stakeholder 
concerns through dialogue, joint fact-finding, negotiation, and problem solving. Potential 
risks related to gender inequality and discrimination against women and girls will be 
addressed through the implementation of the gender strategy. UNDP will develop flexible 
approaches and continuously assess the evolving context, jointly with the United Nations
system, to combat potential risks and changes. Unforeseen events affecting individual 
projects will be assessed by the management committee before approval and will be tracked
by the project implementation team. UNDP maintains a business continuity plan to assure
essential functions in case of crisis.
44. To support programme implementation, UNDP will develop a resource mobilization 
action plan to diversify funding sources and innovative service-oriented management 
models. 
45. UNDP will regularly review and assess the efficiency and performance of this
programme implementation, including with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
International Cooperation. The programme integrates Cooperation Framework governance 
and implementation structures, including results groups, where the United Nations system 
ensures accountability and inter-agency coordination. The National Steering Committee
will provide guidance, oversight, and monitoring of Cooperation Framework
implementation. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
46. UNDP will strengthen institutional capacities in knowledge management – particularly 
the National Institute of Statistics and the Secretariat of General Coordination of the 
Government – at the national and local levels, supporting the generation, dissemination, 
and use of reliable, transparent, and disaggregated data. UNDP will continue monitoring 
the 2030 National Agenda, supporting the National Voluntary Reviews and performing 
analyses and evaluations to identify gaps in measuring goals and achievement. UNDP will 
use innovative mechanisms, tools, and approaches to support national monitoring and 
evaluation capabilities jointly with other United Nations entities. 
47. The monitoring and evaluation system will follow the progress of this programme 
towards the intended transformative changes and national priorities, including the gender 
marker, informed by gender analysis. UNDP will disaggregate data according to relevant 
criteria such as gender, exclusion or vulnerability factors, age and territory. Indicators, 
which rely primarily on country-level data, are captured from the Cooperation Framework
and the UNDP Strategic Plan. Data collection will be captured through an annual report and 
shared with stakeholders. Potential data gaps will be addressed jointly with other United 
Nations partners through alternative sources and capacity-building.
48. Monitoring and evaluations will inform decision-making, promote learning among 
stakeholders, and ensure the accountability of UNDP activity in Honduras and its 
contribution to development results. UNDP integrates the United Nations Inter-agency 
Monitoring and Evaluation Group, which monitors the Cooperation Framework and the 
progress of Honduras towards achieving the 2030 Agenda.Annex. Results and resources framework for Honduras (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Visión de País, goal 2. Plan Estratégico de Gobierno (PEG), sectors 2, 5. Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 5, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 1. The Honduran State implements policies, strategies and programmes that strengthen the rule of law, transparency, accountability, fight against 
corruption and impunity, with a greater participation of civil society and the private sector.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1. Structural transformation
Cooperation Framework outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, targets(s)
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs Major partners/Partnerships frameworks
Estimated cost
by outcome
($ thousands)
1.1. Percentage of trust towards 
institutions (electoral institutions and
judiciary)
Baseline (2018):18%, 25%
Target: 24%, 30%
1.2. Democracy Index score
Baseline (2020):5.36
Target: 5.64
1.3. Rule of Law Index score
Baseline (2020):0.40
Target: 0.43
1.4. Proportion of seats held by 
women in the national parliament and 
local governments (Integrated Results 
and Resources Framework – IRRF
outcome.1.3.a)
Parliament/local governments:
Baseline (2019): 21.7%, 52.9%
Target: 40%, 55%
Latinobarómetro, 
annual
Economist 
Intelligence Unit, 
annual
World Justice 
Project (WJP), 
annual.
National Agenda 
2030, annual
1.1. Justice system strengthened its capacities to improve
management efficiency and efficacy, with an emphasis on access to 
justice and citizen participation.
1.1.1. Number of justice system institutions supported at the 
technical level to improve efficiency, efficacy and citizens’ access 
to services
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Source: projects, annual 
1.1.2. Score in the “Criminal Justice factor” under the Rule of 
Law Index
Baseline (2019): 0.26
Target: 0.30
Source: WJP, annual 
1.2. Strengthened democratic system in Honduras, at the national 
and local level, with particular attention to transparency and social 
accountability and promoting gender equality and a values-based 
culture.
1.2.1. Number of public institutions, civil society organizations,
and private sector organizations that reinforced their capacities to 
promote citizen participation, transparency and accountability, and 
the promotion and dissemination of gender equality and a valuesbased culture 
Baseline: 0
Target: 15
Source: UNDP, annual
1.2.2. Extent to which the CNE has strengthened its capacity to 
conduct inclusive and credible elections (IRRF-2.4.1)
Baseline (2021): limited capacity
Target: Significantly improved capacity 
Source: CNE, UNDP, annual
Public Prosecutor’s Office
Supreme Court
Ministry of Security
National Electoral Council (CNE)
Supreme Electoral Tribunal
Clean Policy Unit
Human Rights Ministry (SEDH)
Ministry of Transparency
Institute Public Information Access
National Commissioner for Human Rights
National Penitentiary Institute
Municipalities
Civil society organizations (CSOs)
Private sector
Political parties
Indigenous communities
Women, youth and disabled organizations
Academia
United States Agency for International
Development (USAID)
European Union
Canada.
Regular
$730
Other
$32,000NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL. Visión de País, goal 14. PEG sector 5. SDGs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 16, 17.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 2. The State is established as an effective and efficient public administration, adapted to the needs of the population, applying a territorial approach, with a 
gender and human rights focus
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Leaving no one behind.
2.1. Public institutions quality index
Baseline (2018): 3.20
Target: 3.50
2.2. Percentage of compliance with 
legal frameworks for promoting and 
monitoring equality and nondiscrimination on the basis of gender. 
Baseline (2015): 80%
Target: 90%
2.3. Multidimensional Poverty Index
Baseline (2018):0.281
Target: 0.264
2.4. Percentage of total government 
spending on social protection 
Baseline: 2%
Target: 4.5%
National Agenda 
2030, annual.
SCGG
Ministry of 
Finance, annual
2.1. Strengthened institutional capacities at national and local levels
in knowledge management, planning, and development foresight 
(with a multinational and rights approach), and promoting 
innovation and digital transformation.
2.1.1. Number of instruments or tools developed and disseminated 
about knowledge management, planning, and development 
foresight
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Source: UNDP, annual
2.1.2. Score in the e-government ranking.
Baseline (2020): 0.4486
Target: 0.5156
Source: United Nations Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, annual.
2.2. Strengthened institutional capacities at national and local levels
for the development and implementation of integrated public 
policies addressing poverty reduction, inequalities, social protection
and care in the framework of the 2030 Agenda. 
2.2.1. Number of institutions (at national and local levels), with
strengthened capacities to develop and implement integrated 
public policies addressing poverty reduction, inequalities, social 
protection or care
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Source: UNDP, annual
2.2.2. Existence of development plans and budgets that integrate 
the 2030 Agenda across the institutions (IRRF 1.1.1.1).
Baseline: Partial 
Target: Full
Source: National Agenda 2030, SCGG, UNDP assessment.
Secretariat of General Coordination of the
Government (SCGG)
Economic Development Secretariat
SEDH
Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion
(SEDIS)
Ministry of Labour and Social Security
Social Sector National Information Centre
(CENISS)
Dirección Gobierno Digital, National Institute
of Statistics (INE)
National Youth Institute (INJ)
National Women’s Institute (INAM) Permanent 
Contingency Commission
(COPECO)
Association of Municipalities (AMHON)
Municipalities
Private sector
Women, producers and indigenous
organizations
CSOs
Academia
International financial institutions (IFIs:
 IMF, World Bank, Inter-American
Development Bank, Central American Bank
for Economic Integration – CABEI)
USAID
European Union
Regular
$1,000
Other
$102,000NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Visión de País, goals 1, 3. PEG sectors 1, 3. SDGs 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 3. The Honduran State implements policies, strategies and programmes that strengthen the sustainability and resilience of its development 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3. Building resilience
3.1. Percentage of the fulfilment of 
reports requested by each ratified 
international agreement concerning
the rational environmental 
management of products containing 
chemicals. 
Baseline (2021): 60 
Target: 75
3.2. Number of municipalities 
classified as “high” or “very high” 
risk in the municipal risk system
(INFORM)
Baseline (2020): 161
Target: 150
National Agenda 
2030, annual
COPECO/INE, 
annual
3.1. The Honduran population, the public administration, and the 
private sector have strengthened capacities to promote a sustainable
economy and resilience to climate change, providing sustainable 
livelihoods to groups in situations of vulnerability, women,
indigenous and Afrodescendent communities.
3.1.1. Number of initiatives launched for the promotion of a 
sustainable economy, with a gender focus 
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Source: UNDP, annual
3.1.2. Number of people whose capacities have been strengthened 
through climate adaptation initiatives with UNDP support (by 
gender, indigenous and Afrodescendent communities, and youth)
Baseline: 0
Target: 24,000 (women: 13,000, indigenous: 4,200, youth: 4,200), 
Source: UNDP, annual
3.2. The Honduran population, public institutions and private sector 
benefit from sustainable practices and strengthened governance 
mechanisms for the conservation and sustainability of biodiversity 
and the optimization of ecosystem assets and services. 
3.2.1. Number of organizations benefiting from sustainable 
practices and governance mechanisms supported for the 
conservation and sustainability of biodiversity and the optimization 
of ecosystem assets and services
Baseline: 0
Target: 3 (1 woman-led)
Source: UNDP, annual
3.2.2. Hectares of protected area under improved management
(IRRF 4.1.2)
Baseline:100,000
Target: 200,000
Source: ICF, annual
3.2.3. Metric tons of chemicals reduced or disposed of (IRRF 4.1.2)
Baseline: 111 Mt
Target: 171 Mt
Source: MiAmbiente+, annual
Ministry of Energy
Ministry of Environment
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
SEDIS
Forest Conservation Institute (ICF)
COPECO
Honduran Coffee Institute
Presidential Office for Climate Change
Green Climate Fund
AMHON
Municipalities
Private sector
Commercial banks
Community organizations
Women, producers and indigenous organizations
CSOs,
NGOs
Academia
IFIs (CABEI, European Investment Bank)
European Union
USAID.
Regular
$247
Other
$10,5003.3. Climate disaster risk integrated systems and governance 
strengthened to reduce risks and vulnerabilities, improve early 
warning systems and allow early recovery from crises and postdisaster. 
3.3.1. Number of people with strengthened capacities on disaster 
preparedness and response (by gender)
Baseline: 0
Target: 2,000, (800 men and 1,200 women)
Source: UNDP, annual
3.3.2. Extent to which data-informed development and investment 
plans incorporate integrated solutions to reduce disaster risks and 
enable climate change adaptation and mitigation 
Baseline: Partial 
Target: Full
Source: COPECO, MiAmbiente+, UNDP, annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Visión de País, goal 2. PEG sector 2. SDGs 5, 10, 16, 17.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 4. The State and population reduce the violence and conflict that affects them, with particular attention to violence against women and youth. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3. Building resilience
4.1. Percentage of women aged 15-49 
years who experienced violence from 
an intimate partner. (IRRF outcome
2.5)
Baseline (2018): 39%
Target: 15%
4.2. Homicide rate per 100,000 
population (IRRF 3.5) by gender
Baseline (2019): 45.36
(91% men, 9% women)
Target: 33.59, (91% men, 9% 
women)
4.3. Femicide rate per 100,000 
population
Baseline (2019): 8.5
Target: 5.6
National Agenda 
2030, annual
Violence 
Observatory, 
annual
4.1. Public policies, institutions, civil society, and private sector
strengthened in knowledge management, prevention of violence, and 
promotion of a culture of peace, particularly groups in vulnerable
situations, such as women
4.1.1. Number of organizations with strengthened capacities in 
prevention of violence and promotion of a culture of peace
Baseline: 0
Target: 16
Source: UNDP, annual
4.1.2. Extent to which the frameworks in place to prevent and 
respond to sexual and gender-based violence are efficient (IRRF
6.3.3)
Baseline: Low 
Target: Medium
Source: INAM, University Institute on Democracy, Peace, and 
Security, SCGG, UNDP, annual
Ministry of Security
SCGG
National Information Centre for the Social Sector
Ministry of Education
Public Prosecutor’s Office
SEDH, INJ, INAM, Supreme Court
Instituto Nacional para la Atención a Menores
Infractores,
INE
Municipalities, private sector, community 
organizations, CSOs, women, youth, indigenous 
and disabled organizations, academia
USAID 
Spanish Agency for International Development 
Cooperation
Regular
$250
Other
$6,800