File Name: IDN-NEP-2014-EN
Year: 2014
Country Name: Indonesia
Country Code: IDN
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: NUMBER 79 OF 2014
Start Year: 2013
End Year: 2014
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

GOVERNMENT REGULATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
NUMBER 79 OF 2014
ON
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA,
Considering
Observing
:
:
a.
b.
c.
1.
2.
that to implement the provision of Article 11
paragraph (2) of Law Number 30 of 2007 on Energy, it
is deemed necessary to set national energy policy;
that the draft of national energy policy has been
approved by the House of Representatives of the
Republic of Indonesia (DPR) under its Decree Number
01/DPR RI/ III/2013-2014;
that based on the considerations as referred to in the
above mentioned letter a and letter b, it is necessary
to enact Government Regulation on National Energy
Policy;
Article 5 paragraph (2) of the 1945 Constitution of the
Republic of Indonesia;
Law Number 30 of 2007 on Energy (State Gazette of
the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 96,
Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of
Indonesia Number 4796);
HAS DECIDED :
To Enact : GOVERNMENT REGULATION ON NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISION
Article 1
In this Government Regulation, the following items shall have the meanings
indicated:
1. Energy shall mean a capability to conduct work that could be in the form
of heat, light, mechanics, chemical, and electromagnetic.2. Energy Sources shall mean a thing that could produce Energy, both
directly and through conversion or transform process.
3. Energy Resources shall mean natural resources that could be utilized, as
Energy Sources and Energy.
4. New Energy Sources shall mean Energy Sources that can be produced by
using new technology, coming from both Renewable Energy and nonRenewable Energy Sources, among others nuclear, hydrogen, coal bed
methane, liquefied coal, and gasified coal.
5. New Energy shall mean the Energy coming from New Energy Sources.
6. Renewable Energy Sources shall mean the Energy Sources produced from
sustainable Energy Resources when well managed, such as geothermal,
wind, bioenergy, sunlight, water flow and waterfall, and hydrokinetic
ocean and ocean thermal energies.
7. Renewable Energy shall mean the Energy deriving from Renewable Energy
Sources.
8. Energy Management shall mean an activity consisting of the supply,
enterprise, and utilization of Energy, and the provision of Strategic
Reserves and Energy Resources Conservation.
9. Energy Independence shall mean the assurance of Energy availability by
fully utilizing the potential source in the country.
10. Energy Security shall mean a condition of ensuring the availability of
Energy and access of people to Energy at affordable prices in the long term
with regard to the protection of the Environment.
11. Energy Conservation shall mean a systematic, planned, and integrated
effort intended to preserve domestic Energy Resources and to improve
efficiency in their utilization.
12. Energy Resources Conservation shall mean Energy
Resources Management that guarantees their utilization and supply by
continuing to maintain and improve the quality of their value and
diversity.
13. Environment shall mean a spatial unit with all objects, power, conditions,
and living creatures, including human beings and their behaviors, which
influence the sustainable life and well-being of human beings and other
living creatures.
14. Independent Energy Management shall mean a quality of Energy
Management which are fully national-interest oriented to ensure that the
Energy, Energy Sources, and Energy Resources are managed as well as
possible for people’s prosperity, by prioritizing the domestic human
resources and industrial capabilities as much as possible.
15. Energy Utilization shall mean the activities to use Energy, both directly
and indirectly from Energy Sources.
16. Energy Industry shall mean all of the industries involved in the production
and sale of Energy including Energy Sources extraction, manufacturing,
refining, transmission, and distribution.
17. Energy Supply shall mean any activity or process aimed to provide
Energy, both from domestic and overseas.
18. Primary Energy shall mean a form of Energy that is given by nature and
has not been subjected to any further processing.19. Final Energy is Energy that can be directly consumed by end user.
20. Energy Elasticity shall mean the comparison between the Energy demand
growth rate to the economic growth rate.
21. Energy Intensity shall mean the total quantity of Energy consumption per
unit of gross domestic product.
22. Energy Reserves shall mean the Energy Resources whose location,
quantity, and quality have been identified.
23. Strategic Reserves shall mean the Energy Reserves for the future.
24. Energy Buffer Stock shall mean the availability quantity of Energy Sources
and Energy stored nationally which is needed to meet the national Energy
demand in a given period of time.
25. Energy Diversification shall mean diversifying Energy Sources utilization.
26. Electrification Ratio shall mean the comparison of the number of
electrified households to the total number of households.
27. Business Entity shall mean a company in the form of a legal entity that
runs a continuous and permanent business, and is established in
accordance with the prevailing laws and regulations, as well as has its
operation and domicile within the territory of the Unitary State of the
Republic of Indonesia.
28. Central Government, hereinafter referred to as Government, is the
President of the Republic of Indonesia who holds the authority to reign the
Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the
Republic of Indonesia.
29. Regional Government shall mean the governor, regent, or mayor and
regional instruments as the elements of the regional government
administration.
30. National Energy Council shall mean a national, independent, and
permanent institution in charge of national energy policy.
31. Household Gas Use Ratio shall mean the ratio between the number of
households that use gas to the total number of households.
Article 2
National energy policy shall be the policy on Energy Management based on the
principles of fairness, sustainability, and environmental sound aimed to
create Energy Independence and national Energy Security.
Article 3
(1) The National energy policy as referred to in Article 2 shall consist of main
policies and supporting policies.
(2) The main policies as referred to in paragraph (1) shall encompass:
a. availability of Energy to meet the national demand;
b. priority of Energy development;
c. utilization of national Energy Resources;
d. national Energy Reserves.
(3) The supporting policies as referred to in paragraph (1) shall encompass:
a. Energy Conservation, Energy Resources Conservation, and Energy
Diversification;
b. Environment and safety;c. pricing, subsidy, and energy incentives;
d. infrastructure and access of people to Energy and Energy Industry;
e. research, development, and application of Energy technology; and
f. institutional and funding matters.
Article 4
The national energy policy as referred to in Article 2 and Article 3 shall be
implemented within the period of 2014 up to 2050.
CHAPTER II
OBJECTVE AND TARGET
Part One
Objective
Article 5
The national energy policy is set as a guide to provide the direction of national
Energy Management in order to achieve Energy Independence and national
Energy Security to support the national sustainable development.
Article 6
The Energy Independence and national Energy Security as referred to in
Article 5, shall be achieved by realizing:
a. Energy Resources as a national capital development and not as a mere
exports commodity;
b. Independent Energy Management;
c. availability of Energy and fulfilment of domestic Energy Sources demand;
d. management of Energy Resources in an optimal, integrated and
sustainable way;
e. efficient Energy Utilization in all sectors;
f. access of people to Energy in a fair and equitable way;
g. development of domestic technological capability, Energy Industry, and
Energy services to be independent and improve human resource capacity;
h. creation of employment; and
i. preservation of the Environment functions.
Part Two
Target
Article 7
Energy Sources and/or Energy Resources shall be intended to be capital
development for the greatest welfare of the people, by optimizing their use for
national economic development, the creation of value added in the country
and absorption of manpower.
Article 8
The target of supply and utilization of Primary Energy and Final Energy shall
be as follows:a. the fulfilment of Primary Energy supply in 2025 around 400 MTOE (four
hundred million tonnes of oil equivalent) and around 1000 MTOE (one
thousand million tonnes of oil equivalent) in 2050;
b. the achievement of per-capita primary energy utilization around 1.4 TOE
(one point four tonnes of oil equivalent) in 2025 and around 3.2 TOE
(three point two tonnes of oil equivalent) in 2050;
c. the fulfilment of power generation capacity provision around 115 GW (one
hundred and fifteen giga watts) in 2025 and around 430 GW (four
hundred and thirty giga watts) in 2050; and
d. the achievement of per-capita electricity utilization around 2,500 KWh
(two thousand five hundred kilo watt hours) in 2025 and around 7,000
KWh (seven thousand kilo watt hours) in 2050.
Article 9
For the fulfilment of Energy Supply and Energy Utilization as referred to in
Article 8, the achievement of national energy policy targets are required as
follows:
a. realization of the new paradigm that Energy Sources is a capital of the
national development;
b. Energy Elasticity achievement shall be less than 1 (one) in 2025 that
comply with the economic growth;
c. reduction in final Energy Intensity of 1% (one) percent per year up to
2025;
d. achievement of Electrification Ratio of 85% (eighty five percent) in 2015
and close on 100% (one hundred percent) in 2020;
e. achievement of the household gas utilization ratio of 85% (eighty five
percent) in 2015; and
f. optimal Primary Energy mix shall be achieved:
1.the role of the New Energy and Renewable Energy at least 23% (twenty
three percent) in 2025 and to be at least 31% (thirty one percent) in
2050 provided that its economical fulfilled;
2.the role of oil shall be less than 25% (twenty five percent) in 2025 and to
be less than 20% (twenty percent) in 2050;
3.the role of coal at least 30% (thirty percent) in 2025, and 25% (twenty
five percent) at the minimum in 2050; and
4.the role of natural gas at least 22% (twenty two percent) in 2025 and at
least 24% (twenty four percent) in 2050.
CHAPTER III
DIRECTION OF THE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
Part One
The Main Policy
Paragraph 1
Availability of Energy to meet the National Demand
Article 10
(1) Availability of Energy to meet the national demand shall be realized by:
a. increasing exploration of the resources, potential and/or proven
Energy, both fossil type and New Energy and Renewable Energy;
b. increasing Energy production and Energy Sources in the country
and/or from overseas;c. increasing the reliability of the production, transportation, and
distribution system of Energy Supply;
d. reducing fossil Energy exports gradually especially for gas and coal
and to set up the deadline to start stopping the exports;
e. embodiying a balance between the increase rate of fossil Energy
Reserves with a maximum production rate; and
f. ensuring the security of the carrying capacity of Environment to
ensure the availability of Energy Sources of water and geothermal.
(2) In realizing the availability of Energy for the national demand as referred
to in paragraph (1), if there is an overlap of land use in Energy Supply
then the precedence shall be the one that has higher national defense
value and/or strategic value.
Paragraph 2
Priority of Energy Development
Article 11
(1) Priority of Energy development shall be carried out by way of:
a. developing Energy by taking into account the balance of the
economical of Energy, security of Energy supply, and preservation of
the Environment functions;
b. prioritizing Energy Supply to the people who do not have the access
yet to Energy of electricity, household gas, and Energy for
transportation, industry, and agriculture;
c. developing Energy by prioritizing local Energy Resources;
d. developing Energy and Energy Resources shall be prioritized to meet
domestic energy demand; and
e. developing the industry of high Energy demand shall be prioritized to
the region which is rich with Energy Resources.
(2) To realize the economic balance of Energy as referred to in paragraph (1)
letter a, priority of the national Energy development shall be based on
the following principles:
a. maximizing the use of Renewable Energy by taking into account the
economic level;
b. minimizing the use of oil;
c. optimizing utilization of natural gas and New Energy; and
d. using coal as the reliable national Energy supply.
(3) The provision as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be exempted to
nuclear Energy that shall be utilized by taking account the security of
the national Energy supply in a large scale, reducing carbon emission
and keep prioritizing the potential of New Energy and Renewable Energy
according to its economical value, as well as to consider it as the last
option by paying close attention to the safety factors.
Paragraph 3
Utilization of the National Energy Resources
Article 12
(1) Utilization of the national Energy Resources shall be performed by the
Government and/or Regional Governments referring to the following
strategy:a. utilization of Renewable Energy Sources of the type of water flow and
water fall Energy, geothermal Energy, hydro kinetic ocean and ocean
thermal energies, and wind Energy shall be directed to electric
power;
b. utilization of Renewable Energy Sources of solar Energy type shall be
directed to electric power, and non electric power for industry,
household, and transportation;
c. utilization of Renewable Energy Sources of bio-fuel type shall be
directed to substitute fuel oil especially for transportation and
industry;
d. utilization of Renewable Energy Sources of bio-fuel type shall be
performed by keep maintaining food security;
e. utilization of Renewable Energy of the biomass and waste type shall
be directed for electric power and transportation;
f. utilization of oil shall only be performed for transportation and
commercial that are not yet substituted by other Energies or Energy
Sources;
g. utilization of natural gas Energy Sources for industry, electric power,
household, and transportation, shall be prioritized for the use of
those with highest added value;
h. utilization of coal Energy Sources shall be for electric power and
industry;
i. utilization of New Energy Sources in the liquid form that is liquified
coal and hydrogen shall be for transportation;
j. utilization of New Energy Sources of solid and gas form shall be for
electric power;
k. utilization of liquid Energy Sources other than liquefied petroleum
gas shall be directed to transportation sector;
l. utilization of hydrokinetic ocean and ocean thermal Energy Sources
shall be encouraged by constructing pilot projects that is connected
to power grade as an initial step;
m. increasing utilization of solar Energy Sources through the use of
solar cell in transportation, industry, commercial building, and
household; and
n. maximization and obligation of utilizing solar Energy Sources shall
be performed with the condition that all components and the solar
Energy generating system from upstream to downstream shall be
produced in stages in the country.
(2) Utilization of the national Energy Resources shall be given the priority to
meet the demand for Energy and raw material.
(3) Priority of the national Energy Sources utilization shall be performed
based on the overall considerations on the capacity, continuity, and the
economy as well as the Environment impact.
Paragraph 4
National Energy Reserves
Article 13
The national Energy Reserves shall include:
a. Strategic Reserves;
b. Energy Buffer Stock; and
c. Operational Stock.Article 14
(1) Strategic Reserves as referred to in Article 13 letter a shall be regulated
and allocated by the Government to ensure long-term Energy Security;
(2) Strategic Reserves as referred to in paragraph (1) shall only be exploited
in accordance with the time determined or whenever necessary for the
national interest;
(3) Further provisions on the management of Strategic Reserves shall be
regulated in a Presidential Regulation.
Article 15
(1) Energy Buffer Stock as referred to in Article 13 letter b shall be provided
to ensure the national Energy Security alligned with the national Energy
efficiency policy, particularly through the policy on appropriate-targeted
fuel oil and electricity subsidies.
(2) Energy Buffer Stock as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided by
the Government under the following provisions:
a. Energy Buffer Stock is the stock other than the operational stock
provided by the Business Entity and Energy Industry;
b. Energy Buffer Stock shall be used to overcome the Energy crisis and
emergency condition; and
c. Energy Buffer Stock shall be provided gradually according to the
economic condition and financial capability of the state.
(3) The National Energy Council shall regulate the type, amount, time, and
location of the Energy Buffer Stock.
(4) The Management of Energy Buffer Stock shall be conducted according
to the provisons of prevailing laws and regulations.
Article 16
(1) Business Entity and industry as Energy supplier shall be obliged to
provide operational stock to ensure continuity of Energy supply.
(2) Further provisions on the operational stock supply as referred to in
paragraph (1) shall be regulated by the Government.
Part Two
Supporting Policy
Paragraph 1
Energy Conservation, Energy Resources Conservation,
and Energy Diversification
Article 17
(1) Energy Conservation shall be conducted from the upstream side
through downstream side, to include management of Energy Resources
and the entire stages of exploration, production, transportation,
distribution, and utilization of Energy and Energy Sources.
(2) Management of Energy Resources as referred to in paragraph (1) shall
be directed to ensure that the supply and utilization of Energy
Resources while maintaining and improving the quality of value and
diversity of the Energy Resources.(3) Energy Resources Conservation shall be performed by sectoral
approach, at least to adjust it to the national spatial plan and the
carrying capacity of the Environment.
(4) To perform Energy Resources Conservation as referred to in paragraph
(3), Energy Supply shall use sustainable Energy Resources.
(5) Producer and consumer of Energy shall be obliged to perform Energy
Conservation and efficiency of Energy Resources management so as to
ensure availability of Energy in the long term.
(6) Energy Conservation in the industrial sector shall be conducted by
taking into account the competitiveness.
(7) The Government and/or Regional Government by virtue of its respective
authority shall set a guideline and implementation of Energy
Conservation policy in particular in the field of Energy saving, at least
covering the following:
a. obligation of standardization and labelization of all equipment of the
Energy users;
b. obligation of Energy management including Energy audit to Energy
users;
c. obligation for using efficient power generating technology and Energy
conversion equipment;
d. socialization on Energy saving culture;
e. realizing investment climate for developing Energy services business
as investor and provider of Energy in efficient way;
f. to accelerate the application and/or transfer to efficient mass
transportation system, both urban and intercity transportation;
g. to accelerate the implementation of electronic road pricing so as to
reduce the traffic congestion triggered by private vehicle; and
h. target-setting on fuel consumption in the transportation sector shall
be measureable and gradually conducted so as to increase efficiency.
Article 18
(1) The Government and/or Regional Government by virtue of its respective
authority shall be obliged to perform Energy Diversification to increase
Energy Resources Conservation and National Energy Security and/or
the regions.
(2) Energy Diversification as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be performed
at least through:
a. acceleration of supply and utilization of diverse type of New Energy
Sources and Renewable Energy Sources;
b. acceleration of substituting fuel oil with gas in the residential and
transportation sectors;
c. acceleration of utilizing electric power for the propulsion of motor
vehicles;
d. increased utilization of low rank coal for mine mouths steam power
plant, gasified coal and liquified coal; and
e. increased utilization of medium and high rank coals for domestic
power plant.Paragraph 2
Environment and Occupational Safety
Article 19
(1) National Energy Management shall be aligned with the direction of the
sustainable national development, preservation of natural resources,
Energy Resources Conservation, and control of the Environment’s
pollution.
(2) The National Energy Management activities shall be obliged to take into
account health, occupational safety, and social impact factors while
maintaining the Environment functions.
(3) Any activities in Energy Supply and Energy Utilization shall be obliged :
a. performing prevention, dwindle, mitigation, and recovery of the
impact, and compensation to the parties affected;
b. minimizing the production of waste, reuse of waste in the production
process, the use of waste for other benefits, and extract the elements
that still have the benefits contained in the waste, while taking into
account the social aspects, Environment and its economical; and
c. prioritizing the use of environmental friendly technologies.
(4) Any exploitation of nuclear installations shall be obliged to take into
account the safety and the risk of accidents and bear all the indemnity
to third parties who suffer losses caused by nuclear accident.
(5) Implementation of the Environment management and implementation of
occupational safety under the national Energy Management activities,
Energy Supply, and Energy Utilization as referred to in paragraph (1),
paragraph (2), paragraph (3), and paragraph (4) shall be carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the prevailing laws and regulations.
Paragraph 3
Energy Prices, Subsidy and Incentives
Article 20
(1) Energy Price shall be set on the basis of a Fair Economic value.
(2) Renewable Energy Price shall be regulated based on:
a. the calculation of the Renewable Energy price with the assumption
to compete with Energy price deriving from petroleum Energy
Sources prevailing in an area within a certain time, which is
calculated to exclude the fuel oil subsidy; or
b. the rational calculation of Energy prices for Renewable Energy
supply from local sources, in order to secure the Energy supply in
certain areas which are in the remote location, under developed
facilities and infrastructure, vulnerable to weather disturbances, or
are near to the territorial border lines of the Unitary States of the
Republic of Indonesia.
(3) The Government shall regulate the price of coal in the country until the
establishment of an efficient market.
(4) The Government actualize the electricity market at least through:
a. price setting of certain Primary Energy such as coal, gas, water, and
geothermal for power generation;
b. setting of progressive electricity tariffs;
c. application of feed in tariff mechanism in setting the selling price of
Renewable Energy; andd. improvement of geothermal Energy Management by sharing the risk
between electricity supply license holders and developers.
(5) The Government shall set Renewable Energy market, including a
minimum quota of electricity, liquid fuels, and gas sourced from New
Energy and Renewable Energy.
Article 21
(1) Subsidy shall be provided by the Government and Regional
Governments.
(2) Subsidy as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided in terms of:
a. application of Fair Economical as referred to in Article 20 paragraph
(1) may not be performed; and/or
b. Renewable Energy price as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (2)
letter b is more expensive than the non-subsidized Energy prices of
fuel oil.
(3) Provision of subsidy as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be targeted
appropriately to groups of less fortunate people.
(4) Reduction of subsidies for fuel oil and electricity shall be conducted
gradually until the purchasing power of people is achieved.
Article 22
(1) The Government and Regional Governments shall provide fiscal and
nonfiscal incentives to encourage diversification program of Energy
Sources and development of Renewable Energy.
(2) The Government and Regional Governments shall provide incentive for
the development, exploitation, and utilization of Renewable Energy in
particular for the small scale and located in remote areas until its
economical value be competitive with the conventional Energy.
(3) The Government shall provide incentive to the producers and
consumers of Energy who perform Energy Conservation and Energy
efficiency obligation and give disincentive to those who do not
implement Energy Conservation and Energy efficiency.
(4) The Government shall provide incentive to private institutions or
individuals who develop the core technology in the field of New Energy
and Renewable Energy.
(5) The incentives granted by the Government and Regional Governments
shall be realized executed in accordance with the provisions in the
prevailing laws and regulations.
Paragraph 4
Infrastructure, Access of People, and Energy Industry
Article 23
(1) The development and strengthening of the Energy infrastructure and
access of people to Energy shall be performed by the Government
and/or Regional Governments.
(2) The development and strengthening of Energy infrastructure as well as
access of people to Energy as referred to in paragraph (1) shall carried
out by:
a. improving the ability of domestic industry in the provision of Energy
infrastructure;b. developing infrastructure while supporting coal industry which
includes transportation, stockpiling, and blending to achieve an
efficient market and enable to supply domestic demand
continuously;
c. accelerating the provision of supporting infrastructure for oil and gas
production, refining fuel, Energy transportation and distribution,
transmission systems, and distribution of Energy;
d. accelerating the provision of supporting infrastructure for New
Energy and Renewable Energy;
e. providing access for people to obtain Energy information
transparently and to obtain Energy easily; and
f. facilitating access of people to obtain information on the development
and strengthening of Energy infrastructure.
(3) The development of energy infrastructure shall take into account the
geographical condition of Indonesia which are mostly composed of
marine waters, by strengthening the infrastructure of the exploration,
production, transportation, distribution, and transmission within the
archipelago areas.
Article 24
(1) The Government shall encourage and strengthen the development of
Energy Industry in order to accelerate the achievement of Energy
Supply and Energy Utilization target, strengthening the national
economy and absorption of employment.
(2) Strengthening the development of the Energy Industry as referred to in
paragraph (1) shall include:
a. improvement of Energy Industry and Energy services capability in
the country;
b. uprise of the development of production equipment industry and
utilizers of Renewable Energy in the country;
c. improvement of the domestic capacity to support the exploration of
geothermal and electric power supporting industry;
d. encouragement of the system and components industry for
equipment of solar power plant installation and power generating
from the energy of hydro kinetic ocean and ocean thermal;
e. increasing local content in the national Energy Industry;
f. development of the component/equipment industry for wind power
plant installation through small and medium enterprises and/or
national industry;
g. provision of greater opportunities to the national companies in
managing oil, gas, and coal; and
h. development of Energy Industry in the country through the
purchase of factory license.
Paragraph 5
Research, Development, and Application of Energy Technology
Article 25
(1) Research, development, and application of Energy technology activities
shall be directed to support the national Energy Industry.
(2) Funding for research, development and application of Energy technology
as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be facilitated up to commercial
stage by:a. the Government and/or Regional Governments in accordance with
their respective authority; and
b. Business Entity.
(3) The Government and/or Regional Governments shall encourage the
creation of a climate for utilization and in favour of the results of
research, development, and application of national Energy technology.
(4) The Government and/or Regional Governments shall reinforce the areas
on research, development, and application of Energy at least by:
a. preparing and upgrading the capability of human resources in
mastery and application of technology as well as safety in the field of
Energy; and/or
b. increasing in mastery of domestic Energy technology by undertaking
research, development, and implementation of efficient Energy
technology.
Paragraph 6
Institutional and Funding Matters
Article 26
(1) The Government and/or Regional Government shall perform
institutional strengthening to ensure the achievement of the objectives
and targets of the Energy Supply and Energy Utilization.
(2) The institutional strengthening as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be
conducted at least by:
a. improving the institutional system and services of the Government
and Regional Governments bureaucracy and increased interagencies coordination in the field of Energy in order to accelerate the
decision-making, licensing process, and development of Energy
infrastructure;
b. enhancing cooperation and coordination among research
institutions, universities, industry, policy makers, and the
community in order to speed up mastery and Energy Utilization;
c. improving institutional accountability by adjusting the functions
and authority of the central and regional level institutions;
d. improving the capability of human resources in the field of Energy in
the regions in Energy Management;
e. strengthening the capacity of the organizations at the regency/city
level which shall be responsible for planning, development and
Energy Management in rural areas; and/or
f. regionalization of electrical Energy supply in order to reduce
disparities in electrical Energy supply outside Java.
(3) The Government and/or Regional Governments in accordance with their
respective authority shall be responsible for handling and overcoming
the problems of Energy.
Article 27
(1) The Government and/or Regional Governments in setting the Energy
Supply growth target shall take into account the economic growth
target.
(2) In order to achieve the growth target on Energy Supply as referred to in
paragraph (1), the Government and/or Regional Governments shall
provide adequate allocated funding for the development and
strengthening of Energy infrastructure.(3) The Government and/or Regional Governments shall encourage the
strengthening of funding to ensure the availability of Energy,
equilization of Energy infrastructure, equal access of people to Energy ,
the development of national Energy Industry, and achievement the
target of Energy Supply and Energy Utilization.
(4) The Government shall encourage Business Entities and banks to
finance the construction of infrastructure and Energy Utilization.
(5) The strengthening of funding as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be
conducted at least by:
a. enhancing the role of national banks in the financing of oil and gas
production nationwide, Renewable Energy development activities,
and Energy-saving programs;
b. applying depletion premium of fossil Energy towards Energy
development; and/or
c. providing specific budget allocations by the Government and/or
Regional Governments to accelerate equitable access to electricity
and Energy.
(6) Depletion premium as referred to in paragraph (5) letter b shall be used
for oil and natural gas exploration and development of New Energy and
Renewable Energy Sources, human resource capacity building, research
and development, and development of supporting infrastructure.
CHAPTER IV
SUPERVISION
Article 28
The National Energy Council shall perform supervision on the implementation
of the intersectoral national energy policy.
CHAPTER V
OTHER PROVISIONS
Article 29
The National energy policy may be reviewed within 5 (five) years at the earliest
when deemed necessary.
Article 30
The National energy policy shall be the ground of formulating National Energy
Master Plan and National Electricity Master Plan.
CHAPTER VI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 31
At the time this Government Regulation comes into effect, all the
implementing regulations of the Presidential Regulation Number 5 of 2006 on
National Energy Policy shall remain in effect to the extent they are not in
contradiction with this Government Regulation.ELUCIDATION
ON
GOVERNMENT REGULATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
NUMBER 79 OF 2014
ON
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
I. GENERAL
Energy has an important and strategic role in the achievement of social,
economic and Environmental goal in the national sustainable development.
Energy Demand is projected to continually increasing as a result of the
economic growth and the increase of population. Therefore, Energy
Management has to be well-implemented in order to meet the energy supply
assurance both for the present and future needs.
Energy Management in particular the Energy Resources management is
not yet optimal performed to meet Energy needs in the country. A portion of
the Primary Energy is still allocated for export to generate foreign exchange
and source of revenue in the State Budget. As a result, the domestic Energy
needs both as fuel and raw materials for the industry are still not optimally
fulfilled as mandated in Article 33 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of
Indonesia.
In addition, there are also a number of problems facing the energy
sector, among others:
1. Energy use is not yet efficient;
2. Energy subsidies are not yet on the proper target;
3. Energy prices have not yet reached the economic price;
4. interest in investment is still low;
5. dependence on fossil Energy is still high and has not been followed by an
increase balance of reserves supply;
6. limitations of Energy infrastructure;
7. Energy infrastructure development has not been supported by a strong
and independent national industry;
8. limitations of the budget;
9. lack of favours to the domestic technology products;
10. development of energy research has not been well integrated;
11. mastery of Energy technology is still low;
12. lack of Energy development priority setting;
13. access of people to energy is still low;
14. Energy Management has not applied fully the principle of sustainability;
and
15. the added value of Energy Management is not yet optimal.
Looking at the energy current conditions and a number of problems
faced in the Energy sector, the Government deems necessary to perform
Energy Management properly on the supply side management and the
demand side management in order to achieve Energy Independence and
national Energy Security. Thus, it is necessary to develop national energy
policy that includes the availability of Energy to meet the national needs,
priorities of Energy development, national Energy Resources utilization and
national Energy Buffer Stock. The Energy supply Policy as well as the priority
of Energy development and the national Energy Buffer Stock is directed to
ensure the national security of Energy supply through the utilization ofEnergy Resources proportionately, both non-fossil Energy Resources such as
geothermal, biomass, water flow and water fall energy, solar energy, wind
power, nuclear power, hydrokinetic ocean and ocean thermal energies and
fossil Energy Resources such as petroleum, coal, natural gas, coal bedmethane. While the policy on Energy Resources utilization, is directed to the
optimal and efficient use of Energy in all consumers sectors.
Energy Management paradigm that has been running has placed
Energy Resources as exports commodity to generate foreign exchange. These
conditions resulted in the domestic Energy supply can not be secured
properly, increase of added value is not optimal, and the loss of the
opportunity to create new employment to become one of the sources of
economic growth barriers. Hence, Energy Management policy paradigm needs
to be changed to make Energy as national capital development.
With the shift of the aforesaid paradigm, it is expected to increase the
state revenues from the Energy sector that can be partly used to encourage
the development of other sectors of Energy inter alia through searching and
increasing the fossil Energy reserves, the development of the New Energy and
Renewable Energy, Environment functions restoration, and the Energy
Resources Conservation.
II. CHAPTER BY CHAPTER
Article 1
Self-explanatory.
Article 2
Self-explanatory.
Article 3
Self-explanatory.
Article 4
Self-explanatory.
Article 5
Self-explanatory.
Article 6
Self-explanatory.
Article 7
Self-explanatory.
Article 8
The supply and utilization target of Primary and Final Energy is obtained
by projecting the national Energy demand up to 2050 to be obtained
through the projection of the Energy demand within a certain period of
time taking into account the influencing parameters and assumptions
used. In making the projection of Energy demand through 2050, the
main parameters used are economic growth and population growth.Energy demand projections also take into account the potential savings
in future use of Energy both in the demand side and the Supply side of
Energy as a result of advanced efficient technology such as Energy
machinery or equipment and the growing public awareness for Energy
saving.
Energy Demand up to 2050 is formulated by projecting Indonesia to
become the new economic power (emerging economy) in 2025 and
become a developed country by 2050.
Article 9
Letter a
Self-explanatory.
Letter b
Self-explanatory.
Letter c
Self-explanatory.
Letter d
Self-explanatory.
Letter e
Self-explanatory.
Letter f
Number 1
The target of New Energy and Renewable Energy mix is
broken down into types of New Energy and Renewable
Energy in the National Energy Master Plan.
Number 2
Self-explanatory.
Number 3
Self-explanatory.
Number 4
Self-explanatory.
Article 10
Paragraph (1)
Letter a
Self-explanatory.
Letter b
Self-explanatory.
Letter c
Self-explanatory.
Letter dReducing the fossil Energy exports in stages especially for
gas and coal is meant to prioritize the fossil Energy
utilization in particularly gas and coal for fulfilling domestic
demand on raw materials or fuel that will post fossil Energy
particularly gas and coal as the economy mover that will
provide value added and multiplier effect towards the
creation of employment opportunity, growing upstream and
downstream supporting industry, empowerment of people
in the surrounding areas, yielding an increase of state
revenue from tax and non-tax which in the end will increase
the economic growth and welfare of the people.
Letter e
Self-explanatory.
Letter f
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (2)
Self-explanatory.
Article 11
Paragraph (1)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (2)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (3)
This provision contains a view that observing the utilization of
nuclear Energy requires high safety and security standards and
considering the effects of nuclear radiation hazards to the
Environment, the usage is considered as the last option.
However, in case an in-depth study has been done on the
availability of technological development of nuclear Energy for
peaceful purposes, fulfilment of Energy growing demand, the
national Energy Supply in a large scale, reducing carbon
emissions, and the urgent national interest, as such in principle
nuclear Energy could be utilized.
Article 12
Self-explanatory.
Article 13
Self-explanatory.
Article 14
Self-explanatory.
Article 15
Self- explanatory.
Article 16
Paragraph (1)The Energy supply industry includes the industries performing
business on processing, transportation, storage and trade of
Energy.
Paragraph (2)
Self-explanatory.
Article 17
Paragraph (1)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (2)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (3)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (4)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (5)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (6)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (7)
Letter a
Self-explanatory.
Letter b
The term "Energy management" is meant an integrated
activity to control Energy consumption in order to achieve
effective and efficient Energy Utilization to produce
maximum output by applying structured and economic
technical measures to minimize Energy Utilization,
including Energy for the production process and to
minimize the consumption of raw material and supporting
material.
Letter c
The term "efficient in this provision is the maximum value
resulting from the comparison between the output and
input of Energy in the Energy utilizer equipment.
Letter d
The term “saving” in this provision is related to the
behaviour of using Energy effectively and efficiently.
Letter e
Self-explanatory.
Letter f
Self-explanatory.Letter g
Self-explanatory.
Letter h
Self-explanatory.
Article 18
Self-explanatory.
Article 19
Self-explanatory.
Article 20
Paragraph (1)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (2)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (3)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (4)
Letter a
Self-explanatory.
Letter b
Self-explanatory.
Letter c
The term “feed-in tariff” in this provision is meant a
mechanism of the Renewable Enegy selling price policy
which is designed for expediting the investment on
Renewable Energy technology.
Letter d
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (5)
Self-explanatory.
Article 21
Paragraph (1)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (2)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (3)
Self-explanatory.
Paragraph (4)
Reduction of fuel oil and electricity subsidies in stages shall be
aligned with the development of New Energy and Renewable
Energy with the aim to encourage the development of New Energy
and Renewable Energy ensuring that the New Energy andRenewable Energy prices are competitive with the fossil Energy
prices.
Article 22
Self-explanatory.
Article 23
Self-explanatory.
Article 24
Self-explanatory.
Article 25
Self-explanatory.
Article 26
Self-explanatory.
Article 27
Self-explanatory.
Article 28
Self-explanatory.
Article 29
Self-explanatory.
Article 30
Self-explanatory.
Article 31
Self-explanatory.
Article 32
Self-explanatory.
Article 33
Self-explanatory.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE STATE GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
NUMBER 5609