File Name: IND-NEP-2008-EN
Year: 2008
Country Name: India
Country Code: IND
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2008
Start Year: 2008
End Year: 2032
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Integrated Energy Policy
Report of the Expert Committee
Government of India
Planning Commission
New Delhi
August 2006We, the Members of the “Expert Committee on Integrated Energy Policy”, hereby submit our Final Report.
Kirit S. Parikh
Chairman, Expert Committee
Member, Planning Commission, Government of India
T.L. Sankar Amit Mitra
Ex-Principal, Administrative Staff College of India Secretary General, FICCI
Leena Srivastava D.S. Rawat
Executive Director, TERI Secretary General, ASSOCHAM
J.L. Bajaj V. Raghuraman
Ex-Chairman, SERC Representative of Confederation of Indian Industry
Rangan Banerjee Urjit R. Patel
Professor, IIT, Mumbai Executive Director, IDFC
Ajit Kapadia Pradeep Chaturvedi
Vice Chairman, Centre for Fuel Studies & Research The Institution of Engineers (India)
Subimal Sen R.R. Shah
Member, West Bengal Planning Board Member Secretary, Planning Commission
R.V. Shahi M.S. Srinivasan
Secretary, Ministry of Power Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas
Anil Kakodkar Prodipto Ghosh
Secretary, Deptt. of Atomic Energy Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests
V. Subramanian H.C. Gupta
Secretary, Ministry of Non-conventional Energy Secretary, Ministry of Coal
Sources
Convenor
Surya P. Sethi
Adviser (Power & Energy), Planning Commission,e- ,l- vkgyqokfy;k
MONTEK SINGH AHLUWALIA
mik/;{k
;kstuk vk;ksx
Hkkjr
DEPUTY CHAIRMAN
PLANNING COMMISSION
INDIA
;kstuk Hkou] laln ekxZ] ubZ fnYyh&110001 nwjHkk"k % 23096677] 23096688 QSDl % 23096699
Yojana Bhawan, Parliament Street, New Delhi-110001 Phones : 23096677, 23096688 Fax : 23096699
E-MAIL : dch@yojana.nic.in
Foreword
Energy is a vital input into production and this means that if India is to
move to the higher growth rate that is now feasible, we must ensure reliable
availability of energy, particularly electric power and petroleum products, at
internationally competitive prices. We cannot hope to compete effectively in
world markets unless these critical energy inputs are available in adequate quantities
and at appropriate prices.
The present energy scenario is not satisfactory. The power supply position
prevailing in the country is characterised by persistent shortages and unreliability
and also high prices for industrial consumer. There is also concern about the
position regarding petroleum products. We depend to the extent of 70 percent on
imported oil, and this naturally raises issues about energy security. These concerns
have been exacerbated by recent movements in international oil prices. Electricity
is domestically produced but its supply depends upon availability of coal,
exploitation of hydro power sources and the scope for expanding nuclear power,
and there are constraints affecting each source.
Achieving an efficient configuration of the various forms of energy
requires consistency in the policies governing each sector and consistency in the
pricing of different types of energy. There is also a need for clarity in the direction
in which we wish to move in aspects like energy security, research and development,
addressing environmental concerns, energy conservation, etc. To address these
issues in an integrated manner, the Prime Minister had directed that the Planning
Commission should constitute an Expert Committee to undertake a comprehensive
review and to make recommendation for policy on this basis. The Expert
Committee was constituted under the chairmanship of Dr. Kirit S. Parikh,
Member, Planning Commission and has finalised its report after an extensive
process of deliberation and consultation with various stakeholders. The draft
report was also placed on the web site of the Planning Commission and comments
were invited which have been taken into consideration in preparing the final
report.,e- ,l- vkgyqokfy;k
MONTEK SINGH AHLUWALIA
mik/;{k
;kstuk vk;ksx
Hkkjr
DEPUTY CHAIRMAN
PLANNING COMMISSION
INDIA
;kstuk Hkou] laln ekxZ] ubZ fnYyh&110001 nwjHkk"k % 23096677] 23096688 QSDl % 23096699
Yojana Bhawan, Parliament Street, New Delhi-110001 Phones : 23096677, 23096688 Fax : 23096699
E-MAIL : dch@yojana.nic.in
The report of the Expert Committee provides a broad overarching
framework for guiding the policies governing the production and use of different
forms of energy from various sources. It makes specific recommendations on a
very large range of issues. The report is a valuable input into policy making and
will help shape our energy policy in the 11th Plan. Early implementation of the
recommendations in the report would contribute substantially to putting the
economy on a sustainable higher growth path.
(Montek S. Ahluwalia)Preface
The energy policies that we have adopted since independence to serve the socio-economic
priority of development have encouraged and sustained many inefficiencies in the use and
production of energy. We pay one of the highest prices for energy in purchasing power parity
terms. This has eroded the competitiveness of many sectors of the economy. The challenge is to
ensure adequate supply of energy at the least possible cost. Another important challenge is to
provide clean and convenient “lifeline” energy to the poor even when they cannot fully pay for
it, as it is critical to their well-being. Therein lies the importance of an effective and comprehensive
energy policy.
In this context, the Prime Minister had directed the Planning Commission, to setup an
Expert Committee to prepare an integrated energy policy linked with sustainable development
that covers all sources of energy and addresses all aspects of energy use and supply including
energy security, access and availability, affordability and pricing, as well as efficiency and
environmental concerns. The committee was constituted on August 12, 2004 and was to submit
its report within six months i.e., by February 11, 2005. Given the complexity involved and wider
consultation needed, the term of the committee was extended upto 11th October 2005. The draft
report of the Committee was put on the website of Planning Commission inviting comments. We
received a large number of them from individuals, groups and institutions some of whom had
organised special discussion meetings on the draft report. I thank them all. We have finalised the
report after taking these comments into account. While the finalisation of the report has taken
some time, it is worth noting that some of the policy suggestions made in the draft report have
been in the meanwhile taken up by the Government for implementation.
It is my pleasure and also my privilege to thank all the Members of the Committee for
their many important suggestions and for sparing their valuable time towards the finalisation of
this report.
I am also thankful to the officers and staff of the Power & Energy Division of the
Planning Commission for their contributions in the preparation of this report, particularly Shri
Surya Sethi, Convenor of the Committee, for his many ideas, contributions, help in drafting the
report and for ensuring consistency and clarity. S/Shri R.C. Mahajan, M. Satyamurty, R.K. Kaul,
I.A. Khan, B. Srinivasan, Dr. A. Mohan, D.N. Prasad, Rajnath Ram and Dr. M. Govinda Raj
provided many inputs and support.
I also thank Dr. Vivek Karandikar and Dr. Prasanna Dani of the Observer Research
Foundation for their help in developing energy supply scenarios.
Finally, I want to thank Shri Sanjay Vasnik for diligently, carefully and cheerfully typing
many drafts of the report.
(Dr. Kirit S. Parikh)
Member (Energy),
Planning Commission &
Chairman, Expert Committee on Integrated Energy Policy
Dated: 09.08.2006Contents
Page No.
Members of the Committee iii
Foreword v
Preface vii
Overview xiii
Abbreviations Used xxxi
Chapter I. The Challenges 1
1.1 The Energy Scene 1
1.2 The Issues 13
1.3 The Vision 14
1.4 Need for an Integrated Energy Policy 15
1.5 Approach 16
Chapter II. Energy Requirements 18
2.1 Commercial Energy Needs 18
2.2 Required Electricity Generation 19
2.3 India’s Oil Demand 22
2.4 India’s Coal Demand for Non-Power Use 23
2.5 India’s Non-Power Natural Gas Demand 23
2.6 Total Primary Commercial Energy Requirement 26
2.7 Non-Commercial Energy Requirement 28
2.8 Total Primary Energy Requirement 31
2.9 Summing Up 31
Chapter III. Supply Options 33
3.1 India’s Energy Reserves 33
3.2 Supply Scenarios 40
3.3 Implications of the Results of the Scenarios 41
3.3.1 Aggregate Energy Needs and Imports Dependence 45
3.3.2 Energy Supply Options 45
3.3.3 Energy Efficiency and Demand Side Management 48
3.3.4 Carbon Emissions 50
3.3.5 Implications for Investment Needs 50
3.3.6 The Main Actions Recommended 51
3.4 Energy Independence in an Energy Scarce World 51
Chapter IV. Energy Security 54
4.1 What is Energy Security? 54
42 The Nature of the Problem 554.3 Policy Options for Energy Security 57
4.3.1 Reduce Energy Requirements 57
4.3.2 Substitute Imported Energy by Domestic Alternatives 58
4.3.3 Diversify Supply Sources 60
4.3.4 Expand Resource Base and Develop Alternative Energy Sources 61
4.3.5 Increase Ability to Withstand Supply Shocks 64
4.3.6 Increase Ability to Import Energy and Face Market Risks 65
4.3.7 Increase Redundancy to Deal with Technical Risk 65
4.4 Energy Security for the Poor 66
4.5 Policies and Initiatives for Energy Security 66
Chapter V. Energy Policy Options/Initiatives 68
5.1 The Emerging Backdrop 68
5.2 Policies Covering Energy Markets, Pricing, Regulation, Taxation, Subsidies, 71
Externalities and Institutions
Chapter VI. Policy for Energy Efficiency and Demand Side Management 81
6.1 Large Potential for Saving Energy 81
Chapter VII. Policy for Renewable and Non-Conventional Energy Sources 89
Chapter VIII. Household Energy Security: Electricity and Clean Fuels for All 99
8.1 Electricity 100
8.2 Cooking Energy 101
8.3 Subsidy through Debit Cards/Smart Cards 102
Chapter IX. Energy R&D 103
Chapter X. Power Sector Policy 109
Chapter XI. Coal Sector Policy 115
Chapter XII. Oil and Gas Sector Policy 123
Chapter XIII. Energy-Environment Linkages 129
13.1 Energy Supply Side: Environment Concerns 129
13.1.1 Exploration, Production and Transformation of Fossil Fuels 129
13.1.2 Environmental Impacts of Nuclear Power 130
13.1.3 Environmental Impacts of Large-Scale Hydropower 130
13.1.4 Environmental Impacts of Renewable Energy 131
13.2 Environmental Dimensions of Demand Side Impacts 131
13.3 Understanding the Determinants of Air Quality 131
13.3.1 Levels and Trend Analysis of Urban air quality in five major Indian cities 132
13.4 Long-term Sustainability of India’s Energy Use 132
13.4.1 Local and Regional Impacts 132
1342 India’s Approach to Climate Change 135Concluding Comment 137
Annexures 138
Annexure-I Order Constituting the Committee 138
Annexure-II Gist of Earlier Energy Policy Committees/Groups 141
Annexure-III Calorific Values, Units and Conversion Factors 147
List of Tables
Table 1.1 Selected Energy Indicators for 2003 1
Table 1.2 Household Energy Consumption in India (July 1999 – June 2000) 8
Table 1.3 Growth of Motorised Transport Vehicles 10
Table 2.1 Energy Use Elasticity w.r.t. GDP 18
Table 2.2 Elasticities Used for Projections 19
Table 2.3 Energy Use Elasticity w.r.t. GDP from Cross-Country Data of 2003 19
Table 2.4 Projections for Total Primary Commercial Energy Requirements 20
Table 2.5 Projections for Electricity Requirement 20
Table 2.6 Projections for Electricity Requirement by MOP 21
Table 2.7 Sources of Electricity Generation – One Possible Scenario 22
Table 2.8 Demand Scenario for Petroleum Products - India 24
Table 2.9 Demand Projection of Coal by Various Agencies in Mt 25
Table 2.10 Demand Scenario for Natural Gas - India 27
Table 2.11 Commercial Fuel Requirements for Non-Power Use in Physical Units 28
Table 2.12 Projected Primary Commercial Energy Requirements (One Possible Scenario) 28
Table 2.13 The Demand Scenario of Various Energy Items for Household 29
Consumption in India
Table 2.14 The Impact of Electrification on the Demand Scenario of Various Energy 30
Items for Household Consumption
Table 2.15 Total Primary Energy Requirement (Mtoe) 31
Table 2.16 Per Capita Energy Requirements in Selected Countries (2003) 32
Table 3.1 India’s Hydrocarbon Reserves 33
Table 3.2 Reserves/Production of Crude Oil & Natural Gas 35
Table 3.3 The Approximate Potential Available From Nuclear Energy 36
Table 3.4 Possible Development of Nuclear Power Installed Capacity in MW 37
Table 3.5 Renewable Energy Resources 37
Table 3.6 Some Energy Supply Scenarios for 8% GDP Growth 41
Table 3.7 Scenario Summaries for 8% GDP Growth — Fuel Mix in Year 2031-32 44
Table 3.8 Ranges of Commercial Energy Requirement, Domestic Production and 45
Imports for 8 percent Growth for year 2031-32
Table 3.9 Generation Capacities and Load Factors in Scenario 11 46
Table 3.10 Primary Energy Supply Sources (2003-04) 52
Table 4.1 Sources of India’s Oil Imports – 2004-05 59
Table 7.1 Capital Costs and the Typical Cost of Generated Electricity from 90
the Renewable Options
Table 7.2 International Feed-in Tariffs 91Table 13.1 Environmental Impacts Associated with Energy Transformation 129
Based on Fossil Fuels
Table 13.2 Supply Side, Local and Regional Environmental Impacts 130
Table 13.3 India Approved CDM Projects 135
List of Figures
Figure 1.1 Total Primary Energy Supply (TOE) Per Capita (2003) vs. GDP Per Capita 2
(PPP US$2000)
Figure 1.2 Kilo Watt hours of Electricity Consumption Per Capita (2003) vs. 3
GDP Per Capita (PPP US$2000)
Figure 1.3 Human Development Index (HDI) vs. Electricity Consumption 3
Per Capita in 2002
Figure 1.4 Peak Power and Energy Shortages in States/UTs. 2004-05 4
Figure 1.5 Distribution of Households by Primary Source of Energy Used 6
for Cooking- India
Figure 1.6 Pattern of Household Energy Consumption
Figure 1.6(a) Monthly Per Capita Household Consumption 8
Pattern Urban India, 2000
Figure 1.6(b) Monthly Per Capita Household Consumption 8
Pattern Rural India, 2000
Figure 1.7 Domestic Consumption and Production of Crude Oil 9
Figure 1.8 Growth of Transport Vehicles and Two Wheelers 10
Figure 2.1 Projected Electricity Generation Growth (BkWh) 21
Figure 2.2 Plan-wise Projected Installed Capacity Addition (MW) 21
Figure 2.3 Percentage Share of Commercial Primary Energy Resources—2003-04 29
and 2031-32
Figure 2.4 Percentage of Households Using LPG 30
Figure 3.1 Fuel Mix Comparison in Year 2031-32 42
Figure 3.2 Coal Dominant Scenario 1 - Fuel Mix Year-Wise 42
Figure 3.3 Forced Hydro, Nuclear and Gas Scenario 5 - Fuel Mix Year-Wise 43
Figure 3.4 Forced Renewables Scenario 11 - Fuel Mix Year Wise 43
Figure 3.5 CO2
 From Energy Use in Alternative Scenarios in Year 2031-32 50
Figure 4.1 India’s Growing Share in Global Energy Consumption (Higher Projections) 56
Figure 4.2 World Oil Prices 56
Figure 6.1 Reduction in the Energy Consumption of Refrigerators Sold in the 87
United States of America
Figure 7.1 Renewable Energy Options 89
Figure 13.1 Air Pollution in Residential Areas 133
Figure 13.2 Air Pollution in Industrial Areas 134
List of Boxes
Box 1.1 The Burden of Traditional Fuels in Rural India 7
Box 6.1 Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 82
Box 6.2 Initial Cost and Life Cycle Cost 86
Box 11.1 Delivered Cost of Domestic and Imported Thermal Coal 119India faces formidable challenges in
meeting its energy needs and in providing
adequate energy of desired quality in various
forms in a sustainable manner and at
competitive prices. India needs to sustain an
8% to 10% economic growth rate, over the
next 25 years, if it is to eradicate poverty and
meet its human development goals. To deliver
a sustained growth rate of 8% through 2031-32
and to meet the lifeline energy needs of all
citizens, India needs, at the very least, to increase
its primary energy supply by 3 to 4 times and,
its electricity generation capacity/supply by 5
to 6 times of their 2003-04 levels. With 2003-
04 as the base, India’s commercial energy supply
would need to grow from 5.2% to 6.1% per
annum while its total primary energy supply
would need to grow at 4.3% to 5.1% annually.
By 2031-32 power generation capacity must
increase to nearly 8,00,000 MW from the
current capacity of around 1,60,000 MW
inclusive of all captive plants. Similarly
requirement of coal, the dominant fuel in
India’s energy mix will need to expand to over
2 billion tonnes/annum based on domestic
quality of coal. Meeting the energy challenge is
of fundamental importance to India’s economic
growth imperatives and its efforts to raise its
level of human development.
The broad vision behind the energy
policy is to reliably meet the demand for
energy services of all sectors at competitive
prices. Further, lifeline energy needs of all
households must be met even if that entails
directed subsidies to vulnerable households.
The demand must be met through safe, clean
and convenient forms of energy at the leastcost in a technically efficient, economically
viable and environmentally sustainable manner.
Overview
Considering the shocks and disruptions that
can be reasonably expected, assured supply of
such energy and technologies at all times is
essential to providing energy security for all.
Meeting this vision requires that India pursues
all available fuel options and forms of energy,
both conventional and non-conventional.
Further, India must seek to expand its energy
resource base and seek new and emerging
energy sources. Finally, and most importantly,
India must pursue technologies that maximise
energy efficiency, demand side management
and conservation. Coal shall remain India’s
most important energy source till 2031-32 and
possibly beyond. Thus, India must seek clean
coal combustion technologies and, given the
growing demand for coal, also pursue new coal
extraction technologies such as in-situ
gasification to tap its vast coal reserves that are
difficult to extract economically using
conventional technologies.
The approach of the Committee is
directed to realising a cost-effective energy
system. For this the following are needed:
(i) Wherever possible, energy markets
should be competitive. However,
competition alone has been shown to
have its limitations in a number of
areas of the energy sector and
independent regulation becomes even
more critical in such instances.
(ii) Pricing and resource allocations that
are determined by market forces under
an effective and credible regulatory
oversight.
(iii) Transparent and targeted subsidies.
(iv) Improved efficiencies across the energy
chain.(v) Policies that reflect externalities of
energy consumption.
(vi) Policies that rely on incentives/
disincentives to regulate market and
consumer behaviour.
(vii) Policies that are implementable.
(viii) Management reforms that create
accountability and incentives for
efficiency.
A competitive market without any
entry barriers is theoretically the most efficient
way to realise optimal fuel and technology
choices for extraction, conversion,
transportation, distribution and end use of
energy. The tax structure and regulation across
energy sub-sectors should be consistent and
institutional arrangements should provide a
level playing field to all players. Social objectives
should ideally be met through direct transfers.
Environmental externalities should be treated
uniformly and internalised. A consistent
application of “polluter pays” principle may be
made to attain environmental objectives at
least-cost where prescribed environmental
norms are either not applied consistently or
not being adhered to. An energy market with
the above features would minimise market
distortions and maximise efficiency gains. An
integrated energy policy is needed to ensure
that energy costs and availability do not
constrain India’s economic growth and
competitiveness.
While the medium to long-term
challenges of ensuring competitive energy
markets are formidable, the immediate
problems of acute power shortages, adequate
supply of good coal, gas shortages, and concerns
of States rich in coal and hydro resources
require immediate policy action. Our
recommendations address immediate as well as
the medium to long-term issues.
Key, high priority recommendations
are summarised below:
(i) Ensuring Adequate Supply of Coal
with Consistent Quality: Coal
accounts for over 50% of India’s
commercial energy consumption and
about 78% of domestic coal production
is dedicated to power generation. This
dominance of coal in India’s energy
mix is not likely to change till 2031-32.
Since prices were de-controlled, the
sector has become profitable primarily
as a result of price increases and the
rising share of open cast production.
India would need to augment domestic
production and encourage thermal coal
imports to meet its energy needs. The
Committee has concluded that along
the western and southern coasts of
India imported coal is more cost
competitive compared to domestic coal
and further, imported coal is far more
cost competitive compared to imported
gas at these coastal locations. Such a
cost advantage of imported coal over
imported gas is likely to continue for
some time in the future. Thus:
 Domestic coal production should
be stepped up by allotting coal
blocks to central and state public
sector units and captive mines of
notified end users. Coal blocks held
by Coal India Limited (CIL) that
cannot be brought into production
by 2016-17, either directly or
through joint ventures, should be
made available to other eligible
candidates for development and for
bringing into production by 2011-
12.
 At the same time the needed
infrastructure must be created to
facilitate thermal coal imports. This
will facilitate coastal power
generation capacity based on
imported thermal coal. Imports of
thermal coal will also put
competitive pressure on the
domestic coal industry to be more
efficient.
 A system of pricing coal on its
gross calorific value must replace
the current system of pricing coal
on the basis of broad bands of its
useful heat value. Coal companies must be asked to
conform to international practice
of preparing coal prior to its sale.
Washed coal must become the
norm and use of unwashed coal
should become the exception.
 The current system of coal linkages
should be replaced by long-term
coal supply agreements with strict
penalties for not meeting contracted
supplies, quality and offtake
commitments.
 Coal must be brought under
independent regulation to improve
exploitation and allocation of
available resources, and to regulate
e-auctions and coal prices and to
enable a competitive coal market
to take shape.
 By the end of 2007-08 the quantity
of coal sold through e-auction must
reach 20% of domestic production.
 Ideally, the Coal Mines
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973, should
be amended to facilitate: (a) private
participation in coal mining for
purposes other than those specified
in the Act and (b) offering of future
coal blocks to potential
entrepreneurs. A consensus should
be built on the need to reform this
Act.
(ii) Addressing Concern of Resource Rich
States: Both coal and hydro resources
are concentrated in a few states.
Increasingly states are becoming more
assertive in demanding higher share of
benefits that their local energy resources
provide to the country as a whole.
Even though these are national
resources and should not be rendered
uncompetitive because of such
demands, it is conceivable that
mechanisms can be put in place that
result in resource rich states reaping
more equitable benefits. Allowing
resource rich States a share in the profits
of the enterprise tapping such local
resources through what is called a
“carried equity interest” and further
allowing the state or its residents an
opportunity to invest in such projects
on equal terms and appropriately
revising the royalty rate etc. are possible
solutions to removing hurdles in
exploiting these domestic sources of
primary energy. The NDC must take
up this issue immediately in respect of
coal and hydro resources. Over the
longer term, a National Policy on
Domestic Natural Resources should be
formulated and enacted through the
Parliament.
(iii) Ensuring Availability of Gas for
Power Generation: There is a total
generation capacity of 12,604 MW based
on gas and liquid fuels. Bulk of it is
base loaded under combined cycle
operation. However, gas supplies have
been restricted and the overall
utilisation remains at only 54.5%. A
significant part of this capacity was
realised under the earlier liquid fuel
policy while the rest has been built
based on unenforceable fuel supply
agreements that would have been
unbankable in any other environment.
While requiring that no new gas
capacity be built without firm and
bankable gas supply agreements, effort
should be made to allocate available
domestic gas supplies to the fertiliser,
petrochemicals, transport and power
sectors at prices that are regulated to
yield a fair return to domestic gas
producers. Such a practice should be
enforced till a better demand-supply
balance emerges and domestic gas
production achieves some of the
potential that is often cited. A more
competitive market can then function.
(iv) Power Sector Reforms: These must
focus on controlling the aggregate
technical and commercial losses of the
state transmission and distribution
utilities. This is essential to creating a
financially robust power sector in each
state. Only financially healthy state
power distribution utilities can sustain
the growing generation and
transmission of Central Power SectorPSUs and State Power Sector Utilities
(SPSUs) and provide the needed
comfort on payment security to attract
private investment in the power sector
at internationally competitive tariffs.
Our recommendations:
 To control AT&C losses, the
Committee recommends that the
existing Accelerated Power
Development and Reform
Programme (APDRP) be
restructured to ensure energy flow
auditing at the distribution
transformer level through
automated meter reading, a
Geographical Information System
(GIS) mapping of the network and
consumers and the separation of
feeders for agricultural pumps.
Investment in developing a
Management Information System
(MIS) that can support a full energy
audit for each distribution
transformer is essential for
reduction in AT&C losses. This
will also fix accountability and
provide a baseline which is an
essential prerequisite to
management reform and/or
privatisation. The revised APDRP
will provide incentives to State
Electricity Boards (SEBs) that are
linked to performance outcomes
and will also include incentives to
staff for reduction in AT&C losses.
 The Committee also recommends
that the liberal captive and group
captive regime foreseen under the
Electricity Act 2003 be realised on
the ground. India’s liberal captive
regime will not only derive
economic benefits from the
availability of distributed generation
but will also set competitive
wheeling charges to supply power
to group captive consumers. This
will pave the way for open access
to distribution networks. It will
also facilitate private generation that
limits its interface with the host
utility to the use of the distribution
network for a fee and thus can be
realised even before AT&C losses
are reduced.
 To achieve these objectives, the
Committee feels that it is essential
to separate the cost of the pure
wires business (carriage) from the
energy business (content) in both
transmission and distribution at
different voltages. The Electricity
Act 2003 recognises such separation
for the transmission sub-segment.
Separation of content from carriage
in the distribution sub-segment,
however, is considered only as a
means to the provision of open
access. The wires business within
the distribution sub-segment is also
a natural monopoly and must be
regulated. Further, introduction of
Availability Based Tariffs (ABT) for
the intra-state sales and the
upgrading of State Load Despatch
Centres to the technological level
of Regional Load Despatch Centres
should be realised.
 Open access is resisted by
incumbents as they fear that all the
high value paying customers would
go away and they would be left
with small and subsidised
agricultural and domestic
customers. Since these customers
have strong political constituencies,
it may be difficult to raise their
tariffs when needed and the
incumbent utilities would not
remain viable for long. These
concerns can be taken care of if the
cross-subsidy surcharge, wheeling
charge and back-up charge are set
properly. However, if these are set
too high, open access could be
effectively thwarted. These charges
need to be periodically revised and
independently regulated.
 A robust and efficient inter-state
and intra-state transmission system
with adequate surplus capacity that
is capable of transferring power
from surplus regions to deficitregions is a must for ensuring
optimal operation of the system.
 Rehabilitation of existing thermal
stations could raise capacity at leastcost in the short-run. Similarly
rehabilitation of hydro stations
could yield much needed peak
capacity at negligible cost. Both
these steps must be taken up
urgently.
(v) Reduction in Cost of Power: In terms
of purchasing power parity, power
tariffs in India for industry, commerce
and large households are among the
highest in the world. It is important to
reduce the cost of power to increase
both the competitiveness of the Indian
economy and also to increase consumer
welfare. A number of measures are
suggested for this.
 The Government Policy should
ensure that all generation and
transmission projects should be
competitively built on the basis of
tariff-based bidding. Public Sector
Undertakings shall also be
encouraged to participate in such
bids even though the tariff policy
allows them a 5 year window
wherein projects undertaken by the
public sector need not be bid
competitively.
 In cases where tariff continues to
be determined on the basis of costs
and norms, regulators may either
adopt a return on equity approach
or return on capital approach,
whichever is considered better in
the interest of consumers. In
deciding the level of return
provided, the regulator should interalia take into account the return
available on long-term government
bonds and reasonable risk
premiums associated with equity
investments.
 The current practice of state
regulators not allowing state public
sector power utilities the same
returns as the central public sector
utilities should be strongly opposed
in the interest of strengthening fair
competition which alone will bring
down prices in the long-run.
Similarly differential payment
security structures for Central
Power Sector PSUs and the private
sector should be abolished.
 Consumer prices for electricity are
currently set by State Electricity
Regulatory Commissions on cost
plus basis. Regulators should set
multi-year tariffs and differentiate
them by time of day.
 Government should seed the capital
markets to develop market-based
instruments that effectively extend
the tenure of debt available to
power projects to, perhaps, 20
years. This will reduce the capacity
charge in the earlier years and
spread it more evenly over the life
of the project.
 Unit sizes should be standardised
and global tenders invited for a
number of units to get substantial
bulk discount.
 Distribution should be bid out on
the basis of a distribution margin
or paid for by a regulated
distribution charge determined on
a cost plus basis including a profit
mark up similar to that paid for
generation as suggested above.
(vi) Rationalisation of Fuel Prices:
Relative prices play the most important
role in choice of technology, fuel and
energy form. They are thus the most
vital aspect of an Integrated Energy
Policy that promotes efficient fuel
choices and facilitates appropriate
substitution. In a competitive set up,
the marginal use value of different fuels,
which are substitutes, should be equal
at a given place and time so that the
prices of different fuels at different
places do not differ by more than the
cost of transporting the fuels. The
resulting inter-fuel choices will then be
economically efficient. Further: Prices of different fuels should not
be set independently of each other.
As a general rule, all commercial
primary energy sources must be
priced at trade parity prices at the
point of sale, namely the Free-onBoard (FOB) price for products for
which the country is a net exporter
and Cost, Insurance and Freight
(CIF) price for which it is a net
importer. The price of a product
for which the country is selfsufficient in a competitive market
with many suppliers and buyers
would fluctuate between the two
depending upon the ease of import/
export and reliability of supplies.
In a situation with a monopoly
supplier with exportable surplus at
import parity price, the price would
be in between the two depending
on the price elasticity of domestic
demand. This principle is extremely
relevant for the petroleum sector
wherein bulk of the crude oil is
imported and India has become a
net exporter of petroleum products.
 To cushion domestic prices against
short-term volatility of prices on
the international market (FOB or
CIF) domestic prices can be set on
the basis of median prices over the
previous month or a three month
period.
 The petroleum and natural gas
sector is, once again, devoid of any
competition and independent
oversight of either upstream or
downstream activities. On the
upstream side, Directorate General
Hydrocarbons (DGH), an arm of
the Ministry, oversees allocation
and exploitation of oil & gas
reserves and enforces profit sharing
with exploration & production
companies. The current
arrangement needs to be
strengthened and made
independent. On the downstream
side, despite the dismantling of the
Administered Price Mechanism, the
GOI continues to control the
pricing of automotive fuels, LPG,
large part of domestic natural gas
and PDS kerosene. There is no real
competition in the sector other
than in some peripheral products
such as lubricants, despite the
presence of a large domestic private
player in refining and the likely
emergence of other private players
in this field. In fact, the prevailing
pricing and taxation policies and
the market structure provide
significant protection to the private
refineries. The result is that India’s
refining capacity exceeds the
demand by 18% already. There is
an urgent need to have an
independent regulator for both
upstream and downstream sectors.
The notification of the Petroleum
& Natural Gas Regulatory Board
Act, 2006, is thus welcome.
 In the petroleum sector, full price
competition at the refinery gate
and the retail level would lead to
trade parity prices as described
above. Thus instead of
administering prices, full price
competition should be introduced.
 Coal prices should ideally be left
to the market and trading of coal,
nationally and internationally,
should be free. Only a competitive
free market can do an efficient job
of price determination. A
competitive market requires that
there are multiple producers and
that there are no entry barriers to
new producers or to importers.
Pending the creation of such a
competitive market, independent
regulation of coal prices becomes
essential.
 Apart from CIL’s virtual monopoly
in coal supply, coal prices cannot
be determined in a competitive
market open to all users as long as
the largest coal consuming sector,
i.e. power, has coal cost as a pass
throughHoweversince otherusers of coal are numerous and
consume substantial quantities of
coal, a strategy for competitive price
discovery is possible. We
recommend as follows:
• High quality coking and noncoking coal which are
exportable may be sold at
export parity prices as
determined by import price
at the nearest port minus
15%. This practise is
currently being adopted for
supply of good quality coking
coal to the steel industry.
• 20% of the production may
be sold through e-auction.
Quantities to be sold through
e-auction from different
mines must be determined
annually with a monthly
mine-wise schedule to be
independently monitored and
enforced by a coal regulator.
• Remaining coal should be
sold under long-term Fuel
Supply and Transport
Agreements (FSTAs).
Regulated utilities should be
allowed upto 100% of their
certified requirements
through FSTAs. Other bulk
consumers could be allowed
partial FSTAs based on coal
availability. Any shortfalls
should be met through eauction supplies or imports.
• Pithead price of coal under
FSTAs should be revised
annually by a coal regulator
on a basis that inter-alia takes
into account prices obtained
through e-auction, FOB price
of imported coal (both
adjusted for quality) and
production cost, inclusive of
return based on efficiency
standards.
• Coal prices may be made
fully variable based on Gross
Calorific Value (GCV) and
other quality parameters.
 Natural Gas is not an easily tradable
commodity. Making gas tradable
requires significant investments in
pipelines or, alternatively, in
liquefaction, cryogenic shipping &
regasification. Comparing local gas
prices to spot LNG prices in the
international market is grossly
misleading. Again, linking gas prices
to crude price movements is also
misleading. Long-term supply
contracts such as those in Europe
are more representative of natural
gas prices. Natural gas price can be
determined through competition
among different producers where
multiple sources and a competitive
supply-demand balance exist. As
long as there is shortage of gas in
the country and the two major
users of gas, namely fertiliser and
power, work in a regulated cost
plus environment, a competitive
market determined price would be
highly distorted. Such distortions
would get further amplified by the
prevailing regime of fertiliser
subsidies & power sector subsidies
and cross subsidies. In such a
situation price of domestic gas and
its allocation should be
independently regulated on a cost
plus basis including reasonable
returns.
 Another option could be to price
gas on a net-back basis. If gas
becomes a key component in
India’s energy mix, it is pointed
out that beyond the level of gas
consumption in the fertiliser,
petrochemical, automotive and
domestic sectors, gas must compete
with coal as the key alternative for
power generation. This implies that
the cost of generating peak or base
electricity using gas cannot exceed
the cost of peak or base electricity
from coal, the cheapest alternative.
A competitive coal market is thusimportant for setting a proper price
of natural gas on a net-back basis.
An alternative for a gas producers
is to export gas, in which case the
domestic gas price could be the net
realisation of the domestic natural
gas producer after investing and
getting a return on the investment
needed to make the natural gas
tradable across borders in either a
trans-border pipeline or through
liquefaction and shipping facilities.
For the foreseeable future, domestic
gas supplies to both the fertiliser
and the power sector, that together
account for about 80% of the
current gas usage, would need to
be allocated based on availability
and charged at regulated price that
reflects cost of production and a
reasonable profit.
 Central and State taxes on
commercial energy supplies need
to be rationalised to yield optimal
fuel choices and investment
decisions. Relative prices of fuels
can be distorted if taxes and
subsidies are not equivalent across
fuels. This equivalence should be
in effective calorie terms. In other
words they should be such that
producer and consumer choices as
to which fuel and which technology
to use are not affected by the taxes
and subsidies. Socio-economic
benefits such as employment
generation and positive impact on
energy security may support
differential taxes on alternate fuels.
 Environmental taxes and subsidies,
however, are levied precisely to
affect choices. Differential taxes can
be justified here if they
appropriately reflect environmental
externalities. A consistent
application of the “polluter pays”
principle or “consumer-pays”
principle should be made to attain
environmental objectives at leastcost where prescribed
environmental norms are either not
applied consistently or not being
adhered to.
(vii) Energy Efficiency and Demand Side
Management: Lowering the energy
intensity of GDP growth through
higher energy efficiency is important
for meeting India’s energy challenge
and ensuring its energy security. The
energy intensity of India’s growth has
been falling and is about half of what
it used to be in the early seventies.
Currently, we consume 0.16 kg of oil
equivalent (kgoe) per dollar of GDP
expressed in purchasing power parity
terms. India’s energy intensity is lower
than the 0.23 kgoe of China, 0.22 kgoe
of the US and a World average of 0.21
kgoe. India’s energy intensity is even
marginally lower than that of Germany
& OECD at 0.17 kgoe. However,
Denmark at 0.13 kgoe, UK at 0.14
kgoe and Brazil & Japan at 0.15 kgoe
are ahead of India. These figures and
many sectoral studies confirm that there
is room to improve and energy
intensity can be brought down
significantly in India with current
commercially available technologies.
Lowering energy intensity through
higher efficiency is equivalent to
creating a virtual source of untapped
domestic energy. It may be noted that
a unit of energy saved by a user is
greater than a unit produced, as it saves
on production losses as well as
transport, transmission and distribution
losses. Thus a “Negawatt”, produced
by a reduction of energy need has
more value than a Megawatt generated.
The Committee feels that with an
aggressive pursuit of energy efficiency
and conservation, it is possible to reduce
India’s energy intensity by up to 25%
from current levels.
Efficiency can be increased in energy
extraction, conversion, transportation,
as well as in consumption. Further, the
same level of output or service can be
obtained by alternate means requiring
less energy. The major areas whereefficiency in energy use can make a
substantial impact are mining,
electricity generation, electricity
transmission, electricity distribution,
water pumping, industrial production
processes, haulage, mass transport,
building design, construction, heating,
ventilation, air conditioning, lighting
and household appliances. As the Indian
economy opens up to international
competition, it will have to become
more energy efficient. This is well
demonstrated by India’s steel and
cement industry. However, the
Committee recommends the following
policies for raising energy efficiency.
Some of these policies can be
implemented through voluntary targets
undertaken by industry associations as
opposed to external dictates and
enforcement.
 Merge Petroleum Conservation
Research Association (PCRA) with
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE).
The merged entity should be an
autonomous statutory body under
the Energy Conservation Act, be
independent of all the energy
ministries and be funded by the
Central Government. It must:
• Force the pace of
improvement in energy
efficiency of energy using
appliances, equipment and
vehicles, and create “golden
carrot” incentives in the form
of substantial rewards to the
firm which first
commercialises equipment
that exceeds a prescribed
energy efficiency target.
• Enforce truthful labelling on
equipment, and impose major
financial penalties if the
equipment fails to deliver
stated efficiencies. In extreme
cases, resort to black listing
of errant suppliers on
consumer information web
sites and in government
procurement
• Establish benchmarks of
energy consumption for all
energy intensive sectors.
• Disseminate information,
support training and reward
best practices with national
level honours in energy
efficiency and energy
conservation.
 Increase the gross efficiency in
power generation from the current
average of 30.5% to 34%. All new
plants should adopt technologies
that improve their gross efficiency
from the prevailing 36% to at least
38-40%.
 Require a least-cost planning
approach to provide a level playing
field, to Negawatts and Megawatts
so that regulators permit the same
return on the investment needed
to save a watt as to supply an
additional watt.
 Promote minimum life cycle cost
purchase instead of minimum initial
cost procurement by the
government and the public sector.
 Promote urban mass transport,
energy efficient vehicles and freight
movement by railways through
scheduled freight trains with
guaranteed, safe and timely
deliveries. Enforce minimum fuel
efficiency standards for all vehicles.
 Institute specialisations in energy
efficiency/conservation in technical
colleges and commence certification
of such experts.
(viii) Augmenting of Resources for
Increased Energy Security: India’s
energy resources can be augmented by
exploration to find more coal, oil and
gas, or by recovering a higher
percentage of the in-place reserves.
Developing the thorium cycle for
nuclear power and exploiting nonconventional energy, especially solar
power, offer possibilities for India’s
energy independence beyond 2050.At a growth rate of 5% in domestic
production, currently extractable coal
resources will be exhausted in about 45
years. However, only about 45% of
the potential coal bearing area has
currently been covered by regional
surveys. It is also felt that both regional
as well as detailed drilling can be made
more comprehensive. Several possible
options are recommended:
 Covering all coal bearing areas with
comprehensive regional and detailed
drilling could make a significant
difference to the estimated life of
India’s coal reserves.
 India’s extractable coal resources
could be augmented through insitu coal gasification which makes
use of those coal deposits which
are at greater depth and cannot be
extracted economically by
conventional methods.
 Extracting coal bed methane before
and during mining could augment
the country’s energy resources.
 Enhanced oil recovery and
incremental oil recovery
technologies could improve the
proportion of in-place reserves that
could be economically recovered
from abandoned/depleted fields.
 Isolated deposits of all hydro
carbons including coal may be
tapped economically through sub
leases to the private sector.
(ix) Using Energy Abroad: In case India
can access cheap natural gas overseas
under long-term (25-30 years)
arrangements, it should consider setting
up captive fertiliser and/or gas
liquefaction facilities in such countries.
This would essentially augment energy
availability for India.
(x) Role of Nuclear and Hydro Power:
Even if India succeeds in exploiting its
full hydro potential of 1,50,000 MW,
the contribution of hydro energy to
the energy mix will only be around
1.9-2.2%. It is clarified that hydro share
in the primary energy mix comes out
lower because of the way oil
equivalence of hydro electricity is
calculated. A hydroelectric plant
converts a unit of primary energy in
the form of potential energy to almost
one unit of electricity. The fossil fuel
route or the nuclear route needs almost
3 units of a primary energy source to
produce the same unit of electricity.
Thus while hydro’s share in primary
energy mix is lower than that of
nuclear, the kWh produced from hydro
is higher. Similarly, even if a 20-fold
increase takes place in India’s nuclear
power capacity by 2031-32, the
contribution of nuclear energy to
India’s energy mix is also, at best,
expected to be 4.0-6.4%. If the recent
agreement with the US translates into
a removal of sanctions by the nuclear
suppliers’ group, possibilities of imports
of nuclear fuels as well as power plants
should be actively considered so that
nuclear development takes place at a
faster pace.
Nuclear energy theoretically offers
India the most potent means to longterm energy security. India has to
succeed in realising the three-stage
development process described in the
main report and thereby tap its vast
thorium resource to become truly
energy independent beyond 2050.
Continuing support to the three-stage
development of India’s nuclear potential
is essential.
Though its contribution to energy
requirement is limited, hydro
electricity’s flexibility and suitability
to meet peak demand makes it valuable.
Moreover, the development of
hydropower, especially storage schemes,
are critical for India as our per capita
water storage is the lowest among other
comparable countries. Creating such
storages is critical to India’s water
security, flood control and drought
control. The environmental concerns
and the problem of resettlement and
rehabilitation of project affected people(PAPs) can and must be satisfactorily
handled. The PAPs should benefit from
the project as much as other
beneficiaries. This can be accomplished,
for example, as follows:
 Require compulsory land
consolidation and impose a
betterment levy in kind of (say) 5
percent of land on the command
area farmers. Use this land to
resettle and compensate all PAPs.
(xi) Role of Renewables: From a longerterm perspective and keeping in mind
the need to maximally develop domestic
supply options as well as the need to
diversify energy sources, renewables
remain important to India’s energy
sector. It would not be out of place to
mention that solar power could be an
important player in India attaining
energy independence in the long run.
With a concerted push and a 40-fold
increase in their contribution to
primary energy, renewables may
account for only 5 to 6% of India’s
energy mix by 2031-32. While this
figure appears small, the distributed
nature of renewables can provide many
socio-economic benefits.
Subsidies for renewables may be
justified on several grounds. A
renewable energy source may be
environmentally friendly. It may be
locally available thereby making it
possible to supply energy earlier than
in a centralised system. Grid connected
renewables could improve the quality
of supply and provide system benefits
by generating energy at the ends of the
grid where otherwise supply would
have been lax. Further, renewables may
provide employment and livelihood to
the poor. However, the subsidies should
be given for a well-defined period or
upto a well-defined limit.
 The Committee recommends that
for promoting renewables,
incentives should be linked to
outcomes (energy generated) and
not just outlays (capacity installed).
Even when a capital subsidy is
needed, it should be linked to
outcomes. For example, capital
subsidy could also be given in the
form of a Tradable Tax Rebate
Certificate (TTRC) that could be
based on actual energy generated.
The rebate claim would become
payable depending upon the
amount of electricity/energy
certified as having been actually
supplied.
 Power Regulators must create
alternative incentive structures such
as mandated feed-in-laws or
differential tariffs to encourage
utilities to integrate wind, small
hydro, cogeneration etc. into their
systems.
 An annual renewable energy report
should be published providing
details of actual performance of
different renewable technologies at
the state and national levels. This
should include actual energy
supplied from different renewable
options, availability, actual costs,
operating and maintenance
problems etc. It should also report
on social benefits, employment
created, and women’s participation
and empowerment.
 Policies for promoting specific
alternatives are suggested in the
main text. These include fuel wood
plantations, bio-gas plants, wood
gasifier based power plants, solar
thermal, solar water heaters, solar
photovoltaics, bio-diesel and
ethanol.
 It is also recommended that the
Indian Renewable Energy
Development Agency Ltd (IREDA)
be converted into a national
refinancing institution on the lines
of NABARD/National Housing
Bank (NHB) for the renewable
energy sector. IREDA’s own equity
base can be expanded by the
financial institutions of the countryinstead of continuing the current
system of GOI support.
(xii) Ensuring Energy Security: India’s
energy security, at its broadest level, is
primarily about ensuring the
continuous availability of commercial
energy at competitive prices to support
its economic growth and meet the
lifeline energy needs of its households
with safe, clean and convenient forms
of energy even if that entails directed
subsidies. Reducing energy
requirements and increasing efficiency
are two very important measures to
increase energy security. However, it
is also necessary to recognise that India’s
growing dependence on energy imports
exposes its energy needs to external
price shocks. Hence, domestic energy
resources must be expanded. For India
it is not a question of choosing among
alternate domestic energy resources but
exploiting all available domestic energy
resources to the maximum as long as
they are competitive.
The Committee, however, felt that
obtaining equity oil, coal and gas abroad
do not represent adequate strategies for
enhancing energy security beyond
diversifying supply sources. In contrast,
pipelines for importing gas do enhance
security of supply if the supplying
country makes a major investment in
the pipeline. The most critical elements
of our energy security, however, remain
the measures suggested herein to
increase efficiency, reduce requirements
and augment the domestic energy
resource base.
Ensuring energy security requires
dealing with various risks. The threat
to energy security arises not just from
supply risks and the uncertainty of
availability of imported energy, but
also from possible disruptions or
shortfalls in domestic production.
Supply risks from domestic sources,
such as from a strike in CIL or the
Railways, also need to be addressed.
Even if there is no disruption of supply,
there can be the market risk of a sudden
increase in energy price. Even when
the country has adequate energy
resources, technical failures may disrupt
the supply of energy to some people.
Generators could fail, transmission lines
may trip or oil pipelines may spring a
leak. One needs to provide security
against such technical risks. Risks can
be reduced by lowering the requirement
of energy by increasing efficiency in
production and use; by substituting
imported fuels with domestic fuels; by
diversifying fuel choices (gas, ethanol,
orimulsion tar sands etc.) and supply
sources; and by expanding the domestic
energy resource base. Risks can also be
dealt with by increasing the ability to
withstand supply shocks through
creation of strategic reserves, the ability
to import energy and face market risk
by building hard currency reserves and
by providing redundancy to address
technical risks. We recommend as
follows:
 Maintain a reserve, equivalent to
90 days of oil imports for strategiccum-buffer stock purposes and/or
buy options for emergency supplies
from neighbouring large storages
such as those available in Singapore.
The buffer stocks could be used to
address short-term price volatility.
Operating the strategic/buffer
reserves in cooperation with other
countries who maintain such
reserves could also increase their
effectiveness.
 Since 80 percent of global
hydrocarbon reserves are controlled
by national oil companies
controlled by respective
governments, oil diplomacy
establishing bilateral economic,
social and cultural ties can reduce
supply risk.
(xiii) Boosting Energy Related R&D: India
will find it increasingly harder to
import its required quantities of
commercial energy as her share of the
incremental world supply of fossil fuels
could rise from a low of 13% in themost energy efficient scenario to a high
of 21% in the coal dominant scenario
by 2031-32. This assumes that the
world’s supply of fossil fuels grows by
only 2% per annum till 2031-32.
Research and Development (R&D) in
the energy sector is critical to augment
our energy resources, to meet our longterm energy needs and to promote
energy efficiency. Such R&D would
go a long way in raising our energy
security and delivering energy
independence over the long-term. R&D
requires sustained and continued
support over a long period of time.
Energy related R&D has not been
allotted the resources that it needs.
India needs to substantially augment
the resources made available for energy
related R&D and to allocate these
strategically. To take an innovative idea
to its commercial application involves
many steps. Basic research leading to a
fundamental breakthrough may open
up possibilities of applications. R&D is
needed to develop conceptual
breakthroughs and prove their
feasibility. This needs to be followed
up by a working, laboratory scale
model. Projects that shows economic
potential could then be scaled up as
pilot projects, while keeping in mind
cost reductions that could be achieved
through better engineering and mass
production. Demonstrations of such
projects, economic assessments and
further R&D to make the new
technology acceptable and attractive to
customers could follow, before finally
leading to commercialisation and
diffusion. Some key policy initiatives
relevant to energy related R&D are
detailed below:
 A National Energy Fund (NEF)
should be set-up to finance energy
R&D. Our expenditure on R&D
excepting for atomic energy, which
as of today provides less than 3
percent of our total electrical energy
supply, is miniscule compared to
what industry and governments
spend in developed countries. In
the latter, firms generally spend
more than 2 percent of their
turnover for R&D. The total
expenditure on R&D in 2004-05
was Rs.610 crores* for Atomic
Energy and Rs.70 crores for
Ministry of Power, Coal and NonConventional Energy Sources. Even
at one-tenth of the rate at which
firms in developed countries spend
on R&D, i.e. 0.2% of the turnover
of all energy firms whose turnover
exceeds Rs.100 crores a year, we
end up with Rs.1000 to Rs.1200
crores per year which will increase
overtime. We should be spending
much more than this on R&D.
Much of R&D can be considered a
public good. It is thus better
financed by the Government.
Initially an allocation of Rs.1000
crores should be made for energy
R&D excluding atomic energy. To
begin with, individuals, academic
research institutions, consulting
firms, private and public sector
enterprise, should all compete for
this fund. Firms may also be
encouraged to enhance their
expenditure on R&D through tax
incentives.
• The resources devoted to
research in different areas
depend on the economic
importance of that particular
area, the availability of
technology and the likelihood
of success. The latter changes
with time as new
developments in science and
technology take place and
uncertainties reduce. R&D
* Only about 15% of this amount or about Rs.90 crores, was for R&D on nuclear power. The rest of the
expenditure is for R&D on non-electricity applications of Radiation Technology and Fundamental
Research.priorities have to be based
on a dynamic strategic vision
which is frequently updated.
Of critical importance is
research and analysis for the
energy policy to outline
technology road maps. The
NEF should encourage and
fund such studies on a regular
basis in a number of
institutions and should also
commission them from
experienced and qualified
individuals.
• The NEF should support
energy policy modelling
activities in a number of
institutions on a long-term
basis. The different modellers
should be brought together
periodically in a forum to
address specific policy issues.
• A number of technology
missions should be mounted
for developing nearcommercial technologies and
rolling out new technologies
in a time bound manner.
These include coal
technologies (where India
should focus) for efficiency
improvement; in-situ
gasification; IGCC and
carbon sequestration; solar
technologies covering solarthermal and photovoltaics;
bio-fuels such as bio-diesel
and ethanol; bio-mass
plantation and wood
gasification, and community
based bio-gas plants.
• Coordinated research and
development in all stages of
the innovation chain to reach
a targeted goal (such as that
in place in the departments
of atomic energy and space
research) should be used to
develop more efficient
industrial plant, machinery &
processesefficient appliances
hybrid cars, super batteries,
nuclear technologies related
to thorium and fusion, gas
hydrates, and hydrogen
production, storage, transport
and distribution.
• The NEF could provide
R&D funding in support of
applications, innovative new
ideas, fundamental research
etc. to researchers in different
institutions, universities,
organisations and even
individuals working
independently.
• A number of academic
institutions should be
developed as centres of
excellence in energy research.
(xiv) Household Energy Security -
Electricity and Clean Fuels for All:
One of the toughest challenges is to
provide electricity and clean fuels to
all, particularly rural populations given
their poor paying capacity, the limited
availability of local resources for clean
cooking energy, and the size of the
country and its population. The
considerable effort spent on gathering
biomass and cow-dung and then
preparing them for use is not priced
into the cost of such energy. These
fuels create smoke and indoor air
pollution, are inconvenient to use, and
adversely affect the health of people,
particularly women and children. Yet,
given the fact that women and girls
carry most of the burden of the
drudgery and also bear the brunt of
indoor air pollution, the urgency to
meet the challenge should be high.
Such steps are needed for our broader
need to achieve universal primary
education for girls, promote gender
equality and empower women. Easy
availability of a certain amount of clean
energy that is required to maintain life
should be considered as a basic
necessity. Energy security at the
individual level implies ensuring supply
of such a lifeline energy needIndiacannot be energy secure if her people
remain without secure supply of energy
for lifeline needs. Ensuring this would
require targeted subsidies as many
households would be unable to pay for
safe, clean and convenient commercial
energy to meet lifeline needs. This
requires:
 Electrification of All Households: The
government has announced its
commitment to ensure this by 2009-
10.
 Provision of Cooking Energy: We
may set a goal to provide clean
cooking energy such as LPG, NG,
biogas or kerosene to all within 10
years. It may be noted that the
requirement of cooking energy does
not increase indefinitely with
income. Thus the total amount of
LPG required to provide cooking
energy to 1.5 billion persons is
around 55 Mtoe.
 Other Sources: We may provide fuel
wood plantations within one
kilometre of all habitations. Those
who do not have access or cannot
afford even subsidised clean fuels,
rely on gathering wood.
Neighbourhood plantations can
ease their burden and the time
taken to gather and transport wood.
The Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) was
launched to achieve electrification of
all households. By 2009-2010 the
RGGVY aims to electrify the 1,25,000
villages, still without electricity; to
connect all the estimated 2.34 crore unelectrified households below the
poverty line with a 90% subsidy on
connecting costs; and finally, to
augment the backbone network in all
the electrified 4.62 lakh villages. The
5.46 crore households above the
poverty line which are currently
unelectrified, are expected to get
electricity connection on their own
without any subsidy. Going by current
experience, all these households above
the poverty line may not seek such
connectivity on their own.
To make RGGVY sustainable, a
business plan with a viable revenue
model needs to be elaborated. A clear
pricing and subsidy policy and the
means of targeting the subsidy need to
be announced soon. Local bodies,
panchayati raj institutions, NGOs or
even local entrepreneurs can take the
franchise to run the local network.
Women’s self-help groups can also be
empowered to do so.
The consumer pays about 40% of the
import parity price for kerosene sold
through the Public Distribution System
(PDS). The balance 60% of the price is
being funded largely by oil sector PSUs
and to a small extent by the
Government through the budget.
However, subsidies do not reach the
intended beneficiaries due to poor
targeting. The real issue is to improve
targeting within the subsidy programme
well and ensure that those falling
outside the subsidy net pay the full
cost of supply. Additionally, a welltargeted subsidy regime may only
marginally raise the current subsidy
burden.
 The best way for providing subsidy
for electricity and cleaner fuels,
kerosene or LPG, is to entitle
targeted households to 30 units of
electricity per month and LPG,
kerosene or bio-gas purchased from
a local community size plant
equivalent to 6 kg of LPG per
month. A system of debit cards
may be introduced to deliver such
a subsidy. The entitlements can
only be used for purchase of these
products. With modern ICT, debit
card readers operated on battery
and feeding data using mobile
technology, can work in rural areas
of the country as well.
In addition to the above subsidy, other
actions are also needed that create
energy secure villages. We suggest: Finance a large scale socio-economic
experiment to operate community
sized bio-gas plants as a commercial
enterprise either by a community
cooperative or by a commercial
entrepreneur. Bio-gas plants on this
scale could meet the need for clean
cooking energy of a sizable segment
of the rural population.
 Even with subsidies for clean fuel,
it may not be easy to reach clean
fuels to the poor and they may
continue to use fuelwood. As part
of the above programme, improve
the efficiency of domestic chullahs
and lanterns from the prevailing
10-12% to 20-25%, which is easily
attainable and couple this to
improving ventilation in the
cooking area of the dwellings. The
surplus biomass released as a result
of better efficiency could be used
in gasifiers for generating electricity.
 Generate electricity through wood
gasifiers or by burning surplus biogas from the community bio-gas
plants. Such distributed generators
may be able to take electricity to
villages sooner than the grid. This
will encourage local generation and
could conceivably feed the grid
with surplus power at an agreed
feed in tariff at a future date.
Formulate a tariff policy for such
distributed generation for both
household and productive use
including agriculture.
 To reduce drudgery of those who
still need to gather fuel, develop
woodlots within one kilometre of
the village. Provide finance through
self-help groups to transform
women, who, today are only
energy gatherers, into microentrepreneurs engaged in rural
energy markets and energy
management. Women’s groups can
form co-operatives for developing
and managing fuel wood or oil
seed plantations with the same
effort that they put towards
searching and gathering fuel wood
today.
 For setting up of off-grid generation
facilities in rural areas, encourage
the organised sector to adopt rural
community/communities in their
areas of operation.
(xv) An Enabling Environment for
Competitive Efficiency: Apart from
pricing policies, an environment that
allows multiple players in each element
of the energy value chain to compete
on transparent and equal terms is
essential to realising efficiency gains
within the energy sector. Currently
the sector is dominated by large Public
Sector Companies and some sub-sectors
have natural monopoly characteristics
potentially offering economies of scale.
Given this ground reality, independent
& informed regulation becomes
essential to realising competitive
efficiency. Such regulation can play an
important role to see that competitive
markets develop and mature. Such
regulation must in the very least ensure
that:
 The regulatory responsibility/
functions of the State are separated
from the Ministries that control
the Public Sector Units dominating
the energy sector; and
 Till effective competitive markets
emerge, independent regulators
should fix prices or price caps to
mimic competitive markets based
on principles summarised in para
(v) above. Even when competitive
markets emerge, the regulators’ role
will continue to remain important.
(xvi) Climate Change Concerns: Concern
vis-a-vis the threat of climate change
has been an important issue in
formulating the energy policy. Even
though India is not required to contain
its GHG emissions, as a signatory to
the UN Framework Convention on
Climate Change and a country which
has acceded to the Kyoto Protocol,
India has been very active in proposingClean Development Mechanism (CDM)
projects. By May 2006, a total of 297
projects had been approved by India
with approximately 240 million tonnes
of CO2 reduction. Also, since the
impact on the country’s poor, due to
climate change, could be serious, this
report has suggested a number of
initiatives that will reduce the green
house gas intensity of the economy by
as much as one third. These are:
- Energy efficiency in all sectors
- Emphasis on mass transport
- Active policy on renewable energy
including bio-fuels and fuel
plantations
- Accelerated development of nuclear
and hydro-electricity
- Technology Missions for clean coal
technologies
- Focussed R&D on many climate
friendly technologies
The broad policy framework and the
thrust of development suggested here need to
be made more specific. To this end once the
policy framework is accepted, detailed roadmaps
of development should be chalked out and
specific policy measures for implementation
drafted.
With the recommendations of the
Committee, India can meet her energy
requirements in an efficient, cost effective way
and be on a path of sustainable energy security.A ABT-Availability Based Tariff
APDRP-Accelerated Power
Development and Reform Programme
AT&C-Aggregate Technical and
Commercial
APM-Administered Price Mechanism
ADB-Asian Development Bank
ATF-Aviation Turbine Fuel
APEC-Asia Pacific Economic
Cooperation
ALCC-Annualised Life Cycle Cost
AMR-Automatic Meter Reading
B BEE-Bureau of Energy Efficiency
BPL-Below Poverty Line
BCS-Best Case Scenario
BAU-Business as Usual
BCM-Billion Cubic Meters
BARC-Bhaba Atomic Research Centre
BESCOM-Bangalore Electricity Supply
Company Ltd.
BP-British petroleum
BCCL-Bharat Cocking Coal Limited
C CAGR-Compounded Annual Growth
Rate
CASE-Commission for Additional
Sources of Energy
CIL-Coal India Limited
CIF-Cost Insurance and Freight
CDM-Clean Development Mechanism
CO2
-Carbon dioxide
CEA-Central Electricity Authority
CMIE-Centre for Monitoring Indian
Economy
Abbreviations Used
CNG-Compressed Natural Gas
CBM-Coal Bed Methane
CONCOR-Container Corporation of
India Ltd.
CHP-Combined Heat & Power
CIS-Common wealth of Independent
States
CMPDIL-Central Mine Planning &
Design Institute Ltd.
CLASP-Collaborative Labelling and
Appliance Standards Programme
CSIR-Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research
CERC-Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission
CEA-Central Electricity Authority
CO-Carbon Monoxide
CH4
-Methane Gas
CER-Certified Emission Reduction
D DAE-Department of Atomic Energy
DGH-Directorate General of
Hydrocarbons
DSM-Demand Side Management
DSCL-DCM Sriram Consolidated Ltd
DTI-Department of Trade & Industry,
U.K.
DG-Distributed Generation
DST-Department of Science &
Technology
DME-Dimethyl Ether
DBT-Department of Bio Technology
E EMPs-Environment Management Plans
ECL-Eastern Coal Fields Limited
EIA-Energy InformationAdministration
EOR-Enhanced Oil Recovery
EIL-Engineers India Limited
EE-Energy Efficiency
EC Act-Energy Conservation Act.
ESCOs-Energy Service Companies
F FFA- Free Fatty Acids
FSA-Fuel Supply Agreements
FOB-Free on Board
FSTA-Fuel Supply and Transport
Agreement
FDI-Foreign Direct Investment
FBRs-Fast Breeder Reactors
FBTR-Fast Breeder Test Reactor
FO-Fuel Oil
FSI-Floor Space Index
G GAIL-GAIL (India) Limited
GIS-Geographical Information System
GOI-Government of India
GCV-Gross Calorific Value
GDP-Gross Domestic Product
GHG-Green House Gases
GSPC-Gujarat State Petroleum
Corporation
GEF-Global Environment Facility
GTL-Gas to Liquids
GSI-Geological Survey of India
H HDI-Human Development Index
HHs-Households
HOG-High Output Growth
HSDO-High Speed Diesel Oil
HVDC-High Voltage Direct Current
I ICRISAT-International Crops Research
Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
IREDA-Indian Renewable Energy
Development Agency Ltd.
IGCC-Integrated Gasification
Combined Cycle
ICT-Information and Communication
Technologies
IEA-International Energy Agency
IRADe-Integrated Research and Action
for Development.
IHV-India Hydrocarbon Vision 2025
IOC-Indian Oil Corporation
IC-Internal Combustion
IOR-Improved Oil Recovery
IPP-Independent Power Producers
ICCEPT-Imperial College Centre for
Energy Policy and Technology
K KG-Krishna Godavari
L LPG-Liquefied Petroleum Gas
LNG-Liquefied Natural Gas
LWRs-Light Water Reactors
LDO-Light Diesel Oil
LSHS-Low Sulphur Heavy Stock
M MSW-Municipal Solid Waste
MECL-Mineral Exploration
Corporation Limited
MIS-Management Information System
MS-Motor Spirit
MOPNG-Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas
MOP-Ministry of Power
MNES-Ministry of Non-Conventional
Energy Sources
MSP-Minimum Support Price
N NHB-National Housing Bank
NABARD-National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development
NDC-National Development Council
NEF-National Energy Fund
NG-Natural Gas
NGOs-Non-Governmental
Organisations
NSS-National Sample SurveyNSSO-National Sample Survey
Organisation
NCDMA-National Clean Development
Mechanism Authority
NLC-Neyveli Lignite Corporation
NCDC-National Coal Development
Corporation
NEEPCO-North Eastern Electric
Power Corporation Limited
NHPC-National Hydro Electric Power
Corporation
NSG-Nuclear Suppliers Group
NELP-New Exploration Licensing
Policy
O OECD-Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
ONGC-Oil and Natural Gas
Corporation
ORF-Observer Research Foundation
OIL-Oil India Limited
OMCs-Oil Marketing Companies
P PSUs-Public Sector Undertakings
PDS-Public Distribution System
PCRA-Petroleum Conservation
Research Association
PAP-Project Affected People.
PPP-Purchasing Power Parity
PLF-Plant Load Factor
PWC-Price Waterhouse Coopers
POWERGRID-Power Grid
Corporation of India Limited
PHWRs-Pressurised Heavy Water
Reactors
PFBR-Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor
R RSPM-Respiratory Suspended
Particulate Matter
R & D-Research and Development
RGGVY-Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana
ROR-Run of the River
RCs-Regulatory Commissions
REGA-Rural Employment Guarantee
Act.
S SEBs-State Electricity Boards
SPM-Suspended Particulate Matter
S & T-Science and Technology
SPR-Strategic Petroleum Reserve
SPSUs-State Power Sector Utilities
Sox
-Sulphur Oxides
SHGs-Self-Help Groups
SWH-Solar Water Heater
SERC-State Electricity Regulatory
Commission
SO2 – Sulphur Oxide
T TIFAC-Technology Information,
Forecasting & Assessment Council
TTRC-Tradable Tax Rebate Certificates
TPES-Total Primary Energy Supply
TPCES-Total Primary Commercial
Energy Supply
TERI-The Energy and Resources
Institute
TPNCES-Total Primary NonCommercial Energy Supply.
T & D-Transmission and Distribution
TOD-Time of Day
TPA-Tripartite Agreement
U UNFCC-United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
UK-United Kingdom
UNDP-United Nations Development
Programme
UAE-United Arab Emirates
UP-Uttar Pradesh
USA-United States of America
UHV-Useful Heat Value
V VOCs-Volatile Organic CompoundsIndia faces formidable challenges in
meeting its energy needs and providing adequate
and varied energy of desired quality to users in
a sustainable manner and at reasonable costs.
India needs economic growth for human
development, which in turn requires access to
clean, convenient and reliable energy for all.
As we near the 8-10% growth rate that we
aspire for, the quantity & quality of energy we
need, will increase substantially. Thus the
energy challenge is of fundamental importance.
The nature and dimension of this challenge
becomes clear when we look at the energy
scene in the country today. This chapter lays
out the contemporary energy scene,
highlighting issues of concern, and then makes
the case for an Integrated Energy Policies to
address these.
1.1 THE ENERGY SCENE
2. Per capita consumption of energy in
India is one of the lowest in the world. India
consumed 439 kg of oil equivalent (kgoe) per
Table 1.1
Selected Energy Indicators for 2003
Region/Country GDP Per TPES TPES/GDP Electricity kWh/
Capita-PPP Per Capita (kgoe/ Consumption $-2000 PPP
(US $ 2000) (kgoe) $-2000 PPP) Per Capita
(kWh)
China 4838 1090 0.23 1379 0.29
Australia 28295 5630 0.20 10640 0.38
Brazil 7359 1094 0.15 1934 0.26
Denmark 29082 3852 0.13 6599 0.23
Germany 25271 4210 0.17 6898 0.27
India* 2732 439 0.16 553 0.20
Indonesia 3175 753 0.24 440 0.14
Netherlands 27124 4983 0.18 6748 0.25
Saudi Arabia 12494 5805 0.46 6481 0.52
Sweden 27869 5751 0.21 15397 0.55
United Kingdom 26944 3906 0.14 6231 0.23
United States 35487 7835 0.22 13066 0.37
Japan 26636 4052 0.15 7816 0.29
World 7868 1688 0.21 2429 0.31
TPES: Total Primary Energy Supply
*Data for India are corrected for actual consumption and the difference in actual and IEA
assumed calorie content of Indian coal
Source: IEA (2005), Key World Energy Statistics 2005, International Energy Agency, Paris,
http://wwwieaorg
The Challengesperson of primary energy in 2003 compared to
1090 in China, 7835 in the U.S. and the world
average of 1688. India’s energy use efficiency
for generating Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
in Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms is
better than the world average, China, US and
Germany (see Table 1.1). However, it is 7% to
23% higher than Denmark, UK, Japan and
Brazil. Clearly, significant reduction in the
energy intensity of growth can be achieved
based on existing technologies.
3. The level of per capita energy supply is
a good indicator of the level of economic
development as seen in Figure 1.1 where per
capita energy supply is plotted against per
capita GDP. Figure 1.2 shows the relationship
of per capita electricity supply with the level
of economic development. Figures 1.1 and 1.2
are plotted on logarithmic scale and thus their
slopes indicate elasticity of per capita energy
supply w.r.t. per capita GDP i.e. percent change
in per capita energy supply for every percent
change in per capita GDP.
4. If we look at the consumption of
electricity - one of the most convenient forms
of energy - we see that per capita consumption
in India is far below that in other countries.
Moreover, access to electricity is very uneven.
Even though 85 percent of villages are
considered electrified, around 57 percent of the
rural households and 12 percent of the urban
households i.e. 84 million households (over
44.2% of total) in the country did not have
electricity in 2000. Improvement in human
development is also strongly associated with
access to electricity. In Figure 1.3, the Human
Development Index (HDI), which is calculated
from literacy rate, infant mortality rate and
per capita GDP (UNDP, 2004) is plotted against
per capita electricity consumption.
5. Even those who have access to
electricity suffer from shortages and poor
quality of supply. Unscheduled outages, load
shedding, fluctuating voltage and erratic
frequency are common. Consumers and the
economy bear a large burden of the
consequences of this poor quality of supply.
This is evident through many examples. Motors
are over designed and consume more electricity
than required for the task. Voltage stabilisers
are needed for expensive equipment. Diesel
generators provide backup power to industrial
and commercial consumers, while inverters1
 to
Figure 1.1
Total Primary Energy Supply (TOE) Per Capita (2003) vs. GDP Per Capita (PPP US$2000)
Source: IEA (2005)
1 Inverters charge batteries when power is available and when power go out convert the DC power ofFigure 1.2
Kilo Watt hours of Electricity Consumption Per Capita (2003) vs. GDP Per Capita (PPP US$2000)
Source: IEA (2005)
Figure 1.3
Human Development Index (HDI) vs. Electricity Consumption Per Capita in 2002
Note: HDI for India 0.595 and Electricity consumption per capita 553 kWh.
Source: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP-2004) and IEA (2004)
tide over power outages are ubiquitous in city
homes. Equipment often gets damaged. Motors,
compressors and pumps get burnt out often.
Added to these is the cost of idle manpower
and loss in production when power supply is
interrupted. The extent of power shortage varies
from state to state. In 2004-05, the peak shortage
varied from 0 to 25.4% with an all-India average
of 11.7%. Similarly, energy shortage also varied
from 0 to 20.1% with an all-India average of
Human Development Indicator (HDI)
Electricity consumption per capita (kWh)Figure 1.4
Peak Power and Energy Shortages in States/UTs. 2004-05
Source: Central Electricity Authority (CEA), 2005
7.3% (Figure 1.4). These shortages include
scheduled cuts, reported load shedding and
frequency corrections. However, unscheduled
outages are not included.
6. Availability based tariffs (ABT) and
unscheduled interchange charges for power
introduced in 2003 for inter-state sale of power
have reduced voltage and frequency
fluctuations. The latter are still, however, not
as stable as one would like. In all regions,
except the Northern one, frequency was within
the normal band (49.0-50.50 Hz) for more
than 98% of the time in 2004-05, up from 55%
in 2000. Frequency falls when demand exceeds
available supply on the grid.
7. Power capacity has risen at the rate of
5.87% per annum over the last 25 years. The
total supply of electrical energy has risen at the
rate of 7.2% per annum over the same period.
This reflects a gradual improvement in the
average Plant Load Factor (PLF) of thermal
plants (which stood at 74.8% in 2004-05) as
well as a decline in the share of hydro in the
power generation mix. However, consumption
is still constrained as supply and power
shortages continue to plague the country
Shortages and the poor quality of power are
the outcome of inadequate investments in
distribution and transmission. Increasing
generation capacity has attracted the bulk of
investment both at the centre and the state
levels. Aggregate Technical and Commercial
(AT&C) losses which include theft, non-billing,
incorrect billing, inefficiency in collection, and
transmission and distribution losses, exceed
40% for the country as a whole. Consequently
the State Electricity Boards (SEBs), remain
financially sick and hence unable either to
adequately meet their investment needs on
their own or attract private capital to do so.
8. The Ministry of Power has set a target
of adding 1,00,000 MW of generation capacity
between 2002-2012. This programme includes
the 41,110 MW capacity additions proposed in
the 10th Plan to ensure the availability of
reliable and quality power as well as the creation
of an adequate reserve margin. Historically,
plan targets have never been met, and even in
the 10th Plan, the likely capacity addition will
actually be under 28,000 MW. Further, the
generation capacity created does not have the
desired mix of peaking, intermediate and base
load stationsFinallythe history of emphasison investment in power generation results in
loading more and more power on an inadequate
transmission and distribution (T&D) network.
Since T&D investments have not kept pace
with investments in generation, power cannot
be easily moved from surplus to deficit areas.
Industrial and commercial establishments have
been forced to seek captive and standby
generation to meet demand or provide quality
supply on a 24X7 basis to support critical
processes and provide peaking support. There
is good reason to believe that some 50,000
MW of such captive and standby capacity is in
place. Those in the household sector who can
afford it manage with the help of inverters.
9. The sector is dominated by large state
monopolies at both central and state levels.
Over 88% of utility-based generation is in the
public sector, which also, almost entirely,
controls transmission. Private distribution is
limited to Orissa, Delhi and some parts of
West Bengal, Maharashtra, Gujarat and U.P.
An uneven playing field permeates the market
place wherein the Central Power Sector PSUs
get guaranteed post-tax returns of 14-16% with
full payment backed by the GOI. State Power
Sector Utilities (SPSUs) are given zero or low
returns by Regulators who are under constant
pressure not to raise tariffs, which are already
among the highest in the world in PPP terms
for industrial, commercial and household
consumers. For example, in 2002, industries in
India paid 47 US cents per unit as opposed to
20 cents in China, 17 cents in Brazil, 12 cents
in Japan, 5.5 cents in US and 5 cents in
Germany in terms of PPP. Financially sick
state sector utilities are unable to invest on
their own and remain a poor credit risk for
private suppliers of energy. This reality has led
to a growth driven by Central Power Sector
PSUs, which is clearly unsustainable in the
long run since their only customer is bankrupt.
Even the massive investments required in
distribution are unlikely to yield adequate
returns in the current set-up. Nevertheless,
such investments to strengthen distribution
system, irrespective of public or private
ownership must be made. The GOI and the
Regulators have to struggle to put an enabling
environment and a regulatory framework in
place that will nurture competition in each
element of the electricity value chain, bring in
the needed investments and yield the necessary
efficiency gains through such competition.
10. The Accelerated Power Development
and Reforms Programme (APDRP) is aimed at
supporting distribution reforms through
investments and incentives by strengthening
sub-transmission and distribution networks in
the states so as to reduce the aggregate AT&C
loss levels and encourage efficiency
improvements in metering, billing and
collection. The performance of the APDRP,
thus far, has fallen short of the promise with
an investment of only Rs.9,200 crore realised
in the first three years against a target of
Rs.20,000 crores for the 5 years of the 10th
Plan. The programme has to be restructured to
an outcome-driven programme based on
monitorable targets against established baselines.
Privatisation of distribution has also been tried
in Orissa and Delhi as an alternative but the
results are, at best, mixed.
11. Power tariffs are structured on the basis
of industrial and commercial users crosssubsidising agricultural and domestic power
consumption. The agricultural sector is supplied
un-metered power in almost all states and the
farmers pay a highly subsidised lump sum
based on the declared horse power of their
pumps. This leads to a zero marginal cost of
power which promotes, inefficient use and
over exploitation of ground water. The
domestic sector also has a range of subsidies
based on the level of consumption including
heavily subsidised power for the poorest
segment wherein households pay a low lump
sum monthly charge. With the rising cost of
supply, the burden of these cross-subsidies has
increased and is disproportionately loaded on
the paying industrial, commercial and large
household consumers. Additionally, the tariff
structure has created incentives for high paying
consumers to pilfer power under the cover
provided by unmetered power. The habit of
stealing power is now widespread. A vested
interest lobby has been created and what are
euphemistically called AT&C losses remain
stubbornly high. While some state governments
partially compensate the SEBs for subsidies
given to farmers and other specified consumersFigure 1.5
Distribution of Households by Primary Source of EnergyUsed for Cooking- India
Source: NSSO (2001): Energy used by Indian Households 1999-2000. NSS 55th Round, Report No. 464
(55/1.0/6), National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), Govt. of India, August, 2001.
AT&C losses have to be borne by SEBs. Even
if such practices could have been justified in
the formative years of these companies,
necessary corrective measures should have been
taken on the basis of the experience gathered
over subsequent years of operation. The
development of an effective way to subsidise
farmers and certain other consumption
categories that gives them incentives to both
use power efficiently and arrest pilferage, is
very critical for a healthy power sector. The
process of power sector reforms was started in
1992 and continues to date. Despite some
progress, the sector has a long way to go
before becoming competitive and efficient at
meeting demand with quality power and being
able to attract the needed investment to keep
up with growing demand on commercially
viable terms.
12. A majority of India’s people use
traditional fuels such as dung, agricultural
wastes and firewood for cooking food. These
fuels cause indoor pollution. The 1999-2000
55th round of the National Sample Survey
(NSS) revealed that for 86% of rural households
the primary source of cooking energy was
firewood and woodchips or dung cakes. In
urban areas as well, more than 20% of all
households relied mainly on firewood and
chips. Only 5% of the households in rural
areas and 44% in urban areas used LPG.
Kerosene was used by 22% of urban households
and only 2.7% of rural households. Other
primary sources of cooking energy used by
urban and rural households include coke,
charcoal, gobar gas (cow dung gas), electricity
and other fuels.
13. Figure 1.5 shows that not much change
has taken place in rural areas since the 50th
round of NSS (1994-95) though in urban
households use of LPG has nearly doubled.
14. The use of traditional fuels for cooking
with the attendant pollution and the cost of
gathering them imposes a heavy burden on
people, particularly women and girls. The need
to gather fuels may deprive a young girl of her
schooling. Over time, the use of such fuels
increases the risks of eye infections and
respiratory diseases. Lack of access to clean and
convenient sources of energy impact the health
of women and girls disproportionately as they
spend more time indoors and are primarily
responsible for cooking. Women’s microenterprises (an important factor in household
income, as well as in women’s welfare and
empowerment), are heat-intensive (food
processing), labour-intensive, and/or lightintensive (home industries with work in
evenings). The lack of adequate energy supply—
and other coordinated support—affects women’s
abilities to use these micro-enterprises profitably
and safely. Furthermore, women often face
additional barriers in making the best use ofavailable opportunities and obtaining improved
energy services. There are social and practical
constraints related to ownership and control
over productive resources, and women are
typically excluded/marginalised from decisionmaking vis-à-vis the use of these resources.
This is worsened by barriers related to illiteracy,
lack of exposure to information and training.
Thus, the economic burden of traditional fuels
is around Rs.300 billion (see BOX 1.1). An
energy policy that seeks to be responsive to
social welfare must address this fact. It is
estimated that in rural North India, 30 billion
hours are spent in gathering fuel wood and
other traditional fuels annually.
15. The total quantities of traditional fuels
used are substantial. Table 1.2 presents the data
on household energy use. Biomass based fuels
dominate particularly in rural areas, where
they are used by households in all consumer
expenditure categories (see Figure 1.6). This
implies that their use would not reduce even
with economic growth and rising incomes in
rural areas.
BOX 1.1
The Burden of Traditional Fuels in Rural India
A study based on an integrated survey covering 15,293 rural households from 148 villages in
three states of rural North India and one state in South India shows the importance of clean
fuels. Symptoms of diseases related to air and water pollution, expenditure on health and
person days lost, demographic and socio-economic information, measurements of air quality
in the kitchen, outside the kitchen and the home were collected. Indicators for respiratory
functions (Peak Expiratory Flow) were measured for most of the adults present at the time of
the survey. The doctors examined a sub-sample of individuals for confirmation of diseases.
The study estimated that
• 96% of households use biomass energy, 11% use kerosene and 5% use LPG for cooking.
Most of them use multiple fuels.
• Forests contribute 39% of the fuel wood need.
• 314 Mt of bio-fuels are gathered annually.
• 85 million households spend 30 billion hours annually in fuel wood gathering.
• Respiratory symptoms are prevalent among 24 million adults of which 17 million have
serious symptoms.
• 5% of adults suffer from Bronchial asthma, 16% from Bronchitis, 8.2% from Pulmonary
TB and 7% from Chest infection.
• Risk of contracting respiratory diseases and eye diseases increases with longer duration of
use of bio-fuels.
Total economic burden of dirty biomass fuel was estimated to be Rs.299 billion using a wage
rate of Rs.60 per day, comprising of opportunity cost of gathering fuel, working days lost due
to eye infections and respiratory diseases, and the cost of medicine.
As women are the primary sufferers of the adverse impact of use of biomass fuels, there is a
close linkage between gender and energy. Gender and energy issues have remained on the
periphery of energy policy, and require greater attention and backing.
Source: Parikh Jyoti et al (2005)2
2 Parikh Jyoti K. et al “Lack of Energy, Water and Sanitation and its Impact on Rural India” in Parikh Kirit
S. and R. Radhakrishna (eds.), India Development Report 2004-2005, Oxford University Press, New Delhi.Figure 1.6
Pattern of Household Energy Consumption
Figure 1.6(a): Monthly Per Capita Household Consumption Pattern Urban India, 2000
Figure 1.6(b): Monthly Per Cpita Household Consumption Pattern Rural India, 2000
Source: NSS 55th Rnd(Jl1999Jn2000)Ntinl SmplSrOrnitinMinitrf
Table 1.2
Household Energy Consumption in India (July 1999 – June 2000)
Fuel Type Physical Units Mtoe
Rural Urban Total Rural Urban Total
Fire Wood & Chips (Mt) 158.87 18.08 176.95 71.49 8.13 79.62
Electricity (BkWh) 40.76 57.26 98.02 3.51 4.92 8.43
Dung Cake (Mt) 132.95 8.03 140.98 27.92 1.69 29.61
Kerosene (ML) 7.38 4.51 11.89 6.25 3.82 10.07
Coal (Mt) 1.20 1.54 2.74 0.49 0.63 1.12
L.P.G. (Mt) 1.25 4.43 5.68 1.41 5.00 6.41
Source: Derived from NSS 55th Round, (July 1999-June 2000) data, National Sample Survey
Organisation, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of IndiaFigure 1.7
Domestic Consumption and Production of Crude Oil
Source: Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas
16. In 2004-05, net of exports, India
consumed 120.17 Mt of crude oil products
including refinery fuel. Domestic production
of crude oil has been between 30.3 Mt to 33.98
Mt during 1990-2005 (see Figure 1.7). Not only
has domestic production stagnated, oil reserves
hovered between 700 Mt and 750 Mt during
this period. The total oil reserves were 739 Mt
in 1990-91 and were estimated to be 786 Mt in
2004-05. The proved reserves to production
(R/P) ratio was 23 in 2004-05. We now import
72% of our consumption and our import
dependence is growing rapidly. This raises
serious concerns about India’s energy security,
our ability to obtain the oil we need and the
impact of constrained supply and the
consequent increase in oil prices on our
economy.
17. Till 1997, oil and gas exploration was
mainly done by public sector firms. Progressive
liberalisation of exploration and the licensing
policy has attracted some private and foreign
firms. The success of these explorations has
been marginal in enhancing oil reserves.
However, some sizeable gas reserves amounting
to 680 Mtoe [320 Mtoe claimed by Reliance
and 360 Mtoe claimed by Gujarat State
Petroleum Corporation (GSPC)] have been
reported recently which is yet to be confirmed
by DGH. More work is needed to estimate the
total extractable potential. Despite one of the
most liberal exploration licensing regimes, India
has failed to attract any oil majors to explore
in India. This might be an indication of the oil
major’s assessment of the exploration potential
in the Indian Sedimentary basins since typically
such firms prefer to work in large fields. In the
latest round of bidding for exploration under
the new exploration licensing policy (NELP),
oil majors have shown interest. Given the
rising preference for gas as a fuel and feedstock,
India is also seeking to significantly raise gas
imports through LNG and Trans-National gas
pipelines. Oil diplomacy is currently seen as a
major tool for ensuring India’s energy security
along with the acquisition of equity oil and gas
from overseas.Figure 1.8
Growth of Transport Vehicles and Two Wheelers
Source: Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy Pvt. Ltd. (CMIE)
18. The total consumption of petroleum
products grew at the rate of 5.7% per annum
between 1980-81 and 2003-04. However, growth
in consumption has moderated to 2.95% per
annum over the last four years (2000-01 to
2004-05). Consumption for petrol and diesel
grew at 7.3% and 5.8% per annum respectively
between 1980-81 and 2004-05. This was the
outcome of the growth of personal motorised
transport and the rise in share of road haulage.
The numbers of two-wheelers rose from
5,75,893 to 4,14,78,136, three-wheelers from
36,765 to 18,81,085, cars from 5,39,475 to
57,17,456, buses from 93,907 to 5,52,899 and
trucks from 3,43,000 to 20,88,918 between
1970-71 and 2001-02 (Figure 1.8). The vehicle
population continues to grow at higher than
historical rates. However, in the last 5 years
growth in consumption of petrol and diesel
has been far more moderate at 6.9% and less
than 1% respectively. This reflects the improved
efficiency of vehicles and better road conditions.
Table 1.3 gives the decadal growth rates of
motor vehicles from 1970-71 to 2001-02. In
2004-05, liquid fuel consumption in the
transport sector accounted for 28% of our
total petroleum products consumption.
19. Currently, the refining capacity of the
country is greater than the domestic
requirements, making India a net exporter of
petroleum products. The projected addition to
Table 1.3
Growth of Motorised Transport Vehicles
1970-71 1980-81 1990-91 2001-2002 Growth Rate
Two-wheelers 575893 2530441 14199858 41478136 15.3%
Three-wheelers 36765 142073 617365 1881085 14.0%
Cars 539475 900221 2266506 5717456 8.2%
Taxis 60446 100845 243748 684490 8.4%
Jeeps 82584 120475 443734 1168868 9.2%
Buses 93907 153909 331096 552899 6.1%
Trucks 343000 554000 1355953 2088918 6.2%
Source: Center for Monitoring Indian Economy Pvt. Ltd. (CMIE)refining capacity in both the public and private
sectors will far exceed addition in demand and
petroleum products could, therefore, become
India’s largest export. India’s marginal advantage
in becoming a refining hub for exporting
products is not immediately clear.
20. The oil sector remains largely in the
hands of the central Public Sector Undertakings
(PSUs). The exception is refining wherein some
26% of capacity is now in private hands. Before
2002, oil product prices were set by the
government under an Administered Price
Mechanism (APM), which is no longer in use.
The prices of inputs and the products are now
determined on the basis of the import parity
principle even for products wherein India is a
net exporter. However, since prices are fixed
collectively by the public sector oil companies,
there is no price competition at the refinery
gate or retail outlets. The Government of India,
through the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas, has frequently deviated from the import
parity principle in fixing the effective price of
domestic crude as well as the price of petroleum
products at the retail level. Currently, there is
no independent regulation of the upstream or
downstream petroleum sector.
21. The above pricing methodology leads
to multiple distortions when coupled with the
fact that there are differential custom duties on
crude oil and petroleum products, differential
excise duties and central levies on products, as
well as differential state taxes and a normative
pooling of the transport costs. These distortions
and their impact on the profitability of central
PSUs and private refiners are further
compounded by subsidies on LPG and
kerosene, which are exclusively marketed by
central PSUs that share part of the subsidy
burden. Efficient cost based private refiners
with no marketing obligations have thus had
extraordinary advantages in this distorted
market. Even public sector refineries or
upstream operations such as Oil & Natural
Gas Corporation (ONGC) make large profits
while oil marketing companies lose money.
This has restrained the growth of private sector
retailers who find it simpler to sell to the
public sector marketing companies at import
parity prices. Other barriers to private sector’s
entry into retailing include a minimum
investment hurdle of Rs.2000 crore and the
absence of a common carrier principle in the
distribution and marketing sectors. Another
feature of the distorted market is the largescale adulteration of petrol and diesel with
subsidised kerosene.
22. The challenges facing the petroleum
and natural gas sectors include: (a) ensuring
crude oil and gas supplies in a constrained
world market amidst rising prices; (b) demand
management of petroleum products; (c) rational
pricing of petroleum products and natural gas;
(d) removal of entry barriers for private players
in distribution and retail business in order to
create real market competition; (e) regulation
of upstream and downstream sectors; (f)
improving the administration of LPG and
kerosene subsidies and, finally (g) environmental
management through product upgradation.
23. Coal has been the mainstay of India’s
energy supply for many years. Coal
consumption increased from 140 Mt in 1984 to
over 400 Mt in 2004 with a growth rate of
5.4%. Thermal power plants using coal today
account for 57% of our total generation
capacity. Indian coal has a high ash content
and low calorific value – an average of 4000
kcal/kg compared to 6000 kcal/kg in imported
coal. The average calorific value of coal burnt
in India’s power plants is only about 3500
kcal/kg. The high ash content also results in
higher emission of suspended particulate matter
(SPM). However, the sulphur content of Indian
coal is very low, and emission of SO2
 during
combustion is also low. Since SPM is
comparatively easy to trap, Indian coal is
relatively clean. Despite large reserves of coal
domestic supply is tailored to barely meet
domestic demand for thermal coal with small
quantities being imported. India is not selfsufficient in metallurgical coal and over 65% of
the demand is met through imports.
24. The coal sector is dominated by Public
Sector Undertakings (PSUs) under the central
and state governments. PSUs engaged in the
production of coal and lignite contribute nearly90% and 73% of the total production of coal
and lignite respectively. The Coal sector was
progressively nationalised between 1971 and
1973 after recognising the need for scientific
and planned development of resources and
improving the working conditions in existing
mines. The objectives of ‘nationalisation’ have
not been realised completely. The country is
facing an acute shortage of coking coal supplies,
the demand and supply balance of non-coking
(thermal) coal is extremely tight with marginal
quantities of imports required to fill the gap.
More importantly, the quality of thermal coal
has been deteriorating over the years. The
increasing share of opencast mines is one of
the contributing factors for the deterioration
in quality. There has been only a marginal
improvement in productivity. The level of
mechanisation of underground workings and
the success thereof has also not met
expectations.
25. A lack of competition, the absence of
suitable benchmarks for different operational
parameters and the absence of an independent
Regulator for the sector have constrained the
growth of coal industry. Problems of land
acquisition and rehabilitation, stiff legislation
covering forest conservation and environment
management have also, to some extent, affected
the pace of development of the coal sector.
Indian Coal is internationally competitive at
the pithead. However, its pricing has remained
non-transparent and its distribution is restricted
through a complex regime of linkages based on
a constrained rail infrastructure that offers little
flexibility. Moreover, freight rates are exorbitant
and cross subsidise passenger traffic. This makes
Indian coal progressively uncompetitive as it
moves away from the pitheads. In spite of low
(5%) import duty on thermal coal, imports
have been sluggish. This is primarily due to
constraints of port capacity and the cost
associated with multiple handling and inland
transportation of imported coal. Unfortunately
coal consumption at coastal sites is currently
minimal.
26. The entry of the private sector in coal
production is essential for realising efficiency
gains and augmenting the domestic coal supply.
Consequentlythe Coal Mines Nationalisation
(Amendment) Bill, 2000, was introduced in
Parliament to bring about suitable legislative
amendments to permit private sector entry
into the coal sector. However, its passage is
still awaited. Pending such amendment, the
captive mining policy was formulated within
the bounds of existing legislation and several
coal blocks have been offered to potential
entrepreneurs to exploit coal for their own
consumption. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
in coal mining has been allowed and mining
by joint venture companies is permitted albeit
for captive mines. Coal blocks have also been
allocated to other PSUs under Central and
State Governments for coal mining.
27. Large estimates of total coal resources
give a false sense of security because current
and foreseeable technologies convert only a
small fraction of the total resource into the
mineable category. The capacity of PSUs
engaged in exploration has restricted the pace
of proving indicated and inferred resources.
This limited capacity, coupled with the
economics of opencast mines versus
underground mines, gives only limited incentive
to explore for coal beyond 300m depth.
28. Clean coal technologies for improving
the efficiency of energy conversion and limiting
emissions; research and development initiatives
for establishing additional sources of energy
such as coal bed methane; in-situ gasification of
un-mineable and deep seated coal reserves; and
the liquefaction of coal are promising areas for
action but are still in their infancy.
29. While we have developed indigenous
technological capability in all aspects of nuclear
power, our ability to develop nuclear power is
restricted by the very limited availability of
Uranium. In fact, the present Uranium shortage
has forced us to operate even the small nuclear
generation capacity that we have at a load
factor below what is technically possible. The
pace at which we can expand nuclear power
generation using indigenous fuel sources is
thus severely limited even though the eventual
potential for nuclear power generation is vast.
30. There is large unexploited hydel
potential in the contrDeelopment of thisinvolves relatively long gestation lags.
Moreover, storage schemes often involve
displacement of people and submergence of
land. Project affected people need to be resettled
and rehabilitated. Also, storage schemes may
have other environmental consequences such
as adverse impact on aquatic life and
downstream ecosystems. While these problems
are not unsurmountable they have not been
adequately attended to in the past. There is,
therefore, some opposition to the development
of large storage schemes. However, storage
schemes help utilise water that would have
otherwise gone to the seas. Run of the river
schemes avoid these problems though at the
cost of a much lower utilisation of the available
hydro resource both in terms of water usage
and its energy potential. Most importantly,
run of the river schemes, typically, have much
lower capacity for delivering peak power
compared to storage schemes. Thus, if a river
basin can support storage projects, a careful
economic analysis must be done before allowing
that potential to be converted to the easy-to-do
run of the river schemes.
31. Given the shortage of conventional
fuels, non-conventional energy sources hold a
special attraction for the country. Despite many
years of efforts and despite the significant
growth of small-hydro and wind power, the
contribution of non-conventional energy
sources such as wind, solar, biogas, etc., to our
total energy use has remained below 1%.
32. Environmental problems associated
with energy use have become severe in many
urban areas. Most of our cities have a high
concentration of one or more pollutants above
the safe limit. In fact, many Indian cities are
among the most polluted cities in the world.
The Supreme Court mandated the use of
Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) for buses,
taxis and three-wheelers in Delhi beginning
September 2001. Other cities are following
this lead. In our energy strategy environmental
concerns have to be factored in to reduce
emission of local pollutants as well as global
pollutants to ensure that the energy strategy is
ecologically sustainable.
33. The continued dependence on biomassbased fuels, which are mostly obtained from
forests, raises the threat of deforestation,
thinning of forests and a loss of habitat and
bio-diversity.
34. Thus in summarising the energy scene
we note that the immediate problems are
shortages of fuels, a growing dependence on
imported oil that is becoming dearer by the
day, and a power sector with ill financial
health that discourages growth in a country
that needs energy for growth and for
improving human welfare. These problems
should be addressed in the context of our
long-term energy requirements and the
available strategic options to fulfil them so
that we may not get locked into paths that
we may regret later.
1.2 THE ISSUES
35. The energy scene described above raises
a number of issues. We divide these into two
categories: those that need to be addressed
from a long-term perspective and those that
are pressing problems in the short-term.
36. From a long-term perspective a number
of issues need to be addressed:
(a) How much energy do we need over
the long run? Given our resources,
what should be our strategy to meet
the growing demand?
(b) How do we promote the efficient
allocation of various fuels and energy
forms to different uses? What should
be their relative prices?
(c) How do we address the legitimate
concerns of States rich in energy
resources such as coal and hydro?
(d) What institutional reforms are needed
to generate competitive efficiency? How
do we leverage the strength of public
sector units that dominate energy
sectors? How do we obtain credible,
independent, transparent and consistent
regulatory oversight in the energy
sector?
(e) What is the role of renewables in ourenergy supply? How do we promote
their development?
(f) How should we increase India’s known
energy resources? What new
technologies are relevant for India’s
future? How do we promote their
development? What should be our
R&D strategy?
(g) What is the scope for increasing the
energy efficiency of the system? What
policies can lead to higher efficiency?
How do we encourage energy
conservation and energy efficiency? In
particular, how do we reduce the use
of petroleum fuels for transport? What
policies are needed to promote fuel
efficiency and alternatives in transport?
(h) How do we ensure energy security?
What is the role of obtaining equity
energy abroad? How do we reduce
dependence on imported energy?
(i) How do we encourage an energy
system that keeps air pollution within
acceptable limits? The growing global
concern over the threat of climate
change requires that India continues to
increase its energy supply in a
responsible manner without
compromising its economic growth
imperative. India’s long-term energy
strategy must take this into account.
37. In the short-term, our pressing
problems are:
(a) How do we deal with persistent power
shortages? How do we expand
capacities for generation, transmission
and distribution? How to generate
investible surpluses with SEBs? How
do we improve the financial health of
SEBs? How do we reduce AT&C
losses?
(b) How do we reduce the cost of power
and improve its quality? How should
we do away with cost plus regime?
How do we introduce competition?
How can we encourage private sector
participation in the power sector? How
can we provide open access in a level
playing field?
(c) How do we ensure fuel supply for
power generation? How should we
expand coal supply in a cost effective
way? How can we promote investment
in coal production? How do we
expand production by captive mines?
How do we facilitate import of coal
to meet shortfalls in domestic supply
and wherever imports are cost
effective?
(d) How should we allocate and price
domestic gas?
(e) How do we deal with the rising cost of
oil in the world market? How to
minimise its adverse impact on the
economy?
(f) How do we provide clean cooking
energy to all? How can we develop an
energy system that is poverty and
gender sensitive?
(g) How do we provide access to electricity
for all households? Considering some
consumption of electricity as a merit
good that we want all to consume,
how should it be financed?
(h) How do we provide subsidy for
electricity and clean cooking fuels to
certain consumers e.g. poor households
or agricultural pumps, in ways that do
not encourage wasteful use of
electricity?
1.3 THE VISION
38. The broad vision behind the energy
policy is to reliably meet the demand for
energy services of all sectors including the
lifeline energy needs of vulnerable households
in all parts of the country with safe, clean and
convenient energy at the least-cost. This must
be done in a technically efficient, economically
viable and environmentally sustainable manner
using different fuels and forms of energy, both
conventional and non-conventional, as well as
new and emerging energy sources to ensure
supply at all times with a prescribed confidence
level considering that shocks and disruption
can be reasonably expected. In other words,
the goal of the energy policy is to provide
energy security to all.1.4 NEED FOR AN INTEGRATED
POLICY
39. The need to have an integrated policy
arises because different fuels can substitute for
each other in both production and
consumption. Alternative technologies are
available and there is substantial scope for
exploiting possible synergies to increase energy
system efficiency and to meet requirement for
energy services. If the energy system is to be
efficient, our policies must be integrated.
Currently with five separate ministries (Coal,
Petroleum & Natural Gas, Atomic Energy,
Power and Non-Conventional Energy sources),
each concerned with its own turf, policies are
not always consistent, opportunities for interlinkages and synergy are missing and suboptimal solutions are the result. We briefly
look at issues that call for an integrated policy
and describe some of the attributes of such a
policy.
(a) Relative Prices
Different fuels have different calorific
values. Their efficiency in use and
convenience also differ. Moreover, they
generate different kinds and amounts
of pollution. And yet often they are
substitutes for each other in specific
uses. Their relative prices, therefore,
have to be set in a way that the resulting
inter-fuel choices are socially and
economically desirable. For this, their
marginal use values per rupee of fuel
need to be equivalent. Thus prices of
different fuels should not be set
independently of each other.
(b) Consistent Tax Structure
Relative prices can be affected by taxes
and subsidies. Excise and import duties
have to be consistent across different
fuels. For an optimal allocation of
resources, taxes on capital goods that
use different fuels to produce the same
output should be consistent. The tax
structure on alternate fuels may be
used to promote desired policy
objectives relating to environment,
utilising domestic energy resources,
generating employment etc
(c) Level Playing Field
All players and energy projects, public
or private, large or small, domestic or
foreign should be treated equally if the
sector is to be efficient.
(d) Uniform Treatment of Externalities
Different fuels may have different
externalities in their production and
for use. Thus for example, coal involves
mining with potential to damage land
while nuclear power involves a much
smaller amount of mining but poses
problems of hazardous waste disposal.
Biomass based fuels are renewables and
may not result in carbon emissions,
but the air pollution caused by their
use may have a severe and adverse
impact on health. Our policies need to
take an integrated view so that
environmental objectives are attained
at least-cost.
(e) Public Infrastructure
Many elements of the energy system
constitute public infrastructure with
many positive externalities and
economies of scale. Some of them are
natural monopolies. Ports, roads, rail
roads, urban mass transport, etc., play
an important role in the energy system.
Transmission networks or gas pipeline
networks have large economies of scale.
These are often developed through
public efforts or through public-private
partnerships. Their development needs
to be coordinated and their functioning
regulated.
(f) Long Gestation Lags, R&D and
Transition Strategy
Many energy projects involve large
investments and have long gestation
lags. An integrated policy needs to
provide a framework of development,
and a strategy of transition to the
desired energy future. In particular,
R&D for new technologies and new
sources may be most successful with
long-term commitment and support.
Setting priorities among alternative
R&D missions and defining an optimalR&D strategy require an integrated
perspective on the future of the energy
system.
(g) Consistent Regulation
The energy sector requires regulatory
oversight to balance consumer and
producer interests, to ensure efficiency
and to create a level playing field.
Natural monopolies need regulation to
ensure open access to all so that
competitive efficiency is realised.
However, regulation should be
consistent across different energy
sources and across regions, which
requires an integrated policy.
(h) National Priorities
While competitive efficiency is a
desirable goal, policies have to factor
in national priorities. Thus if the
country decides that food security is
paramount and that a certain level of
fertiliser self-sufficiency is required, then
the energy policy needs to provide for
it. If this calls for a certain quantitative
allocation of natural gas, one must
consider such an allocation, though
one should ideally find an
implementation solution that is at the
least-cost.
(i) Regionally Balanced Development
Energy infrastructure is critical for
development. For regionally balanced
development, energy should be
available in all regions. Freight and
transmission equalisation, as practised
in the past, has often caused regionally
distorted development. Thus Bihar, in
spite of its natural resources, has
remained industrially underdeveloped.
One needs to use more direct
instruments where incentives are linked
to outcomes. Distortion of energy
prices do not often serve this purpose.
As different fuels and resources are
differentially distributed geographically,
an integrated approach can help
minimise the cost of distortions and
incentives.
(j) Energy for the Poor
Some amount of clean cooking fuels
(LPG and Kerosene) and electricity are
merit goods, which justifies subsidies
for these goods for the poor. These
subsidies have to be consistent,
progressive and implementable. Ideally,
they should also be self-targeting and
self-limiting. Implemented properly,
they could, especially for women,
relieve drudgery, reduce health impact,
increase productivity and enhance
livelihood options.
1.5 APPROACH
40. Traditional approach to the energy
policy - of determining optimal supply strategy
with quantitative targets - is no longer
appropriate. We must provide policies that
create an enabling environment and provide
incentives to decision makers, consumers,
private firms, autonomous public corporations,
and government departments, to behave in
ways that result in socially and economically
desirable outcomes. The Committee’s approach
has been to identify such policies.
41. It is not necessary to compare precisely
the economics of alternatives as the policy
does not mandate which alternative should be
used and when. Relative economics of
alternatives depend on particular circumstances,
relative prices of different fuels as well as
technological developments. These comparisons
and the resulting choices among them are best
left to economic decision takers. Thus, policy
recommendations have been presented as broad
principles, leaving the details to be evolved, if
necessary, by implementing agencies in the
framework of plans and programmes at any
point of time.
42. The institutional structure in the public
sector that we have so assiduously built up
during the last 55 years or so to promote selfsufficiency and self-reliance in energy, has led
to a monopolistic market structure and led to
the systemic infirmities that are inherent in
cases of majority public ownership of an
enterprise. However, the Committee recognisesthat in a liberalised economy, the private sector
is expected to play an important role in the
energy sector.
43. Keeping this in mind our approach to
designing an integrated energy policy is based
on the following premises:
(a) Effective implementability of policies
is important. Any policy that depends
on the good behaviour of many people
is unlikely to be effectively
implementable.
(b) Informed debate based on widely
disseminated and reliable data is critical
for effective policy formulation.
(c) Incentive compatible policies that factor
in stakeholder concerns are more likely
to be acceptable and implementable.
(d) Competitive set-ups that give
appropriate signals to various economic
agents, such as prices, are to be
preferred.
(e) Independent Regulators have critical
roles to play. However, regulation is
not always a substitute for competition
and by itself cannot give efficient
outcomes. Regulation should be
complemented by an appropriate
industry structure. For example,
experience in electricity sector has
shown that good regulation under a
proper industry structure can mimic
competition. It must also be noted that
the mere presence of competition does
not negate the need for independent
regulation – it only changes the scope
of regulation.
(f) Social objectives should not be sacrificed
to the objective of competition but
should be made consistent with it
through the use of direct transfers
where possible.
(g) Policy has to recognise the existing
institutional structure of the energy
sector and define a transition strategy
of reforms.
(h) Policies should reflect externalities of
energy consumption.
(i) Efficiencies across the energy chain
should be improved.
44. With these principles in mind, we will
now look at energy by each fuel source as well
as at the power sector to address issues identified
earlier. Keeping in mind the need for
integration, we will underline aspects of policies
that need to be integrated with other policies.Long-term projections for energy
requirements are based on assumptions vis-àvis the growth of the economy, population
growth, the pace at which “non-commercial
energy” is replaced by “commercial energy”,
the progress of energy conservation, increase
in energy efficiency as well as societal and
lifestyle changes. It is not surprising, therefore,
that available projections differ widely. Yet it
is useful to have a set of consistent projections
with clearly stated assumptions to outline the
broad discussion of the challenges facing us in
meeting energy needs as well as to provide a
framework for policy formulation. Having said
this, it is emphasised that a rigorous demand
analysis has not been conducted by the
Committee and the numbers here and in
Chapter III merely establish an indicative range
of likely energy demand, supply and mix.
However, the policy recommendations that
emerge are not affected by the lack of precision
in the demand projections.
2.1 COMMERCIAL ENERGY NEEDS
2. We projected total primary commercial
energy requirement on the basis of elasticity
w.r.t. GDP, which gives a percentage change
in commercial energy requirement for one
percent change in GDP. The elasticities are
obtained from time series data of India’s
commercial energy use. These elasticities are
summarised below:
3. The elasticity for per capita primary
commercial energy supply with respect to per
capita GDP estimated from the time series data
of India comes to 0.82 since 1990-91 which is
significantly lower than 1.08 estimated for the
period since 1980-81. Similarly the elasticity
for per capita electricity generation is only
1.06 since 1990-91 compared to 1.30 for the
period since 1980-81. We have used electricity
generation rather than consumption because
while losses have been rising over time, precise
data is not available on technical losses and
commercial losses (which includes pilferage,
non-billing, and non-collection). Except for
technical losses all electricity made available
contributes to GDP. However, since even
technical losses have been rising (current
estimates are upwards of 15%) using electricity
generation instead of actual consumption gives
higher elasticities. Importantly though, the
elasticities in India are falling over time (or
with increasing GDP).
4. The energy elasticities of GDP can be
reshaped by policy interventions, the relative
prices of fuels, changes in technology, changes
Energy Requirements
Table 2.1
Energy Use Elasticity w.r.t. GDP
(Percent change in Commercial energy use for one percent change in GDP)
Regression Using India’s Time Series
Per Capita
1. TPCES w.r.t. GDP (Rs. Crores 1993-94) 1980-81—2003-04 1.08
1990-91—2003-04 0.82
2. Electricity Generated w.r.t. GDP (Utilities + Captive) 1980-81—2003-04 1.30
1990-91—2003-04 1.06
TPCES = Total Primary Commercial Energy Supplyin end-use efficiency of equipment, the level of
the energy infrastructure and development
priorities that affect the structure of the
economy. Normally, overall elasticity falls over
time as is corroborated by the time series data
for India’s commercial energy consumption.
However, there is also a feeling that, for India,
the energy elasticity of GDP growth will not
fall any further as rising income levels will
foster life style changes that are more energy
intense. Based on these alternative views two
sets of elasticities were used for projecting
India’s commercial energy demand. The two
sets of elasticities used are shown in Table 2.2.
5. To get a feel for how India’s energy
elasticities compare with other countries, we
have estimated these elasticities using crosscountry regression based on data of 2003. These
are shown in Table 2.3. The elasticity for total
primary energy supply, TPES, comes to 0.83
for all countries and to 0.79 for countries with
a PPP GDP between $2000 and $8000 (India’s
GDP in PPP terms based on 2000 dollars was
$2732 in 2003 and by 2031-32 might reach the
upper end of the range). India’s energy elasticity
for commercial energy is comparable to the
elasticity estimates for TPES using cross country
data. The elasticity for electricity consumption
comes to 1.24 for all countries and to 1.25 for
PPP GDP range of $2000 to $8000. India’s
elasticity for electricity generation is comparable
to that of countries with per capita GDP
exceeding $8000 in PPP terms. Importantly,
the trend of falling elasticities with rising
income levels is demonstrated even by cross
country data.
6. Using the above estimates, commercial
energy needs have been projected for different
growth scenarios using falling and constant
elasticities from Table 2.2. These projections
are given in Table 2.4, which also shows
population projections by the Registrar of
Census. It is noted, though, that the number
based on constant elasticities is not used in this
report for any comparison.
2.2 REQUIRED ELECTRICITY
GENERATION
7. Requirement for electricity generation,
(projected using the elasticities of Table 2.2) are
shown in Table 2.5. Plan-wise projected
electricity generation and capacity additions
are shown in Figures 2.1 and 2.2 respectively.
Table 2.2
Elasticities Used for Projections
(TPCES w.r.t. total GDP)
TPCES 1 TPCES 2 Electricity Electricity
(Falling (Constant (Falling (Constant
elasticities) elasticities) elasticities) elasticities)
2004-05 to 2011-12 0.75 0.8 0.95 0.95
2011-12 to 2021-22 0.70 0.8 0.85 0.95
2021-22 to 2031-32 0.67 0.8 0.78 0.95
Table 2.3
Energy Use Elasticity w.r.t. GDP from Cross-Country Data of 2003
1. TPES (kgoe/capita) w.r.t. per capita GDP ($ PPP 2000) All Countries 0.83
2000 <GDP <8000 0.79
 GDP >8000 0.76
2. Electricity Consumption (kWh/capita) w.r.t. per capita All Countries 1.24
GDP ($ PPP 2000) 2000< GDP <8000 1.25
GDP >8000 1.09Table 2.5
Projections for Electricity Requirement
(Based on Falling Elasticities of Table 2.2)
Year Billion kWh Projected Peak Installed Capacity
Demand (GW) Required (GW)
Total Energy Energy Required @ GDP Growth @ GDP Growth
Requirement at Bus Bar Rate Rate
@ GDP Growth @ GDP Growth
Rate Rate
8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9%
2003-04 633 633 592 592 89 89 131 131
2006-07 761 774 712 724 107 109 153 155
2011-12 1097 1167 1026 1091 158 168 220 233
2016-17 1524 1687 1425 1577 226 250 306 337
2021-22 2118 2438 1980 2280 323 372 425 488
2026-27 2866 3423 2680 3201 437 522 575 685
2031-32 3880 4806 3628 4493 592 733 778 960
Note: Electricity generation and peak demand in 2003-04 is the total of utilities and non-utilities above 1
MW size. Energy demand at bus bar is estimated assuming 6.5% auxiliary consumption. Peak
demand is estimated assuming system load factor of 76% up to 2010, 74% for 2011-12 to 2015-16,
72% for 2016-17 to 2020-21 and 70% for 2021-22 and beyond. The installed capacity has been
estimated keeping the ratio between total installed capacity and total energy required constant at the
2003-04 level. This assumes optimal utilisation of resources bringing down the ratio between installed
capacity required to peak demand from 1.47 in 2003-04 to 1.31 in 2031-32.
Table 2.4
Projections for Total Primary Commercial Energy Requirements
(Mt of Oil Equivalent)
Year Population GDP TPCES TPCES
in millions (Rs. in Billion (Mtoe) 1 (Mtoe) 2
@1993-94 prices) GDP Growth Rate GDP Growth Rate
8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9%
2006-07 1114 17839 18171 389 397 394 403
2011-12 1197 26211 27958 521 551 537 570
2016-17 1275 38513 43017 684 748 732 807
2021-22 1347 56588 66187 898 1015 998 1142
2026-27 1411 83145 101837 1166 1360 1361 1617
2031-32 1468 122170 156689 1514 1823 1856 2289
Note: 1. Projections based on falling elasticities with respect to GDP
2. Projections assuming no change in elasticities with respect to GDP
3. It is pointed out that the level of commercial energy consumption shown for 2006-07 is not
expected to be achieved as the growth in demand for petroleum products in the first 4 years of
the 10th Plan has only been 2.8% per annum. However, over the long-term, the projections may
still be valid as incomes and access improves.Figure 2.1
Projected Electricity Generation Growth (BkWh)
Figure 2.2
Plan-wise Projected Installed Capacity Addition (MW)
8. For comparison purposes, Table 2.6
provides projections of electricity demand made
by the Ministry of Power. For the purposes of
this report, however, the projections of Table
2.5 have been used.
Table 2.6
Projections for Electricity Requirement by MOP
Year Billion kWh Installed Capacity (GW)
8% 9% 8% 9%
2006-07 700 700 140 140
2011-12 1029 1077 206 215
2016-17 1511 1657 303 331
2021-22 2221 2550 445 510
2026-27 3263 3923 655 785
2031-32 4793 6036 962 1207Table 2.7
Sources of Electricity Generation – One Possible Scenario
Year Electricity Hydro Nuclear Rene- Thermal
Generation (BkWh) (BkWh) wables Energy Fuel Needs
at Bus Bar (BkWh) (BkWh)
(BkWh) Coal (Mt) NG (BCM) Oil* (Mt)
8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9%
2003-04 592 592 74 17 3 498 498 318 318 11 11 6 6
2006-07 711 724 87 39 8 577 590 337 379 12 14 6 6
2011-12 1026 1091 139 64 11 812 877 463 521 19 21 8 8
2016-17 1425 1577 204 118 14 1089 1241 603 678 33 37 9 10
2021-22 1981 2280 270 172 18 1521 1820 832 936 52 59 12 12
2026-27 2680 3201 335 274 21 2050 2571 1109 1248 77 87 14 15
2031-32 3628 4493 401 375 24 2828 3693 1475 1659 119 134 17 20
*includes secondary oil consumption for coal-based generation
9. Electricity requirements can be met by
various alternative fuels. These include coal,
nuclear power, hydropower, gas, oil and
renewables such as biomass, wind energy, solar
energy, etc. In order to understand the broad
dimensions of the fuel requirements for power
generation, a possible fuel mix scenario has
been developed. The projections of this
scenario are summarised in Table 2.7. It is
important to note that Table 2.7 represents
one possible scenario and it should not, in
any way, be considered as the preferred
scenario. Also to the extent that gas, hydro
or nuclear capacity cannot be realised as
projected in the scenario, coal-based
generation will need to fill the gap. In
reality, the choice between coal and gas will
be guided by economic and commercial
considerations including any policy
prescriptions for pricing-in certain
environmental externalities. The level of gas
use projected in the scenario under Table
2.7 is based on somewhat optimistic
assumptions of gas availability and of its
ability to compete with coal on price. Should
these assumptions not hold true, coal
dependence will increase.
10. The projections in Table 2.7 assume
exploitation of full hydro potential of 1,50,000
MW in the country, a capacity addition of
63,000 MW from nuclear power sources and a
14,000 MW capacity from wind farms by 2031-
32. These scenario assumptions in respect of
hydro and nuclear may not be fully realised
and are made here in order to characterise the
boundaries of alternative choices. Generation
from coal-based stations also includes electricity
generation from lignite. The scenario also forces
gas usage for power generation with gas-based
electricity share rising from about 10% to 16%
between 2003-04 and 2031-32. As a result of
these assumptions, the share of coal-based
electricity drops from 72% to 61%. The demand
for oil in power sector covers consumption of
petroleum products in diesel based plants as
well as secondary oil consumption in coalbased plants.
2.3 INDIA’S OIL DEMAND
11. Long-term growth in demand of
petroleum products depends upon a number of
factors such as economic growth (GDP),
elasticity of demand for petroleum products
with respect to GDP growth, relative price
levels of substitute products particularly LNG/
CNG, saturation of LPG demand, and the
impact of energy conservation measures. The
demand for petrol and diesel is dependent on
the growth of road infrastructure, the price of
oil, the future efficiency of vehicles, the growthof alternate modes of transport and the
emergence of substitutes like bio-fuels and/or
technologies such as hybrids. Naphtha demand
is dependent on the growth plans for fertiliser
and petro-chemicals and its price relative to the
price and availability of natural gas. Different
agencies have made various projections
estimating changes in demand of petroleum
products. The committee has reviewed the
demand projections made by Energy
Information Administration(EIA), USA,
International Energy Agency(IEA), India
Hydrocarbon Vision 2025, India Vision 2020,
Working Group Report for the 10th Plan,
Power & Energy Division and Integrated
Research and Action for Development - Price
Waterhouse Coopers (IRADe-PWC).
12. A summary of the projections by
various agencies is given in Table 2.8. As the
available projections by these agencies are for
different years, the same have been interpolated
or extrapolated to bring them to a common
year to ease comparison. The projections by
IEA and EIA are based on unrealistically low
growth rates of GDP for India. It may be seen
that the demand for the year 2025 varies from
235 Mt for the Best Case Scenario (BCS) of
India Vision 2020 to 368 Mt of India
Hydrocarbon Vision (IHV) 2025. The IRADePWC projections exclude Naphtha and their
projection of 347 Mt under high growth case
(HOG) is comparable to 368 Mt of India
Hydrocarbon Vision.
13. It should be emphasised that most of
these projections do not factor in the impact of
change in prices. The world market in
petroleum products has seen large swings in
prices and future prices are difficult to predict.
Since these projections vary a lot, we have
projected oil demand by detailed sectoral enduse analysis.
2.4 INDIA’S COAL DEMAND FOR
NON-POWER USE
14. Long-term projections of the demand
for coal are quite complex owing to rapid
changes in the relative availability and prices
of different fuels as well as the technological
advancements and new policies in the end-use
sectors. Total demand, defined as the aggregate
demand across various non-power coal
consuming sectors such as steel, cement etc., is
assessed by determining the outputs of each
sector, which in turn are functions of GDP
growth. In the last decade or so, a gradual
decline in the elasticity of demand of coal
against GDP has been observed. Possible
reasons for this decline can be: (a) rising share
of the non-energy consuming sector in the
aggregate GDP; (b) substitution of coal by
alternative fuels; and (c) technological
innovations in coal consuming sectors leading
to energy efficiency and a reduction in specific
consumption.
15. The committee has reviewed the
demand projections made by Energy
Information Administration (EIA),
International Energy Agency (IEA), India vision
2020, India Hydrocarbon Vision 2025, Coal
Vision 2025, Working Group Report for the
10th Plan and the Power & Energy Division
of Planning Commission. A summary of
projections by various agencies is given in
Table 2.9. Projections have been brought to a
common year by interpolation/extrapolation
for ease of comparison. The projections by
IEA and EIA are based on low growth of GDP
for India. It may be seen that the projected
demand for coal in the year 2024-25 varies
from 971 Mt for the “Business as Usual”
scenario of India Vision 2020 to 1402 Mt in the
India Hydrocarbon Vision 2025 report. The
Committee decided to use the projections
carried out for Coal Vision 2025 by TERI for
non-power coal requirements and extrapolated
them for estimating the coal requirement for
non-power use in 2031-32.
2.5 INDIA’S NON-POWER
NATURAL GAS DEMAND
16. Currently, the Indian gas market is
supply constrained, especially since the future
demand for gas appears to be strong. Table 2.10
summarises the various long-term projections
available for gas in India. As the available
projections by these agencies are for different
years, the same have been interpolated or
extrapolated to bring them to common years
and have been converted into MMscmd for theTable 2.8 Demand Scenario for Petroleum Products - India (By Various Agencies/Organisations) (Mt) Projections by the Various Agencies EIA (2004) IEA IHV–2025 India Vision–2020 Working Power & (2004) (2000) (2002) Group Energy IRADe & PWC* Report of Division’s (2005)
Year Reference High Low 10th Plan (Planning
Case Case Case (2001-02) Commission)
BAU BCS Projections BAU HOG
(2003-04)
Base Year 2001 2001 2001 2000 1998-99 1997 2001-02 2001-02 2003-04
(105 Mt) (105 Mt) (105 Mt) (102 Mt) (91 Mt) (83 Mt) (108 Mt) (108 Mt) (109.7 Mt)
2004-05 119 122 115 122 132 121 112 119 124 125 1272009-10 139 149 129 145 175 153 135 139 147 162 1762014-15 157 194 154 171 226 193 162 164 174 191 2122019-20 219 254 189 201 288 245 195 195 207 212 2592024-25 264 324 204 230 368 309 235 232 240 260 3472029-30 271 276 281 320 465
EIA - Energy Information Administration, USA IRADe - Integrated Research and Action for DevelopmentIEA - International Energy Agency BAU - Business as Usual PWC - Price Waterhouse CoopersIHV - India Hydrocarbon Vision 2025 BCS - Best Case Scenario HOG - High Output GrowthNote: As the available projections by the various agencies are for different years, the same have been interpolated or extrapolated to bring them to
common years for comparison purposes.Table 2.9
Demand Projection of Coal by Various Agencies in Mt
Source Sectors/Period Base year 06-07 2010 2011-12 2015 2016-17 2020-21 2021-22 2024-25 2025 2030
Power 322 469 617Captive Power 28 32 37
X Plan working Steel 43 40 40group Cement 25 24 25
Fertiliser 4 5 5Others 51 50 56Total 2001-02 473 620 780 981 1126Power 322 413 517 635 719Captive Power 28 43 60 84 102
Coal Vision Fertiliser 42025* 7% GDP Steel 43 53 67 84 97
Cement 25 38 58 88 113Others 51 64 80 101 117Total 2006-07 473 611 782 992 1147Power 322 427 553 699 804Captive Power 28 44 63 90 112
Coal Vision Fertiliser 42025* 8% GDP Steel 43 54 69 90 105
Cement 25 39 61 95 123Others 51 65 82 106 123Total 2006-07 473 630 828 1079 1267
Hydrocarbon 1998-99 1118 1402 1483
Vision 2025
Best Case 1997-98 538 659
India Vision Scenario2020 Business As (311) 688 971
UsualHigh 2001 408 473 548 611 629
EIA Low 374 411 447 481 490
Reference 390 439 493
IEA 2000 484 623 713 817P&E Division, 2001 481 612 764 920 957 1417Planning Comm. (2031-32)
* Projections made by TERI for Coal Vision 2025purpose of comparison. It may be seen that the
demand for gas varies from 155 MMscmd in
low case of EIA to 738 MMscmd in HOG case
of IRADe-PWC for the year 2024-25. Most of
these projections have not taken into account
the price sensitivity of gas. The IHV 2025
states that the share of oil and gas in India’s
energy mix would be 25% and 20% respectively.
Based on the numbers given in IHV 2025 for
projected oil demand (364 Mtoe) the gas demand
works out to be 291 Mtoe if the respective
shares are as stated. However, IHV 2025 also
states that the projected demand for gas in
2025 will be 391 Million Standard Cubic Metre
Per Day (MMscmd) which translates into only
128 Mtoe. This error makes the estimates in
IHV 2025 inconclusive. India Vision 2020 has
estimated the demand for gas to be between 65
and 71 Billion Cubic Metres (BCM) for the
year 2020. IRADe-PWC has projected demand
of natural gas and natural gas equivalent of
Naphtha at 243 BCM under the business-asusual (BAU) scenario and 405.7 BCM under
High Output Growth (HOG) scenario for the
year 2030.
17. Natural gas can replace existing fuels
in various sectors both for feedstock as well as
for energy purposes. However, this substitution
will depend upon the relative price of gas with
respect to other fuels. Therefore, it may be
stated that the demand for gas will depend
upon the price of natural gas relative to that of
alternatives, mainly Naphtha for fertiliser and
petrochemicals and coal for power.
18. The above wide range of estimates for
gas demand was considered by the Committee.
It was agreed to base the demand estimate for
non-power gas on the assumption that the
projected fertiliser (urea) capacity by 2031-32
would be all gas-based; and non-power enduses of gas will continue to grow at 8% or 9%
per annum depending upon GDP growth. The
committee considered this to be a realistic
basis for estimating the use of gas for nonpower use. The use of gas for power generation
will depend on the availability of gas and the
price relative to coal. As detailed in Paragraph
10, the forced gas scenario results in a 16%
share for gas-based electricity generation by
2031-32. Table 2.7 gives the gas demand for
power based on this share of gas in electricity
production.
2.6 TOTAL PRIMARY
COMMERCIAL ENERGY
REQUIREMENT
19. Putting together the various projections
discussed above for coal, oil and natural gas for
non-power use, the commercial fuel
requirement for non-power use are summarised
below in Table 2.11.
20. Total commercial primary energy
requirements based on the scenario drawn for
power in Table 2.7 and the projections made
for non-power oil, coal and gas are
summarised in Table 2.12 using the common
unit of million tonnes of oil equivalent
(Mtoe). It is emphasised that Table 2.12 is
merely one scenario that forces Hydro
(1,50,000 MW), forces Nuclear (63,000 MW)
and forces share of gas-based power generation
(16%). Other scenarios based on DSM,
efficiency improvements, renewables etc. will
bring down the commercial energy
requirements further and change the fuel mix
shown in Table 2.12. In Chapter III
commercial energy supply and the commercial
energy mix is projected under a number of
scenarios reflecting specific policy initiatives.
The commercial energy supply under these
scenarios varies from a low of 1351 Mtoe to
a high of 1702 Mtoe. It is noted that the
commercial energy requirement of 1514 Mtoe
estimated on the basis of falling elasticities
(Table 2.4) is not significantly different from
the mid-point of this range (1526 Mtoe).
Again, the requirement assessed in Table 2.12
is based on assumptions that correspond to
scenario 5 under Chapter III. The commercial
energy requirement estimated in Table 2.12 is
above the mid-point of the range of
commercial energy supply established by the
various scenarios under Chapter III.
21. Figure 2.3 shows the actual percentage
shares of various commercial energy sources in
2003-04 and as projected for 2031-32 in the
scenario under Table 2.12.Table 2.10
Demand Scenario for Natural Gas - India
(By Various Agencies/Organisations)
(MMscmd)
Projections by the Various Agencies
EIA (2004) Power &
Year IEA IHV-2025 India Vision-2020 Energy IRADe & PWC*
Reference High Low (2004) (2000) (2002) Division’s
Projections
Case Case Case BAU BCS (2003-04) BAU HOG
Base Year 2001 2001 2001 2000 1999 - 2000 1997 2001-02 2003-04
(62 MMscmd) (62 MMscmd) (62 MMscmd) (67 MMscmd) (110 MMscmd) (59 MMscmd) (81 MMscmd) (85 MMscmd)
2004-05 74 77 74 91 195 89 87 98 93 952009-10 93 101 93 140 277 115 111 134 145 1642014-15 124 132 109 189 329 149 142 183 226 2852019-20 155 171 132 228 358 194 177 249 356 4932024-25 195 225 155 259 391 258 226 326 488 7382029-30 295 430 667 1111
EIA - Energy Information Administration, USA IRADe - Integrated Research and Action for Development
EA - International Energy Agency BAU - Business as Usual
HV - India Hydrocarbon Vision 2025 BCS - Best Case Scenario
PWC - Price Waterhouse CoopersHOG - High Output Growth* includes Natural Gas & N G equivalent of Naphtha
Note: As the available projections by the various agencies are for different years, the same have been interpolated or extrapolated to bring them to common
years and have been converted into MMscmd for the purpose of comparison.Table 2.11
Commercial Fuel Requirements for Non-Power Use in Physical Units
Non-Power- Coal1Non-Power - Oil2Non-Power- Natural Gas3
Mt Mt B.Cu.M
8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9%
2003-04 91 91 113 113 20 20
2006-07 123 123 126 142 20 22
2011-12 164 170 158 178 30 32
2016-17 221 237 205 231 38 45
2021-22 299 334 266 299 56 65
2026-27 408 475 351 395 73 93
2031-32 562 684 469 528 100 133
Note: Estimated fuel requirements of coal, oil and natural gas are for non-power purposes. 1
As explained in Para 15 2
As explained in Para 13 3
As explained in Para 18
Table 2.12
Projected Primary Commercial Energy Requirements (One Possible Scenario)
(Mtoe)
Year Hydro Nuclear Coal Oil Natural Gas TPCES
8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9%
2011-12 12 17 257 283 166 186 44 48 496 546
2016-17 18 31 338 375 214 241 64 74 665 739
2021-22 23 45 464 521 278 311 97 111 907 1011
2026-27 29 71 622 706 365 410 135 162 1222 1378
2031-32 35 98 835 937 486 548 197 240 1651 1858
CAGR -% 5.9 11.2 5.9 6.3 5.1 5.6 7.2 8 6 6.4
(Compounded
Annual Growth
Rates)
Per capita 24 67 569 638 331 373 134 163 1124 1266
consumption
In 2032 (Kgoe)
In 2004 (Kgoe) 6.5 4.6 157 157 111 111 27 27 306 306
Ratio 2032/2004 3.7 14.6 3.6 4.1 2.9 3.4 5.2 6.3 3.7 4.1
2.7 NON-COMMERCIAL ENERGY
REQUIREMENT
22. The so-called “Non-commercial”
sources of energy, including fuel wood,
agricultural waste and dung, are primarily used
by households for cooking energy. These are
called non-commercial because a major
proportion of these are simply gathered by
actual users directly as opposed to being traded
commercially.23. Based on the latest data available on
household energy consumption from the NSS
55th round covering the year 1999-2000,
household demands are projected assuming that
income distribution in rural and urban areas
remain log-normal with consumption. With
economic growth, the mean per capita
consumption in different expenditure classes
change. It is also assumed that the pattern of
fuel use for a particular monthly per capita
consumption expenditure class remains the
same as observed in the 55th round. The
projections are summarised in Table 2.13.
24. It should be noted that the requirement
of electricity, kerosene and gas for household
consumption are included in the projection
given in Table 2.12. The impact of the Rajiv
Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
(RGGVY), which targets provision of electricity
to all by the year 2009-10, will alter the demand
for electricity. To account for this impact,
household demands are projected from 2009-10
onwards using the energy use pattern of only
those households in the NSS 55th round sample,
which had electricity. These are given in Table
2.14.
25. The differences are substantial only in
2011 and 2016, as even without the acceleration
in rural electrification planned under RGGVY,
most of the households will have been
Figure 2.3
Table 2.13
The Demand Scenario of Various Energy Items for Household Consumption in India
(Mtoe)
Year Fire Wood Electricity Dung Cake Kerosene L.P.G. & Chips
8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9%
2000 79.62 79.62 8.43 8.43 29.61 29.61 10.07 10.07 6.42 6.42
2006 88.64 88.78 18.17 19.26 36.97 37.33 12.68 12.77 15.85 16.87
2011 94.11 94.05 27.17 29.68 40.42 40.48 14.01 14.02 23.94 26.07
2016 98.44 98.50 38.38 42.28 41.93 41.35 14.84 14.70 33.11 35.93
2021 102.06 102.46 50.39 54.78 41.79 40.87 15.16 14.93 41.63 44.16
2026 104.64 105.07 61.37 64.95 40.95 40.28 15.17 14.93 48.11 49.63
2031 106.39 106.59 69.72 71.80 40.47 40.21 15.12 14.96 52.27 52.89Table 2.14
The Impact of Electrification on the Demand Scenario of
Various Energy Items for Household Consumption
(Mtoe)
Fire Wood Electricity Dung Cake Kerosene L.P.G. Year & Chips
8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9%
2011 87.90 88.00 31.13 33.63 31.03 31.16 13.18 13.16 25.27 27.36
2016 92.59 93.02 42.58 46.51 32.21 31.53 13.82 13.64 34.30 36.95
2021 96.85 97.67 54.89 59.35 31.45 30.28 13.98 13.71 42.45 44.72
2026 100.01 100.72 66.19 69.86 30.00 29.12 13.88 13.61 48.55 49.88
2031 102.08 102.41 74.82 76.95 29.14 28.78 13.76 13.59 52.49 53.05
electrified by 2019-20. It is worth noting from
a comparison of Tables 2.13 and 2.14 that for
the year 2011 electrification does not reduce
kerosene consumption significantly. This is
rational. As long as kerosene is available,
especially subsidised kerosene, what is saved
from lighting is used as fuel and the
consumption of dung goes down. This
substitution is more convenient and the dung
saved has greater value as fertiliser. The use of
LPG for cooking will increase over time. Figure
2.4 shows this.
26. The impact of other components of
Bharat Nirman is difficult to assess. If we
assume that the programme will increase rural
incomes by 1% every year, then the differences
for the 8% and 9% growth rate column in
Table 2.14 give some idea of resulting changes
in demand. In 2031, the total household
requirement changes by some 3 percent (5
Mtoe) with a 1% higher growth rate.
27. It may be noted that the household
demand for non-commercial energy (firewood,
Figure 2.4
Percentage of Households Using LPGchips and dung cake) increases from around
109 Mtoe in 2000 to around 131 Mtoe in 2031.
The additional requirement is expected to be
met from agricultural residue and increased
livestock activity that can be expected with 8-
9% growth rates. In any case our goal should
be to progressively substitute these traditional
fuels with cleaner and more convenient fuels.
28. It is pointed out that apart from being
used as household fuel, non-commercial energy
is also used in the unorganised small and cottage
sector for end-uses such as brick kilns, pottery,
jaggery, etc. It is estimated that such
consumption of non-commercial fuels was
around 23.5 Mtoe in 2003-04. With easier
availability of coal, gas and fuel oil growth in
this segment is projected to be a sluggish 3.0%
per annum. Use of non-commercial energy by
the unorganised sector is thus expected to
reach 54 Mtoe by 2031-32.
2.8 TOTAL PRIMARY ENERGY
REQUIREMENT
29. Based on the commercial energy
requirement projected in Table 2.12 and the
non-commercial energy requirement projected
in Table 2.14 together with the non-commercial
energy use by small industries as detailed in
Paragraph 28, the total primary energy is shown
in Table 2.15. Once again, it is emphasised that
this is one scenario that is above the mid-point
of the range of total primary energy supply
estimated in Chapter III. It is further noted that
the 2006-07 requirement in Table 2.15 is taken
from Table 2.4 with falling elasticities. As stated
under Table 2.4 we may not achieve this level
of total primary energy consumption in 2006-
07 as petroleum demand has been sluggish in
the first 4 years of the 10th Plan.
2.9 SUMMING UP
30. The challenge facing the country is to
ensure that the energy needed to sustain an 8
to 9% growth rate becomes available. To put
the requirement in perspective, per capita
energy use in other countries in 2003 is
compared with India’s projected needs for 2032
in Table 2.16. It is pointed out again that the
scenario considered here is based on Table 2.12
and 2.15 and is hence above the mid-point of
the range of energy supply scenarios established
in Chapter III.
31. India’s per capita consumption of
energy in its various forms in 2003-04 is well
below that of developed countries and the
world average in 2003. Even in 2032, the per
capita consumption in India from various
sources of energy will be well below the 2003
level of per capita consumption in respect of
developed countries. In fact, as seen from Table
2.16 India’s projected level of per capita energy
consumption in 2032, will be less than 74% of
the world average in 2003.
32. One should note that these projected
needs are based on past trends from the demand
side based largely on the projection of income.
They assume that energy prices will remain on
Table 2.15
Total Primary Energy Requirement (Mtoe)
Year TPCES TPNCES* TPES
8% 9% 8% 9% 8% 9%
2006-07 389 397 153 153 542 550
2011-12 496 546 169 169 665 715
2016-17 665 739 177 177 842 916
2021-22 907 1011 182 181 1089 1192
2026-27 1222 1378 184 183 1406 1561
2031-32 1651 1858 185 185 1836 2043
*This includes household requirement as per Table 2.14 and consumption by small industries as per Para 28.Table 2.16
Per Capita Energy Requirements in Selected Countries (2003)
TPES Electricity Oil Gas Coal Nuclear Hydro
(kgoe) Consumption (kgoe) (Cu.m.) (Kg) (kWh) (kWh)
(kWh)
India 2003-04 439 553 111 30 257* (375) 16 69
India 2031-32 (projected 1250 2471 331 149 925* (1388) 256 273
@ 8% GDP growth)**
World Average (2003) 1688 2429 635 538 740 403 423
OECD (2003) 4668 8044 2099 1144 1651 1924 1076
U.S.A. (2003) 7840 13066 3426 2176 3410 2624 948
China (2003) 1090 1379 213 32 1073 32 215
South Korea (2003) 4272 7007 2264 627 1541 2570 101
Japan (2003) 4056 7816 2146 845 1247 1859 816
*Per capita coal consumption of India has been estimated based on the calorific value of hard coal used
internationally (6000 kcal/kg) to maintain uniformity. The figures in brackets are the actual per capita
consumption based on Indian coal with a calorific value of 4000 kcal/kg.
** Based on numbers estimated in Tables 2.7, 2.12 and 2.15.
Source: IEA (2005), Key World Energy Statistics 2005
the trend lines. They also assume that progress
in energy efficiency and energy conservation,
replacement of non-commercial energy and
societal and lifestyle changes will continue as
per historical trends. There are, of course,
opportunities to accelerate or alter the pace of
the trends. The projected energy requirements
can be reduced substantially with accelerated
improvement in energy efficiency and
conservation, which should be considered as
the most important supply options since they
have the potential to reduce consumption by
20-25%. This is considered when the supply
options are explored later in the report.
33. These projections and the scenarios in
the next chapter provide broad guidelines to
potential investors, and may supplement their
own assessments of the demand levels in various
energy sub-sectors.
34. What are the alternative supply
options? To what extent can demand be met
based on domestic resources? To what extent
imports would be needed? These questions are
addressed in the next chapter.Strategies to meet our energy
requirement are constrained by country’s
energy resources and import possibilities.
Unfortunately, India is not well endowed with
natural energy resources. Reserves of oil, gas
and Uranium are meagre though we have large
reserves of thorium. While coal is abundant, it
is regionally concentrated and is of low calorie
and high ash content, though it has the
advantage of a low sulphur content. The
extractable reserves, based on current extraction
technology, remain limited. Hydro potential is
significant, but small compared to our needs
and its contribution in terms of energy is
likely to remain small. Further, the need to
mitigate environmental and social impact of
storage schemes often delays hydro
development thereby causing huge cost
overruns.
3.1 INDIA’S ENERGY RESERVES
2. India’s Hydro-Carbon Energy Reserves
are summarised in Table 3.1.
Supply Options
Table 3.1
India’s Hydrocarbon Reserves
Production Net Reserve/
Proved Inferred Indicated in Imports in Production Ratio
Resources Unit 2004-05 2004-05 P/Q (P+I)/Q
(P) (I) (Q) (M)
Coal (as on 1.1.2005) Mtoe 38114 48007 15497
Extractable Coal** Mtoe 13489 9600-15650 157 16 86 147-186
Lignite (as on 1.1.2005) Mtoe 1220 3652 5772
Extractable Lignite Mtoe 1220 9 - 136 136
Oil (2005) Mt 786* - - 34 87 23 23
Gas (2005) Mtoe 1101* - - 29 3 (LNG) 38 38
Coal Bed Methane Mtoe 765 - 1260-2340
In-situ Coal Gasification*** ? ?
* Balance Recoverable Reserves
** Extractable coal from proved reserves has been calculated by considering 90% of geological reserve as mineable
and dividing mineable reserve by Reserve to Production ratio (2.543 has been used in ‘Coal Vision 2025’ for
CIL blocks); and range for extractable coal from prognosticated reserves has been arrived at by taking 70% of
indicated and 40% of Inferred reserve as mineable and dividing mineable reserve by R:P ratios (2.543 for CIL
blocks and 4.7 for non-CIL blocks as per ‘Coal Vision 2025’).
*** From deep seated coal (not included in extractable coal reserves)
Note: Indicated Gas resource includes 320 Mtoe claimed by Reliance Energy but excludes the 360 Mtoe of
reserves indicated by GSPCL as the same have not yet been certified by DGH.
Source: Respective Line MinistriesCOAL SUPPLY SCENARIO
3. Proved reserves of coal, the most
abundant energy resource, at the current level
of consumption can last for about 80 years. If
all the inferred reserves also materialise then
coal and lignite can last for over 140 years at
the current rate of extraction. Of course, coal
and lignite consumption will increase in the
future and the reserves would last for far fewer
years. If domestic coal production continues to
grow at 5% per year, the total (including
proven, indicated and inferred) extractable coal
reserves will run out in around 45 years.
However, only about 45% of the potential
coal bearing area has currently been covered
by regional surveys. Further, it is felt that
both regional as well as detailed drilling can be
made more comprehensive. Covering all coal
bearing areas with comprehensive regional and
detailed drilling could make a significant
difference to the estimated life of India’s coal
reserves. The problem with coal remains finding
a way to raise the proportion of extractable
reserves, ensure adequate production and take
care of the environmental impact of production
and use.
4. In-situ coal gasification can significantly
increase the extractable energy from India’s
vast in-place coal reserves. This is so because
in-situ coal gasification can tap energy from
coal reserves that cannot be extracted
economically based on available open cast/
underground extraction technologies. However,
in-situ gasification has not yet been deployed
commercially anywhere in the world. ONGC
is engaged in trials to establish the feasibility
and economics of this technology for Indian
coal and lignite in collaboration with Russia.
Neyveli Lignite Corporation has tied up with
an Australian group to pursue in-situ
gasification of lignite. In-situ gasification has
many environmental advantages. The problems
of overburden removal and ash disposal faced
by conventional coal mining and use are
eliminated. Gasification is the first step towards
a clean coal technology since carbon can be
captured from the syn-gas produced and
sequestered in the mine or pumped back in oil
or gas fields to enhance oil or gas recovery. Insitu coal gasification, with or without carbon
sequestration could be eligible for carbon
credits. Finally, using this process at abandoned
coalmines might provide an economically
attractive option for full extraction of energy
from in-place reserves. Clearly, the potential
for domestic energy supply based on in-situ
coal gasification can be large but it has not yet
been assessed.
OIL AND GAS SUPPLY SCENARIO
5. The reserves of crude oil are merely
786Mt. These can sustain the current level of
production for 23 years and are less than only
7 years worth of our level of consumption in
2004-05. There has been no significant step up
in crude oil reserves during the last decade in
spite of large investments in exploration
activities (see Table 3.2). The country has not
had any significant oil find since the Bombay
High fields, more than 28 years ago. As a
result, crude oil production has stagnated and
the gap between the demand and domestic
availability of crude oil is widening. Import
dependence will keep rising, unless dramatic
new discoveries are made. Only one third of
the potential oil bearing area has been explored
so far. The reluctance of international majors
to explore in India seen in the past, seems to
have changed following the high success rate in
gas discovery achieved by relatively small
international players. They have shown much
greater interest in the latest round of bidding
for exploration blocks under the new
exploration licensing policy (NELP). Also,
some geologists predict vast amount of
undiscovered oil in India. What it may require
is development of technology to overcome
geological barriers for deep drilling both above
ground and under sea. In any case India’s
supply strategy while stepping up exploration
should not rely on the possibility of finding oil
domestically.
6. The situation was similar in the case of
natural gas reserves till 2001-02 before the
discovery of gas in Krishna-Godavari basin by
Reliance. Coupled with the recent large
discovery of natural gas claimed by Gujarat
State Petroleum Corporation (GSPC), these
finds have added to the gas reserves
substantially. However, the size of the reserveof the GSPC find is yet to be certified by the
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH).
7. The Directorate General of
Hydrocarbons has estimated the country’s
resource base for Coal Bed Methane (CBM) to
be between 1400 BCM (1260 Mtoe) and 2600
BCM (2340 Mtoe). To give impetus to
exploration and production, the government
has formulated the CBM policy. Based on two
rounds of bidding under this policy, contracts
have been signed with PSUs/private companies
for the exploration and production of CBM in
13 blocks. An additional three blocks have
been taken up for development on the basis of
nomination. The estimated investment in these
blocks is about Rs.560 crore and the likely
CBM resources generated is estimated as 850
BCM (765 Mtoe). ONGC maintains that
commercial production of CBM from some of
these blocks will start in 2007. Thus, at the
very low current rate of production, the proven
gas and CBM reserves, together, can last for
some 50 years.
NUCLEAR
8. India is poorly endowed with Uranium.
Available Uranium supply can fuel only 10,000
MW of the Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors
(PHWR). Further, India is extracting Uranium
from extremely low grade ores (as low as 0.1%
Uranium) compared to ores with up to 12-14%
Uranium in certain resources abroad. This
makes Indian nuclear fuel 2-3 times costlier
than international supplies. The substantial
Thorium reserves can be used but that requires
that the fertile Thorium be converted to fissile
material. In this context, a three-stage nuclear
power programme is envisaged. This
programme consists of setting up of Pressurised
Heavy Water Reactors (PHWRs) in the first
stage, Fast Breeder Reactors (FBRs) in the
second stage and reactors based on the Uranium
233-Thorium 232 cycle in the third stage. It is
also envisaged that in the first stage of the
programme, capacity addition will be
supplemented by electricity generation through
Light Water Reactors (LWRs), initially through
imports of technology but with the long-term
objective of indigenisation. PHWR technology
was selected for the first stage as these reactors
are efficient users of natural Uranium for
yielding the plutonium fuel required for the
second stage FBR programme. The FBRs will
be fuelled by plutonium and will also recycle
spent Uranium from the PHWR to breed
more plutonium fuel for electricity generation.
Table 3.2
Reserves/Production of Crude Oil & Natural Gas
Year Crude Oil (Mt) Natural Gas (BCM)
Reserves* Production Reserves* Production
1970-71 128 6.9 62 1.4
1980-81 366 10.5 351 2.4
1990-91 739 32.2 686 18.0
2000-01 703 32.4 760 29.5
2001-02 732 32.0 763 29.7
2002-03 741 33.0 751 31.4
2003-04 761 33.4 853 32.0
2004-05 739 33.9 923 31.8
2005-06(p) 786 33.2 1101 32.2
(p) Provisional
* Reserves position as on 1st April of commencing year
Source: Ministry of Petroleum & Natural GasThorium as blanket material in FBRs will
produce Uranium 233 to fire the third stage.
9. The first stage programme of PHWR
technology has reached maturity, though much
later than was initially expected. A beginning
has been made in the introduction of LWRs
with the inter-governmental agreement between
India and the Russian Federation for
cooperation in setting up of 2x1,000 Megawatt
Electrical (MWe) LWRs at Kudankulam, Tamil
Nadu. A 40 MWt Fast Breeder Test Reactor
(FBTR) was set-up in 1985 at Kalpakkam to
gain experience in the technology under the
second phase. This has been followed by
progress in the development of technology for
the first Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR)
of 500 MWe capacity. Such a plant is currently
under construction. Research and development
on the utilisation of Thorium is also in progress.
10. FBR technology is critical to developing
stage two of India’s nuclear power programme.
Without developing the wide-scale use of FBR
technology, India will find it difficult to go
beyond 10,000 MWe nuclear capacity based on
known indigenous Uranium resources. Use of
FBR technology would enable indigenous
Uranium resources to support a 20,000 MWe
nuclear power programme by the year 2020.
Such a FBR programme is critical to developing
the Thorium-based third stage of India’s nuclear
power programme. The Bhabha Atomic
Research Centre (BARC) is also engaged in
R&D activities to develop an Advanced Heavy
Water Reactor of 300 MWe capacity that would
provide industrial scale experience necessary
for the Thorium-based Stage Three of India’s
nuclear power programme. Table 3.3 shows
the potential of nuclear energy with domestic
resources in the country.
11. The pace of development of nuclear
power is constrained by the rate at which
plutonium can be bred and Thorium converted
to fissile material. If India is able to import
nuclear fuel, the process can be accelerated.
Two possible growth paths of nuclear power
are summarised in Table 3.4.
RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES
12. Given the limited amount of domestic
conventional energy sources, renewable energy
resources gain significance in the Indian context.
India’s renewable energy resources are
summarised in Table 3.5. It may be noted that
many renewables require land. The potential
energy generated is assessed independently for
each option. If all such options are developed
together the combined potential may be less
than the sum due to a paucity of available land
for energy generation as other competing land
uses may dominate.
HYDROELECTRICITY
13. India’s hydel resources are estimated to
be 84,000 MW at 60% load factor. The current
utility based installed capacity is 32,326 MW
and the average annual generation over the last
three years (2002-05) was 74 Billion Kilowatt
hours (BkWh) giving a load factor of 29%. At
such a load factor an installed capacity of
1,50,000 MW including some 15,000 MW of
Table 3.3
The Approximate Potential Available From Nuclear Energy
Particulars Amount Thermal Energy Electricity
TWh GW-yr. GWe-Yr. MWe
Uranium-Metal 61,000-t
In PHWR 7,992 913 330 10,000
In FBR 1,027,616 117,308 42,200 5,00,000
Thorium-Metal 2,25,000-t
In Breeders 3,783,886 431,950 1,50,000 Very large
Source: Department of Atomic EnergyTable 3.4
Possible Development of Nuclear Power Installed Capacity in MW
Year Unit Scenario Remarks
Optimistic* Pessimistic
2010 GWe 11 9
2020 GWe 29 21
2030 GWe 63 48
2040 GWe 131 104
2050 GWe 275 208
* It is assumed that India will be able to import 8,000 MW of Light Water Reactors with fuel over
the next ten years.
Source: Department of Atomic Energy
These estimates assume that the FBR technology is
successfully demonstrated by the 500 MW PFBR
currently under construction, new Uranium mines are
opened for providing fuel for setting up additional
PHWRs, India succeeds in assimilating the LWR
technology through import and develops the Advanced
Heavy Water Reactor for utilising Thorium by 2020.
Table 3.5
Renewable Energy Resources
Resources Unit Present Potential Basis of Accessing Potential
Hydro-power MW 32,326 1,50,000 Total potential assessed is 84,000 MW** at
60% load factor or 1,50,000 MW at lower
load factors
Biomass
Wood Mtoe/year 140 620* Using 60 million Ha wasteland yielding (20)
MT/Ha/year
0.6** 4 In 12 million family sized plants
Biogas Mtoe/year 0.1 15 In community based plants if most of the
dung is put through them.
Bio-Fuels
Bio-diesel Mtoe/year - 20* Through plantation of 20* million hectares of
wasteland or 7* million hectares of intensive
cultivation
Ethanol Mtoe/year <1 10 From 1.2 million hectares of intensive
cultivation with required inputs.
Solar
Photovoltaic Mtoe/year - 1,200 Expected by utilising 5 million hectares
wasteland at an efficiency level of 15 percent
for Solar Photovoltaic Cells
Thermal Mtoe/year 1,200 MWe scale power plants using 5 million
hectares
Wind Energy Mtoe/year <1 10 Onshore potential of 65,000 MWe at 20
percent load factor
Small Hydro-power Mtoe/year <1 5
 * The availability of land and inputs for getting projected yields is a critical constraint
 ** based on 50 percent plants under use
Source: Respective Line Ministries3
Pikh Ji Kd Pikh KS(1977) “Mbiliid If BiThli“EVl
small hydel plants (size <25 MW) may be
justified given the available potential
hydroelectric energy. All new projects should
be designed with this objective in mind. Such
a strategy would ensure that hydro is maximally
used for meeting peak loads. Undeveloped
hydro potential is mainly concentrated in the
North East, Himachal and Uttaranchal. In
addition there are possibilities of importing
hydropower from Nepal and Bhutan whose
combined economically feasible potentials is
estimated to be in excess of 55,000 MW.
14. The accelerated hydro development plan
aims to build 50,000 MW of new capacity by
2025-26. Out of this, 25690 MW are to be
installed in Arunachal Pradesh. Problems of
environment and ecology, and the social
problems of resettlement of project-affected
people have delayed development of hydro
projects, particularly those that involve large
storage dams. Of the 50,000 MW planned, 31,000
MW shall come from run of the river (ROR)
schemes where these problems are more
manageable. However, the available energy
varies from month to month and peaking
capacity is minimal. It is estimated that 19,660
MW of ROR schemes generate 2 BkWh of energy
in a lean month and 13 BkWh in a high inflow
month, giving load factors of 14% to 90%.
WIND
15. Onshore wind energy potential is
estimated to be around 45,000 MW. Currently,
it is claimed that Indian wind farms deliver a
capacity factor of about 17% on average. As a
first level of approximation, this permits a
grid-connected wind capacity estimate of as
much as 20,000 MW at the current size of
India’s grid. The actual grid connected wind
capacity, however, is only about 3,600 MW.
This reflects both a poor exploitation of claimed
potential and, perhaps, the exaggerated claims
of capacity factors. Even if one goes by a wind
potential of 65,000 MW (as estimated by the
Wind Power Society) inclusive of off-shore
potential and further assumes that technological
innovations will raise capacity factors to 20%,
the total contribution of wind energy to India’s
energy mix will remain below 10 Mtoe. Despite
this, wind power, especially at the lagging ends
of the grid, provides several benefits and should
be pursued wherever it is viable.
BIOMASS, BIOGAS AND BIO-FUELS
16. Biomass is the major domestic fuel used
for cooking, and consists mainly of agricultural
by-products and gathered wood. Domestic
biomass use in 2000 was 80 Mtoe. Along with
dung cakes which provided 30 Mtoe, biomass
based fuels provide 81% of domestic energy.
Biomass is also used as industrial fuel by small
industries in the unorganised sector and by
cottage industries. Inclusive of such use biomass
along with dung cakes accounts for almost a third
of India’s total primary energy consumption.
This non-commercial energy for the domestic
use is essentially managed by women without
technology, or investment, and involves
unsustainable practises, backbreaking drudgery,
health problems especially for women and the
girl child and likely environmental damage. What
needs to be done to make this energy resource
more sustainable is to improve the efficiency and
convenience of using biomass through, for
example, wood gasification or biogas plants.
Rural people aspire to have clean and convenient
fuel just like their urban counterparts. Though
falling in its share of the total energy mix, biomass
dependence shall continue to rise in absolute
terms, and biomass will remain a part of India’s
energy supply scene till 2031-32 and beyond. As
such, a technology mission for enhanced and
efficient use of biomass/bio-fuels is highly
desirable.
17. India has a 40 year old biogas
programme. The total number of family size
biogas plants installed is 3.7 million, though
evaluation studies show that only half of these
are in use. Community based plants can process
dung from households with less than the 3-5
animals that are required for a family sized
plant and can also use any excess gas available
from family sized plants. Managing a
community sized plant in an incentive
compatible way that ensures voluntary
cooperation of all stakeholders is admittedly
challenging but is very much possible and
worth pursuing (Parikh and Parikh, 1977)
3
.18. Biomass could become a major energy
source if fuel wood plantations are developed.
This requires land, which may have other
competing uses. In fact, biomass, bio-fuels
(vegetable, edible and non-edible oils and
ethanol) and solar energy on sizeable scale all
require large amounts of land. The potential
energy generated is shown in Table 3.5. At
appropriate relative prices, farmers may
themselves decide to use their land for
producing energy. Clearly, Table 3.5 shows
that wood plantations offer the best option for
biomass based supply sources along with
possessing a huge employment generation
potential. Wood gasification or direct
combustion are possible options for power
generation based on such biomass. The
economics would depend on actual yields from
the wood plantations.
19. Bio-diesel is a natural diesel substitute.
While bio-diesel from non-edible oils such as
Jatropha, Karanj, Mahua etc., has attracted lot
of attention recently, its economic feasibility
depends largely on the yields one can get from
wasteland and/or the returns one can get from
good quality land with irrigation and fertiliser
use compared to returns from growing other
crops. A number of projects being undertaken
now will provide an assessment of these
comparative returns in a few years. Bio-diesel
also provides decentralised local fuel, which
can be used directly without esterification in
stationery engines. The process of bio-diesel
generation and use can also create significant
employment. These benefits should be factored
in while assessing the desirability of bio-diesel
when the data on land productivity are
available.
20. Ethanol is used extensively in Brazil as
a fuel for cars. In the Indian situation of
scarcity of land and water, the available
quantities of ethanol, when used as feedstock
for production of chemicals and potable
alcohol, offer higher economic and opportunity
costs to the country rather than its use as an
admixture with gasoline. If technology can be
developed to economically collect and convert
crop residues such as rice straws (which are
currently burnt) or if intensive cultivation of
land for crops to produce cellulosic ethanol
constitutes an attractive option to farmers,
adequate quantity of ethanol could then be
available to blend petrol with 10% or higher
concentration of ethanol. At present ethanol
as a transport fuel can make some contribution
but is not likely to constitute a major option.
SOLAR-ENERGY
21. Solar energy has a large potential in
the country. The average solar insolation in
the country is 6 kWh/meter2
/day. This can be
exploited by many direct thermal applications
such as for cooking, heating or in photovoltaic
cells that directly convert sunlight to electricity.
The present conversion efficiency of
commercially available photovoltaic cells is less
than 15 percent. With this efficiency the
potential of covering just 5 million hectares of
land with photovoltaic cells is 1200 Mtoe/
year. Photovoltaic technology is proven but
expensive and the cost of electricity exceeds
Rs.20/kWh at present. Potential to reduce costs
and increase efficiency exists and a technology
mission for this purpose is highly desirable.
22. Solar thermal generation is economical
for water heating for both households and
industrial use. Much of its potential has yet to
be exploited. Appropriate policies need to be
designed to accelerate the exploitation of this
energy source. Solar thermal generation has
not found acceptance globally, though the
potential to use it in hybrid systems may be
there.
HYDROGEN
23. Hydrogen is seen as the new energy
carrier. Development of Hydrogen technology
is being pursued in many countries. India has
also set up a Hydrogen Development Board to
promote development of technologies for
producing, transporting, storing and
distributing hydrogen as well as to explore the
field of fuel cells for efficient end-use of
hydrogen. Hydrogen can also be burnt directly
in internal combustion engines. It can be
produced from hydrocarbons and biomass, by
splitting water with the use of solar, hydro,
wind or nuclear energy, and through certainmicrobial processes. The overall efficiency of
the hydrogen cycle, however, remains in doubt.
Hydrogen production, liquefaction or
compression, transportation, storage and final
dispensation, all entail huge amount of energy
consumption and loss. Significant barriers
relating to financial and technological viability
remain in the widespread use of hydrogen in
automotive or stationary applications. Metal
hydrides that store hydrogen and release it for
direct combustion have been developed for
powering two/three-wheelers in the country
but the technology has not yet been
commercialised. Stationary applications or
automotive applications using fuel cells are still
relatively uncompetitive.
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
24. Another emerging technology of
interest is the liquefaction of coal. South Africa
leads the world in this technology based on the
Sasol process. Some 6 tonnes of relatively high
quality (5500+ kcal/kg) coal is required to
produce one tonne of liquid fuel. The
technology was commercially proven in South
Africa and has been in use there for a number
of decades. At current prices of oil, this
technology may be viable even for Indian coals
and should be pursued.
25. Among new energy resources that have
yet to be proved are gas hydrates and nuclear
fusion. India has large deposits of gas hydrates
(methane gas trapped inside ice) off her coasts.
The technology to exploit it is yet to be
developed. Fusion power which requires fuels
that can be obtained from sea water offers
virtually unlimited power. The technology of
controlled fusion with positive energy gain in
an economic way is also yet to be developed.
These two energy sources are not likely to be
available commercially in the next 25 years.
3.2 SUPPLY SCENARIOS
26. Table 2.12 in Chapter II outlines one
possible energy mix scenario. This scenario
assumes that electricity generation will be based
on the full development of hydro and nuclear
potential of the country and the use of gas to
the extent of 16%. Possible fuel-wise
substitution should be taken into account in
considering supply options. With respect to oil
for transport use, it cannot easily be replaced
in significant quantities unless there are
technological breakthroughs or large-scale shifts
to public transport in place of personal vehicles
or to freight movement by railroads in place of
trucks. Other than for power generation
demand for natural gas is in the production of
fertilisers and chemicals where it cannot be
economically substituted. With coal and natural
gas there is a clear substitution possibility.
Such a substitution will depend on the relative
availability and price of coal/gas.
27. To explore the consequences of
different alternatives and their quantitative
significance a number of scenarios have been
developed using a multi-sectoral, multi period
optimising linear programming model4
. These
scenarios are described in Table 3.6. They are
designed to assess the importance of critical
policy options for meeting energy requirements.
These scenarios are designed to map out
extreme points of feasible options and none
of them should be looked upon as a preferred
scenario.
28. The linear programming model used
above obtains the least-cost solution subject to
constraints over ten 5-year periods from 2000
till 2050. It also has sub-periods characterising
peak, intermediate and base load during
summer and winter seasons. Power demand is
characterised for three regions: (a) near coal
mines, (b) distant coastal regions and (c) the
rest. Options at distant coastal regions include
transmission from pithead plants and load
centre based generation using domestic coal
or imported coal. The amount of pithead
generation is restricted due to environmental
reasons. In the case of hydro, India’s full
potential of 1,50,000 MW is taken as exploited
by 2031-32. Nuclear capacity of 63,000 MW is
assumed to be realised by 2031-32. As regards
4 The model developed by Observer Research Foundation (ORF) was upgraded and the scenarios developed
under the guidance of Dr. Kirit Parikh by a team from ORF.Table 3.6
Some Energy Supply Scenarios for 8% GDP Growth
Scenario Description
1. Coal-Based Development Most electricity generation by the most economical option –
which turns out to be primarily coal.
2. Maximise Nuclear Assumes nuclear development as per the optimistic scenario of
Table 3.4.
3. Forced Hydro Development of the entire (1,50,000 MW) domestic hydro
potential by 2031-32.
4. Maximise Hydro & Nuclear Both nuclear and hydro as in 2 and 3.
5. ‘4’ plus forced Natural Gas 16% of electricity generation from gas. This is comparable to
the scenario of Table 2.7 & 2.12.
6. ‘5’ plus Demand Side Demand side management reduces electricity demand by
Management 15 percent.
7. ‘5’ plus Higher Coal Power *Thermal Efficiency of future coal power plants increased to
Plant Efficiency 38-40 percent for super critical boilers. from 36 percent for
the present 500 MW
8. ‘6’ plus Coal Power Plant Both DSM and coal efficiency together.
Efficiency
9. ‘8’ plus higher freight share Railways freight share increased from 32 percent to
of Railways 50 percent.
10. ‘9’ plus vehicle efficiency Fuel efficiency of all motorised vehicles increased by
increased 50 percent.
11. ‘10’ plus renewables 30,000 MW wind power, 10,000 MW of solar power, 50,000
MW of biomass power, 10 Mt of bio-diesel, and 5 Mt of
ethanol by 2031-32.
* Thermal efficiency of coal-based plants refers to gross thermal efficiency based on gross generation
and is equal to the ratio of gross heat output to gross heat input.
gas, the model is forced to have a 16% share
for gas-based power generation by 2031-32. A
model scenario critically depends on the set of
assumptions, parameters and constraints, and
in particular on the relative costs and prices
of the alternatives available, the discount rate
and the projected requirements. Requirements
have been specified in terms of billion units
of electricity, billion tonne-kilometre of freight
traffic, and billion passenger-kilometre of
passenger traffic. The freight and passenger
traffic projections have been made using
elasticities with respect to GDP of 1.0 and
0.8, estimated using time series data from 1930
to 2000. The “optimality” of the solution is
contingent on the various inputs/assumptions
detailed herein. The importance of the model
is that each solution provides a consistent
scenario. It should be noted that the model
does not suggest preferred scenarios. They are
in fact extreme options to define the feasible
space for alternate policy choices. Thus when
1,50,000 MW of hydel by 2031-32 is estimated,
it does not mean that given the various social,
political and environmental constraints we will
in fact fully develop our hydel resources to
reach this estimate. The scenario does,
however, show what the implications are for
energy supply if we were able to develop the
full hydro potential. Table 3.7 summarises the
results of the scenarios. Figure 3.1 shows this
graphically. Period-wise details for three
selected scenarios are given in Figures 3.2 to
3.4.
3.3 IMPLICATIONS OF THE
RESULTS OF THE SCENARIOS
29. The results provide us insights on
aggregate energy needs and required imports,
energy supply options, the importance of
energy efficiency and demand side management,
the range of carbon emissions, and investment
needs. We look at these in turn.Figure 3.1
Fuel Mix Comparison in Year 2031-32
Figure 3.2
Coal Dominant Scenario 1 - Fuel Mix Year-WiseFigure 3.3
Forced Hydro, Nuclear and Gas Scenario 5 - Fuel Mix Year-Wise
Figure 3.4
Forced Renewables Scenario 11 - Fuel Mix Year WiseTable 3.7 Scenario Summaries for 8% GDP Growth — Fuel Mix in Year 2031-32 Mt of Oil Equivalent (Mtoe) Scenario No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Scenario Coal Forced Forced Forced Forced Forced Forced Forced Forced Nuc+ Forced Scenario Description Dominant Hydro Nuclear Nuclear+ Nuc+Hyd Nuc+Hyd+ Nuc+Hyd+ Nuc+Hyd+ Hyd+GAS+ Nuc+Hyd+ 10+Forced Case Hydro + GAS GAS+ DSM GAS+ GAS+ DSM+ DSM+ GAS+DSM Renewables Coal eff. Coal eff. Coal eff.+ +Coal eff. Rail share up +Rail share up+Transport eff. Crude Oil 486 485 486 485 486 486 485 485 447 361 350
Natural Gas 104 105 104 105 197 174 191 171 171 171 150Coal 1,022 953 998 929 835 715 818 698 701 707 632Hydro 13 35 13 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35Nuclear 76 76 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98Renewables 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 87Non-commercial 185 185 185 185 185 185 185 185 185 185 185Total 1,887 1,840 1,885 1,839 1,837 1,695 1,813 1,673 1,639 1,558 1,536Total without 1,702 1,655 1,700 1,654 1,652 1,510 1,628 1,488 1,454 1,373 1,351Non-CommercialCrude Oil 25.7% 26.4% 25.8% 26.4% 26.4% 28.7% 26.8% 29.0% 27.3% 23.2% 22.8%Natural Gas 5.5% 5.7% 5.5% 5.7% 10.7% 10.3% 10.5% 10.2% 10.5% 11.0% 9.8%Coal 54.1% 51.8% 52.9% 50.5% 45.5% 42.2% 45.1% 41.7% 42.8% 45.4% 41.1%Hydro 0.7% 1.9% 0.7% 1.9% 1.9% 2.0% 1.9% 2.1% 2.1% 2.2% 2.2%Nuclear 4.0% 4.1% 5.2% 5.3% 5.3% 5.8% 5.4% 5.9% 6.0% 6.3% 6.4%Renewables 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 5.6%Non-Commercial 9.8% 10.1% 9.8% 10.1% 10.1% 10.9% 10.2% 11.1% 11.3% 11.9% 12.0%Total 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 1003.3.1 AGGREGATE ENERGY NEEDS AND
IMPORTS DEPENDENCE
30. Based on the various scenarios
developed the total commercial energy
requirement for India in 2031-32 varies from a
low of 1351 Mtoe to a high of 1702 Mtoe. This
level of commercial energy requirement entails
an annual growth of 5.2% to 6.1% over the
commercial energy supply level in 2003-04 to
sustain an 8% growth rate of GDP. The total
primary energy requirement in 2031-32 varies
from a low of 1536 Mtoe to a high of 1887
Mtoe. This yields an annual growth in total
primary energy requirement of 4.3% to 5.1%
over the 2003-04 level to sustain a GDP growth
of 8% per annum.
31. The modelled scenarios help us in
assessing the significance of various options.
They also suggest our likely dependence on
energy imports. The level of imports depend
on the level of domestic production. Given
our resources shown in Table 3.1, domestic
production of oil and gas will depend critically
on new finds. If we don’t make major new
discoveries, our production can increase only
marginally. We can only guess what the
production will be and be ready for the worst.
Thus we assume that we can produce by 2031-
32 only 35 Mtoe of oil per year and around
100 Mtoe of natural gas including coal bed
methane. Our production of coal is constrained
by our ability to successfully use our ample
domestic resources. The main hurdle could be
an inability to expand production at the needed
pace, environmental constraints due to
attendant deforestation and the social problem
of resettlement of project affected people. At a
modest growth rate of production of 5.5 percent
per year - a rate slightly higher than what has
been achieved over the previous 25 years - the
production of coal and lignite by 2031-32 will
be around 1400 Mt. Based on these assumptions,
our import needs for the various scenarios will
be as shown in Table 3.8. Thus, with an 8%
GDP growth rate an import dependence for
energy in 2031-32 could be as low as 29 percent
and as high as 59 percent. Increasing coal
production and associated infrastructure of
transport, as well as improving energy use
efficiency in generation and use are critical if
we are to reduce our dependence on imported
energy.
3.3.2 ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS
32. The major choices are use of alternative
fuels in the power sector and in modes of
transport. Table 3.9 shows the generation
capacities in scenario 11 (renewables scenario)
from different sources and the load factor for
each type of plants for the year 2031-32. This
is an extreme scenario where all options for
power generation other than coal, are pushed
to their limits. We have also assumed high
Table 3.8
Ranges of Commercial Energy Requirement, Domestic Production and Imports for
8 percent Growth for year 2031-32
Fuel Range of Assumed Range of Import
Requirement in Domestic Imports* (Percent)
Scenarios Production
(R) (P) (I) (I/R)
Oil (Mt) 350–486 35 315–451 90–93
Natural Gas (Mtoe) 100–197 100 0-97 0-49
including CBM
Coal (Mtoe) 632-1022 560 72-462 11-45
TCPES 1351-1702 — 387-1010 29-59
*Range of imports is calculated across all scenarios as follows:
Lower bound =Minimum requirement – Maximum domestic production
Upper bound = Maximum requirement – Minimum domestic productionplant load factors for biomass gasification and
combustion, and somewhat lower factors for
conventional plants. It gives the minimum coal
requirement.
33. It is seen that even under scenario 11,
coal is the dominant fuel with a share of 51%
in electricity generation and a share of over
41% in the energy mix. Gas-based generation
constitutes only 11% of electricity generation
capacity in scenario 11. The capacity factor of
gas plants remains 31% showing that they are
mainly used for peaking. Scenarios were also
generated with alternative prices of natural gas
and it is found that natural gas is not selected
when the gas price is US$ 4.5 per MMBtu or
higher even for peaking power as long as the
coal price remains at or below US$ 2.27 per
MMBtu (i.e. $45 per tonne of imported coal
with 6000 kcal/kg). The low load factor for
hydro plants is an outcome of the limited
availability of hydro energy.
34. The results of the scenarios in the
context of the brief review of energy resources
show the following:
(a) Any supply strategy over the coming
decades will have to emphasise India’s
major resource, i.e. coal. Coal is the
most abundant domestically available
primary energy resource other than
thorium and solar insolation. In the
“coal-based development” scenario, the
total demand for coal increases from
172 Mtoe in 2004-05 to 1022 Mtoe in
2031-32. Measured in Mt of Indian coal
with 4000 kcal/kg, the requirement of
coal will thus increase from 406 Mt in
2004-05 to 2555 Mt in 2031-32. The
quality of Indian coal is deteriorating
progressively. A 5% deterioration over
the next 25 years would raise the coal
requirement to 2689 Mt by 2031-32 in
terms of Indian coal. This order of
increase may call for a massive rise in
coal imports unless domestic
production increases correspondingly.
This would increase our energy
dependency on imports. Additionally,
since use of coal is associated with the
environmental problems of mining and
local air pollution, apart from CO2
emission; coal use must be accompanied
by appropriate environmental measures
and use of clean coal technologies. Even
under the least coal intensive option,
Table 3.9
Generation Capacities and Load Factors in Scenario 11
Source Capacity (MW) Plant Load Factor (%)
Coal 269997 67
Natural Gas 69815 27
Coal Bed Methane 27778 36
In-situ Coal Gas 22222 36
Nuclear 63060 68
Hydro 150153 30
IGCC Pet coke 3137 68
Wind – Onshore 32141 20
Wind – Off-shore 1200 25
Biomass Gasification 1200 75
Biomass combustion 50000 70
Solar 10000 17.5
Total 700703 50domestic coal production would need
to rise to 1580 Million Tonnes.
(b) A massive effort is clearly needed to
expand domestic coal production.
Given that, at present, coal mines take
8 years to develop and Coal India suffers
from several problems, it is doubtful
that Coal India can meet this need.
Opening up the coal sector to private
mining and use of the best technology
are unavoidable. Captive mining as
permitted at present alone will not
suffice. We must build a consensus to
allow changes in the coal sector to
happen sooner rather than later. In
any event, massive investments would
be needed to enhance the rail
infrastructure to move large quantities
of domestic coal. Alternate coastal/
river transportation of coal may also
have to be pursued aggressively.
(c) As seen from Table 3.8 high quality
coal (6000 kcal/kg) import needs could
range from 120 million tonnes to 770
million tonnes by 2031-32. To put this
in perspective, currently less than a
billion tonnes of high quality coal
equivalent is traded internationally out
of a production of about 4.8 billion
tonnes of equivalent high quality coal.
This will require the development of
appropriate port infrastructure as well
as the development of end-use (power,
steel and cement) at coastal locations
to avoid double handling and inland
transportation of imported coal.
(d) Development of hydropower as a clean
power source has to be given due
priority. Full development of hydro
potential while technically feasible, will
require timely resolution of issues of
water rights, resettlement of project
affected people and environmental
concerns. These issues can be and must
be resolved satisfactorily. The irrigation
and flood control benefits of hydropower and its operational flexibility
can justify the higher costs of hydel
plants. It is pointed out that India
needs to create water storage capacity.
Its storage per capita at 207m3
/capita is
one of the lowest in the world and
compares poorly with the
corresponding levels of 1964 m3
/capita
and 1111 m3/capita in the US and
China respectively.
(e) States that are well endowed with coal
and/or hydro resources have been
increasingly demanding a greater share
of the benefits to the nation from
exploiting these resources. This is an
urgent issue and must be taken up at
the National Development Council
(NDC) level to avoid delays and
additional costs in fully exploiting these
domestic energy resources.
(f) Though nuclear energy can make only
a modest contribution over the next 25
years, longer term consideration of even
a modest degree of energy selfsufficiency suggests the need to pursue
the development of nuclear power using
Thorium. Despite the many delays and
disappointments in achieving set targets
of nuclear energy development in the
past, this is an option we cannot afford
not to pursue. Today the PHWR is
economically competitive with coalbased plants at certain locations.
(g) If the import of 6,000 MWe of LWR
reactors does not materialise, the
installed nuclear capacity by 2031-32
will be 48,000 MW instead of 63,000
MW. The impact on the various
scenarios will, however, be marginal
and none of the policy conclusion
would be affected. We have not
depended on large scale import of
LWRs due to the uncertainties
involved. Imported LWRs could be an
important option if the FBR and
Thorium reactor routes not materialise
or are found to be uneconomical.
Energy security concerns may leave us
no option other than full pursuit of
the FBR and Thorium routes.
(h) The optimistic nuclear development
scenario as envisaged is contingent on
6,000 MW of additional import of
LWRs whose plutonium could be used
in FBRs along with the plutonium
fh10000 MWiour own Uranium. Import of the
additional 6,000 MW of LWRs (and
associated fuel) depends upon the
handful of countries constituting the
Nuclear Suppliers’ Group (NSG). If
the sanctions by the NSG are removed
and India is able to import Uranium
and nuclear power plants, nuclear
power can play a much bigger role in
the power sector. The capacity growth
then would not be constrained by Table
3.4. However, if energy security
concerns are our primary driver
towards nuclear, then import of LWRs,
even though more economical, may
have to be limited to restrict our
dependence on energy imports.
(i) Full development of hydro potential
and realisation of the optimistic nuclear
scenario by 2031-32 reduce coal
requirement by some 93 Mtoe (232 Mt
of Indian coal) from the level of 1022
Mtoe projected in the coal dominant
scenario. This scenario implies total
electricity generation capacity of
7,75,500 MW in 2031-32 of which
hydro capacity will be 1,50,000 MW,
and nuclear capacity will need to
expand from the present 3,660 MW to
63,000 MW.
(j) If we assume no dramatic new finds of
oil occur in the country, our oil imports
will be around 315 to 451 Mt in 2031-
32. This is about four to five times of
what we import today. Assuming that
world trade over this period will grow
from 2.4 billion tonne (Bt) today to 4
Bt by that time, India’s imports will
constitute 7.9 to 11.3 percent of global
trade.
(k) Gas does not emerge as a major fuel in
any of the scenarios. The share of gas
in the energy mix remains below 11%.
Even when gas is pushed for power
generation, only 16% of the power
generated comes from gas. This is so
despite the scenarios assuming that
domestic natural gas supplies will be
supplemented with coal-bed methane
and in-situ gasification of coal as well
as with imported LNG
(l) A disturbing fact that emerges from
the study of various scenario is that
even if India somehow succeeds in
raising the contribution of renewable
energy by over 40 times by 2031-32
inclusive of a renewable power capacity
of 1,00,000 MW (compared to 6,161
MW as on March 2005); the
contribution of renewables to our
energy mix will not go beyond 5.6%
of total energy required in 2031-32.
This is consistent with various
projections worldwide that shows that
the fossil fuel dependence of the world
as a whole will continue to rise till
2031-32.
3.3.3 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND DEMAND
SIDE MANAGEMENT
35. India’s conventional energy reserves are
limited and we must develop all available and
economic alternatives. Simultaneously, a major
stress must be laid on energy efficiency and
conservation, with particular emphasis on
efficiency of electricity generation, transmission,
distribution and end-use. Clearly, over the next
25 years energy efficiency and conservation are
the most important virtual energy supply
sources that India possesses.
(a) India cannot deliver sustained 8%
growth over the next 25 years without
energy and water, and these two
together shall, in turn, pose the biggest
constraints to India’s growth. The
energy intensity of our growth has
been falling and is about half what it
used to be in the early seventies but
there is significant room to improve.
In 2003 India consumed 0.16 kilogram
of oil equivalent per dollar of GDP
expressed in purchasing parity terms.
This compares to 0.23 in China, 0.22
in US and a world average of 0.21.
However there are several countries in
Europe and Japan at or below 0.15.
One should note that cross country
comparisons are full of pitfalls. For
example, if the share of hydel energy is
higher in the total energy mix, energy
intensity would be lower. Even then,these comparisons do show that energy
intensity can be brought down by 20%
in India with commercially viable
technologies currently available and in
use in the developed countries.
(b) The most energy efficient scenario from
our model shows an aggregate energy
requirement of 1536 Mtoe in 2031.
This scenario is 19% more efficient
than the most energy intensive scenario.
With a projected population of 1.468
billion, the per capita total primary
energy supply (TPES) in the most
energy efficient scenario comes to 1046
kgoe/year. This is comparable to
China’s per capita TPES in 2003. Even
in the most energy intensive scenario
the per capita TPES in 2031-32 is only
1285 kgoe. This compares with the
2003 world average per capita energy
consumption of 1688 kgoe. Thus while
the projected total energy requirement
may look large, it is perhaps not large
enough for the GDP growth assumed.
(c) Efficiency of coal power plants
themselves can be improved
substantially. The average gross
efficiency of generation from coal
power plants is 30.5%. The best plants
in the world operate with super critical
boilers and get gross efficiency of 42%.
Germany is even claiming gross
conversion efficiency of 46%. It should
be possible to get gross efficiency of
38-40% at an economically attractive
cost for all new coal-based plants. This
alone can reduce coal requirement by
111 Mtoe of coal (278 Mt of Indian
coal). Thus a very high priority should
be given to developing or obtaining
the technology for coal-based plants of
high efficiency.
(d) If Demand Side Management (DSM)
options are pursued to reduce demand
for electricity through energy efficient
processes, equipment, lighting and
buildings so that electricity demand is
reduced by 15% by 2031-32, a reduction
of 152 Mtoe (381 Mt of Indian coal) in
coal requirement takes place. Studies
have shown that economically attractive
options of DSM exist to attain such
reductions. Energy efficiency and DSM
should have a very high priority.
Policies to promote these are described
in Chapter VI.
(e) Since domestic oil supply has stagnated
at a low level and requirements are
growing, oil use efficiency, conservation
and substitution by other forms of
energy are major options to reduce oil
imports. The same is true of gas, though
the prospects of finding gas look
somewhat brighter. Since no economic
substitutes are obvious for the transport
sector at least till 2031-32, energy
efficiency of vehicles and use of mass
transport have to have high priority. If
the energy efficiency of all motorised
transport vehicles is increased by 50%,
(an efficiency level that is already
achieved in the world today) our oil
requirement will go down by some 86
Mt by 2031-32. If on the other hand
railways are able to win back the freight
traffic they have lost to trucks and
manage to carry 50 percent of freight
billion tonne kilometre (Bt-km), then
oil requirement can go down by 38
Mt. These two initiatives in the
transport sector can, together, reduce
our oil requirement by over 25% from
the most oil intensive scenario in 2031-
32.
(f) Urban mass transport is much more
fuel efficient per passenger kilometre
compared to private vehicles. Mass
transport also reduces road congestion
and air pollution. Thus development
of urban mass transport systems of
quality and convenience that can attract
passengers will contribute significantly
to energy conservation.
(g) If both energy efficiency of coal
generation and DSM are pursued
together along with higher freight share
by Railways and a push for renewables,
coal demand could come down by over
38% from the coal dominant scenario
to 632 Mtoe (1580 Mt of Indian coal).
36All of the above recommendationsFigure 3.5
CO2 Generation Comparison in year 2031-32
resulting from an analysis of the scenarios
studied, are technologically viable. Pursuing
them can lower our energy demand by over
19%. Failure to deliver on these
recommendations could push India into the
international market for coal with a potential
demand equal to over 75% of the current level
of trade. The short to medium term impact of
such an eventuality on coal prices could be
disastrous. That being said, there are indications
that over the medium term world output of
coal and coal trade is set to increase significantly.
3.3.4 CARBON EMISSIONS
37. Estimates of CO2 generated from
energy use in different scenarios are shown in
Figure 3.5. Between Scenarios 1 (coal dominant
scenario) and scenario 11 (with all efficiency
and DSM measures and renewables) the
difference is nearly 35%.
38. The carbon emission implications of
our scenarios are therefore significant. Annual
CO2 emissions could rise from 1 billion tonne
at present to 5.5 billion tonnes per year by
2031-32 in the high coal use scenario and 39
billion tonnes in the low coal and renewable
dominant scenario. In the US, emissions today
are in excess of 5.5 billion tonnes of CO2
. In
per capita terms, however, India’s carbon
emissions in 2031-32 will be 2.6 to 3.6 tonnes
of CO2 compared to the 2004 level of over 20
tonnes in US and a global average of 4.5
tonnes in 2004.
3.3.5 IMPLICATIONS FOR INVESTMENT NEEDS
39. Apart from the challenges of physically
supplying different forms of energy discussed
above, the investment requirement also show a
need for purposive action. The electricity
generation, transmission and distribution sector
alone is estimated to require an investment of
at least Rs.60 trillion in 2005 rupees. The total
energy sector investment could well amount to
Rs.100-110 trillion in 2005 rupees inclusive of
related infrastructure.
40. An economy growing at 8% should
have little difficulty in mobilising the needed
resources particularly with public private
partnerships. The main challenge, however, is
to create efficient and financially viable energysub sectors so that investors have the incentives
to invest in a competitive set up where
consumers interests are simultaneously
protected.
3.3.6 THE MAIN ACTIONS RECOMMENDED
41. Comparisons of energy requirements
and our resource base suggest that our
hydrocarbon resources would be grossly
inadequate to meet our needs. From a longer
term perspective we need to take a number of
actions:
 Relentlessly pursue energy efficiency
and energy conservation as the most
important virtual source of domestic
energy.
 Institute policies that maximise
domestic coal production.
 Create coastal infrastructure for import
and use of coal.
 Develop coal transportation
infrastructure including alternatives
such as coastal and river movement.
 Develop fully the nuclear and hydro
option.
 Mount R&D efforts to develop
commercially viable in-situ coal
gasification technology.
 Redouble exploration efforts for oil,
gas and coal.
 Raise the level of diplomacy to access
hydrocarbon reserves overseas and gas
pipelines to India.
 Undertake a technology mission on
carbon sequestration.
 Undertake pilot projects to assess the
economics and social benefits of
biomass plantations and bio-fuels
 Undertake a solar technology mission
to make solar power using
photovoltaics or solar thermal
economically attractive.
 Undertake R&D for exploiting gashydrates.
 Undertake R&D for fusion to keep
open that option for unlimited power.
 Assess off-shore wind power potential.
3.4 ENERGY INDEPENDENCE IN
AN ENERGY SCARCE WORLD
42. World energy supplies are becoming
increasingly constrained. India needs to grow
its energy share in a market with sluggish
growth in supply and rising prices. It is assumed
that the world’s fossil fuel supplies grow by
2% per annum. Then India’s share of world
supplies of fossil fuels in 2031-32 would rise
from a level of 3.7% to a low of 7.6% in the
most energy efficient scenario to 10.9% in the
most energy intensive scenario.
43. President Kalam in his Independence
Day address to the nation in 2005 has called
for achieving energy independence. While
energy security is a major concern for the next
25 years, from a longer term perspective energy
independence becomes important. What does
an energy independence scenario look like?
The main challenges are to augment total
domestic energy supply.
44. Table 3.10 shows the energy supply by
sources for the year 2003-04. The following
options exist to substitute oil:
 Industrial use of Naphtha, Fuel Oil
(FO) and High Speed Diesel Oil
(HSDO) and domestic use of LPG and
Kerosene can all be replaced by natural
gas. Domestic availability of gas, today,
looks more promising than oil. Gas
should be used for power generation
only after it meets the above demand.
 Produce bio-diesel in a decentralised
manner and substitute all agricultural
use of HSDO/LSHS/fuel oil with biodiesel.
 Encourage blending of ethanol with
petrol.
 Provide adequate quality power to
reduce the need for diesel used for
standby generators and diesel pumps.
 Expand electrification of railways to
reduce diesel needs.
 Improve railways’ freight service so
that all long distance goods traffic prefer
railways thereby substantially reducing
HSDO used for transport. Promote urban mass transport to
reduce demand for petrol for personal
motorised vehicles.
 Improve fuel efficiency of motorised
vehicles by a factor of two through
better vehicle design.
 Encourage hybrid vehicles which are
now available commercially on cost
competitive terms.
45. Under President Kalam’s vision for
energy independence, India could eliminate its
Table 3.10
Primary Energy Supply Sources (2003-04)
(All figures in Mtoe)
Source Domestic Import# Total
Coal & Lignite Coal 145.00 14.00 167.00
Lignite 8.00 -
Oil & Products LPG 12.44 0 12.44
Kerosene 10.69 0.84 11.53
HSD 40.31 -6.29 34.02
LDO 1.21 0.00 1.21
FO 8.36 -0.35 8.01
LSHS 4.60 0.00 4.60
MS 8.59 -3.19 5.40
ATF 2.66 -1.77 0.89
NAPHTHA 13.59 0.21 13.80
Bitumen 3.24 0.00 3.24
Pet Coke 2.80 0.00 2.80
Lubes etc 1.37 1.53 2.90
Others* 18.01 0.15 18.16
TOTAL 127.87 -8.87 119.00
Gas Gas 29.00 - 29.00
Electricity Hydel 7.00 - 7.00
Nuclear 5.00 - 5.00
TOTAL 12.00 - 12.00
TOTAL COMMERCIAL ENERGY 327.00
Non Commercial Fuel wood Agro 110.00 - 110.00
Waste
Dung Cake 32.00 - 32.00
Biogas 1.00 - 1.00
TOTAL 143.00 - 143.00
TOTAL ENERGY 470.00
* Ohildfifl f b9 Moil dependence over the next 40-50 years by:
 Developing cheap batteries with high
storage density for hybrids/electric
vehicles.
 Developing solar power. As suggested
by President Kalam, if efficiency of
solar photovoltaics can be increased
from the current 15% to 50%, without
increasing the cost, we can have all the
power we need at competitive costs by
covering a small fraction of our land
(the land required can be further
reduced by putting photovoltaic cells
on all roof tops). The surplus solar
power during day time can be used to
split water to produce hydrogen that
can provide electricity at night and can
also be used to run motor vehicles
using fuel cells.
 Developing nuclear power based on
Thorium.
46. A focussed research effort in the
direction suggested by President Kalam needs
to be initiated now as the sooner these
technologies are available, the better it will be
for the country’s energy security and
independence.4.1. WHAT IS ENERGY SECURITY?
Obtaining a secure and adequate supply
of a traded commodity, be it food or fuel, is
generally a problem prevalent amongst poor
people, poor regions or poor nations. With the
power to pay the price the rich often find
willing suppliers for what they want. The
World Energy Assessment (UNDP 1999) report
defines energy security as: “the continuous
availability of energy in varied forms in
sufficient quantities at reasonable prices”. This
definition needs to be modified to better reflect
our situation.
2. We define energy security as follows:
“We are energy secure when we can
supply lifeline energy to all our citizens
irrespective of their ability to pay for it as well
as meet their effective demand for safe and
convenient energy to satisfy their various needs
at competitive prices, at all times and with a
prescribed confidence level considering shocks
and disruptions that can be reasonably
expected”.
The various elements of this definition
that may be noted are: “all her citizens”, “lifeline
energy”, “effective demand”, “safe and
convenient energy”, “at competitive prices”,
“at all times”, “various needs”, “prescribed
confidence level”, “shocks and disruptions” and
“reasonably expected”.
These are motivated by the following
considerations:
(a) It is important that energy is supplied
to all citizens. When the energy needs
of only some citizens are met, it cannot
be a sustainable situation.
(b) It is necessary to provide “lifeline”
energy to all citizens irrespective of
their paying capacity. Energy up to a
certain level is a basic necessity and
whether the state supplies it or not,
people will procure it in any way
possible. If the state does not provide
such lifeline energy, environmental
degradation can be expected. Lifeline
energy consumption for those who
cannot afford energy at market price
has to be made good through subsidies
that, preferably, target the intended
beneficiaries directly. Energy security
requires that the lifeline energy needs
of the Nation are met in full.
(c) Effective demand, i.e. demand backed
by the ability to pay at market
determined prices, should be met fully.
If it is not, the rich will get what they
desire but the poorer classes won’t.
(d) If demand is not met at competitive
prices the competitiveness of the Indian
economy would be compromised.
(e) Safe and convenient energy is desirable
as use of traditional fuels such as wood
or dung cakes causes indoor air
pollution and leads to adverse impact
on health, particularly that of women
and children.
(f) Energy is required in different forms
to meet different needs. Energy in one
form cannot be easily substituted by
other forms. Often such substitution
involves cost or loss in the quality of
service. For example, kerosene can
replace electricity for lighting but at a
cost and a loss in quality of service.
Fuel cells or batteries could replace IC
engines using petrol or diesel but at a
cost.
(g) Energy should be available at all times.
Interruptions in energy availability can
impose high costs on the economy and
also on human wellbeing
Energy Security(h) To ensure energy security at all times,
shocks and disruptions that can be
reasonably expected must be
anticipated. Ability to withstand such
shocks and disruptions is essential for
energy security. However, one cannot
guard against all possible shocks at
affordable costs. The surety of energy
supply cannot be 100 percent. One can
ensure supply only within a certain
prescribed confidence level.
4.2 THE NATURE OF THE
PROBLEM
3. Energy security has become a growing
concern because India’s energy needs are
growing with rising income levels and a
growing population. At the same time, our
dependence on imported energy has increased.
Up from 17.85% of Total Primary Commercial
Energy Supply (TPCES) in 1991, imports
accounted for 30% of our TPCES in 2004-05.
What is of particular concern is that imports
comprise largely of oil and during 2004-05, oil
imports constituted 72% of our total oil
consumption.
4. Our projected energy requirement and
various supply options show the country’s
growing dependence on import of energy. Not
only oil and gas but also coal imports are
likely to grow substantially over time. Energy
security, thus is an important concern for
India’s energy policy.
5. The growing dependence on energy
import raises several concerns. India’s
requirements of fossil fuels for the year 2030
based on the scenarios of Table 3.7 (which
gives requirements for 2031-32) are projected
to be 337 to 462 Mt of oil, 99 to 184 Mtoe of
gas and 602 to 954 Mtoe of coal. If the global
fossil fuel supply increases by only 1.7%, as
projected by IEA, then India’s share in 2030
would range from 5.8% to 8.0% for oil, 2.4%
to 4.5% for natural gas and 16.7% to 26.5% for
coal (see Figure 4.1). Will we get all the energy
that we need even when we are willing and
able to pay the price? What will we do if
supply is disrupted due to events outside our
control? Warsstrikesand political upheavals
in the oil exporting countries can suddenly and
drastically reduce global oil supply. Also in a
situation of conflict, an oil blockage may be
imposed against India. One can think of many
such eventualities. How do we keep our
economy going in such a situation? How do
we deal with this supply risk? The threat to
energy security arises not just from the
uncertainty of availability and price of imported
energy, but also from the possible disruption
or shortfalls in domestic production. Supply
risk from domestic sources, such as from a
strike in Coal India or Railways, also needs to
be addressed.
6. The second concern is not disruption
of supply but the market risk of a sudden
increase in oil price. While we may be able to
pay for imports, a high oil price can cause
inflation, slow down the economy and impose
hardship on our people. Given that world oil
prices have fluctuated substantially over the
years (see Figure 4.2), the adverse impact on the
economy of sudden and large increases in oil
price is perhaps a more likely risk than supply
disruption.
7. Any disruption in access to energy can
be very expensive in welfare terms as energy is
critical not only for economic growth but also
for human survival and well-being. For
example, if an increase in the price of oil, a
disruption of oil supply or erratic power supply
forces farmers to reduce the use of their pumps
and tractors, the consequent reduction in
agricultural output and employment can have
a serious and adverse impact on the poor.
Thus, a government may choose not to
immediately transmit a sudden large increase
in the international price of imported energy
to consumers. To be able to insulate consumers
against such sudden price increase, governments
may have to bear the burden of this price rise
for some time. This requires a certain resilience
in the government finances. Of course, if the
price increase persists, it has to be transmitted
to the consumers sooner or later since oil
imports constitute a large part of India’s oil
consumption and the subsequent import bill is
sizeable. Thus, India is exposed to price
fluctuations in the world market and we have
to accept this realityFigure 4.1
India’s Growing Share in Global Energy Consumption
(Higher Projections)
Source: Projections are based on the scenarios of Table 3.7 reflecting a GDP Growth Rate of 8% for
India and for World they are 2030 numbers from IEA, 2005
Figure 4.2
World Oil Prices8. Even when the country has adequate
energy resources, technical failures may disrupt
the supply of energy to some people.
Generators may fail, transmission lines could
trip or oil pipelines may spring leaks. There
may be many such accidents that disrupt the
supply of energy. One needs to provide security
against such technical risks.
4.3 POLICY OPTIONS FOR
ENERGY SECURITY
9. The effectiveness of measures to
enhance energy security depends on the nature
of the disruption. The costs of the various
measures also differ. One wants to minimise
the expected cost for a desired level of
confidence. Such measures include: reduction
in the need for energy and the consequent
reduction in energy imports; diversification of
supply sources; maintenance of strategic reserve;
and obtaining equity oil or gas abroad that
could, under some cases, help in reducing the
consequences of both supply and market risks.
10. Actions to improve energy security
can be classified broadly into two groups, one
that reduces risks and another that deals with
the risks after they occur. The major policy
options are:
(a) Reducing Risks
- Reduce the requirement of energy by
increasing efficiency in production and
use of energy;
- Reduce import dependence by
substituting imported fuels by domestic
fuels;
- Diversify fuel choices and supply
sources;
- Expand domestic energy resource base.
(b) Dealing with Risks
- Increase ability to withstand supply
shocks;
- Increase ability to import energy and
face market risk;
- Increase redundancy to deal with
technical risk.
4.3.1 REDUCE ENERGY REQUIREMENTS
11. Major opportunities exist in reducing
energy requirements without reducing energy
services. Improvement in energy efficiency or
conservation is akin to creating a new domestic
energy resource base. Such efficiency
improvements can be made in energy
extraction, conversion, transmission,
distribution and end-use of energy. All of these
efficiency improvements can come using
currently available commercial technologies.
Some examples are detailed below:
(a) The efficiency of extracting fossil fuels
in India as well as other mining
activities can easily be improved by
some 10%. For fossil fuels this would
mean a lower level of energy spent per
unit of energy extracted.
(b) Fuel efficiency of Coal Power Plants:
The average fuel conversion efficiency
of Indian power plants is just about
30.5% though the new 500 MW plants
have efficiency of 36%. State of the art
super critical pulverised fuel fired
boilers can reach an efficiency level of
46% depending on plant location.
Under Indian conditions an efficiency
level of 38-40% should be attainable.
Considering our large dependence on
coal-based power plants, obtaining this
technology for all new power plants
should be our first target. Possible
policies to achieve this target are:
(i) Purchase technology, if available at
reasonable price otherwise set-up a
technology mission to develop it
independently.
(ii) Offer to buy 20 plants of a standard
size, say 700 MW from any firm
that first commercialises 42%
efficiency coal fired boiler for
Indian coals at a price prescribed in
advance.
(c) Another major option is provided by
freight traffic. The share of railways in
total tonne kilometre (t-km) of goods
traffic has come down from 70% in
1970-71 to 39% in 2003-04. If the
railway carried 70% of the goods traffictoday, it would carry 300 Bt-km of
additional traffic. Assuming that all of
this goods traffic would have been
carried by Railways using diesel, the
diesel saved in year 2003-04 would have
been around 5 Mt out of a total
consumption of 40 Mt. If all of the
goods traffic was carried by Railways
using electric traction, the diesel saved
would have been around 8 Mt in 2003-
04. Thus a significant saving of diesel is
possible if Railway operations can be
upgraded to win back the haulage lost
to road traffic. The needed policies are:
(i) The monopoly of Container
Corporation (CONCOR) for the
container traffic on railways should
be ended.
(ii) Freight rates should be rationalised
and the cross subsidy to passenger
traffic should be reduced, if not
eliminated.
(iii) Timely delivery of goods should
be guaranteed, preferably by
operating scheduled goods trains
between large cities.
(iv) Dedicated corridors for goods
traffic should be developed,
preferably on electric traction,
between metro cities.
(d) Energy efficiency and demand side
management also have a large scope to
reduce energy requirement. These
include the use of energy efficient
appliances and automobiles, hybrid cars,
energy efficient buildings, efficient
lighting, cogeneration, distributed
generation with Combined Heat and
Power (CHP) use, energy efficient and
well-maintained irrigation pumps,
smokeless improved woodstoves, etc.
The needed specific policy initiatives
are discussed in Chapter VI.
(e) In the long-term, promotion of public
transport in urban areas can
significantly reduce energy
consumption particularly the need for
imported oil and gas. Some advance
actions that can be taken now are as
follows:
(i) Develop effective and attractive
mass transport such as
underground, elevated trains, light
rail, monorail or dedicated bus lanes
in existing metros.
(ii) For medium size cities, make plans
for efficient public transport
corridors to serve future population
and acquire the right of way. Public
transport can then be further
developed as the city develops.
Development of city infrastructure
can be financed by gradually
increasing permissible built up area
or Floor Space Index (FSI) and
auctioning the right to build. Even
existing land owners should be
required to purchase the additional
right to build, if they want to
extend their buildings.
(iii) Congestion charges and parking fees
should be levied in city centres to
discourage the use of private cars.
4.3.2 SUBSTITUTE IMPORTED ENERGY BY
DOMESTIC ALTERNATIVES
12. Energy security can be increased by
reducing the need for imported energy by
substituting it with other forms of energy.
Though this does not reduce the need for total
energy, it reduces import dependence. If the
domestic substitutes increase dependence on
one particular fuel, however, it can increase
domestic supply risk. Conversely, if substitutes
diversify the domestic energy mix, they can
also reduce supply risk particularly if the
substitutes are local renewables. Some
important options include:
(a) Electrification of railways can replace
diesel trains. Of course this calls for
investment in electrification of tracks,
electric locomotives and electricity
generation. However, with crude oil at
US$70 a barrel, electric traction can be
economically attractive on routes with
lower traffic density than before. Such
electrification can lead to the
substitution of imported diesel with
domestic coal.
(b) Wood plantations with a potential of
yielding up to 20 tonnes of wood perhectare per year in a sustainable way
could significantly expand the domestic
energy resource base. Wood can be
burned directly or gasified for power
generation. This would reduce the need
for future gas/coal imports.
(c) Bio-diesel and Ethanol can substitute
diesel and petrol. Bio-diesel becomes
particularly attractive when it is derived
from inedible oilseeds from trees that
need little water and fertiliser and can
thus grow without care on wasteland.
Table 4.1
Sources of India’s Oil Imports – 2004-05
Country Oil Imports % of Total
(Mt) Imports
Middle East Region Iran 9.61 10.03
Iraq 8.33 8.69
Kuwait 11.36 11.85
Neutral Zone 0.15 0.15
Oman 0.14 0.14
Qatar 1.19 1.24
Saudi Arabia 23.93 24.96
UAE 6.43 6.71
Yemen 3.51 3.66
Sub Total 64.64 67.43
Other Regions Angola 2.44 2.55
Brazil 0.29 0.30
Brunei 0.81 0.84
Cameroon 0.35 0.36
Congo 0.14 0.14
Egypt 2.12 2.21
Equador 0.15 0.16
Equitorial Guinea 1.66 1.73
Gabon 0.28 0.29
Libya 1.47 1.53
Malaysia 3.43 3.58
Mexico 2.28 2.38
Nigeria 15.08 15.73
Russia 0.16 0.16
Sudan 0.33 0.34
Thailand 0.27 0.28
Sub Total 31.23 32.57
Total 95.86 100.00Ethanol can be obtained from molasses,
which may have other economically
more paying uses. Ethanol can also be
obtained from other starchy crops and
from cellulosic plant matter. The
competition for using limited land
resources and availability of water pose
the main challenges to increasing the
production of ethanol.
(d) Use of hybrid vehicles and/or of electric
vehicles, cars, scooters and motorbikes
can significantly reduce requirements
of petrol. This requires development
of low weight, high density batteries.
An advantage of such vehicles is that
individuals can adopt this technology
without the development of a
supporting fuel supply network as
would be required by hydrogen or fuel
cell based vehicles.
(e) If hydrogen can be produced as a byproduct of industry or with locally
available energy sources, hydrogen
based vehicles could provide an option
to reduce dependence on oil imports.
(f) Coal can be converted into oil as is
done in South Africa. The technology
is well-developed and in use for years.
Sasol is routinely available at filling
stations along with petro and diesel in
South Africa.
4.3.3 DIVERSIFY SUPPLY SOURCES
13. The impact of a short-term disruption
in the normal source of supply will depend on
how important that source is in our total
import mix. Thus the first measure for
increasing security is to diversify our sources
of supply both domestically as well as for the
import of oil or gas. India currently imports
oil from many different countries as can be
seen from Table 4.1. While we import oil from
25 different countries, nearly two-thirds of our
imports are from four countries, i.e. Saudi
Arabia, Nigeria, Kuwait and Iran.
14. Energy security can be increased not
only by diversifying sources of import of a
particular fuel but also by diversifying the
energy mix by using different types of fuels.
An economy that uses coal, oil, gas, nuclear,
hydro and renewables of various kinds is
naturally less dependent on one particular fuel,
and hence less vulnerable to supply disruptions
of either domestic or imported energy sources.
The security provided by such diversification
is enhanced when the ability of the users to
switch among fuels increases. One should assess
the uses in which different fuels or energy
forms can substitute each other. In an
emergency if rationing of a particular fuel is
needed, this process can be made less costly by
encouraging the use of substitutes by specific
users. This can also have a bearing on the size
of the strategic reserve that one needs.
15. Apart from sourcing oil or LNG
imports from different countries, supply risks
can also be reduced by policy coordination
among importing and exporting countries, by
importing gas through pipelines, or getting
hydropower from neighbouring countries.
Many countries in India’s neighbourhood have
very large resources of natural gas. Among
these are Iran, Turkmenistan, Bangladesh and
Myanmar. Turkmenistan’s gas can be
augmented by gas from Uzbekistan,
Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and the Astrakhan
littoral on the Russian shore of Caspian sea.
Developing such a supply chain poses geopolitical challenges. Payoffs are large and
attempts must be made to overcome such
obstacles. However, gas imports through transnational pipelines raise their own issues
concerning energy security.
(a) Policy Coordination: Not only
importers but also exporters benefit
from stable prices. Major Asian oil
importers like India, China, Japan,
Republic of Korea and major Asian
suppliers like Saudi Arabia, UAE,
Kuwait, Iran, Qatar and Oman all have
a stake in securing oil supply and
demand. A cooperative relationship -
perhaps under an Asian Energy
Association - can help in reducing
fluctuations in oil supply and prices.
(b) Import of Gas Through Pipelines:
Gas imports from, say, Iran through
Pakistan, or from Central Asia through
Afghanistan and Pakistan or fromMyanmar through Bangladesh do
provide a higher degree of energy
security compared to equity oil or gas.
This is so because of the security of
such supply. The supplying country
typically invests in the pipeline and
hence has a stake in maintaining the
supply. Also, if supply to India is
stopped, alternate buyers along the
route may be difficult to find and the
pipeline cannot be easily diverted like,
for example, a LNG ship. Thus the
risk of disruption from the supplier is
relatively smaller. There is, however,
the risk of sabotage of the pipeline as it
transits through different countries.
This can be guarded against by the
following:
(i) Create an interest in the pipeline
for all countries through which it
transits. For example, a common
pipeline shared by India and
Pakistan will have substantial gains
for Pakistan too. There are
economies of scale that reduce costs
for Pakistan over the alternative of
obtaining gas through a pipeline of
its own. Also Pakistan would earn
transit fees. With this, a disruption
should it occur, would likely be of
a short duration.
(ii) Get multilateral agencies to invest
in the project by way of equity
and debt.
(iii) Enlarge the domestic buffer stock
of LNG, have redundancy in
regasification facilities and ensure
that, in the case of a disruption,
the supplier would be obligated to
provide compensatory supply in
the form of LNG. Such additional
buffer stock can only be justified
as cost of energy security.
(c) Import of LNG: Importing LNG
through long-term contracts provides a
flexible alternative to pipelines. Since
the global gas market has developed
and LNG trade has increased, the price
of natural gas is likely to match the
opportunity cost of selling it as LNG.
Thus, the cost advantage of piped gas is
not likely to be very large and has to
be balanced against the risks of pipeline
discussed above.
(d) Import of Hydro-Power Through
Nepal/Bhutan: Substantial scope exists
for import of hydro-power from Nepal
and Bhutan. Their combined potential
is estimated to be in excess of 55,000
MW. This could enhance energy
security as hydro-power (which is
particularly suited for meeting peak
power demand) can replace natural gasbased generators which are also used
for peaking purposes. The problem of
arriving at an agreement on the price
of power needs to be resolved. The
development of a market for power
trading in the country provides a
benchmark that should make this task
simpler. Nepal and Bhutan may be
given the right to sell power to anyone
on the market to ease this process.
4.3.4 EXPAND RESOURCE BASE AND DEVELOP
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SOURCES
16. Our resource base can be expanded in
many ways: enhance recovery from existing
resource bases; explore to find new reserves;
obtain equity energy abroad; and develop new
sources of energy through R&D.
(a) Enhanced Recovery: Enhanced oil, gas
and coal recovery from existing fields
is an obvious option. India’s recovery
of in-place reserves can improve easily
by 5-10 percentage points. Better mine
design and the use of technologically
advanced mining techniques are valid
options. In the case of oil and gas,
Improved Oil Recovery (IOR) and
Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR)
techniques can improve exploitation of
in-place reserves. Recovery of oil and
gas from abandoned and/or marginal
fields may also be taken up. However,
the cost of such recovery should be
balanced against the total amount of
oil or gas that may be recovered from
the field.
(b) In-situ Coal Gasification: Similarlyfor coalfields, in-situ gasification may
permit much higher recovery of coal
than can be economically mined by
conventional techniques. Technology
development for in-situ gasification
should be vigorously pursued and entry
barriers for gasification removed.
(c) Coal Bed Methane: Methane is
adsorbed in coal seams. This Coal Bed
Methane (CBM) usually escapes into
the atmosphere when coal is mined.
Tapping and utilising the CBM as a
source of commercial energy has been
in vogue in the US and Australia for
several years. The estimated potential
of CBM in India is in the range of
1400-2600 billion cu. metres (BCM)
(1260-2340 Mtoe). The Government
formulated a CBM policy in 1997 and
the development of CBM is a
concurrent responsibility of the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
and the Ministry of Coal. So far, 13
blocks have been awarded through
competitive bidding and 3 blocks by
nomination to various PSUs/private
companies for exploration and
production of CBM. The estimated
CBM resources in these blocks are 850
bcm (765 Mtoe) and a total production
of about 23 MMscmd at peak
production level is expected from these
blocks. In addition to this, the Ministry
of Coal - with the assistance of UNDP/
GEF - is implementing a CBM
Recovery and Utilisation
Demonstration Project in the Jharia
coalfields under the Coal Science &
Technology programme. Promotion of
CBM exploration and production is
essential to expanding the domestic
resource base in the short to mediumterm.
(d) Exploration: Efforts can be stepped
up to find new reserves. Recent success
by private as well as public sector
companies such as Reliance and Gujarat
State Petroleum Corporation Ltd. in
finding gas shows the need to attract
more players in exploration in the
country. Exploration for all energy
resources - coal, oil, gas and Uranium
- should be stepped up. Offshore wind
energy potential should also be mapped.
(e) Equity Oil, Gas, Coal from Other
Countries: Obtaining equity oil abroad
does not particularly increase oil
security beyond diversification, if any,
of supply sources. The political risk of
disruption of the supply of equity oil
through embargos or nationalisation
etc., would be similar to risk entailed
in oil import from the same country.
It also provides a right to a resource
for a period that is typically longer
than that provided by options and
futures contracts. To the extent that
India owns that oil abroad, whether it
is brought to India or sold in the
international market, the value remains
the same. Thus obtaining equity oil
abroad should be mainly looked upon
as a commercial investment decision. If
the amount of money invested in
obtaining equity oil were to earn a
higher return in an alternate
investment, then such investment
provides a better level of comfort for
accessing oil at even higher prices in
the future. Equity oil, however, does
increase the country’s access to imports
in the same way as a long-term supply
commitment. Thus we should explore
and seize economically attractive
opportunities for equity energy abroad.
However, such investments must factor
in all country, political and logistic
risks. A simple way to ensure an
independent oversight of the technoeconomic viability of a new investment
would be to require that it raises at
least two-thirds of the funding required
through off-shore commercial loans/
equity on a stand-alone basis without
recourse to sovereign guarantees and
without recourse to the balance sheets
of India’s national energy companies.
(f) Using Energy Abroad: In case India
can get access to cheap gas in gas surplus
countries, it could consider setting up
captive energy intensive units such as
fertiliser plants in these countries.Alternatively, India could set up captive
liquefaction plants to bring LNG into
the country.
(g) Coal to Oil: Rising oil prices in the
world market makes conversion of coal
to oil economically attractive. Sasol
claims that its technology for
converting South African coal to liquids
is viable if crude oil stays above US$45/
barrel. India should establish the
viability of Sasol technology with
domestic coal and establish the breakeven price at which coal to liquids
would make sense for Indian coal.
Another step in this direction would
be the inclusion of coal to oil
conversion in the list of captive use
under Section 3(3) of the Coal Mines
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973, so that
dedicated coal blocks could be allocated
for this purpose.
(h) Gas to Liquid (GTL): In addition to
sourcing piped natural gas and LNG,
natural gas liquids may be another
option. Major investments are being
planned for conversion of gas to liquid
in countries with large gas reserves
viz., Qatar, Nigeria and Australia. India,
with strong political ties with Russia
and CIS countries, can consider setting
up GTL plants in these countries under
long-term arrangements wherein India
gets a share of the produced liquids.
However, a comprehensive study to
evaluate technology, available resources
and the economics involved is necessary
prior to entering into any collaborative
arrangement.
(i) New Domestic Sources: The domestic
resource base can also be expanded
through developing hitherto poorly
developed or new sources of energy.
Some of these resources may require
R&D to make them economical.
Among these are:
(i) Nuclear Power: With meagre
availability of Uranium in the
country and vast resources of
Thorium, any long-term nuclear
strategy has to be based on
Thorium. The three stage strategy
of development of nuclear power
from pressurised heavy water based
reactors to fast breeder reactors to
Thorium based reactors requires a
sustained R&D effort. Success in
these efforts could deliver some
2,50,000 MW of nuclear power by
2050 and much more thereafter.
Given the limited resources of oil,
gas and Uranium, solar energy and
Thorium based nuclear option are
the only two sizeable sources (apart
from fusion) of energy for the
country. Thus, the Thorium option
must be pursued. Failure to
economically develop India’s
Thorium based nuclear potential
to the fullest will significantly
increase India’s dependence on
domestic and imported coal.
Nuclear power will not only
enhance energy security but also
yield rich dividends by reducing
carbon emissions.
(ii) Gas Hydrates: Very large reserves
exist in Indian waters and have the
potential to provide vast amount
of gas. Technology to exploit these
economically in ecologically safe
ways is yet to be developed.
However, the potential size of the
resource makes it critical to
vigorously pursue R&D.
(iii) Wind: The potential for onshore
wind power has been assessed to
be 45,000 MW. The Wind Energy
Society of India claims it to be as
high as 65,000 MW. However,
given that the average capacity
factor realised by India’s wind farms
is only about 17%, the total
contribution to energy from these
plants would be relatively small.
Thus while wind power may be
pursued for environmental and
economic reasons, its contribution
to energy security will remain very
limited. Off-shore wind power
potential has not yet been assessed.
As mentioned above such5
 Pachauri, R.K. (2005): Addressing the Challenge of Energy Security. A report prepared for the Asian
Development Bank by The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), New Delhi.
assessments should be taken up
immediately.
(iv) Solar: Solar energy, if it can be
economically exploited constitutes
a major energy resource for the
country. Solar electricity generated
through either the thermal route
or using photovoltaic cells provides
comparable amounts of electricity
per unit of collector area. Both
methods currently provide about
15% conversion efficiency. While
it is clear that the ratio of capital
cost to the efficiency of energy
conversion needs to be brought
down significantly, solar thermal
and solar photovoltaic routes to
electricity generation remain
attractive alternatives to enhance
India’s energy security. Nanotechnology holds the hope for
making a major breakthrough in
solar photovoltaic technology. It is
stressed here that solar water
heating is cost effective for India
even today and can reduce India’s
demand for oil, gas and coal if
pursued to meet the hot water
demand in industry and households.
(v) Energy Plantations: Growing fuel
wood for running power plants
either directly or after gasification
can save the coal or gas used for
generating power. Since the
country’s energy needs are growing,
imports of coal and LNG are also
likely to grow. Fuel wood
plantations can help improve
energy security. The scope for such
plantations is substantial. For
example, if 10 million hectares of
wasteland can be converted to fuel
wood plantations with a sustained
yield of 200 Mt of wood per year,
it would obviate the need for some
200 Mt of domestic coal. Moreover
since wood is a renewable fuel, no
net carbon emission takes place.
Thus all compensatory afforestation
should be made in the form of
energy plantations to improve
India’s energy security.
4.3.5 INCREASE ABILITY TO WITHSTAND
SUPPLY SHOCKS
17. Once imports are minimised and
diversified, the shortage due to disruption of
supply from any one country will be small and
can be dealt with by maintaining a strategic
reserve. A stock of oil can be kept either in
storage tanks or in the form of ability to get
higher output from existing wells at short
notice.
18. If the supply disruption is total, such
as might occur through a blockade in a situation
of conflict, the size of the buffer stock needed
would depend on the expected length of supply
disruption. In today’s world local wars are not
likely to last beyond a few weeks often due to
the interventions by the world community.
Thus the size of the buffer stock need not be
very large. Pachauri (2005)5
 argues as follows:
“Strategic reserves of crude oil and
petroleum products were first
recognised as a policy tool in the
aftermath of first oil shock in 1973.
Major industrialised nations got
together and formed the International
Energy Agency (IEA), which was
charged with the task of coordinating
the purchase of oil during a future
shock and of coordinating the draw
down of reserves during the hour of
crisis. Currently, IEA member
countries hold strategic stocks of about
90 days of net imports and there are
already talks of increasing the cover to
120 days. Strategic reserves do not come
cheap. According to an estimate
prepared by the Engineers India
Limited (EIL), the capital cost of
building a strategic reserve of 5 Mt of
crude oil at Rajkot (2.5), Mangalore
(1.5) and Vishakhapatnam (1.0) are
Rs.1225.2 crores with a mixture ofconcrete tanks and rock caverns. The
maintenance cost of these facilities is
calculated as 29.3 crores. This excludes
the cost of crude”. (At $70/barrel 5 Mt
of crude equivalent to about 14 days of
net imports is estimated to cost
Rs.11,545 crore)
“No extensive exercise has been done
evaluating the benefits of Strategic
Petroleum Reserve (SPR) for India.
APEC (APEC, 2000) concluded
“emergency oil stocks could be the
most effective means for minimising
the economic cost of interrupted
supplies and high oil prices”. (APEC –
Emergency oil stocks and Energy
Security, Tokyo March 2000). It further
said that this was true for a large
economy or a group of economies.
Similar conclusion was reached by
Leiby and Bowman (The Value of
Expanding the U.S. Strategic Petroleum
Reserve, Paul N. Leiby 7 David
Bowman, Oak ridge National
Laboratory, November 2000) who
concluded that benefits from expanding
the size of reserves for the US economy
are enormous”.
“The strategic reserves of crude oil/
petroleum products, held by developed
countries serve as a global common
good. Draw down of such reserves
during a crisis has an impact on the
world oil market, which is integrated
to a fair extent. Thus, poorer countries
can reap the benefits of strategic reserves
without holding it. Otherwise also, it
seems practical to have regional strategic
reserves that would not only entail
lower costs but will also expand the
possible benefits among many
countries. Regional cooperation in
South Asia in this respect can be
fruitful. For a country like India, given
the uncertainty about benefits, it may
be more economical to hold the
minimum reserves required to tide over
very short-term supply disruptions”.
19. These arguments suggest a strategic oil
reserve of around 30 days at mostHowever
an oil reserve of 90 days is maintained by
many countries, which they also use as a
buffer stock against price fluctuations. We
might use that as a thumb rule for our strategic
plus buffer stock reserve. Such a reserve can
also provide enough room to curtail domestic
needs by switching over to alternate fuels,
rationing to restrict some uses and promoting
thrift thereby making it possible to manage a
longer supply disruption. The effectiveness of
such a reserve can be increased if it is a part of
regional reserve or is cooperatively operated
with reserves of other countries such as the
IEA member countries.
4.3.6 INCREASE ABILITY TO IMPORT ENERGY
AND FACE MARKET RISKS
20. To guard against the market risk of a
sudden price increase, we need to keep our
energy import bill within a certain proportion
of our foreign exchange earnings or maintain a
stock of foreign exchange to address volatility.
21. Options contracts and the futures
market can be used to reduce the risk of price
volatility. If the energy market is competitive
then managers can be expected to use these
instruments to reduce their risk. Even then,
for public sector management, special schemes
may have to be designed to provide incentives
to minimise import costs. However, options
and futures may not be available over a long
duration. Equity oil or gas holdings abroad
may provide better security against sudden
price increases.
22. A buffer stock can also help in reducing
the impact of short-term volatility in prices.
As pointed out above its effectiveness increases
when it is worked cooperatively with reserves
of other countries.
4.3.7 INCREASE REDUNDANCY TO DEAL WITH
TECHNICAL RISK
23. The obvious solution against technical
risks is to provide redundancy. For example,
electrical networks minimise probability of a
loss of load by providing alternate routes.
Similarly, power plants carry standby capacity
or a spinning reserve to address the technicalrisk of same station going off the grid or of a
sudden increase in demand. Some redundancy
must be built into the design of all energy
installations to address such technical risks.
4.4 ENERGY SECURITY FOR THE
POOR
24. Even when the country has adequate
energy and even when there are no technical
failures, the poor may not get clean energy.
The issues and policies for providing energy
security to the poor are discussed later in
Chapter VIII.
4.5 POLICIES AND INITIATIVES
FOR ENERGY SECURITY
25. India’s energy security concerns have,
thus far, been largely defined by a narrow
focus on supply disruptions and the consequent
need to increase redundancy in our stocks of
crude oil and petroleum products through the
creation of a strategic storage. In reality, India’s
energy security concerns go well beyond a
narrow focus on a likely supply disruption in
our crude oil imports. India’s energy security,
at its broadest level, has to do with the
continuous availability of primary commercial
energy at a competitive price to fuel our
economic growth and to provide reliable access
to modern forms of primary and secondary
energy and energy services needed for lifeline
support to over 50% of our population which
lacks access to any form of commercial energy
barring the unreliable and often costly supply
of PDS kerosene primarily for lighting. Again,
energy security requires that such access to
lifeline energy be ensured even if it requires
directed subsidies.
26. We have discussed how to reduce risk
to our energy security by way of policies
aimed at reducing our energy requirements
and import dependence (through efficient
production, transmission, distribution and use
of energy, development of efficient energy
markets, instituting well-targeted “lifeline”
entitlements, and diversifying/expanding the
domestic resource base using commercial or
near-commercial technologies). India’s ability
to effectively manage such risks can only grow
with her rising economic and political stature
in the World economy. Yet, there are certain
additional policies that can be instituted to
enhance our energy security. These are:
 A legal claim to energy resources abroad
can marginally enhance India’s energy
security to the extent that such a claim
increases the diversity of supply sources.
Equity oil and gas abroad are being
currently pursued. The Planning
Commission, recognising the looming
coal import requirements, has been,
emphasising equity coal for the past
three years in order to further increase
the diversity of supply of fuels.
Nonetheless, these acquisitions should
be primarily assessed as commercial
investments. Thus, while the
Government must aggressively support
acquisition of energy assets overseas,
companies active in this field must be
forced to securitise the assets with
international funding instead of the
current practice of acquisitions based
on 100% equity. The process of
securitisation essentially creates an
interest of other investors in the cash
flow anticipated from the asset being
acquired. This will not only provide
independent oversight on the quality
of such acquisitions but also strengthen
our legal claim over these assets under
extreme situations.
 Another mitigating policy could be to
diversify imported fuels as well as the
sources of such imports. Today, almost
100% of our energy import is in the
form of crude oil with 67% being
sourced from the Middle East. A
strategy to import larger quantities of
Gas, LNG, coal, ore emulsion, ethanol
etc, as additional energy sources should
be considered. Further, imports from
other countries can be enhanced for
strategic diversification of supply
sources.
 Power plants at coastal locations should
be set up with captive jetties to run on
imported coal.
 If and when the gas pipeline from Iranmaterialises, we may have a sudden
increase in supply of natural gas of
nearly 30 Mtoe a year. After meeting
the feedstock requirement for fertiliser
and chemical plants, the temptation
will be to use this increased supply for
power generation. Advance planning
should be done to use this gas in more
appropriate ways such as in distributed
generation and CHP applications where
we can get an efficiency of 80% or
more.
 India currently has stocks equal to
about 85 days of requirement excluding
line-pack and the strategic stocks for
the defence department that are
maintained by Indian oil. However,
these stocks are more in the nature of
raw material and finished good
inventories (for which facilities had
been built during the comfortable cost
plus regime) and not in the nature of
strategic reserves. Internationally, a 90-
day strategic reserve is considered
adequate for providing security against
short-term supply disruption and/or
extreme price spikes. India could
earmark part of the available storage
capacity with oil companies as strategic
reserve controlled by the Government.
Japan follows this practice and requires
its oil companies to carry and maintain
a strategic reserve. Additional strategic
storage may also be built to supplement
such mandated strategic reserves.
Regional cooperation in South Asia in
this respect can be fruitful. For a
country like India, given the
uncertainty about benefits, it may be
more economical to hold the minimum
reserves required to tide over very
short-term supply disruptions.India has to depend on a mix of
different fuels to meet its energy requirement.
The opportunities and economics for
substitution vary with place, time and
application. To ensure that options selected by
individuals and firms lead to an efficient strategy
for the country, appropriate policies need to
be followed within an integrated framework
and in the context of the emerging backdrop
detailed below.
5.1 THE EMERGING BACKDROP
2. Energy for Growth: The discussion
in Chapters I through IV provides the necessary
backdrop to the Energy Policy Options/
Initiatives that India needs to pursue. India has
committed herself to eradicating poverty and
empowering its people with education and
health. Given that the population is expected
to reach 1.47 billion by 2031-32, and the fact
that sizeable part of India’s population, today,
is living below the poverty line, rapid growth
rates of around 8% per annum over the next
25 years are essential for attaining these goals.
To fuel a sustained 8% annual growth, our
energy scenario faces major challenges. Even a
conservative projection of India’s energy needs
to fuel this level of economic growth requires
that basic capacities in the energy sector and
related physical infrastructure such as rail, ports,
roads and water grow by factors of 3 to 7
times by 2031-32 alongside a 20-fold increase in
nuclear and a 40-fold increase in renewable
energy. If we cannot assure supply at even the
conservatively projected levels of commercial
energy (1.35 to 1.70 billion tonne oil equivalent
by 2031-32 compared to the 2003-04 level of
327 Mtoe), we will not be able to grow at 8%
per annum. This level of commercial energy
consumption yields a growth in total energy
consumption that ranges from 4.3% per annum
to 5.1% per annum over the 2003-04 level of
consumptionHoweverto supply the energy
needed, it is essential that India, once again
gives energy the same importance it was given
in the first 30 years of its planned development.
With the current emphasis on market driven
growth, this implies that India must make a
deliberate effort to create an enabling
environment that attracts the required
investments into energy and related
infrastructure, and an environment that exploits
the synergy of public private partnership.
3. “Lifeline” Energy for All: Access to
safe, clean, convenient and reliable energy is
vital for people’s well-being. Clean cooking
energy is essential for freeing women and girls
from the burden of indoor air pollution and
the drudgery of long hours spent in gathering
fuel wood and dung. Clean cooking energy is
thus also a tool for empowering girls and
women to pursue education and enriched
livelihoods. Again, a minimum amount of
electricity is essential to remove darkness,
extend working hours and raise productivity.
However, even when safe, clean and convenient
energy is available, the poor may not be able
to pay for it at market prices. No progressive
government can ignore its responsibility to
provide a “lifeline” level of energy inputs in
the form of electricity and clean cooking fuel.
Such lifeline consumption is an essential part
of energy security for India’s people. Further,
such lifeline consumption would need to be
subsidised for some consumers till income levels
rise to make such consumption affordable for
all households. The good news is that such
lifeline consumption does not require more
than 75-80 billion kilowatt hours of electricity
(BkWh) (about 12-13% of net electricity
generation in 2004-05) and some 16-17 Mtoe of
LPG (about 4.5 to 5.0% of the 2004-05 level of
commercial energy consumption). Further, it
can be said that currently not more than 75%
of the lifeline consumption of electricity (60
Energy Policy Options/InitiativesBkWh) and some 85% of LPG (13 Mtoe) needs
to be subsidised to varying degrees. These
percentages will fall relative to our total
consumption over time. However, in absolute
amounts, these numbers are not likely to exceed
these levels of magnitude as consistent growth
at 8% should reduce poverty levels and raise
capacity to pay to effectively negate the impact
of population growth. What is essential, though,
is efficient targeting which ensures that: (a)
only lifeline level consumption is subsidised;
and (b) the subsidy is enjoyed only by those
who cannot afford to pay for such lifeline
consumption at market prices. However, even
with full electrification and targeted subsidies
on commercial fuels for cooking, India’s
reliance on traditional non-commercial energy
sources will rise in absolute terms to some 185
Mtoe in 2031-32 from the current level of
about 150 Mtoe even as the share of total
primary non-commercial energy consumption
falls from about 30% to 10-12%. If we succeed
in providing clean commercial fuels to
households as proposed, this bio-mass would
increasingly get diverted for industrial use and/
or power generation.
4. Role of Different Fuels: Given India’s
limited resources of oil, gas, Uranium and
hydro-power, it needs to develop all
economically viable sources of energy. The
integrated analysis of various energy resources
and supply options reveals that even under
aggressive growth assumptions for hydro (5
times current levels) and nuclear (20 times
current levels), the contributions from the two
together cannot exceed 8-10% of commercial
energy supply in 2031-32. However, both hydro
and nuclear remain strategically important;
hydro for providing much needed peaking
support and storage capacity for water and
nuclear to work towards India’s energy
independence in the long-run based on
Thorium. Renewable energy, even when it
rises to 40 times its current level will, at best,
meet only about 5 to 6% of India’s commercial
energy demand by 2031-32. Despite this,
renewables remain important from the point
of view of increasing our domestic resource
base. Fossil fuels maintain their domination in
India just as in other parts of the world. The
share of coal varies between 41% and 54% and
that of oil and gas together between 32% and
41% of total energy. Abundant Thorium and
solar resources might become important sources
for India beyond 2050 provided we promote
R&D now to be able to realise this potential in
the future. Under the most optimistic scenarios
for hydro, renewable and nuclear growth, and
domestic supply levels for coal (3.8 times
current levels), oil (3 times current levels) and
gas (more than 5 times current levels), India’s
import dependence for commercial energy, in
2031-32, would range from a low of about 29%
in the most energy efficient scenario to about
59% in the most energy intensive scenario.
Realistically speaking, it is likely that India
would need to import some 40-45% of its
commercial energy requirement compared to
the current level of under 30%. Domestic
commercial energy supplies will then need to
rise four times in aggregate over the next 25
years if import dependence for commercial
energy is not to exceed 40%.
5. India’s Energy Intensity: The energy
intensity of India’s growth has been falling and
though it is currently about half what it used
to be in the early seventies, there remains
significant room to improve. Improvement in
energy intensity creates a virtual source of
energy by reducing the total energy needed to
sustain a given level of growth. While
differences in the structures of different
economies may result in different energy
intensities, available data clearly shows that
energy intensity can be brought down
significantly in India with commercial
technologies that are currently available. The
country must endeavour to do so at the earliest.
6. India’s Energy Demand in the Global
Context: Putting India’s likely energy demand
in 2031-32 in a global perspective, one sees that
China’s current energy consumption is 1100-
1200 Mtoe and USA’s current consumption is
2400-2500 Mtoe. In comparison, India
consumed about 348 Mtoe of commercial
energy in 2004-05. With a projected population
of just under 1.47 billion in 2031-32, India’s
per capita energy consumption (based on the
mid point of the range of scenarios developed
in Chapter III) will be marginally above China’s
current per capita consumption or be aboutone seventh of the current US per capita
consumption. What this means is that India on
per capita basis, currently consumes under 6%
of what the US consumes and under 41% of
what China consumes and will, by 2031-32,
consume just under 15% of current US
consumption levels and equal China’s current
per capita consumption. More importantly,
India’s per capita energy consumption that is
less than 27% of 2003-04 level of global average
energy consumption, shall in 2031-32 also
remain just about 74% of the current global
average. On simple considerations of equity
alone, therefore, India cannot be denied this
level of energy consumption by 2031-32.
7. On an incremental basis, assuming the
world’s fossil fuel supply grows at about 2%,
India’s incremental fossil fuel demand will
account for 21% of the incremental world
supply of fossil based commercial energy by
2031-32 in the most fossil fuel intensive scenario.
In the least fossil fuel intensive scenario, India’s
incremental share of the incremental world
supply of fossil fuel based commercial energy
will be 13% by 2031-32. India’s share of world
supplies of fossil fuels in 2031-32 would rise
from a level of 3.7% to a low of 7.6% in the
most energy efficient scenario and 10.9% in
the most energy intensive scenario. It is pointed
out that it is this incremental demand from
India when coupled with the much higher
incremental demand from China that is cited
as putting pressure on fuel prices and is raising
apprehensions in the world community. The
fact is that the incremental US demand for oil
was twice that of India and China’s was twice
that of US over 2000 to 2004. The real issue is
not the incremental demand from India but
the dire need to curb consumption and realise
life style changes in the developed world. If
India is to be denied even the modest levels of
energy consumption cited in Paragraph 6 even
in 2031-32 then we can forget about eradicating
poverty or meeting the millennium
development goals. Further, if the energy
consumption levels in the developed world are
not brought down significantly the climate
change goals shall never be met irrespective of
the growth in Indian demand. Finally, the 8%
GDP growth trajectory is as important to
reducing poverty in India as it is to enable
India to absorb technologies and policies that
lower its energy intensity.
8. Growth in a Constrained Energy
Market: Irrespective of the final level of
demand, India’s growing demand for
commercial energy supply has to be seen in
the context of a tightening global energy market
with rising prices and stagnant outputs. The
world oil demand is expected to grow from
the current level of 81-82 million barrels per
day to 110 million barrels a day by 2020 at a
growth rate of 1.8% per annum. Nearly 65%
of crude oil is traded across borders. The
world gas production is expected to rise from
2420 Mtoe to 3418 Mtoe by 2020 at a growth
rate of 2.2% per annum. However, less than
25% of gas is traded across borders either
through pipelines (natural gas) or to a lesser
extent as LNG (30% of the total gas trade).
The US production of oil peaked in 1970 and
North American gas production is widely
believed to have peaked in 2000. The world oil
and gas production are expected to peak in the
2010-15 and 2015-2020 time frames respectively.
The growth in the demand of primary energies,
over time, has not lead in the past to an
exhaustion of reserves because the right price
signals lead to new, more competitive, sources
of energy that take their place. Nevertheless,
the uncertainties of energy markets, particularly
in moving supplies to where they are needed,
coupled with the long lead times of new
investments in developing new and alternate
reserves/sources of primary energy and adding
corresponding refining/liquefaction/
transportation capacities reinforce the view that
the supply-demand balance for oil and gas is
likely to remain tight for the foreseeable future.
Even if this is considered to be a pessimistic
outlook, India should be prepared for it.
9. The common belief that current prices
of oil are high is only true in nominal terms.
If one looks at historical oil prices in constant
2005 dollars then the recent average of about
$55-60 per barrel is comparable to the average
price of US$53.50 that prevailed between 1974-
1985. In fact, in comparable 2003 dollars oil
prices were at an all time high of $80 a barrel
in 1980 and were at $72 a barrel during the
four year period 19791982These facts arebehind the low impact that currently nominally
high oil prices are having on global inflation
and the predictions of higher prices to come.
10. It is thus of utmost importance that
alternatives to oil which are based on domestic
resources are pushed. Energy efficiency, energy
conservation, development of substitutes and
R&D to make them economically viable should
get high priority. Some of the possibilities are
identified in Section 3.4.
11. Coal Remains India’s Most Important
Energy Source, Gas Share Remains Low:
Coal emerges as the most important energy
source for India accounting for not less than
41% of our energy mix under any scenario and
potentially reaching 54% of the energy mix
under certain scenarios. Even at the 41% level,
India will need 1.6 billion tonnes (about 4
times the current production). At the higher
share requirement could rise to 2.5 billion
tonnes (over 6 times the current production)
of coal from domestic sources. The additional
coal requirement from domestic sources will
be even higher if the past trend of falling
domestic coal quality is not arrested. India
could also import 250 to 500 Mt of superior
coal to reduce local coal requirement by 375 to
750 Mt per annum. It is pointed out, however,
that currently only about 700-800 Mt of coal is
internationally traded. Associated port and rail
handling would have to rise in capacity to
achieve any of the above scenarios. Gas under
various scenarios is seen to account for only
5.5% to 11% of our energy mix in 2031-32.
Achieving a gas share in the 10-11% range in
India’s energy mix presumes successful
development of the Krishna-Godawari (KG)
basin potential, exploitation of coal bed
methane and success with trans-national gas
pipelines and LNG imports. Clearly India’s
policy framework must recognise the preeminence of coal and the importance of getting
the required technology to maximally exploit
the large in-place reserves of coal.
12. Development of New Sources:
Depending upon the level of increase in
domestic coal production to meet growing
demand, India’s currently known reserves of
extractable coal will not last beyond 45 years
Thus, we have to stretch out our energy
resources as much as we can by promoting
energy efficiency and conservation. To augment
our energy resources, we should also promote
the development of new sources of energy.
13. Energy Coordination Committee:
The above backdrop and the discussions in the
previous four chapters establish: (i) the
inescapable dependence of growth across all
sectors of the economy (including social sectors)
on the assured availability of energy supplies at
competitive prices; (ii) the existence of cross
cutting issues impacting various sub-sectors of
energy and the related infrastructure for its
production and delivery; (iii) the massive
investment needs of the sector for increasing
domestic supply and ensuring energy security
for all; (iv) the need to raise technology levels
and mounting specific R&D efforts under
mission mode; and (v) instituting targeted
subsidies for lifeline energy needs. These
features and the need for rational pricing &
taxation to promote inter-fuel substitutions,
cost reduction and efficiency gains etc. underline
the need for an integrated energy policy. They
also provide the basis for the Integrated Energy
Policy Committee to support the Planning
Commission’s 10th Plan proposal for “Creation
of an Apex Body on Energy under the
chairmanship of the Prime Minister”. Such a
body at the highest level of government is
essential for operationalising the kind of policy
decisions enumerated below. An “Energy
Coordination Committee”, under the
Chairmanship of the Prime Minister, has
already been created to review and approve
policies for the energy sector as a whole.
5.2 POLICIES COVERING ENERGY
MARKETS, REGULATION,
PRICING, TAXATION,
SUBSIDIES, EXTERNALITIES
AND INSTITUTIONS
14. Meeting Growing Energy Needs in a
Cost-Effective Way: To meet growing energy
needs in an efficient, cost-effective way requires
a policy framework that realises efficiency in
production, transmission, distribution and
consumption of all available types of energy,
and that provides incentives to supply requiredenergy. Promoting transparent and competitive
markets for all forms of energy supplies/services is
the first policy initiative that the government
must take as part of its integrated energy policy.
Such competitive markets provide the best means
to extract efficiency gains from the sector.
15. Having said this, it is also recognised
that in some sectors within the energy sector
(especially power) truly competitive markets
may be difficult and costly to realise. Efficient,
strong and independent regulation can,
however, address this concern effectively.
Transparent and competitive markets that offer
a level playing field to all participants, and are
independently regulated, are essential to the
creation of an enabling environment for
domestic and foreign investment flows from
public and private sources to the energy sector.
Energy efficiency in extraction, conversion,
transmission, distribution and consumption
requires that all players and all energy projects,
public or private, mega projects or micro
projects, domestic or foreign, are treated equally
under a consistent policy framework. Moreover,
appropriate pricing of various energy sources
and services is needed to realise efficient choice
across fuels. The policies to achieve competitive
and transparent markets must recognise the
dominance of large public sector units in most
energy sub-sectors. Many of these PSUs are
financially strong but their strength has been
acquired in a protected public sector
environment. The presence and strength of
dominant and efficient public sector units can
be an asset in the transition to a competitive
set-up as they, through their participation could
provide a starting benchmark that the markets
must better. Some key specific initiatives needed
to support such an overall policy commitment
across the energy sector, and for each of the
energy sub-sectors, are described below.
16. Independent Regulation: Independent
regulation is critical to attaining competitive
efficiency in the energy sector since the sector
is characterised by large economies of scale and
has natural monopoly characteristics in subsectors such as transportation and distribution
networks. It is important that all sub-sectors of
the energy sector are regulated and done so in
a consistent mannerTodayonly the power
sector has a regulatory framework. A Regulator
for the petroleum sector is being established. A
Regulator for coal is also needed. The regulatory
framework must ensure the following:
 To provide genuinely independent
regulation across each sub-sector of the
energy value chain, the regulatory
responsibility/functions of the State
must be separated from the Ministries
that control the PSUs that dominate
the energy sector and are the principal
owners of over 75% of India’s energy
assets and related infrastructure.
 Since domain knowledge is important,
a common Regulator is not
recommended for all energy sub-sectors.
However, to provide cohesion and
consistency of regulation across all
energy sub-sectors, the Regulators
should meet regularly and arrive at the
common principles that emerge from
this Integrated Policy.
 There should be a common appellate
tribunal for all the energy sub-sectors.
 The functioning of regulatory
institutions must be improved by:
• Creating an autonomous
Regulatory Academy
• Institutionalising the selection of
Regulators and their impact
assessment under the Regulatory
Academy
• Mandating training for all
Regulators
• Granting financial autonomy to
regulatory institutions
• Limiting the quasi-judicial role of
Regulators to tariff setting and
dispute resolution
• Providing a system that makes
Regulators accountable to
Parliament
• Mandating annual reports from all
Regulators that detail progress
under and compliance with the
various provisions of the Act they
are regulating
 In order to give independent regulation
a fair chance of success, the governmentshould create the enabling policy
environment for competitive and
transparent markets by eliminating
barriers to entry and removing propublic sector biases.
 It should also be recognised that
regulation and competitive markets are
not substitutes for one another.
Similarly ownership is no guarantee
for efficiency and replacing a public
monopoly by a private one is unlikely
to yield efficiency gains. Privatisation
of dominant public sector enterprises
in the energy sector is likely to be
effective only if a well-regulated and a
competitive market exists/results.
17. Relative Prices for Efficiency: Relative
prices play the most important role in choice
of fuel and energy form. They are thus the
most vital aspect of an Integrated Energy Policy
that promotes efficient fuel choices and
facilitates fuel substitution towards specific
objectives. In a competitive set-up, if the
marginal use value of different fuels which are
substitutes for one another are equal at a given
place and time, and if the prices of different
fuels at different places do not differ by more
than the cost of transporting the fuels, then
the resulting inter-fuel choices will be efficient.
Prices of different fuels cannot be set
independently of each other. However, this is
the current practice and the domestic energy
prices are not only uncompetitive but suffer
from a number of distortions as detailed in
Paragraph 19 below.
18. In perfect markets the relative prices of
different energy supplies and services yield the
most optimal fuel mixes, investment flows and
economic outcomes. At the margin, competing
energy sources providing the same end service
are priced identically per unit of such service
delivered. However, such perfect energy
markets do not exist in most countries. Supply/
resource constraints, priority of domestic
energy resources over imported energy
resources, lack of substitutability, externalities
such as ease of use, differences in achievable
levels of efficiency, differences in specific
investment levels per unit of energy, differences
in environmental impact etc. – all combine to
thwart rational markets for energy. Add to
this mix policies that look upon energy
supplies/services selectively and differently for
purposes such as raising fiscal resources and
providing subsidies; – or politically different
perceptions of what constitutes a long-term
“social good” and what is best for the “national
interest” and what one gets is a recipe for adhoc policies that are, more often than not,
inconsistent. To obtain competitive efficiency
in this environment requires continuous
engagement by policy makers at the seniormost administrative and political levels and a
set of dedicated and fiercely independent
Regulators to achieve near optimal market
behaviour.
19. The Distortions in Pricing Energy in
India: As pointed out earlier, based on
purchasing power parity comparisons, the
Indian consumer pays one of the highest tariffs
in the world6
, for energy supplies/services. At
present in most energy sub-sectors there is
virtually no competition. Despite the
dismantling of the Administered Price
Mechanism in the petroleum sector and price
controls in the coal sector, Government
controls hydrocarbon pricing. The current
policy is to price petroleum products at
international parity without any competition
among incumbents. However, this policy is
not being followed. Further, prices are loaded
with taxes and levies that are not uniform and
lack consistent policy drivers. Access to
petroleum products including subsidised
kerosene meant for the Public Distribution
System is limited. There is a need to examine:
(a) why the so called import parity price is
used for oil products wherein India is a net
exporter; (b) why trade parity prices are not
used; (c) what is the basis on which import
parity is calculated; (d) the practice of burdening
oil marketing with kerosene and LPG subsidies
6 Based on country reports we have calculated that in 2002 the average purchasing power parity price in US
cents per kWh was 30.8 in India, 7.7 in US, 9.5 in Germany, 15.3 in Japan, 20.6 in China and 27.6 in
Brazil.and the leakages in these subsidised products;
and (e) the practice of making upstream
companies share the subsidy burden of oil
marketing companies. Serious entry barriers
remain for new entrants to import products
and market the same freely. Natural gas supplies
are well below current demand levels and
multiple prices prevail in the market. Coal has
been deregulated under a monopoly supplier,
even though the import and transportation
infrastructure for moving coal remains both
deficient and largely in the hand of Government
monopolies. Again there are serious entry
barriers for new entrants wishing to mine coal.
Supplies of coal barely match demand. Power,
a secondary form of commercial energy, is
grossly overpriced (for the paying industrial,
commercial and large domestic consumers) since
over 40% of the energy through put is either
not paid for or bills for it are not collected by
the State utilities. Uranium fuel used in India’s
nuclear plants costs at least three times the
prevailing international prices due to very poor
deposits. Wind power in India delivers only
about 17% capacity factor on average, India’s
hydro sector has been plagued with significant
delays and cost over-runs, and the Himalayan
geology makes siltation a major issue in hydro
development and the realisation of our full
hydro potential thereby affecting costs of hydropower. Non-commercial energy is considered
to be practically free since opportunity costs of
labour spent in collecting firewood or cow
dung and preparing the same are rarely factored
in. Taxes on petroleum products are a key
source of government revenue but not uniform
across products and, finally, differential state
taxes and custom duties on crude and petroleum
products introduce further distortions in energy
pricing in India.
20. While keeping energy prices high has
helped limit demand, it has definitely made
Indian industry, agriculture and commerce less
competitive and has constrained consumption,
both of which subdue economic growth. High
energy prices are akin to a tax burden on the
consumer and the economy. Given India’s
energy supply constraints and its energy
security concerns, national priorities will
require that all available energy resources be
optimally exploitedRational pricing of energy
supplies and services must ensure that: (i)
distortions are removed across all energy and
energy service sub-sectors; (ii) appropriate
priority is given to the development of local
energy resources and related infrastructure; (iii)
energy conservation and energy efficiency are
encouraged; (iv) India’s competitiveness is
raised; and (v) economic growth is spurred.
Key policy principles and initiatives in pricing
energy supplies and services that cut across all
energy sub-sectors of India are enumerated
below.
 As a general rule, all commercial
primary energy sources must be priced
at trade parity prices at the point of
sale. This should be particularly so for
the oil sector where imported crude
provides over 70 percent of domestic
consumption of petroleum products.
Even when the global oil market
dominated by Organisation of the
Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) is not a competitive market,
the trade parity prices reflect India’s
opportunity costs. However, the
domestic economy may have to be
protected against short-term volatility
in the International market caused by
speculators and manipulators. The
government can do this by adjusting
taxes and duties in a revenue neutral
way. An alternative could be to allow
price adjustments based on lagging 1-3
month average prices, thereby forcing
oil companies to use short-term
hedging. Another alternative would be
to use long-term supply contracts linked
to a variety of more stable energy price
indices. Of course any persistent price
change that cannot be absorbed by
change in taxes and duties, should be
passed on to the domestic consumers.
Several arguments are made to maintain
the status quo of import parity pricing
in the oil sector. However, the only
legitimate alternative to trade parity
prices is full price competition at
refinery gate and retail levels in a
competitive environment with low
entry barriers and multiple players.
Once full price competition ispermitted on the inputs as well as the
outputs at all levels and the
Government stops interfering in price
setting, trade parity prices will prevail
and the need for building up costs on
a normative basis with possibilities of
padding up, as is currently being done,
will be obviated and efficiency gains
will emerge in procurement and
marketing. Prices of petroleum
products will also vary across the
country reflecting actual costs and
relative regional strengths of the oil
companies.
 While the above idea works for traded
goods, non-traded goods have to be
handled differently. Prices of non-traded
commercial energy supplies can be
determined through competition
among different producers (this
presumes multiple sources, low entry
barriers, and a competitive supplydemand balance) or independently
regulated on a cost plus basis including
reasonable returns (where competing
supply sources are absent, entry barriers
are high and demand exceeds available
supply). The cost plus regulation must
take into account any realisation that
is achieved out of by-products priced
and sold on competitive terms. To
illustrate this point, the cost plus regime
pricing natural gas in India does not
take the full credit for by-products as it
continues to price the C2
/C3
components of natural gas well below
their traded or competitive prices.
 To trade natural gas either through
trans-national pipelines or as liquefied
natural gas (LNG) requires a large
investment in pipelines or gasification/
regasification facilities (in small
quantities natural gas is nearly nontradable). If sufficient gas is available
such investments may be worthwhile
but carry risks related to long-term
price for LNG. In a competitive set
up, the producers of associated and
non-associated natural gas have the
option of liquefying the gas and
transforming it into a tradable
commodity or, alternatively, piping it
to an export market. Either option
adds cost (inclusive of return on capital
employed) to transform the nontradable natural gas to a tradable
commodity based on investments. The
net-back-realisation by the gas producer
would thus be the price of gas at the
landfall point which makes it possible
for the gas producer to incur the extra
cost of making it tradable and yet
compete effectively in the end market
with other suppliers of natural gas,
LNG or alternate energy forms. This
net-back-price should then become the
minimum price for the domestic user
of such natural gas. At this net-backprice the gas supplier has the choice of
selling gas domestically or taking the
investment risk and exporting the same
through a pipeline or by conversion to
LNG.
 Given limited production of natural
gas in India, economic considerations
may well require that domestically
available gas be made available first to
those end-uses that best extract its
economic value among competing enduses. Such end-uses in India could, for
example, be fertiliser, petrochemicals
CNG vehicles and power in that order.
All of these end-users could compete
for the natural gas available from
domestic sources with a floor price
that would be equivalent to the netback-price that the producer could have
obtained as described above. Under
such a scenario natural gas would first
meet the fertiliser, CNG &
petrochemical demand in full before
reaching the power sector. In reality
this situation is complicated by the
fertiliser subsidy regime and the power
pricing regime both of which allow
pass through of feedstock/fuel costs.
Again gas use may be considered
economically more justified for peaking
power that must be priced differently
but it is not. There is also a Supreme
Court order that requires preferential
allocation of gas for CNG vehicles.Unless these ground realities change
gas may need to be allocated under a
cost plus regulation.
 However, with limited availability of
natural gas, domestic prices in a
competitive set up would reach the
price of imported regasified LNG price
or even exceed it if LNG import
facilities do not exist. Since some of
the priority uses of gas have externalities
(e.g. the lower air pollution due to
CNG buses) in a situation of limited
domestic availability, such a user would
be willing to pay a CNG premium
over diesel, the alternate fuel. To avoid
such distortions, till such time that a
better demand-supply balance emerges,
some allocation of gas to specific uses
along with restraints on the price of
natural gas may be needed. Once
adequate natural gas is available either
through LNG or piped gas imports or
domestic natural gas, the marginal use
in India would likely be power
generation where natural gas will have
to compete with domestic or imported
coal. Of course, a gas-based power plant
can be a peaking plant in which case it
will have to compete against alternative
sources of peaking power. The market
determined price of natural gas would
be one at which power generated using
natural gas would have the same cost
as power generated through the
cheapest alternative which would most
likely be a coal-based plant. New
domestic gas developments and the
Joint Venture fields developed under
New Exploration Licensing Policy
(NELP) rounds would need to take the
foregoing pricing policies into account.
 How should one allocate natural gas in
a shortage? If there were no other
distortions, a competitive market would
be the ideal mechanism. However,
given that a certain degree of selfsufficiency is considered desirable for
domestic fertiliser production,
allocation of natural gas to fertiliser
plants on a priority basis may be
required to ensure adequate domestic
production. Also, as long as fertiliser
producers have feedstock cost as a pass
through gas price determined through
competition would be distorted. The
case for allocating compressed natural
gas to the transport sector is also strong
as long as the Supreme Court’s mandate
continues to require the use of CNG
by buses, taxis and auto-rickshaws. In
the long-run, however, air pollution
should be controlled by stipulating
emission standards and not by
mandating a particular fuel, since air
pollution can also be controlled by use
of clean diesel. There would then be
no need to allocate gas for transport
sector.
 It must be recognised that the bulk of
Indian coal cannot be easily traded.
The Power Sector consumes about 80%
of the domestic coal production. With
an ash content of over 40% and a
calorific value averaging only 3500 kcal/
kg., most of the coal sold to the power
sector would have to be “prepared” to
be made tradable. This would entail
both cost and additional investment.
In international trade, shipping and
handling of coal typically accounts for
30-35% of the cost of coal with an
average calorific value of about 6000
kcal/kg. In India transport and handling
costs can reach 200% to 300% of the
pit head price of coal when moved to
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Goa, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Delhi,
Haryana, Punjab and parts of UP. This
reinforces the need for washing and
preparation of coal by the coal supplier
since high grade energy used for
traction is used to transport a low
grade fuel and useless ash. Further, it
brings into focus the need to gradually
decrease cross subsidies in railways since
the rail freight for coal and other
commodities is higher than what can
be economically justified. Eliminating
cross subsidy surcharges on the
movement of primary energy sources
and other bulk freight items will not
only make energy prices morecompetitive but will also shift freight
traffic from the far less energy efficient
road sector to the railways. Offering
open access to rail lines for private
movers may be another way to make
rail movements more efficient. As a
result of high freight rates imported
coal is competitive at coastal locations
all along India’s Western Coast and
parts of Tamil Nadu.
 The price of coal should vary with
quality and its calorific content. Cost
of production varies with the scale and
technique of production as well as with
geological conditions. A central planner
is highly unlikely to have the needed
information to set prices in a rational
manner. Only a competitive free
market can do an efficient job of price
determination. A competitive market
requires that there is also competition
on the supply side, i.e. that there are
many producers and no entry barriers
to new producers. Entry of new players
in coal mining should be facilitated,
trading of coal should be made
completely free and coal prices should
be left to the market once competing
suppliers come into the market.
 Would this make coal expensive? As
long as there is also competition on
the supply side, coal prices will remain
near the cost of production, including
a reasonable return on investment. New
entrants would whittle away any excess
profits. Even when domestic producers
take time to augment production,
competition from imports will keep
the price in check. At the ports
domestic coal has to compete with
imported coal and the delivered price
of coal calorie cannot exceed the landed
cost of imported coal calorie. This also
puts a natural constraint on coal prices
at mine mouths since they have to be
below the landed cost of imports minus
the transportation cost from mine to
port. If coal is exported, the mine
mouth price cannot exceed FOB price
minus the transport cost.
 Given current ground realities coal
prices cannot be determined in a
competitive market open to all users as
long as there is a single dominant
supplier and the largest coal consuming
sector, i.e. power, operates on a costplus regime making it indifferent to
coal prices. Under the prevailing
conditions, a strategy for competitive
price discovery is possible as follows:
(i) High quality coking and noncoking coal which is exportable
may be sold at trade parity prices
as determined by the import parity
price at the nearest port minus
15%. This practise is currently
being adopted for supply of good
quality coking coal to the steel
industry.
(ii) Twenty percent of the production
may be sold through e-auctions.
Quantities to be sold through eauctions from different mines must
be determined annually with an
independently monitored monthly
mine-wise schedule that is enforced
by an independent coal Regulator.
(iii) The remaining coal should be sold
under long-term Fuel Supply and
Transport Agreements (FSTAs).
Regulated utilities should be
allowed upto 100% of their certified
requirements through FSTAs.
Other bulk consumers may have
to be given partial FSTAs based on
coal availability. Any shortfalls
should be met through e-auction
supplies or imports.
(iv) The pithead price of coal under
FSTAs will have to be revised
annually by a coal regulator on a
basis that inter-alia takes into
account prices obtained through eauctions, the FOB price of
imported coal (both adjusted for
quality) and the production cost
inclusive of return based on
efficiency standards.
(v) Coal prices should be made fully
variable based on Gross Calorific
Value (GCV) and other quality
parameters. A competitive coal market is important
for setting a proper price of natural
gas. This is so because in a market that
does not have any constraints in gas
supply, the marginal use of gas will be
power generation which places it in
competition with coal.
 Entry barriers for new mining
companies must be dismantled, and
time taken for awarding blocks,
granting clearances and opening mines
reduced significantly. India also needs
to invest in port facilities and create
coast based power generation capacities
based on imported coal. These steps
would facilitate trade and benefit from
the discipline of competition that trade
provides. Improved port capacities and
coastal power plants with dedicated
jetties will not only yield competitive
efficiency through imports but can also
facilitate movement of domestic coal
through coastal shipping, thereby
providing a competitive alternative to
the stretched bulk freight capacity of
railways.
 All secondary energy resources should
be priced based on competitive
procurements by the service provider.
Regulators must facilitate multiple
suppliers for all secondary energy
resources and energy services. Where
the service is provided by a natural
monopoly such as a pipeline or a
distribution network, rents must be
independently regulated and, where
possible, competitively procured under
normative and regulated caps. All such
natural monopolies must be pure
common carriers and service providers
with no interest in the content.
21. A competitive price regime can be
established in the power sector once tariff
based bidding becomes the norm during the
11th Plan period. Similarly, prices of petroleum
products at the refinery gate can be freed and
competitively set. However, coal and gas prices
cannot be left to the market till a number of
coal suppliers emerge, gas availability improves,
or till fertiliser prices are deregulatedThus
Regulators are necessary for these sectors to set
prices that will mimic markets as outlined
above.
22. Consistency of Taxes Across Fuels:
Currently Central & State taxes on various
forms of primary and secondary energy are a
significant part of the final price. More
importantly, these taxes are not applied
consistently, thereby resulting in significant
price distortions. Taxes are essential to raising
revenues but the following policies are essential
to ensure that they minimally affect energy
choices:
 Central and State taxes on commercial
energy supplies need to be rationalised
so as to become neutral to fuel choices
and investment decisions. Relative
prices of fuels can be distorted if taxes
and subsidies are not equivalent across
fuels. In other words, taxes and
subsidies should be such that producer
and consumer choices as to which fuel
and which technology to use are not
affected by them.
 The equivalence of taxes across
competing fuels should be uniform with
respect to energy service delivered duly
adjusted for prevailing overall energy
efficiency levels and any other specific
externality relevant to specific fuels.
This would result in the least distortion
as it would take into account effective
calories and the conversion efficiencies
of alternate fuels.
 Making the energy sector fully
“Vatable” or rationalising taxes and
eliminating differential taxation by State
Governments can reduce distortions.
 Eliminating custom duty differentials
on crude and petroleum products,
differential levies on alternate fuels,
removing or applying a uniform low
custom duty on all imports for energy
sector projects/investments/supplies are
other measures critical to rationalising
taxes in order to minimise distortions
in energy markets. This can be done in
a revenue neutral way. Removal of misplaced incentives such
as those available to Mega Power
Projects is needed. While the rest of
the world is recognising the higher
efficiency of distributed generating
facilities, India is providing incentives
to Mega Projects. Consequently, State
Governments opt for Mega projects
that claim the incentives and then swap
power among themselves to meet the
guidelines of the Mega power policy
thereby creating unnecessary
transmission capacity and movement
of power back and forth. There should
be no discrimination in available
incentives based on size or type of
technology or fuel used.
 In fact, incentives should be similar for
each of the energy sub-sectors so that
balanced development takes place. Any
tax concession or duty exemption
provided should be available to all
energy sub-sectors unless it supports a
well-documented economic benefit.
23. Dealing with Externalities: While
taxes to raise revenues should be levied in a
way that least affect fuel/energy choices,
environmental taxes and subsidies can be used
to actually affect fuel/energy choices. Some
options available to deal with environmental
externalities could be:
 A consistent application of the “polluter
pays” principle or “consumer pays”
principle should be made to attain
environmental objectives at least-cost
where prescribed environmental norms
are either not applied consistently or
not being adhered to. Methodologies
need to be developed to do this
consistently.
 Using incentives, cross subsidies, tax
breaks for public investments to
maximise the more energy efficient rail
freight, electrification of railways,
building double decked freight trains,
improved mass transportation options,
R&D for efficient engines or fuel
alternatives etc., could also help mitigate
environmental concerns.
 Certain conservation objectives may
be better served through appropriate
regulations such as minimum vehicle
occupancy ratios, minimum fuel
efficiency norms, or even allowing odd
and even numbered vehicles on road
on alternate days etc.
 Taxes and subsidies to create differential
pricing and achieve the above objectives
run the risk of creating perverse
incentives. As an example, lower
taxation of diesel to boost public
transport has several negative outcomes
such as adulteration, less emphasis on
efficiency in road transport carriage,
agricultural and off-road applications, a
negative environmental impact and the
spawning of diesel passenger vehicles
enhancing all of the foregoing negatives.
Thus care should be exercised in using
taxes and subsidies.
24. Environment is not the only externality
that can be managed through differential tax
rates. Differences in taxes may be justified
based on documented benefits from exploitation
of domestic resources, maintaining international
competitiveness, creation of employment or
similar objectives.
25. Subsidies for the Weaker Sections:
Subsidies designed to benefit weaker sections
of the society remain poorly targeted and result
in serious price distortions and malpractices.
Most of the LPG subsidy is actually benefiting
the rich and the upper middle classes. A large
part of the PDS kerosene is used for adulterating
diesel and burned in standby generating sets.
Agriculture and household subsidies on
electricity provide the basis for theft of power
by industrial and commercial consumers. The
following policy options exist to address this
concern:
 Moving the prevailing subsidies and
cross subsidies in the energy sector
designed for the weaker sections of the
economy to the Central and State
Budgets will go a long way in removing
price distortions, providing optimal
price signals and eliminating
malpractices. Subsidies that cannot be targeted in a
fool-proof manner should be made
available as minimal entitlements to
everyone. Consumption in excess of
the minimum should be charged at full
cost of supply. Further, entitlements
should be made tradable if not
consumed by requiring the service
provider to cash the entitlement at the
full marginal cost of supplying the
underlying energy resource or service.
 Another way to provide subsidies
efficiently is to make service providers
bid for making the entitlements
available to the beneficiaries at leastcost to the State.
26. Institutional Reforms for
Competitive Efficiency: Neither appropriate
pricing nor independent regulation by
themselves, can lead to competitive efficiency
if dominance by one or two large public or
private sector units continues and if the public
sector remains handicapped by lack of authority
to take commercial decisions. Ease of entry for
other players from both public and private
sectors and competition from the world market
will create incentives to be efficient.
27. Public Sector Autonomy to Ensure a
Commercial Culture: All public sector
companies must be managed by independent
boards with no more than two government
nominated Directors including just one from
the incumbent Ministry. All other Directors
should be nominated independently with
necessary sitting fees and consequent
responsibilities under the Companies Act. No
Director should have a direct or indirect
beneficial interest in the company exceeding a
prescribed monetary equivalent of say Rs.2
lakhs, in any financial year.
28. The Dismantling of Entry Barriers:
Entry of other firms from within the central,
state or private sectors into all sub-sectors of
energy should be facilitated. Thus, open access
to distribution networks, the removal of
restrictions on captive coal mines, allocations
for coal, oil and gas blocks in competitive and
transparent ways and creating a level playing
field for all players must be undertaken to
generate competition.
29. Developing Long-Term Debt
Markets: The Central and State Governments
as well as term lending institutions must seed
the market for long-term (20 years plus) debt.
This should be available to finance all
infrastructure, particularly energy
infrastructure. Options could include one or
more of the following:
(a) capital market based instruments;
(b) debt structures with 20 year repayment
schedules including bullets at the end
of years 10-12 along with undertakings
for take-out financing of the bullets as
they fall due;
(c) guarantees for later maturities;
(d) twenty year repayment terms with
built-in refinancing every 5 years;
(e) partial risk guarantees and other similar
structures that effectively provide 20
year plus funding for the energy sector.6.1 LARGE POTENTIAL FOR
SAVING ENERGY
The importance of energy efficiency
and demand side management (DSM) has clearly
emerged from the various supply scenarios and
is further underlined by rising energy prices.
Efficiency can be increased in energy extraction,
conversion, transportation, as well as in
consumption. Further, the same level of service
can be provided by alternate means that require
less energy. The major areas where efficiency
in energy use can make a substantial impact
are mining, electricity generation, electricity
transmission, electricity distribution, pumping
water, industrial production and processes,
transport equipment, mass transport, building
design, construction, heating ventilation and
air conditioning, lighting and household
appliances. It may be noted that a unit of
energy saved by a user is greater than a unit
produced as it saves on production, transport,
transmission and distribution losses. Thus a
“Negawatt” (a negative Megawatt) produced
by reducing energy need saves more than a
Megawatt generated.
2. In the 1990s, several studies have
estimated the potential and cost effectiveness
of energy efficiency and demand side
management (DSM) in India7
. Despite these
potential studies, actual implementation has
been sluggish. The 8th Five Year Plan made a
provision of Rs.1,000 crores for energy
efficiency to provide targeted energy savings of
5,000 MW and 6 Mt in the electricity and
petroleum sectors respectively. There is no
clear quantification of the actual costs and
savings achieved. The 9th Five Year Plan
proposed the passing of the Energy
Conservation Act and the setting up of the
Bureau of Energy Efficiency.
3. The 10th Five Year Plan proposes
benchmarking of the hydrocarbon sector
against the rest in the world. It also suggests
demand side management specifically in the
transport sector. The target for energy savings
in the 10th Plan is 95,000 Million Units which
is about 13% of the estimated demand of
7,19,000 Million Units in the terminal year of
the 10th Plan. However, there is no specific
allocation to meet the energy savings targets.
4. A study prepared for the Asian
Development Bank (ADB, 2003) estimated an
immediate market potential for energy saving
of 54,500 million units and peak saving of
9,240 MW. Though there is some uncertainty
in any aggregate estimates, it is clear that costeffective saving potential is at least 15% of total
generation through DSM. Additional savings
are possible on the supply side through
reduction in auxiliary consumption at
Policy for Energy Efficiency
and Demand Side Management
7
 Nadel, S., V. Kothari, and S. Gopinath (1991): Opportunities for Improving End-Use Electricity Efficiency in
India, American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, Washington, DC.
Banerjee R., Parikh J.K. (1993): Demand Side Management in Power Planning – An exercise for H.T. Industries
in Maharashtra, Economic and Political Weekly, August, 7-14, pp. 1659-70.
Parikh J.K., Reddy B.S., Banerjee R. (1994): Planning for Demand Side Management in Electricity Sector, Tata
Mc-Graw Hill Company Ltd., New Delhi.
Parikh J.K., Reddy B.S., Banerjee R. & Koundinya S. (1996): DSM Survey in India: Awareness, Barriers and
Implementability, Energy, Vol. 21, No. 10, pp. 955-966.generating plants and lowering technical losses
in transmission and distribution. At present an
estimate of the total volume of the energy
efficiency consulting business (audit,
performance contracting, engineering, technical
assistance and consultancy) is less than 1% of
its potential (DSCL, 2004)8
.
5. Since Energy Efficiency (EE)/DSM
schemes are often cost effective, is it necessary
to have policy interventions? In actual practice
there are several barriers that constrain the
adoption of EE/DSM schemes including high
transaction costs, lack of incentives to utilities
who perceive DSM as a loss of market base,
BOX 6.1
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE)
BEE was established under the Energy Conservation Act, 2001 with effect from 1st March,
2002 to meet the following objectives:
 To exert leadership and provide policy framework and direction to national energy
conservation and efficiency efforts and programmes.
 To coordinate energy efficiency and conservation policies and programmes and take it to
the stakeholders
 To establish systems and procedures to measure, monitor and verify energy efficiency
results in individual sectors as well as at a macro level.
 To leverage multi-lateral and bi-lateral and private sector support in implementation of
Energy Conservation Act and efficient use of energy and its conservation programmes.
 To demonstrate delivery of energy efficiency services as mandated in the EC Act through
private-public partnerships.
 To interpret, plan and manage energy conservation programmes as envisaged in the
Energy Conservation Act.
Actions taken by BEE so far are given below:
 BEE has conducted National Certificate Examinations for selection of Energy Managers
and Energy Auditors.
 Energy auditing agencies for accreditation on the basis of their energy auditing capabilities
and institutional set-up have been cleared by BEE.
 Draft norms for fixation of specific energy consumption in Cement and Pulp & Paper
Industries have been framed and these norms are under discussion prior to finalisation.
 Task forces in 7 Energy Intensive Sectors have been set-up and best practices on energy
conservation are being discussed by these task forces.
 Industries are being motivated to take up energy efficiency measures through institution
of National Energy Conservation Award Scheme of Ministry of Power.
 Energy Audits for 9 Govt. buildings have been completed that include Rashtrapati
Bhawan, Prime Minister’s office, South Block (Defence Ministry), Rail Bhawan, Sanchar
Bhawan, Shram Shakti Bhawan, Transport Bhawan, R&R Hospital, Delhi Airport and All
India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and implementation plans have been prepared.
 Energy Conservation Building Code has been prepared and is under review by the
stakeholders.
8
 DSCL (2004): Catalysing Markets Through Innovative Financing and Competitive Procurement for Energy
Efficiency, G.C. Datta Roy Presentation available at www.bee-india.nic.ininadequate awareness, lack of access to capital,
perceived uncertainty concerning savings, a
high private discount rate, limited testing
infrastructure with which to ascertain savings
and an absence of a reliable measurement and
verification regime. Policy interventions are
required to address these barriers.
6. To conserve petroleum products, the
Petroleum Conservation Research Association
(PCRA) was set-up by Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural Gas (MOPNG) in 1978. The
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) was
established under the Energy Conservation Act,
2001, with effect from 1st March, 2002, under
the Ministry of Power (MOP). The mission of
BEE is to develop policies and strategies on
self-regulation and initiate market interventions
aimed at reducing the energy intensity of the
Indian economy. While BEE has made a
beginning (see BOX 6.1), a lot more needs to be
done. BEE does not have a fulltime head and,
as of September 2005, had only 4 professionals
on staff.
7. Since nearly one third of total energy
is used for domestic cooking, efficiency of the
cooking process should be given a high priority,
particularly since this process is currently
marked by poor level of efficiency.
8. To promote energy efficiency and
conservation we need to create an appropriate
set of incentives through pricing and other
policy measures. Barriers to the adoption of
efficient technologies have to be removed and
encouragement to develop and deploy more
efficient technologies has to be provided. Public
policy can set the pace for such development
by offering attractive rewards and imposing
biting penalties.
9. An enabling institutional framework is
essential to achieve the objectives listed above.
Details of such an institutional framework are
listed below:
 The BEE should be made an
autonomous statutory body under the
Energy Conservation Act and be
independent of all the energy ministries.
It should be funded by the Central
Government. A cess on fuels and
electricity (adjusted for the cess on fuels
used for generating electricity) can be
justified as a user charge. BEE staffing
should be substantially strengthened.
 Existing national energy efficiency
organisations like the Petroleum
Conservation Research Association
(PCRA) should be merged with the
BEE. This will ensure that the BEE is
responsible for energy efficiency for all
sectors and all end-uses.
 Based on the recommendations of the
merged autonomous body the
government could directly provide
funding support to financial institutions
for promoting energy efficiency
programmes.
 Energy efficiency and conservation
programmes and standards should be
established and enforced. The BEE
should develop such standards for all
energy intensive industries and
appliances as well as develop modalities
for a system of incentives/penalties for
compliance/non-compliance. These
standards should be at levels equal to
or near current international norms.
 Mechanisms for independent
monitoring and verification of achieved
energy savings and the cost effectiveness
of programmes must be established.
Evaluation reports should be
quantitative and made publicly
available. An annual report of the
investments and savings made through
specific energy efficiency and DSM
programmes should be prepared by the
BEE and reported to the Parliament.
The feedback from the monitoring
exercises should help in modifying
programme designs.
 Truthful labelling must be enforced
with major financial repercussions if
equipment fails to deliver stated
efficiencies. In extreme cases, one can
resort to black listing errant suppliers
at consumer information web sites and
on government procurement rosters. Verification and labelling requires
testing laboratories. A programme for
setting up such laboratories in public,
private and the NGO sectors is needed.
 National Building Codes should be
revised to facilitate and encourage
energy efficient buildings.
 Large scope exists to make buildings
energy efficient. Construction materials
are energy intensive and the use of
appropriate materials and design can
save a significant amount of energy not
only in construction but also during
use by building occupants. Innovative
and energy efficient building
technologies should be widely
publicised through an annual prize.
Reducing energy needs for heating and
cooling by orientation, insulation and
using temperature differences in earth
or water at some depth could also be
significant.
 Improvement in energy efficiency and
DSM require actions by a large number
of persons and institutions. To mobilise
them, the first task is to create
awareness of the scope of possibilities
and the extent of gains one can make
through such measures.
 Promote and facilitate energy service
companies (ESCOs) that can identify
energy saving options and provide
technical support needed for execution
to industries and commercial
establishments.
10. Some policy initiatives can yield quick
returns with small effort just like plucking low
hanging fruits. These could include —
 Regulatory commissions can allow
utilities to factor EE/DSM expenditure
into the tariff.
 Each energy supply company/utility
should set-up an EE/DSM cell. The
BEE can facilitate this process by
providing guidelines and necessary
training inputs. A large number of
pilot programmes that target the
barriers involved and have low
transaction costs need to be designed,
tested with different institutional
arrangements, with different incentives,
and with varied implementation
strategies. Innovative programme
designs can then be rewarded.
 Implementing Time-of-Day (TOD)
Tariffs: All utilities should introduce
TOD tariffs for large industrial and
commercial consumers to flatten the
load curve. Utilities should support
load research to understand the nature
of different sectoral load profiles and
the price elasticities of these loads
between different time periods to
correctly assess the impact of differential
tariffs during the day. The utility should
have focus group meetings with
industrial or large commercial
consumers, document a few potential
case studies illustrating the potential
for shifting loads and provide
information and analytical support
along with implementation of the TOD
tariff.
 Facilitating Grid Interconnection for
Cogenerators: Enforce mandatory
purchase of electricity at fixed prices
from cogenerators (at declared avoided
costs of the utility) by the grid to
encourage cogeneration. The buying/
selling price should be time –
differentiated and declared by the state
regulatory commissions at the time of
each tariff notification.
 Improving Efficiency of Industrial,
Municipal and Agricultural Water
Pumping: Institute measures that
encourage adoption of efficient
pumping systems and shifting of
pumping load to off-peak hours. The
public sector should be mandated to
do so, and the private sector could be
encouraged to do so through time-ofday pricing. This will help reduce peak
demand and energy demand.
 Instituting an Efficient Motors
Programme: This initiative should
focus on manufacturers/rewinding
shops and target market transformation,by providing incentives to supply
energy efficient motors.
 Instituting an Efficient Boiler
Programme: This initiative should
focus on industry and provide
incentives for replacement of old
inefficient boilers.
 Promoting Solar Hot Water Systems:
This programme should aim at both
industrial and household needs of hot
water.
 Promoting Variable Speed Drives:
All large industries should be required
to assess suitability of variable speed
drives for their major pumping and fan
loads.
 Undertaking Efficient Lighting
Initiative: Utilities should launch pilot
efficient lighting initiatives in towns/
cities (similar to the Bangalore
Electricity Supply Company
(BESCOM) programme in Bangalore).
Features should include warranties by
manufacturers and deferred payment
through utility bill savings.
(International examples are available at
www.efficientlighting.net)
 Improving Cooking Efficiency:
Efficiency of cooking stoves should be
improved by targeting manufacturers
and requiring them to label stoves so
that the consumers know the cost of
fuel used. Energy efficient utensils and
efficient cooking practices should be
promoted as they offer a very large
scope for reducing fuel consumption
(see www.bachatcooker.com).
 Making Energy Audits Compulsory
For All Loads Above 1 MW: Energy
audits should be done periodically and
be made mandatory for public
buildings, large establishments
(connected load >1 MW or equivalent
energy use >1MVA) and energy
intensive industries.
 Reaping Daylight Savings: Saving
daylight by introducing two time zones
in the country can save a lot of energy.
11. Medium to long-term initiatives could
include —
 Adoption of a least-cost planning and
policy approach that ensures that
energy efficiency and DSM have a level
playing field with supply options. The
regulatory commissions should invite
bids for DSM while approving new
capacity additions. Thus, if a state
requires an additional peak demand of
1,000 MW over the next five years, the
utility can ask for bids from
Independent Power Producers (IPPs)
as well as Energy Service Companies
(ESCOs). For example, an efficient
lighting programme may offer to save
150 MW at a cost of Rs.5,000/peak
kW saved. This would then become
part of the least-cost plan before putting
in new power plants that may cost
Rs.40,000-50,000/peak kW generated.
Similar exercises should be adopted for
the oil sector.
 Initiate benchmarking exercises for
different industrial sectors, hotels,
hospitals, buildings, etc. In each
segment, the benchmark would provide
the theoretical minimum energy
consumption, the best practice and
specific steps required to reduce energy
consumption. A road map (5-10 years)
should be created for energy efficiency
improvements in each industry
segment. The BEE can catalyse the
benchmarking process by bringing
together energy auditors, researchers,
end-users and providing the required
funding.
 The Government (Central/State),
Railways, Defence and public sector
units constitute a large market segment
for energy intensive products. The basis
for selecting a vendor is usually only
the lowest initial cost. It is
recommended that the procurement
process be modified based on the
minimum annualised life cycle cost (see
BOX 6.2). A manual should be prepared
establishing the methodology for
annualised life cycle costing with asimple spreadsheet package to enable
easy implementation.
 Though life cycle costing seems
particularly relevant for appliance
purchase since appliances are often
bought without consideration of
operating costs, it should be used for
all decision-making and alternatives
should be compared in terms of
expected present discounted values of
life cycle cost.
 Increasing Efficiency of Coal-Based
Power Plants: Require NTPC and
SEBs to acquire technology to enhance
the fuel conversion efficiency of the
existing population of thermal power
stations from an average of 30% to
35%. No new thermal power plant
should be allowed without a certified
fuel conversion efficiency of at least
38-40%. While competitive tariff based
bidding can balance fuel efficiency
against capital cost and provide
incentives for efficiency improvement;
in the absence of such competition the
pace of efficiency improvement needs
to be forced.
 Shifting Freight Traffic to Railways:
Improve railway service to win back
the long-distance freight traffic carried
by trucks today that consume five times
as much diesel per net tonne kilometer
of freight carried. Construction of
dedicated freight corridors and
dismantling of the Container
Corporation (CONCOR) monopoly
are critical measures for this. Already,
the railways have permitted private
operators. Carrying 3000 billion tonne
kilometres (Bt-km) of freight (half of
projected freight traffic in 2031) by rail
instead of trucks can save approximately
50 Mt of diesel per year. To attract
freight traffic, railways must ensure
timely and secure delivery. This can be
accomplished by operating scheduled
container trains and by charging freight
on the container, rather than the
content, so that the customers can lock
and seal it.
 Promote Waterways: Water transport
is energy efficient. Make investment to
provide the needed infrastructure to
facilitate water transport.
BOX 6.2
Initial Cost and Life Cycle Cost
In many cases of energy equipment the annual costs of operation predominate as compared
to the capital cost. However the operating costs are often not considered at the time of the
purchase, as they are part of the total electricity bill and recurring maintenance costs. The
purchase decision is based on the initial cost. Table shows the initial cost and the annualised
life cycle cost (ALCC) for some typical energy appliances based only on the annual electricity
cost since it is the main cost component for these products.
Table: Comparison of Initial Cost and Life Cycle Cost
Sl. Equipment Rating Initial cost Annual ALCC Cost of
No. (Rs) Electricity (Rs) electricity as
Cost (Rs) %of ALCC
1. Motor 20 hp 45,000 600,000 605,720 99.0
2. EE Motor 20 hp 60,000 502,600 512,700 98.0
3. Incandescent Lamp 100 W 10 1168 1198 97.5
4. CFL 11 W 350 128 240 53.6Figure 6.1
Reduction in the Energy Consumption of Refrigerators Sold in the United States of America
Source: Wiel, S. (2001)9
 Promote Urban Mass Transport:
Promote urban mass transport by
providing quality services which may
be partially financed by imposing
congestion, pollution and parking
charges on those who use personalised
motor transport. Plan for future mass
transport corridors in smaller cities and
acquire the right-of-way. As the city
grows, the permissible built up area
may be gradually increased. However
the additional right to build should
remain with the local government,
which it can auction to finance mass
transport and other urban
infrastructure.
 Fuel Efficient Vehicles: Promote
hybrid vehicles in India, which are
internationally already available
commercially. Also promote the
already commercial flexi fuel vehicles
that can burn varying proportions of
ethanol-blended fuels.
12. At an 8 percent growth rate, we will
nearly double our capital stock in nine years.
Energy using equipment and appliances will
also spread rapidly. Thus, the manufacturers of
equipment and appliances should be targeted
to force the pace of improvement in energy
efficiency. The following steps may be taken
to improve efficiency of energy consuming
equipment:
 Mandate time bound targets of energy
efficiency for industrial equipment,
boilers, and appliances such as motor
vehicles, pump sets, refrigerators, water
heaters, boilers, etc.
 Create competition among
manufacturers to be the first to achieve
the target through a “golden carrot”
which is a large monetary reward to
9
 Wiel, S. (2001): Introduction, Energy Efficiency Labels and Standards: A Guidebook for Appliances,
Equipment, and Lighting, S. Wiel and J.E. McMahon, eds. (Washington, D.C., Collaborative Labelling and
Appliance Standards Programme (CLASP).the first one to commercialise products
which provide, say a minimum saving
of 20% over the best existing design
within a given time frame. The Super
Energy Efficient Refrigerator Project
in the US is a successful example of
such a policy initiative(see Figure 6.1).
 Mandate clear and informative labelling
in well-designed standardised forms for
equipments and appliances. Combine
this with consumer awareness
programmes that illustrate the savings
and possible associated gains.
 Strengthen appropriate labelling by
creating regional facilities for testing
and certification. Such a labelling/
standards initiative should be supported
by analytical studies to establish
equipment consumption benchmarks
(minimum achievable energy
consumption targets).
13. Industries may need technical support
to identify and execute energy saving options.
Energy service companies (ESCOs) can provide
such support. We need to promote and facilitate
ESCOs. Some possibilities include—
 Financing Support – The support for
ESCOs could be in the form of
payment security mechanisms (this may
be required for projects in
municipalities, government buildings),
partial credit guarantees, or venture
capital. Financial institutions may be
encouraged to provide these.
 Encouraging different business models
– For ESCOs to be successful in India
a variety of alternative business models
need to be attempted to determine the
appropriate ones in the Indian context.
The BEE could facilitate 15-20
demonstration ESCO projects in
different sectors. These should be welldocumented, independently monitored
and made available to the public. This
will encourage more entrepreneurs to
invest in ESCOs.
 ESCOs as producers of “Negawatts”
may be given the same tax breaks that
are available for renewable energy
programmes or other energy
investments.
 Providing an institutional framework
for independent monitoring &
evaluation of projects delivered by
ESCOs. This would involve
independent testing laboratories and
setting benchmark standards.An examination of India’s primary
energy balance shows that renewables account
for about 32% of primary energy consumption
in 2003-04. Of this, the major contributor is
traditional biomass mainly used in cooking
followed by electricity generation from large
hydro plants. The actual share of modern
renewables (see Figure 7.1) in India’s energy
mix is significantly lower (about 2% of the
total).
2. Adverse local environmental impacts
(SOx
, NOx, SPM) and global environmental
impacts (green house gas emissions mainly due
to carbon dioxide) associated with fossil fuel
use have resulted in an increased emphasis on
renewables. Figure 7.1 shows a listing of some
of the commonly used renewable options.
Renewables can be used for space heating,
cooling, water pumping, cooking and for almost
any end-use that is presently met by fossil
fuels.
3. As the country is short of energy
resources the need to develop all energy sources
including renewable options is paramount. Our
Policy for Renewable and NonConventional Energy Sources
Figure 7.1
Renewable Energy Optionsefforts in the past have not been as successful
as we would have liked. Many renewables have
high initial costs (see Table 7.1). Often
development efforts have been sub-critical and
subsidy driven growth has not provided
incentives for technical improvements or cost
reduction. There are also externalities of the
use of renewables, the benefits of which do not
accrue to the user.
mandated in many countries (see Table
7.2). The regulated feed-in tariffs should
have time-of-day features that improve
economics of renewable power.
 With the capital subsidy available for
improving rural access having become
uniform for both remote and gridconnected villages/habitations, Ministry
Table 7.1
Capital Costs and the Typical Cost of Generated Electricity from the Renewable Options
Sl. Source Capital Cost Estimated Cost of Total Installed
No. (Crores of Generation Capacity
Rs/MW) Per Unit (MW)
(Rs./kWh) (upto 31.12.2005)
1. Small* Hydro-Power 5.00-6.00 2.50-3.50 1748
2. Wind Power 4.00-5.00 3.00-4.00 4434
3. Biomass Power 4.00 3.00-4.00 377
4. Bagasse Cogeneration 3.00-3.50 2.00-3.00 491
5. Biomass Gasifier 2.50-3.00 3.00-4.00 71
6. Solar Photovoltaic 25-30 15.00-20.00 3
7. Energy from Waste 5.00-10.00 4.00-7.50 46
*<25 MW
4. Renewable energy may need special
policies to encourage them. This should be
done for a well-defined period or up to a welldefined limit, and be done in a way that
encourages outcomes and not just outlays.
Suggestions include:
 Capital subsidies which only encourage
investment without ensuing outcome
should be phased out by the end of the
10th Plan.
 Power Regulators must seek alternative
incentive structures that encourage
utilities to integrate wind, small hydro,
cogeneration etc., into their systems.
All incentives must be linked to energy
generated as opposed to capacity
created.
 Respective power Regulators should
mandate feed-in laws for renewable
energy where appropriate as provided
under the Electricity Act and as
of Power (MOP) and Ministry of Non
Conventional Energy Sources (MNES)
need to better coordinate the outcomes
of RGGVY, MNES’s rural
electrification programme, and the
newly developed pilot projects under
Village Energy Security Programme.
Similar coordination is also called for
between the rural electrification
programs, telecom and road
connectivity initiatives and certain
social sector programs. Bundling of
services is likely to achieve greater
success and is more likely to yield
sustainable structures that are replicable
through separate franchises.
5. Price subsidy for renewables may be
justified on several grounds. A renewable energy
source may be environmentally friendly. It
may be locally available making it possible to
supply energy earlier than possible through aTable 7.2
International Feed-in Tariffs
Tariff in Rs./kWh**
Conventional Wind Photovoltaics Biomass
Domestic Commercial (Windy sites)b (Non windy) (Cap.<5 MW) 0-0.5 MW 0.5-5 MW 5-20 MW
Germany* 6.0 2.3 1st 5 yearsa 5.2 5.2 27.6 5.85 5.27 4.99 (2001) (2002) Next 15 years 3.4 4.6 Guaranteed for 20 years c
(Cap. (Windy (Non (Inter-
<12 MW) sites) windy) mediate)
France 5.21 1.83 1st 5 years 4.6 4.6 4.6 8.6 17.2
(2002) (2002) Next 15 years 1.7 4.6 3.4 (Mainland) (Overseas)
(Cap.<50MW)d (Cap.<5kW) (Cap>5kW)
Spain+ 5.29 2.00 Fixed 3.6 22.7 12.4 3.5
(2001) (2001) OR OR
Premium of 1.5 20.63 10.32 1.4
Austriae 6.48 2.54 4.5 26.9 to 4.4 to
(2002) (1995) 34.4 9.2
* 2002 data a Since 2002 tariff reduced by 1.5% per year+ 2003 data b Sites that achieve more than 150% of reference output
c For new installation price reduced by 5%. The obligation to pay ends when total installed capacity reaches 1000 MWd Premiums and tariff set by Governmente Uniform fixed price for 13 years (2003)
** Based on exchange rate of Rs.57.31 Per Euro (December-2003)
Source: T. Stenzel, T. Foxon, R. Gross (2003): Review of renewable energy development in Europe and the US, Report for the DTI Renewables Innovation
Review, ICCEPT, Imperial College, London, October 2003.centralised system. It may also provide
employment and livelihood to the poor.
6. The environmental subsidy for
renewables could be financed by a cess on nonrenewables and fuels causing environmental
damage.
7. All price subsidies should be linked to
outcomes. Thus, for example, giving a capital
subsidy on a wind power plant provides
encouragement to set-up a power plant but
does not provide any additional incentive to
generate power. Instead a price premium on
feed-in tariff for wind power into an existing
power grid ensures outcome for the outlay.
For grid connected renewables, Regulatory
Commissions (RC’s) should provide feed-in
laws to permit renewables to supply electricity
to the grid. RC’s should ensure that the
renewables are given a tariff at least equal to
the avoided cost of generation.
8. A premium on feed-in tariff may not
benefit a stand alone plant in a remote area.
For such a plant, a capital subsidy may be
required. Such a capital subsidy, however, can
be linked to the amount of power actually
generated if it is given in the form of Tradable
Tax Rebate Certificates (TTRCs). The rebate
claim would then become payable when
electricity is generated and would be linked to
the amount of electricity generated. This will
also encourage earlier exploitation of better
wind sites. The need to keep the TTRCs
tradable arises from the possibility that small
generators may not have adequate taxable
income to benefit fully from tax rebates.
9. In areas where there is no electricity
grid, there should be minimum clearances/
permissions required for setting up a
Distributed Generation (DG) system. Supply
companies/entrepreneurs should be free to setup micro-grids and recover revenues from
customers. This is already provided for in the
Electricity Act. Each state should clearly define
guidelines to facilitate this process.
10. A critical issue in distributed generation
for rural electrification is the cost recovery and
the implementation mechanism. Different
policy experiments for implementation of DG
in different regions should be attempted. The
village panchayat aided by the state energy
agency and technical experts should decide the
appropriate technology option (biogas, biomass
gasification, wind-diesel, micro-hydel, bio-oilengine) for their village. For isolated systems it
is beneficial to link the DG system to an
industrial load (cold storage, oil mill etc.) to
improve its load factor and hence its economic
viability. The capital subsidy should be based
on the annual generation, and should preferably
be in the form of an annualised subsidy to be
provided based on actual generation. These
projects can be set-up by panchayats,
independent power producers or renewable
energy service companies. A mechanism of
bidding can be used to obtain the annualised
subsidy level sought for sustainability. For
example, if it is decided to electrify a village
using a dedicated producer gas engine and
biomass gasifier, bids may be obtained for the
support required annually for the concession
period per kWh of actual generation. The
project would then be given to the lowest
bidder. Such a programme would require actual
tracking of annual generation. This is feasible
using existing technologies of remote
monitoring and would add only incrementally
to the system cost.
11. An annual renewable energy report
should be published providing details of actual
performance of different renewable technologies
at the state and national levels. This would
include actual energy supplied from different
renewable options, availability, actual costs,
operating and maintenance problems etc. The
monitoring should also encompass other
parameters like user profiles (in order to ensure
that government support is indeed going to
poor households), as well as livelihood
outcomes such as increased income, improved
food security and gender impacts. In fact, this
also applies to rural electrification, where the
monitoring parameter should not just be the
villages and/or hamlets electrified. Monitoring
must be based on actual households electrified,
hours of electricity received by these households
and the various impacts described aboveInaddition to monitoring the performance of
devices, the assessment should critically review
the programme objectives and the strategy
adopted in order to suggest course corrections
as required. Information on any system that is
receiving government support should be made
publicly available. It is essential to ensure that
independent assessment of performance is done
for all renewable projects receiving government
funding. This will help in tracking programmes,
avoiding repeating mistakes and providing midcourse corrections.
12. The Department of Science and
Technology (DST) has set up Technology
Business Incubators for entrepreneurs for
renewable energy, energy efficiency and rural
energy. However, entrepreneurs also need
finance. Financial institutions should be
encouraged to set-up Venture Capital Funds
for energy entrepreneurs. DST should monitor
actual success on the ground and reshape its
programme based on actual results/feedback.
13. The following specific policies to
promote various renewables are recommended:
 Mini Hydro: A detailed survey should
be carried out to identify potential
sites. Identified sites should then be
auctioned. For plants which are not
connected to an existing grid, bids for
the lowest tariff with a pre-specified
premium in the form of TTRCs should
be invited. For village level plants, the
entrepreneurs should be encouraged to
supply power to meet other
requirements such as agro processing
and milling and if such productive loads
are not available, the entrepreneurs
should develop sustainable integrated
schemes that aim at developing the
community as a whole. If the plant can
feed into a grid, the grid should be
required to accept power at the
regulated feed-in tariff with time-ofday features, and the plant site should
be auctioned off for minimum premium
in the form of TTRCs linked to
electricity generation. The
responsibility for investments needed
to connect to the grid should be fixed
in advance before the bidding.
 Wind Power: For wind power, site
selection is freer than hydro-power and
wind plants can be set-up on private
land. Thus there may be a need to
auction only sites on public property.
The same two types of auctions may
be followed as described above for
hydro-power plants. Where cultivation
is not affected, a wind turbine
installation should be permitted on
agricultural land without requiring its
conversion to non-agricultural land.
 Bio-Diesel: The production of biodiesel needs to be encouraged in a way
that primarily involves outcome related
fiscal incentives for its economic
production. Certain vegetables oils can
be directly mixed with diesel, especially
for stationary applications, in certain
proportions without any significant
processing. Transesterification of
industrial oils (with high levels of free
fatty acids (FFA) or vegetable oils can
yield bio-diesel which can substitute
fossil fuel-based diesel in both stationary
and motive applications. Non-edible oils
such as those obtained from Jatropha
and Karanj are gaining attention for
production of bio-diesel in India.
Currently, significant uncertainty
prevails over the exact yields from
Jatropha or Karanj cultivation with
estimates ranging from a low of 0.4
tonne of diesel per hectare to 1.0 tonne
of diesel per hectare.
Bio-diesel can be encouraged in
alternative ways. One way is to
encourage oil companies to take the
lead in developing large-scale plantations
directly through contract farming by
individual farmers, self-help groups
(SHGs), rural cooperatives, panchayats
etc. In this case the problem of pricing
of seed and bio-diesel are internalised.
Another way is to let organised
industries, self-help groups or
cooperatives on the line of Amul,
pursue Jatropha, Karanj and othersuitable plantations. They may sell the
oil extracted or set up transesterification
units individually or collectively to sell
bio-diesel either to oil companies for
blending or directly to consumers in
jerry cans.
Up to 100% tax rebate can be provided
for investments made in plantations
and bio-diesel processing through
TTRCs linked to actual bio-diesel/seed
production. In addition, TTRCs could
include a premium for use of
renewables, employment generation
and an environmentally preferable fuel.
In cases where the TTRCs are acquired
by the oil companies, organised
industry and/or large cooperatives, a
competitive environment with multiple
players would ensure that the benefits
are shared with the ultimate grower.
Further, this green fuel can be made
free of taxes and levies currently
imposed on diesel based on fossil fuels
with the bulk of the benefit being
passed on to the end-consumer as is
done in countries such as Germany,
Spain, Italy and USA. A part of the
benefit could also be used to build a
fund that would provide price support
to the Jatropha/Karanj farmer in the
event that world price of fossil fuelbased diesel goes below a certain preset price. The investment incentive can
be adjusted as economic viability is
established and the country achieves a
level of output that meets the targeted
replacement in both stationary and
motive applications. Employment
generated in cultivating bio-plantations
may be made eligible for coverage under
the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme.
A parallel initiative based on bio-diesel
production from the residual industrial
oil produced as a by-product while
refining edible oils may also be
encouraged. Significant quantities of
such residual oils are available in world
markets but current imports into India
attract different levels of custom duty
based on end-use. A duty of 65% is
imposed on use of such residual
industrial oils for conversion to biodiesel. If this duty is reduced to 5% as
in the case of crude oil, it would be
possible to produce diesel based on
such imports of industrial oil at about
Rs.25/litre. This may be sold directly
to consumers by producers or to oil
firms without levying any of the
current taxes and levies imposed on
fossil based diesel. Again, the oil
companies may be required to pass on
bulk of the benefit to the consumers.
Thus the following policies are
recommended for bio-diesel:
• Support Jatropha, Karanj and other
similar species, with incentives as
suggested above.
• Since the end objective is to
promote bio-diesel and significant
research is still needed to establish
viable germ plasms and genotypes
for bio-fuel plantations, it is
recommended that the parallel
route based on industrial oils be
pursued immediately through a
reduction in import duty to 5%
for high FFA vegetable oils for
conversion to bio-diesel.
• Transesterification facilities set up
by importers of industrial oils may
also be given TTRCs.
• Encourage direct and local sale of
bio-diesel where feasible. This can
begin with the metro towns.
• As a green fuel make bio-diesel free
of excise and levies charged on fossil
fuel-based diesel.
• Bio-diesel and/or blends of biodiesel should be sold with full
disclosure and priced differently
from pure fossil fuel based diesel.
 Ethanol: Ethanol is a more complex
issue. At the outset it is stated that any
investment in R&D and
commercialisation of cellulosic ethanol
may be given a full tax credit for an
initial period of 5 years based on
delivery of defined outcomes. Ethanolblending helps diversify energy mix
and so improves energy security. If the
ethanol is produced domestically the
impact on energy security is even better.
There is no surplus ethanol available
in the country for blending in petrol
for motive energy. India has been
importing ethanol since 2002 and
became the largest importer from Brazil
in 2005 with imports of 411 million
litres. This was over 9% of the world
ethanol trade in 2005. The imported
alcohol was primarily used by the
chemical industry as it could not access
domestic alcohol.
As a comparison, a 5% blend of ethanol
in petrol in India would require 610
million litres of ethanol – some 14-15%
of world trade in ethanol. Clearly, the
foregoing numbers show that domestic
availability of ethanol in India (which
depends on cane production & yields)
and India’s policy on blending alcohol
with petrol can significantly affect
domestic and world prices of ethanol.
Needless to add that the fate of the
chemical industry in India hangs
critically in balance between policies
that decide end-use of domestically
produced ethanol on one hand and the
lowering of barriers to international
competition in chemicals on the other
hand.
An ethanol blending programme was
announced in 2003. The programme
could not succeed because of nonavailability of ethanol. However,
domestic prices of ethanol have doubled
since 2003 to reach import parity prices.
Ethanol in India is produced as a byproduct of the sugar industry from
molasses. About half the domestic
production is used for potable purposes
while the balance is used by industry
which supplements shortfalls through
imports. The value addition in industry
is on average 2-3 times higher than the
value addition as an additive to petrol.
India is the only large country where
potable liquor is produced from
molasses – most other countries
produce potable liquor from grain. For
the Indian liquor industry domestic
molasses remains the cheapest option
since ethanol import for potable
purposes attracts a custom duty of
150%. Since the liquor industry
provides huge tax revenues to both
central and state governments, they
have traditionally managed to maintain
their hold on domestic molasses based
ethanol to meet their need. The
remaining domestically available
ethanol is simply inadequate to meet
the needs of both the domestic chemical
industry and blending with petrol. Thus
one or both, the chemical and the
petroleum industry have to import
ethanol, on which custom duty of only
10% is levied, to meet their needs.
Sugarcane yields in Brazil are some
23% higher on average and sugar yields
from sugarcane is about 34% higher.
The cost of producing sugarcane based
ethanol in Brazil is 40-50% that of
India. Brazil produces 42% of world’s
ethanol. USA, the second largest
producer of ethanol, with 37% share of
world production, produces ethanol
from corn which is heavily subsidised.
The per capita land availability in Brazil
is more than 15 times and in USA
more than 10 times that in India. Only
1% of the cultivable land in Brazil is
currently under sugarcane production
and water availability is not a problem.
Thus Brazil’s ethanol industry has
significant growth potential. In India
water is a big constraint and sugarcane
plantations have remained at 3.8 to 4.2
million hectares over the last 15 years.
Given persistent shortages in grain, lack
of water and pace of urbanisation,
India’s acreage under sugarcane is not
likely to increase.
It is pointed out that the calorific value
of ethanol is only 56% of petrol.
However, blending improves burning
efficiency and thus ethanol is priced
some 30-35% below gasoline prices inBrazil which is the biggest user of
ethanol for motive purposes.
Given the above facts, availability of
molasses based alcohol from the sugar
industry is unlikely to grow
significantly. Even if new sugarcane
acreage comes up in water rich areas of
Bihar and U.P., it should ideally replace
current acreage in water scarce areas
such as Maharashtra. Productivity gains
are potentially possible and the same,
if achieved, would by themselves not
even be able to keep up with the likely
growth in demand if the blending
programme takes off in earnest. Even
grain based alcohol would become
viable only if we first address our food
security concerns and agricultural
growth rises to at least 4% level. Thus
the options available to India to increase
availability of ethanol in the short to
medium term are:
(a) aggressively support alternate routes
to ethanol such as cellulosic ethanol
and low water intensity crops such
as sweet sorghum;
(b) raise sugarcane yields and divert
increased cane output for ethanol
production;
(c) promote grain-based alcohol to the
extent possible especially from
spoilt grains;
(d) remove barriers to import of
ethanol for all end-uses; and
(e) like equity oil seek ethanol acreage
in Brazil – the world’s cheapest
producer of ethanol.
Thus the following policies are
recommended:
• Set import tariff on alcohol
independent of use and at a level
no greater than that for petroleum
products.
• Require that oil companies may
blend upto 5% of ethanol with
petrol but do not mandate oil
companies to do so.
• Price ethanol at its economic value
vis-à-vis petrol but not, in any
event, above its import parity price.
• Companies in India such as Praj
Industries and International Crops
Research Institute for the SemiArid Tropics (ICRISAT) have
developed commercial varieties of
sweet sorghum. To encourage
alternate routes to ethanol, such
production may be procured at the
full trade parity price of petrol for
5-7 years instead of being purchased
at its true economic value based on
calorific content duly adjusted for
improved efficiency.
• As a green fuel, however,
government may wish to waive all
or part of the excise and levies
charged on petrol to the extent
that it contains ethanol. However,
bulk of the benefit must be passed
on to the consumer.
• Petrol pumps must declare if they
are selling blended petrol and price
it differently.
• Incentivise cellulosic ethanol with
investment credits as detailed above.
 Fuelwood Plantation: Cooperatives
should be encouraged and facilitated to
grow tree plantations in villages.
Cooperatives which are open to all
members of the community should be
given government land on a long-term
lease. Women should be encouraged to
set-up and manage such plantations so
that the time they now spend in
gathering fuel can be spent productively
in a way that empowers them. They
should also be provided finance. If
organised and managed properly, such
plantations are economically viable and
successful as shown by the experience
of National Tree Growers Cooperatives
Foundation [Parikh et al (1997)10]. Field
based NGOs could also be involved in
this activity. To encourage large-scale
plantations, based on contract farming,
10 Parikh Jyoti K. and Reddy B. Sudhakara, Editors (1997): Sustainable Regeneration of Degraded Lands
through people’s participation”, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi.the corporate sector could be
incentivised to build wood based power
plants with assured access to benefits
announced under the liberal captive
policy enunciated in the Electricity Act,
2003.
 Electricity from Wood Gasification:
This process can provide electricity
based on gasification of wood and can
be very useful especially in remote
villages. The same set of policies
indicated for micro hydel and wind
power plants should be followed here.
 Community Biogas Plants: Biogas
plants have been promoted for families
with 5 or more cattle head to obtain 2
to 3 cubic metre of gas per day. The
estimated potential is 14 million plants.
This leaves out the dung of all those
who have fewer animals and also wastes
the surplus gas that may be produced
in warmer months. The real potential
of biogas is thus in community level
plants. To encourage private or
community entrepreneurs to set these
up, they need to be provided land and
finance. Also to have the willing
participation of all the cattle owners in
the community requires an appropriate
operating strategy. Parikh and Parikh
(1977)11 have shown the possibility of
such a strategy. The essential policy
required is the provision of land and
finance.
 Family Size Biogas Plants: If fuel
efficient cooking utensils and methods,
with which 60% to 70% energy can be
saved, are used than even a biogas plant
with one or two cattle heads can
provide the bulk of required energy
for a family’s cooking. This would
avoid the institutional complexity of
operating community level biogas
plants. Compact and monolithic biogas
plants suitable for one, two or three
animals are now available. Trials with
small biogas plants and energy efficient
cooking should be carried out to
examine their acceptability.
 Solar Thermal Water Heaters (SWH):
These are economical. The main barrier
to their adoption is the expense of
retrofitting plumbing in households and
industries. Building laws should be
amended to ensure that all new
buildings and factories have solar water
heaters. Existing households,
commercial establishments and factories
should be encouraged to install solar
water heaters through a DSM
programme run by electricity utilities.
Alternatively incentives may be given
in the form of income tax rebates,
property tax rebates, rebates in transfer
fees and rebates in electricity charges.
The government, including the defence
and public sector, account for a
significant amount of new construction
and installation. They can set the
example by conforming to revised
building laws.
 Solar Thermal Power Plants: The
economic viability of solar thermal
plants has not yet been fully established.
To encourage entrepreneurs to invest
in such plants, a higher premium of
feed-in tariff may be given. The higher
premium can be justified given the
higher risk and may be available to
only the first 5000 MW of solar thermal
plants.
 Solar Photovoltaics: Even though
present costs of photovoltaics are very
high, since the ultimate potential is
very large, incentive to commercialise
and lower the cost may be provided
through a higher feed-in tariff, again
for the first 5000 MW of installed
capacity.
14. We do not recommend any particular
set of renewables as the preferred mix. The
attractiveness of a particular option depends
on local circumstances and each option has its
11 Parikh J.K. and Parikh K.S. (1977): Mobilisation and Impacts of Biogas Technologies, Energy, Vol. 2, pp. 441-
445.own niche and unique advantage. The policy
instruments we have recommended permit all
options to compete on a level playing field.
15. Some institutional arrangements to
promote renewable energy are needed. These
are:
 Restructure existing Commission for
Additional Sources of Energy (CASE)
providing it independent status and
authority de-linking it from the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources and making it responsible for
overall development of Renewable
Energy Programmes in the country.
 Convert existing Indian Renewable
Energy Development Agency Ltd
(IREDA) into a national apex
refinancing institution on the lines of
NABARD/National Housing Bank
(NHB) for the Renewable Energy
Sector by bringing equity from banks,
insurance companies and financial
institutions in the country.One of toughest challenges before us is
the provision of electricity and clean fuels to
all; and in particular to rural populations
considering their poor paying capacity, the
limited availability of local resources for clean
cooking energy, and the size of the country
and its population. Yet considering that women
and the girl child carry most of the burden of
the drudgery of gathering fuel wood,
agricultural wastes and animal dung and also
bear the brunt of indoor air pollution, the
urgency to meet the challenge should be high
if we are to achieve universal primary education
for girls, promote gender equality and empower
women. The considerable effort spent on
gathering biomass and the cow-dung and then
preparing them for use is not priced into the
cost of such energy. Additionally, these fuels
create smoke and indoor air pollution, are
inconvenient to use and have an adverse impact
on the health of people, particularly women
and children. Easy availability of certain amount
of clean energy required to maintain life should
be considered a basic necessity. Energy security
at the individual level implies ensuring the
availability of such energy. This requires the
following:
 Electricity in all households – While
under its National Common Minimum
Programme the Government of India
is committed to electrification of all
households in 5 years, its flagship
programme, Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY),
launched to achieve this is designed to
provide access to all households and
actually electrify only BPL households
by 2009-10. A programme that ensures
that all households have electricity
needs to be developed.
 We must also set a goal to provide
clean cooking energy such as LPG,
NG, biogas or kerosene to all within
10 years. It may be noted that the
requirement of cooking energy does
not increase indefinitely with income.
Thus the total amount of LPG required
to provide cooking energy to 1.5 billion
persons is about 55 Mtoe.
 Meanwhile we could provide fuel wood
plantations within one kilometre of all
habitations. Those who do not have
access or cannot afford even subsidised
clean fuels will need to gather wood.
Neighbourhood plantations within one
kilometre of each habitation can ease
this burden and reduce time taken to
gather and transport wood.
 To develop sustainable energy supply,
women’s groups can form oil seed
plantations or tree-growing cooperatives to manage and produce biofuel & fuel wood with the same effort
that they put into searching and
gathering fuel wood today. Finance
through self-help groups should be
provided to transform women, who
are today’s energy gatherers into
tomorrow’s micro-entrepreneurs for
energy management.
2. Energy security for the poor should go
beyond providing energy for subsistence. One
must recognise the need to provide energy to
the poor to increase their livelihood
opportunities, production capacities and
incomes so that eventually they can afford
clean and convenient energy sources. For the
poor in rural areas we need an integrated rural
Household Energy Security:
Electricity and Clean Fuels for Allenergy programme to ensure energy security.
What needs to be done is discussed below.
8.1 ELECTRICITY
3. The Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) aims to
electrify the 1,25,000 unelectrified villages,
connect all the estimated 2.34 crore unelectrified
households below the poverty line (BPL) and
augment the backbone network in all the
currently electrified 4.62 lakh villages by 2010.
While the BPL households are connected free
of cost, the rest of the programme receives a
90% capital subsidy. The 5.46 crore unelectrified
households above the poverty line are expected
to get an electricity connection on their own
without any subsidy. However, going by
current experience the hope that the above
poverty line households will seek connections
on their own may not be realised. The fact is
that up to 40% of the households remain
without electricity even in States that have
been fully electrified.
4. Expansion of connectivity under
RGGVY will require a corresponding
expansion of supply capability. Given the
present widespread and endemic shortage of
power in many states, special action is needed
to facilitate and encourage decentralised
distributed generation (DG) systems so that
communities can take their destiny in their
own hands instead of waiting for utility
companies to supply electricity reliably. The
DG plants in villages where grid extension is
not proposed are covered under RGGVY’s
subsidy programme. In grid connected areas
also DG plants can benefit from the incentives
provided by MNES.
5. For RGGVY to deliver electrification
of all households, the following needs to be
addressed:
 Scope of RGGVY must be redefined
to include electrification of all
households.
 Power plants based on wood
gasification have been shown to be
feasible as well as economical. Enough
woody biomass is available in many
parts of the country for a village to
generate adequate electricity to meet
its needs. It is possible that a village
goes in for the DG option feeding a
local grid in the first instance.
Subsequently, the village could get
connected to the grid in the normal
course of grid expansion. At that stage,
the DG facility can possibly provide
grid support by feeding-in power at
the lagging end of the grid. A case can
be made for subsidising DG even in
villages proposed to be electrified
through grid extension.
 To make RGGVY sustainable, a
business plan that makes it financially
viable needs to be elaborated. A clear
pricing and subsidy policy and the
means of targeting the subsidy need to
be announced soon. Local bodies,
panchayati raj institutions, NGOs or
even local entrepreneurs can take the
franchise to run the local network.
Women’s self-help groups can be
empowered to do so as well. An
essential requirement for sustainability
is the need to promote paying
productive loads in each village.
6. A policy that gives 30 units of
electricity per month to each household as a
matter of entitlement is recommended. As
already pointed out, such lifeline consumption
is not likely to require more than 75-80 billion
units in absolute terms. As already stated, not
more than 60 billion kWh of this lifeline
consumption needs to be subsidised to varying
degrees even in 2031-32. Any consumption
beyond the lifeline consumption should be at
full rates. Putting such a lifeline energy support
regime in place would require metering and
targeting the subsidies to the needy. The
decentralisation of the billing and collection
foreseen under RGGVY and the distribution
transformer based accountability foreseen under
the revised APDRP are likely to prove helpful
in targeting such lifeline support. However,
the most desirable solution remains the
provision of direct cash subsidies to the needy
through smart cards. In deciding the level of
subsidy, it must be recognised that even thepoorest household does spend something on
energy for lighting and hence must pay a
minimum amount for obtaining the lifeline
electricity support. As per the NSS 55th Round
Survey in 1999-2000, among the households in
rural areas that had electricity, those that
belonged to the poorest 5% of all rural
households spent more than Rs.300 per year
for electricity. Thus a charge of Rs.1.0 per
kWh for the first 30 units per month should
be within the capacity and willingness of even
the poorest 5% of households.
8.2 COOKING ENERGY
7. Providing clean cooking energy to all
is also a big challenge. The 2001 census found
that 625 million do not have any access to
modern (cooking) fuels. It is also true that
about 70% of the energy used for cooking in
Indian households comes from non-commercial
fuels. This may be a result of underlying gender
bias wherein the bulk of the cooking energy is
‘managed’ using non-commercial fuels collected
mostly by women and the girl child, with little
investment, management or technology inputs
and little political or administrative backing.
They need attention and help.
8. The available clean cooking fuels are
LPG, biogas, kerosene and electricity.
Electricity is, in our context, a relatively
expensive form of cooking energy and should
be provided only in very specific circumstances
where other options do not work or are more
expensive due to remoteness and or agroclimatic conditions. While these fuels cause
less pollution in the kitchen, only biogas is
carbon neutral. Other clean fuels are producer
gas and coal based Dimethyl Ether (DME)
which may be cheaper than LPG. These,
however, require extensive development in
production and marketing.
9. If most of the animal dung available in
rural India is fed into biogas plants (either
community size with each producing >20 m3
of gas per day or family plants suitable for one,
two, three or more cattle heads), supplemented
with suitable other biomass and with improved
micro-organisms, some 30 to 40 percent of
rural cooking energy need can be met by
biogas. With energy efficient cooking systems,
energy need can be substantially reduced and
biogas can meet much of cooking energy needs.
Community biogas plants managed as
commercial enterprises need to be encouraged
with finance and provision of land.
10. LPG is the most convenient cooking
fuel. If we desire that all households use it,
then, besides setting up a distribution network,
the poor will have to be provided financial
assistance. However, as indicated earlier, lifeline
level of LPG consumption that needs to be
subsidised is estimated as only about 13 Mtoe
even in 2031-32. Again, the most effective way
of targeting differing levels of subsidy to support
lifeline consumption of cooking energy is by
providing it directly to the end-consumer in
cash through smart cards.
11. At present kerosene is subsidised.
Distribution of subsidised kerosene has not
been without problems. The current delivery
system of kerosene subsidy by keeping the
price of kerosene to the consumer low and
compensating the oil companies for the
difference in the consumer price and the import
parity price has led to shockingly high rate of
corruption in the petroleum distribution
agencies. A lot of kerosene to be distributed
under PDS system is diverted for the
adulteration of high priced diesel even at the
depot level. Based on NSS data we estimate
that only 56 percent of kerosene released by
States reaches people as PDS kerosene. Since
the different between price of diesel and PDS
kerosene was Rs.21 per litre in 2005-06, a
leakage of 44 percent implies that Rs.10,400
crore were made by unscrupulous distributors.
Removing the subsidy may improve the
availability of kerosene in rural areas for at
least those who can afford it. They will use
more of kerosene freeing biomass based fuels
for the poor. Once houses are electrified under
RGGVY, or by providing them with solar
lighting systems, the need to subsidise kerosene
for lighting will also no longer be there. If
kerosene is to be subsidised as a cleaner fuel,
the only way of preventing this pernicious
adulteration and the widely prevalent
corruption is to make the price of keroseneand diesel very close and give the subsidy to
the consumer directly by way of coupons or
smart cards.
8.3 SUBSIDY THROUGH DEBIT
CARDS/SMART CARDS
12. The best way for providing subsidy for
electricity and cleaner fuels, kerosene or LPG,
is to give an entitlement to the targeted
households equivalent to 30 units of power
and 6 kg. of cooking gas or equivalent amount
of kerosene to cover one or both needs. A
system of debit cards or smart cards may be
introduced whereby the targeted households
get a credit of different amounts of cash for the
purchase of these entitlements. The available
credit on the debit/smart card can only be
used for purchase of these entitlements. With
modern ICT, card readers operated on battery
and feeding data using mobile technology can
work in rural areas of the country too.
13. The problem of bogus cards has plagued
our public distribution system. How do we
ensure that bogus debit cards would not be
issued? One way to do this is to put the names
of all cardholders on the village board and
internet. Another option would be to provide
cards with physiological identification.
14. Even if a household decides to sell the
entitlement and not use power, LPG and
kerosene, it would still be welfare improving.
The poor who prefer to sell their entitlement
and still gather biomass based fuels would be
better off as there would be much less
competition for it. The effort and time involved
mainly of women and girls in gathering fuel
would go down. To reduce the adverse impact
of indoor air pollution on their health, women
should be informed about possible defensive
measures, such as ventilating the kitchen by
removing a brick or two under the roof, using
improved smokeless chulahs, keeping the
children away from the stove and minimising
the exposure to smoke, etc.
15. Within this broad strategy the suggested
policy actions to provide electricity and cleaner
fuels to all are summarised below:
 Provide a monthly entitlement of 30
units of electricity and 6 kg. of LPG or
equivalent amount of kerosene for one
or both lifeline energy needs through a
system of Smart/Debit Cards with
varying levels of direct cash support to
targeted households as detailed above.
 To facilitate distributed generation
under RGGVY to enhance the speed
by which we can electrify all
households. Revise the scope of
RGGVY to cover actual electrification
of all households. Most importantly
develop a viable revenue model for
RGGVY.
 Eventually when the grid supply
reaches the villages electrified using DG,
the local generation could feed power
price into the grid, at regulated feed-in
tariffs, to support the lagging ends of
the grid.
 For setting up of off-grid generation
facilities in rural areas, encourage the
organised sector to adopt rural
community/communities in their areas
of operation. Even tax rebates may be
considered linked to actual outcomes.
 A large-scale socio-economic
experiment should be financed to
operate community sized biogas plants
either by a community cooperative or
by a commercial entrepreneur. This
should assess various management
models in a scientific manner and
examine whether the inclusion of the
poor and disadvantaged can be
guaranteed. Successful management
models should be replicated on a largescale.
 Community land should be allocated
to women’s self-help groups and they
should be provided with finance and
technical help to develop fuel wood
plantations in convenient locations.Research and Development (R&D) in
the energy sector is critical to augment our
resources, to meet our long-term needs, to
promote efficiency, to attain energy
independence and to enhance our energy
security.
2. A look at the projections of
International Energy Agency (IEA), the Energy
Information Administration (EIA), British
Petroleum (BP) and Shell reveals the continuing
growth in global fossil fuel consumption till
2030. India may find it harder and harder to
import required energy as our requirements
are growing faster than the growth in the
world’s total fossil fuel supplies. The solution
for India lies in: (a) reducing requirements by
using fuel/energy more efficiently; (b) seeking
substitutes to fossil fuels; (c) shifting to fuel
efficient modes of transport; (d) augmenting its
domestic energy resources; and (e) adopting
leading commercial or near commercial low
carbon and high-energy-efficiency technologies
that extract and use coal, our most abundant
primary energy resource, in a more sustainable
manner. Energy R&D has a critical role to
play in all these areas. The policy initiatives
that stand out for India are detailed in this
chapter.
3. Energy R&D has not got the resources
that it needs. We need to substantially augment
the resources for energy R&D and to allocate
these strategically. To take an innovative idea
to a commercial application involves many
steps. Basic research leading to a fundamental
breakthrough may open up possibilities of
applications. R&D is needed to develop any
new concept and to prove its feasibility. This
needs to be followed up by a working model
at laboratory scale. Scaling up to a pilot project
follows if the economic potential is attractive
keeping in mind cost reductions that could be
achieved through better engineering and mass
production. Demonstration projects, further
economic assessment and more R&D then go
into making the project acceptable and
attractive to customers before
commercialisation and diffusion can take place.
4. At each stage appropriate support needs
to be provided for R&D. The nature of the
support and the attendant institutional
arrangements will differ. India has used three
approaches; technology development missions
that require coordinated research and
development of all stages of the innovation
chain to reach a targeted goal such as in the
departments of atomic energy and space
research; technology roll out missions to
develop and roll out commercial or near
commercial technology such as the missions to
provide rural telephony; and broad based R&D
support to research institutions, universities
and others through project funding.
Technology Missions are the most appropriate
mechanism, particularly when it requires
coordinated action in a number of different
areas, which may involve different government
ministries, departments or levels and the private
sector. A technology mission whether for
development or roll out not only brings a
single point focus to dispersed initiatives in the
relevant field but also provides support to
research projects in universities and research
institutions with the aim of delivering the
mission objectives. Technology missions must
cover areas that are of critical importance to
India’s long-term energy needs. While
coordinated effort is desirable for all R&D in
all links of the innovation chain, it becomes
critical to place such a coordinating role under
a commercially oriented entity, with wellidentified targets, when one needs to roll out
already commercial or near commercial
technologies in a time-bound manner. Funding
for specific projects to be taken up in
universities and R&D institutions as a part of
Energy R&Dsuch programme should be routed through the
coordinating agency for time-bound outcomes.
In either approach, it is emphasised that R&D
requires sustained support over long periods of
time.
5. Based on these considerations, we
recommend the following:
 A National Energy Fund (NEF) should
be set-up to finance energy R&D. Our
expenditure on R&D excepting for
atomic energy, which as of today
provides less than 3 percent of our
total electrical energy supply, is
miniscule compared to what industry
and governments spend in developed
countries. In the developed world,
industry generally spends more than 2
percent of its turnover on R&D. In
India, the total expenditure on R&D
in 2004-05 was Rs.610 crores12 for
Atomic Energy and Rs.70 crores for
Ministry of Power, Coal and NonConventional Energy Sources. Even at
one-tenth of the rate at which industry
in developed countries spends on R&D,
i.e. 0.2% of the turnover of all energy
firms whose turnover exceeds Rs.100
crores a year, we end up with Rs.1000
to Rs.1200 crores per year which will
increase over time. We should be
spending much more than this on
R&D. Much of R&D can be considered
a public good. There is, thus, a strong
case for funding by the government
either directly or through fiscal
incentives. The latter accounts for the
bulk of government support in the
developed countries. Fiscal incentives,
however, have not resulted in
significant expenditure on R&D by
Indian industry. An annual allocation
should be made by the government for
energy R&D. To begin with, for the
first year Rs.1,000 crores, excluding
atomic energy, may be provided to
this fund. Individuals, academic research
institutions, consulting firms, private
and public sector enterprise, could all
compete for grants from this fund for
identified and directed research.
 The fund should be governed by an
Independent Board with representation
of Department of Science &
Technology (DST), Planning
Commission and Energy Ministries.
However, a majority should be outside
experts. It would support all stages of
R&D from basic research to diffusion
with appropriate policies, resources and
institutions.
Each identified technology goal should
be broken down into its constituent
basic research and applied research.
Both types of research should be
allowed to access funding from the
NEF but all activities must be
coordinated to deliver defined goals/
targets/milestones in a time-bound
manner.
The fund should promote the
formation of consortia between
industry, research institutions, and
academia in each of the identified
energy technology areas. A virtual
network of energy research institutions,
like laboratories of Council of Scientific
& Industrial Research (CSIR),
Department of Science & Technology
(DST), Department of Biotechnology
(DBT) etc. and private sector, should
be created to assist in pooling resources
and exploiting synergies through
dispersed but well coordinated and
directed research for identified
technologies.
 Each company in the field of energy
should be mandated to spend at least
0.4% of its turnover on R&D. Any
contribution made by the company to
NEF could qualify for full deduction
from the income taxes due from the
company.
12 Only about 15% of this amount viz., Rs.610 crores, was for R&D on nuclear power. The rest of the
expenditure is for R&D on non-electricity applications of Radiation Technology and Fundamental
Research. The NEF should aim at making India
a global leader in energy technologies
most relevant to India’s energy security
for sustained growth.
6. We have already identified some
projects for R&D earlier. However, we
recognise that the world of technology is
dynamic and one should be flexible in one’s
strategy.
 Resources devoted to research in
different areas depend on the economic
importance of that particular area, the
scope of technology and the likelihood
of success of R&D in developing these.
The latter changes with time as new
developments in science & technology
take place and uncertainty reduces.
R&D priorities have to be based on a
strategic vision which is frequently
updated. Of critical importance is
research and analysis to outline
technology road maps. The NEF
should commission, encourage and fund
such studies on a regular basis in a
number of institutions and through
individuals.
 The NEF should support energy policy
modelling activities in a selected
institution on a long-term basis.
Different modellers should be
periodically brought together in an
energy modelling forum to address
specific policy issues.
7. In view of the discussion above the
Committee felt the need for several National
Technology Development Missions crucial to
India’s long-term energy security. These
technology missions must pull together all
current efforts and resources being devoted to
the technologies relevant to the mission and
place their responsibility as separate but linked
parts of a single chain of command working
towards specific and time-bound deliverables.
The missions must engage industry, academia
and India’s R&D infrastructure of laboratories
and research institutions. The missions
identified below exclude nuclear energy as
research in that field is progressing well under
the various institutions controlled by the
Department of Atomic Energy and covers
fission, fusion, breeding of fissile material, use
of Thorium as also a number of non-energy
related fields. The following National
Technology Missions are recommended:
 In-situ coal gasification: Given its vast
reserves of relatively poor quality coal
which might prove uneconomical for
extraction beyond 300 meter depth
using convention technologies, India
needs to take the lead in developing
this technology in order to enhance
the life of its most important and
dominant energy resource. This
technology would extract energy from
deep seated coal without the high ash
that accompanies Indian coal.
 Integrated Gasification Combined
Cycle (IGCC) is a clean coal
technology that India has been pursuing
for some 3 decades. These efforts should
be brought under a mission to establish
efficacy with Indian coal and likely
commercial viability.
 Coal to liquids and/or gasified coal
to liquids: If crude settles at above
$45/barrel on a long-term basis,
adapting this technology to Indian coal
could increase India’s energy security.
This technology was successfully
deployed in South Africa using South
African coal. They have tested Indian
coal and confirm that the technology
works.
 Carbon capture and sequestrations:
India’s energy mix will remain
dominated by coal at least to 2031-32
and possibly beyond. In order to grow
in a sustainable manner capturing
carbon and sequestering it would
become critical for India in the years
to come. Such technology has already
been deployed commercially in
conjunction with enhanced oil recovery
from adjacent oil fields in three
locations worldwide.
 Bio-energy mission: This mission
could cover three distinct areas related
to bio-energy. These include: (i) Biodiesel from non-edible oils such asJatropha and Karanj; (ii) Cellulosic
ethanol; and (iii) energy plantations. A
bio-fuel mission to plant Jatropha or
other appropriate oil plants on 4,00,000
hectares of wasteland within three years
has been undertaken to assess yields
under alternative agro-climatic and soil
conditions, diverse cultivation practices
and different levels of inputs such as
water and nutrients. The mission will
identify germ plasm of promise and
develop high yielding varieties. Even if
the experiment shows little scope for
economic exploitation of bio-diesel, the
expenditure could be justified just as a
failed oil exploration effort, by the
large local employment generated. A
similar mission needs to be mounted
for energy plantations wherein the
biomass generated could be gasified or
combusted directly in wood fired
boilers for power generation. Funds
available under NREGA (National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act)
could be used for meeting the cost of
planting under both these schemes.
Production of cellulosic ethanol is
getting considerable attention and India
should also mount a separate mission
for R&D in this emerging energy
source.
 Storage technologies: Storage
technologies are important for using
intermittent sources of power and for
the automotive sector. Super
conducting storage devices and super
battery technology should be focused
on, given that cost and higher capacity
to weight ratios are still big challenges.
 Solar: Solar technology is often seen as
relevant for niche applications. Given
that solar energy is one of our major
energy sources and the only renewable
energy source with sufficient potential
to meet almost all our energy needs,
we should give a high priority to
development of solar technology for
large-scale deployment. A technology
mission should be mounted to break
barriers to wider use of solar thermal
and for bringing down the cost of solar
photovoltaic by a factor of five as soon
as possible.
 Advanced materials: Several
technologies depend on developing
advanced materials. A mission to
support this could actually cut across
several technologies and could also draw
from current work done in a variety of
fields such as nuclear, space, transport,
etc. for applications in the field of
energy.
 Hydrogen: Development of Hydrogen
as an energy carrier is being pursued in
many countries. Hydrogen can be used
to generate electricity in a fuel cell or
it can be burnt directly in internal
combustion engines. Hydrogen,
however, has to be produced by
expanding another primary or
secondary form of energy. This can be
gas, coal, oil, solar energy, biomass,
hydro or nuclear energy. It is also
possible to produce it through
microbial action. A mission covering
all aspects of hydrogen production,
storage, transport, deployment and use,
can be justified on three considerations:
(i) Since many countries are working
on hydrogen, the R&D on
applications will find international
market.
(ii) Some of the R&D for fuel cell
based vehicles is common for
electric vehicles which may become
attractive with advancement of
battery technology; and
(iii) If economic production of
hydrogen through electrolysis of
water using solar energy, and/or
nuclear energy or from microbial
action materialises, and storage,
transportation and distribution of
hydrogen becomes economically
viable, hydrogen could become a
clean and endless energy option.
 Gas hydrates: A technology mission
for assessment and exploitation of gashydrates is justified given India’s
abundant gas hydrate reserves in deep
waters8. The Committee has identified the
following areas wherein technologies are either
fully commercialised elsewhere or are near
commercialisation. Even technologies that have
been commercialised elsewhere a certain
amount of adaptation may be called for. In all
these areas, technology roll out missions are
proposed. An industry, or a group of industries
or a commercially oriented agency should be
asked to take the role of lead coordinator and
seek early acquisition, adaptation and
commercialisation. R&D funding for in-house
research and directed outsourced research
should be provided based on competing offers.
 A number of energy efficiency
technologies including DSM
technologies. Technology Information,
Forecasting & Assessment Council
(TIFAC) can be asked to identify
specific technologies ready for
adaptation and/or commercialisation in
India.
 Recovery of coal bed methane and mine
mouth methane. Blocks have been
allocated already. ONGC and others
holding blocks should be asked to
indicate firm dates for tapping this
energy and identifying any specific
hurdles or technology needs.
 Fluidised bed boilers and advanced
circulating bed fluidised boilers should
be promoted for use with low quality
Indian coals and/or washery rejects.
BHEL, L&T and others should be
asked to take the lead in developing
this application and its wider use.
 Washing of Indian coal, requires that a
well-established technology be adapted
for Indian coals of different quality so
that yields and viability can be
improved. BHEL and NTPC should
lead this effort with the support of the
research institutions of the coal
industry.
 Reduction of SOx/NOx and particulate
emissions to match global standards.
NTPC, private sector and SEBs could
compete for taking the lead on this.
 Current practices/technologies for
exploration and extraction of coal for
adaptation in Indian conditions. Coal
India and Neyveli Lignite to be given
the lead in this area.
 Increased/enhanced oil and gas recovery
and recovery of hydrocarbons from
abandoned and isolated fields. ONGC
should be given a time-bound
programme to acquire and deploy such
technologies.
 Fuel-efficient vehicles. The automotive
industry should be asked to achieve
higher fuel efficiency standards in steps
so as to reach efficiencies that are at
least twice current levels. Companies
reaching defined milestones first to be
given large cash awards along with
fiscal incentives based on outcomes.
 Hybrid vehicles and battery operated
vehicles. Automotive industry to lead
the efforts in commercialising these
technologies. Large cash awards and
fiscal incentives given based on
outcomes.
 Off-shore wind potential to be tapped.
Wind mill manufacturers to take lead
in delivering a time-bound programme.
GOI to provide fiscal incentives.
 Alternate routes to alcohol such as
sweet sorghum should be promoted.
Industries such as Praj and industrial
alcohol users to compete for R&D
funding and fiscal/cash rewards against
defined outcomes.
 Promoting community bio-gas plants.
The real potential of biogas is in
community level plants. To have the
willing participation of all the cattle
owners in the community requires an
appropriate operating strategy.
Individual and community
entrepreneurs should be encouraged to
experiment with alternate strategies by
providing land and finance. Industries
should also be roped in to execute the
programme through adoption of
villages. Tax rebates to be provided on
a graduated scale based on actual
outcomes in the field.9. The above list is neither a
comprehensive list nor a mandatory one. It is
an indicative list of technology areas relevant
to India’s needs. The primary idea is to conduct
and fund research that is directed and outcome
oriented. All funding made available and fiscal
incentives provided should be linked to
achievement of defined outcomes. Finally, a
variety of institutions and individuals can be
tapped but in a coordinated fashion to deliver
defined outcomes.
10. In addition to the two types of
technology missions, the NEF should also
provide R&D support for application,
innovation of new ideas, fundamental research
etc., to researchers from different institution,
universities, organisations and even individuals.
11. Such a R&D programme will require
large number of trained researchers. However,
a vigorous programme of research and teaching
in academic institutions will itself attract
students and, over time, relevant expertise will
develop. A number of academic institutions
should be developed as centres of excellence in
energy research. Generous funding for
fellowships for energy R&D may be provided
to students pursuing post-graduate degrees.
12. Energy R&D, particularly that devoted
to reduce green house gas emissions, has
characteristics of global public good. India
should link up with other countries and
cooperate with international R&D initiatives.
India’s manpower strength in R&D can then
be leveraged to get better results sooner and at
lower cost. Joint research with shared IPRs
could boost India’s R&D efforts significantly.
Also, with our growing and diversified energy
market, R&D efforts can find quicker returns
on successful commercialisation in India. Such
a strategy would give India its appropriate
place in global energy R&D.When India became independent in
1947, the country had a power generating
capacity of 1362 MW. Generation and
distribution of electricity was carried out
primarily by private utility companies. A few
of these are still in existence. Power was
available only in a few urban centers; rural
areas and villages did not have electricity
supply.
2. The Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, was
enacted to facilitate faster power sector
development and State Electricity Boards (SEBs)
were set up in all the states to achieve the
desired objective. All new generation,
transmission and distribution came under the
purview of SEBs. The creation of SEBs led to
faster development of power sector in the
country. However, financial constraints of the
State Governments precluded the SEBs from
adding the desired capacity to meet the growing
demand. During the Fifth Plan period (1974-
79) it was felt that Central Government should
supplement state governments’ efforts to expand
the power system in order to ensure that the
country achieves the desired economic growth.
The National Thermal Power Corporation
(NTPC) and National Hydroelectric Power
Corporation Ltd. (NHPC) were set up in 1975
and North Eastern Electric Power Corporation
Ltd. (NEEPCO) in 1976 to achieve this
objective. Under the Department of Atomic
Energy (DAE) the country’s first Nuclear
Power Plant was set up in 1969. Later in 1987
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd
(NPCIL) was set up by the DAE to develop
nuclear power plants in the country. These
Central Power Sector PSUs were responsible
for their own transmission schemes till the
National Power Transmission Corporation
(POWERGRID) was created in 1989 with the
responsibility of constructing, operating and
maintaining the inter-state and inter-regional
transmission system of the country.
3. Although the Central Public Sector
units delivered their objectives to a satisfactory
level, it soon became evident that the public
sector dominance of this crucial sector was
increasingly being seen as a weakness. Power
sector reforms were initiated in 1991 to
encourage competition and seek private
participation in each sub element of the sector,
namely generation, transmission and
distribution. Fast Track private sector projects
with Government guarantees followed by the
Mega Power Policy were announced to attract
large-scale private investment into the sector.
These efforts did not bear fruit but the
Government persisted and proceeded to usher
in an independent and transparent regulatory
regime. After the enactment of Regulatory
Commissions Act, 1998, Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission (CERC) was set up at
the central level and twenty four states have
either constituted or notified the constitution
of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions
(SERCs) since then. The SEBs of A.P., Orissa,
Haryana, Karnataka, U.P., M.P., Uttaranchal,
Delhi, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and
Assam have been unbundled and corporatised.
4. Despite these reform initiatives, most
of the SEBs continued to make financial losses
because of an unsustainable level of aggregate
technical and commercial losses. Unpaid dues
of the Central Public Sector Units mounted
and, by 2001, had crossed the Rs. 40,000 crore
mark. These dues were seen as a major
impediments to the reform process and were
securitised under a tripartite agreement covering
Central Sector Power Utilities, Coal India and
Railways. The tripartite agreement guaranteed
payments to these Central PSUs and used
incentives to encourage commercial discipline
and initiation of reform process in the States.
5. It has become increasingly evident that
distribution reform holds the key to long-term
Power Sector Policysustainability of the sector. Distribution has
been privatised in Orissa and Delhi but results
have been mixed, at best. The presence of the
private sector, even today, remains limited to
about 12% of generation and covers distribution
in only a few cities. To encourage distribution
reforms, the Accelerated Power Development
and Reforms Programme (APDRP) was
launched. APDRP supports distribution
reforms in the states through investment
support and incentives for lowering AT&C
losses. APDRP set out to bring down AT&C
losses to 15% by 2007 from an estimated level
of 45% in 2002 and restore the financial health
of SEBs. However, the performance of APDRP
has fallen well short of the promise. Investment
in the distribution sector remains low and the
overall AT&C loss level continues to remain
high.
6. As a result, power shortages remain a
persistent problem. The inability to expand
generating capacity, strengthen transmission
networks and improve distribution systems
reflect the financial sickness of SEBs. They do
not have the resources to invest themselves
nor have the credibility to attract private
investors. The large AT&C losses are partly an
outcome of neglect of investment in
transmission & distribution (T&D) over the
years. Substantial investments are needed in
T&D. Simultaneously, changes have to be made
to better manage the distribution of electricity.
The problems of pilferage, misclassification of
consumers, under/over billing and noncollection of bills would also need to be
addressed. At the national level AT&C losses
still exceeded 40 percent in the year 2004-05
(CEA 2005). The ratio of energy billed to
energy available was a low 68 percent in 2004-
05.
7. Among those that are billed for
electricity are large number of farmers and
domestic consumers who are subsidised. Cross
subsidies from industrial and commercial
consumers that were meant to fund the
subsidies given to farmers and domestic
consumers are, today, also funding the losses
and the inefficiencies of the distribution
companies. Less than 48 percent of the billed
energy is sold to industrial and commercial
consumers (including sales to public water
works and railway traction). However, this 48
percent of billed energy yields over 70 percent
of the actual revenue collected by the state
utilities. The cross subsidies cannot be raised
any further as they have reached a level where
industries find it cheaper to set-up their own
generating plants.
RESTRUCTURING OF APDRP
8. The problems with APDRP are: lack
of baseline data to assign accountability and
assess outcomes, poor preparation of projects
as revealed by some independent assessment
and a lack of incentives for the staff to reduce
AT&C losses. APDRP needs to be restructured
as follows:
 Introduce automatic meter reading
(AMR) of all distribution transformers
to track how much loss occurred in
each area served by a transformer and
establish accountability. Back this with
a Geographical Information System
(GIS) that maps the distribution system
to facilitate power audits, pinpoint the
offenders and improve customer service.
Introduce an incentive scheme for staff
whereby they share the additional
revenue collected in their distribution
circle.
 Data generated with AMR and GIS
mapping can help split up AT&C losses
into technical, billing, collection & theft
and help in designing specific corrective
actions and assigning responsibility and
accountability. This data should be
disseminated to the public to create
support for corrective action.
 Bifurcate agricultural pumping load
from the non-pumping load in all rural
feeders. Use available technological
options to limit and measure the
amount of agricultural pumping energy
provided
 For all loads above say 50 kWh,
introduce intelligent meters that permit
real time and remote recording of data
and allow remote control over the
power supplied by each meter. This
would help effective management ofconnected load and the reported
pilferage by large consumers.
 Introduce time-of-day pricing with shift
to electronic meters.
 All central assistance to state
governments for the power sector must
be linked exclusively to loss reduction
and improved viability.
 The improvements listed above and
the base line data generated as a result
would bring greater transparency in
the process of privatisation (if pursued)
and provide a better estimate of the
transition funding needs under
outcome driven privatisation models
that seek to restore the viability of
distribution.
POWER SECTOR REFORM
9. Ideally, agricultural consumers should
be metered and the subsidy should be given
to the distribution utility by the State
Government based on actual energy delivered.
However, given the political reality where
many Chief Minister’s promise free power to
farmers, separation of feeders is suggested as a
second best solution. It will enable the
distribution utility to ration agricultural
consumers and to meet their requirement at
off peak hours thus lowering the economic
burden of free power to farmers and providing
more accurate estimates of real agricultural
consumption.
10. Privatising distribution is seen by some
as an alternative solution to reducing AT&C
losses. Based on experience worldwide,
privatising utilities is definitely part of the
solution. India’s experience with privatising
the Delhi and Orissa distribution has, however,
raised as many questions as it has answered.
Where privatisation is politically feasible, it
should be done in a transparent manner based
on authentic base-line data and through a
genuine round of competitive bidding. There
should be no shifting of the publicly announced
terms of privatisation post bidding. The
restructured APDRP can, in the very least,
help create an authentic base line.
11. As the provisions of the Electricity
Act, 2003 take root, the pace of reforms is
likely to accelerate and private sector
participation should become easier. The Act
provides the basic framework for encouraging
competition in the sector and creates open
access to encourage private sector investments
in each element of the electricity value chain.
Moreover, it permits setting up of captive and
group captive power plants without the
clearance of the distribution utility and provides
for wheeling power from the captive plants to
captive consumers without any cross-subsidy
surcharge. However, significant private sector
participation and competition still elude the
sector. While movement of the reform process
is in the right direction, actual achievements
have been minimal.
12. Worldwide, the efforts in introducing
competition and in deregulating the power
sector have yielded mixed signals. Emphasis
on competition has, in several countries,
highlighted the limitations of open market
orientation, unbundling and open access. The
resulting stress on capacity creation especially
in transmission, loss of price stability, uneven
sharing of benefits between large and small
consumers, high institutional and transaction
costs etc. have together created support for
integrated utilities with monopolies in licensed
geographical areas. The question being asked
today by some is if well-functioning regulation
that creates capacity through competition is
not a better answer than totally free
competition that permits full access to
consumers. It has been seen worldwide that
spot markets, power pools, retail choices, etc.
require an elaborate and often expensive
institutional and regulatory framework without
which the benefits are difficult to achieve.
Similarly worldwide experience shows that
privatisation in the electricity sector can
certainly help but may not be necessary or
sufficient to effect transformation.
13. It might be argued that in the electricity
sector competition should be encouraged, where
appropriate, rather than taking it as a default
principle. The lumpy investments needed to
create capacity, the relatively large incremental
step when new capacity is addedthe gestationlag in creating additional capacity and
environmental and logistical issues create
hurdles to perfect competition in the power
sector with available technology choices. This
could change in the future. Specifically with
respect to India, management reforms
(particularly in the distribution sub-sector) are
as important as a liberal captive and open
access regime driven by a desire to create
competition in the power sector. While it
might be utopian to assume that perfect
regulation could substitute competition, it is
unambiguously clear that regulation will indeed
expand once competition sets in. It is equally
unrealistic to assume that perfect competition
can be introduced in the power sector in a
short time. The key for India might be effective
stakeholder involvement for successful
regulation. This may go as far as appointing an
office of “Consumer Advocate” at the state
level. Again, while privatisation is one possible
option for distribution, it cannot be a prerequisite or a necessary consequence of APDRP
restructuring. The door for reform under public
ownership must be left open.
14. The above should not be read as a vote
against entry of private sector into the power
sector or negating the benefits of competition.
As stated above, competition is very much
possible in each element of the electricity value
chain under a well-functioning regulatory
regime. In the context of India, the strength of
the dominant public sector can be effectively
leveraged to introduce competition that extracts
efficiency gains in generation, transmission and
distribution.
15. Capacity expansion is currently done
mainly by the Central PSUs who have been
insulated from payment problems by the
Tripartite Agreement (TPA) involving SEBs,
State Government and Reserve Bank of India.
The TPA protects payments to Central Power
Sector PSUs, Railways and Coal India through
recourse to the account of the state governments
with the Reserve Bank of India. Although the
TPA came into existence in 2001 in the context
of past dues of state governments to Central
Power Sector PSUs, Railway and Coal India; it
has been applied also to all new capacity created
by Central Power Sector PSUsRailway and
Coal India since then. The states have been
maintaining payment discipline vis-à-vis Central
Power Sector PSUs, but the long-term viability
of the arrangement is questionable, particularly
as the share of Central Power Sector PSUs in
power generation keeps on increasing. There
is, thus, an inescapable need to reform the
power sector.
REDUCTION IN COST OF POWER
16. There is at present no level playing
field between Central Power Sector PSUs and
others. The tariff of the Central Power Sector
PSUs is determined on the basis of costs and
norms with a guaranteed 14/16% post tax
return on equity. This tariff determination
regime gives little incentive to be efficient. The
private sector generators do not get the comfort
of the payment security mechanism available
to Central Power Sector PSUs under the TPA
and the State power utilities do not get the
assured post tax returns.
 In cases where tariff continues to be
determined on the basis of costs and
norms, regulators may either adopt a
return on equity approach or return
on capital approach, whichever is
considered better in the interest of
consumers. In deciding the level of
return provided, the regulator should
inter-alia take into account the return
available on long-term government
bonds and reasonable risk premiums
associated with equity investments.
 Distribution should be bid out on the
basis of a distribution margin or paid
for by a regulated distribution charge
determined on a cost plus basis
including a profit mark up similar to
that described above.
 All generation and transmission projects
(with the exception of one time capacity
expansion of up to 50% of installed
capacity of a generating plant) should
be competitively built on the basis of
tariff-based bidding. Public Sector
Undertakings shall also be encouraged
to participate in such bids even though
the tariff policy allows them a 5 year
window wherein projects undertakenby the public sector need not be bid
competitively.
 The liberal captive and group captive
regime foreseen under Electricity Act,
2003, should be realised on the ground.
India’s liberal captive regime will not
only derive economic benefits from
availability of distributed generation
but set competitive wheeling charges
to supply power to group captive
consumers. This will pave the way for
open access to distribution networks.
 The Ministry of Power (MOP) should
facilitate large-scale capacity addition
(20,000 MW or more) to meet identified
demands of beneficiary states through
international competitive bidding. Bulk
orders of this size, to be delivered over
a given time frame, can, if executed
properly, be used to: (a) lower capital
costs; (b) introduce plants that deliver
internationally comparable conversion
efficiencies; (c) promote coastal
locations with dedicated facilities for
handling domestic coal transported by
sea or imported coal; (d) realise
internationally comparable emission
standards; and (e) under certain
circumstances, create new domestic
manufacturing and engineering capacity
to build power plants. Since the
projected capacity additions over the
next 25 years are more than 6,00,000
MW, there is no danger of pre-empting
future competition or limiting
technology options by such bulk
purchases.
 Any subsidy given to poor households
or farmers should be funded by the
State Government through its budget.
REGULATOR
 Existing projects and future investments
that are not competitively bid must
comply with CERC’s tariff guidelines.
States that do not comply should be
made ineligible for Central Sector
support for their power sector.
 Operationalise the flexible and enabling
captive regime foreseen under the
Electricity Act and provide consumer
choice through open access. This
requires the development of normative
wheeling and distribution costs at
different voltages by respective
Regulators, the introduction of timeof-day pricing at the bulk and retail
levels, and the identification of cross
subsidies embedded in the cost of
supply in each distribution circle. Timeof-day tariff may make gas-fired peaking
stations economical.
 Electricity prices are currently set by
State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions on cost plus basis.
Regulators should set tariffs for a
number of years and differentiate them
by time of day.
 Respective Regulators should adapt best
international practices that reward
utilities for seeking: (i) distributed
generation with waste heat recovery
where feasible; (ii) demand side
management; and (iii) energy
conservation and energy efficiency
technology adoption through Negawatt
incentives.
 Regulators must establish feed-in-tariffs
for power from renewable energy
sources. The feed-in-tariffs should also
provide time-of-day benefits to
renewable energy supplies.
17. Other policy initiatives needed are:
Transmission and Distribution
 Separate content from carriage in both
transmission and distribution.
Regulated caps for: (i) wheeling charges
at different transmission voltages; and
(ii) distribution margins for consumers
at different voltage levels must be
introduced. Competition should be
introduced in building transmission
capacity on the basis of wheeling tariffs
and in distribution on the basis of
distribution margins.
 Inter-state transmission networksshould be managed by a regulated
monopoly. Transmission lines critical
for inter-state flows of power and for
system stability should also be managed
by the central body, even if it is entirely
within one state.
 Independent and/or fully transparent
load dispatch is required at regional
and state levels to ensure a level playing
field among competing common
carriers. An independent planning body
for transmission networks is necessary
to ensure proper development of such
networks.
Rural Electrification and Distributed
Generation
 Require the State Governments to
notify rural areas as required by the
Electricity Act, 2003. Such notification
could assist the emergence of
independent rural suppliers of
electricity thereby enhancing access for
both household and productive uses.
Many remote villages may be provided
electricity and energy security through
locally available renewable resources.
 To facilitate distributed generation and
encourage generation by renewables,
make grid connections for feeding in
surplus power to the grid, at the grid’s
avoided cost, mandatory. In order that
this does not jeopardise grid stability,
variable frequency transformers for
asynchronous network connections
may be used along with appropriate
grid management.
 To set up off-grid or distributed
generation facilities in rural areas,
encourage the organised sector to adopt
rural communities in their areas of
operation. They can build local
capacities to operate such plants and
eventually transfer the plants to local
groups.
 Ensure sustainable revenue models for
rural electrification programmes.
Without such revenue models
programmes such as RGGVY are
unlikely to be sustainable.
Adding Domestic Manufacturing and
Engineering Capacity
 The available manufacturing and
engineering capacity in the country is
grossly inadequate to support the
ambitious capacity addition programme
in thermal, hydro, nuclear, renewable
and T&D sectors. There is an urgent
need to create these capacities,
preferably in the private sector.
18. In order to avoid power shortages and
take timely action annual electricity
requirements should be projected and yearwise targets for generation capacity be set for
seven years. Each project, public or private,
should be monitored along with a number of
milestones. This will help entrepreneurs to
take timely decisions to invest.The origin of coal mining in India
dates back to 1774. Demand for coal started
rising mainly for use by the railways after 1885
and coal production reached a level of over six
million tonne per annum by the beginning of
twentieth century. Coal mining was
predominantly done by the private sector and
pricing was market driven. A surge in demand
was witnessed during the First World War,
which multiplied many-fold during the Second
World War. Government control over prices,
production and distribution was imposed upon
the coal industry during this period by the
Colliery Control Order, 1944 modified under
the Essential Commodities Act, 1946 and it
remained in force even after independence. By
1950, coal output had risen to about 32 Mt and
Railways continued to be the single largest
consumer (31%) followed by Iron & Steel and
brass foundries (14%), brick kilns (9%), power
utilities (7%), cotton mills (7%), others (32%)
including colliery consumption (11%).
2. The Coal Board was set up in 1951 for
the conservation of coal resources and safety of
mines under Coal Mines (Conservation &
Safety) Act, 1952. The Mines & Minerals
(Regulation & Development) Act, 1948, was
consolidated in 1957 to deal with procedures
for granting and operating mineral concessions
and prescribing royalties to State Governments.
Also, the Mines Act, 1923, enforcing safety in
mines and welfare of miners was replaced by a
more comprehensive act in 1952.
3. After independence, the Government
passed an Industrial Policy Resolution in April,
1956 thereby including coal in the list of
industries earmarked for development in the
public sector and the National Coal
Development Corporation (NCDC) was
created in 1956 to carry on coal mining in the
public sector. The Coal Bearing Areas
(Acquisition & Development) Act was enacted
in 1957 to help NCDC acquire coal bearing
land in various states.
4. Coal mining by the private sector led
to a situation wherein there were a number of
small pits, which functioned with little regard
to conservation, safety of workers and use of
scientific methods of development. This led to
hazardous working conditions and loss of coal.
Recognising these, the coal industry was
nationalised in two phases - coking coal in
May 1972, and non-coking coal in May 1973.
A holding company, Coal India Limited (CIL),
was formed in November 1975, with several
coal producing subsidiary companies based on
geographical location of coalfields and one
company dedicated to mine planning and
design. Mines belonging to NCDC were merged
with different subsidiary companies. Tata Iron
& Steel Company in private sector and Indian
Iron & Steel Company and the Damodar Valley
Corporation under the public sector continued
to operate their captive mines. Singareni
Collieries Company Ltd. is the oldest public
sector coal company under the administrative
control of Government of Andhra Pradesh
with an equity share of 51%. The balance 49%
belongs to the Government of India.
5. Lignite development was pursued
through a public sector enterprise, the Neyveli
Lignite Corporation Ltd. (NLC) established in
1956. Besides NLC, lignite is also being mined
by the State PSUs of Gujarat and Rajasthan.
6. Geological Survey of India (GSI) is
vested with the responsibility of regional
exploration for coal. Mineral Exploration
Corporation Ltd. (MECL), Central Mine
Planning & Design Institution Ltd. (CMPDIL)
& Geological Survey of India (GSI) have been
identified for undertaking promotional
explorations to supplement regional
explorations with a view to expedite
Coal Sector Policyexploratory efforts for coal and lignite. Detailed
exploration is being carried out primarily by
MECL & CMPDIL on behalf of the coal
companies. Some of the mining and geological
corporations of the State Governments are
also taking up coal exploration on their own.
7. Coal consumption in the country has
been rising steadily and in 2005-06 India
consumed some 432 Mt of coal. This included
import of 17 Mt of metallurgical coal and 20
Mt of thermal coal. Given limited reserves of
high grade metallurgical coal and the high
cost of underground mining, India currently
imports about 66% of its requirement of
metallurgical coal. Thermal coal imports are
not significant. However, the quality of
domestic thermal coal has deteriorated over
the years due to the increased reliance on the
more cost-effective opencast mining. The
improvement in overall labour productivity
has been marginal primarily because the
mechanisation of underground mines has not
been successful to a large extent. The Industry
also continues to face problems in regard to
land acquisition and rehabilitation.
8. Following the economic reforms
instituted in 1991, the private sector has been
allowed to mine coal for captive consumption
under the Captive Mining Policy of 1993. The
captive mining policy allowed allocation of
blocks to designated end-users for mining coal
for their own use. The current list of authorised
end-uses includes power, steel and cement
producers. FDI was permitted in coal mining,
and joint ventures were also permitted. A large
number of coal blocks stand allocated to private
entrepreneurs for developing captive mines but
only few of these mines have started
production. The captive mining policy has
significant hurdles and has not been a success,
so far, either in raising domestic production or
in increasing the number of domestic producers.
State Government Corporations and CPSUs
are permitted under the Coal Mines
(Nationalisation) Act to take up coal mining at
par with CIL. Some state governments like
Jharkhand and J&K operate small mines.
9. In line with the economic reforms
aimed at raising the level of competition in
various core sectors, the government proposed
to allow private participation in commercial
coal mining. A Bill was introduced in the
Parliament in April, 2000, to amend the
provisions of Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act,
1973, for facilitating private participation in
commercial coal mining. The Bill proposes to
open up the coal sector to private investment,
but it does not have the requisite political
support for passage. While waiting for the
April 2000 Bill to be enacted by the Parliament,
the Government is trying to remove the barriers
to captive mining under the current law.
10. Keeping in view the railway
infrastructure, distribution of coal among
various user industries and movement plans
are controlled through a mechanism of
linkages. A long-term and short-term linkage
committee allocates coal to various core
industries such as power, steel, cement etc.
The linkage committee, an inter-ministerial
group, evaluates the requirement of coal by
consumers at the planning stage and links it
to what seems like a rational source from a
long-term perspective after examining factors
like quantity and quality required, time frame,
location of the consuming plants, transport
logistics and the development plan for the
coal mine. Unfortunately, the linkages remain
frozen, and as mines and users develop, they
no longer remain rational.
11. Coal prices were decontrolled totally
from the 1st of January, 2000 after scrapping
Colliery Control Order 1946; and coal
producing companies (CIL and SCCL) fixed
prices on their own and revised the same
periodically based on an escalation formula
under a cost plus approach. As a result, coal
prices have been revised several times in the
recent past. Decontrolling price in a
monopolistic situation is adversely affecting
the interest of consumers. In the absence of a
coal market with competing suppliers, there is
a need to develop a transparent mechanism for
pricing domestic coal.
12. Currently there is no competition in
the coal sector and the public sector monopoly
continues. No regulatory framework is available
and in such a situation grievance redressal forconsumers, particularly in regard to price/
quality disputes, is difficult. To raise the
commercial performance of the industry to
meet international standards and to sustain the
projected growth of energy sector, it is
important to address these issues.
13. Coal accounts for over 50% of India’s
commercial energy consumption and some 78%
of domestic coal production is dedicated to
power generation. Since prices were decontrolled, the sector has become profitable
primarily as a result of price increases and the
rising share of the more remunerative open
cast production. The sector has also recorded
improvements in productivity but despite these
improvements, the coal sector scores poorly
against international comparators because of
excessive manpower, poor project formulation,
inefficient procurement, poor accounting and
financial management systems, low productivity
etc. Despite these inefficiencies domestic coal
is internationally competitive at mine-mouth.
In fact, coal at the mine-mouth is the only
primary or secondary form of energy in which
India is internationally competitive. Another
positive for the coal sector is its good safety
record when compared with international
experience.
14. A concern often voiced for India’s coal
sector is the inefficient exploitation of the inplace coal reserves and the lack of control on
mining practices that could potentially be
sterilising significant parts of existing reserves.
Driven by short-run maximisation of economic
benefits if coal is mined in an open cast mine
only to the depth of 150 metres, and the
overburden is used to fill up the void, coal
lying in the lower horizon and reserves below
150 metres depth in the same horizon, then get
practically sterilised as it would be even more
uneconomic for subsequent exploitation using
conventional mining technologies. At current
levels of production growth, the known
extractable reserves will be exhausted in less
than 45 years. A large part of India’s coal
reserves may not be extractable with current
mining technologies. India must, thus, lead the
way for extracting this energy through in-situ
coal gasification in the interest of her energy
security
15. Primary energy from the coal resources
can be augmented if mining plans exploit coal
efficiently and if coal bed methane as well as
mine-mouth methane is captured and used.
The needed technology is globally available
but has to be adapted to Indian conditions.
Similarly in-situ coal gasification can use coal
that is difficult to recover with conventional
mining. Technology for in-situ gasification
needs to be developed.
16. Most of India’s coal resources - proved,
indicated and inferred - are said to be within
300 meter depth. There is a concern that this
is an outcome of insufficient exploration of
deposits below 300 meters and a sense that
exploiting coal below that depth with
conventional mining is, in any event,
uneconomical for low quality coal. Detailed
coal exploration is almost exclusively done by
CMPDIL, which is a subsidiary of CIL.
Concern has been raised about CMPDIL’s
independence under this structure. Moreover,
CMPDIL’s drilling capacity is limited and this
has resulted in a limited detailed exploration
programme for proving reserves. CMPDIL
should be made an autonomous institute. Its
capacity should be strengthened and
exploration for coal should be opened up to
others just as exploration for petroleum has
been opened up.
17. Enlarging the coal resource base is
important to meet coal requirements. Under
the various scenarios coal requirement is
projected from a low of 1580 Mt to high of
2555 Mt for 2031-32 and about 1128 to 1870
Mt for 2026-27. Coal India Ltd. has targeted a
maximum production of 839 Mt by 2025 in its
‘Vision 2025’ document. Clearly, if India is to
avoid large-scale imports of coal, not only does
India need to increase the pace of growth in
coal production but also raise coal production
targets significantly. What this requires is to:
(a) increase the number of players in coal
mining; (b) since Coal India currently has
blocks with 70% of the proven reserves, deblock those blocks that Coal India does not
propose to bring into production by 2016-17
and assign them to captive users with a
condition that these blocks be brought into
production by 201112and (c) raise theexploration effort significantly to prove
additional reserves.
18. Building domestic capacity for mining
equipment and significantly raising domestic
engineering capacity is necessary to achieve the
projected level of production.
19. India is the third largest coal producer
in the world but remains a marginal player in
international coal markets. Even domestically,
there is an absence of a coal market with bulk
of the sale taking place under a system of coal
linkages based on available rail capacity. Pithead prices of coal are set by Coal India, the
monopoly producer. Railways, another
Government monopoly, cross subsidises
passenger traffic with coal freight thereby
making delivered price of coal 2-4 times the
pit-head price of coal in states such as Punjab,
Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa,
Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Western U.P.
& Delhi.
20. The constrained supply of thermal coal
and the projected requirement of thermal coal
suggest the need to import coal. By the end of
the 11th Plan India’s import needs could rise
to 50-60 million tonnes of high quality thermal
coal. Import of coal will also put a competitive
pressure on the domestic coal industry to be
efficient. No significant import of thermal coal
is evident in the near future despite the fact
that long-term import contracts would make
imported coal competitive against domestic
coal at coastal locations in the above states.
The reason for this is the absence of coastal
power plants, inadequate port capacity and the
need to trans-ship imported coal on domestic
rail/road linkages to consumption points. While
power generated at pithead and delivered
through HVDC transmission lines can be
cheaper than power generated from imported
coal at coastal location, there is a limit to the
amount of generation that can be done at
pithead due to environmental considerations.
Coastal power plants based on imported coal
thus have an economic space (see BOX 11.1).
Thus India must:
 Encourage coastal power plants based
on imported coal.
 Develop the needed infrastructure for
coal imports.
21. Unlike in the rest of the world, coal in
India is sold without any “preparation” or
“dressing”. Simple deshaling, improved mining
procedures and sizing of coal could bring down
the average ash content of Indian coal to around
35% from the current level of over 40%. Full
washing could reduce the ash content further,
thereby saving transport costs and resulting in
more efficient power plant design and
operation. Only a small fraction of thermal
coal is actually “washed” in India. One of the
hurdles to washing is the prevailing unique
practice of pricing coal on grades based on
wide bands of Useful Heat Value (UHV) instead
of the fully variable system based on the more
precise Gross Calorific Value (GCV) as done
in the rest of the world.
22. In the light of the foregoing, the sector
is in serious need for market based reforms.
The following policy initiatives are suggested:
Policies not requiring legislative amendments:
Increasing Number of Coal Producers
 Pending the passage of the Coal Mines
(Nationalisation) Amendment Bill,
2000, the number of players in coal
mining should be increased through
avenues available under the existing
legislation that permits mining by state
governments, public sector companies
and for captive use by recognised endusers (power, steel and cement).
Captive block holders must be
permitted to sell incidental coal
surpluses during the development and
operation of a block to CIL. Groupcaptive mines should be allowed for
small end-users, and a target must be
set for the Ministry of Coal to achieve
at least 100 Mt of captive production
by 2012.
 Coal blocks held by Coal India Limited
(CIL) that cannot be brought into
production by 2016-17, either directly
or through joint ventures, should beBOX 11.1
Delivered Cost of Domestic and Imported Thermal Coal
Most of the domestic coal supplies to power sector fall under Grade E and F having average
delivered calorific value of 3500 kcal/kg against at least 6000 kcal/kg of imported coal.
Domestic and imported coal in terms of cost per million kilo calories of delivered heat value
at the consumer end were compared. It may be seen that the delivered cost of the power grade
Indian coal exceeds the cost of imported coal at port when transported to consumers beyond
1000 km. Further, imported coal is the cheaper option even with inland transportation of
some 500 km if domestic coal has to travel beyond 1400 km to reach the consumer.
Assumptions:
Domestic coal from mine to consumer and imported coal from port to consumer are being
transported by rail. Landed CIF price of imported coal having GCV of 6000 kcal/kg is taken
as US$60. Exchange rate assumed is Rs 44.50 per US$. Domestic coal price includes weighted
average notified price of coal for the respective grades, royalty, stowing excise duty,
transportation charges from mine to railway siding, central sales tax and rail freight. Landed
price of imported coal at port includes all applicable taxes and duties. However cost of
handling imported coal at the Indian port and transporting it to the railway siding for inland
transportation is not included. If this is done, the economical distance to which imported coal
can be transported inland will reduce further.
made available to other eligible
candidates for development with the
condition that they be brought into
production by 2011-12. Allottees of
captive blocks in general should be
required to work the block within a
specified time limit failing which
allotment should be cancelled and/or a
pre-agreed penalty imposed.
 The gestation periods for the end-use
project may be different than that of
the coal mine. To ensure that both the
mine and the end-use project are
developed in a cost-effective manner
the innovative use of short-term
linkages can be made. This must be
linked with strictly enforced guarantees
that back performance related to boththe end-use project and the captive
mine.
 Transfer pricing of coal from captive
mines needs to be established both for
the sake of assessing coal royalties as
well as tariffs in a regulated sector such
as power wherein coal cost is a pass
through. Even if power tariff is
determined on the basis of competitive
bidding, transfer price would be needed
to assess state levies/royalties.
Pricing of Coal
 Ideally coal price should be determined
in a competitive market. This, however,
is not possible as long as the number
of suppliers are limited and as long as
for the largest coal consuming sector,
i.e. power, coal cost is passed through
and fully compensated in determining
electricity tariff. However, since other
users of coal are numerous and consume
substantial quantities of coal, a strategy
for competitive price discovery is
possible. We recommend as follows:
• High quality coking and noncoking coals which are exportable
may be sold at export parity prices
as determined by import price at
the nearest port minus 15%. This
practise is currently being adopted
satisfactorily for supply of good
quality coking coal to the steel
industry.
• 20% of the total coal produced
should be sold through e-auctions.
For e-auctions to be successful, CIL
should, directly or otherwise,
ensure availability of coal and offer
it for sale to meet the total demand.
Quantities to be sold through
e-auction from different mines must
be determined annually with a
monthly mine-wise schedule to be
independently monitored and
enforced by a coal regulator.
• Remaining coal should be sold
under long-term Fuel Supply and
Transport Agreements (FSTAs).
Regulated utilities should be
allowed upto 100% of their certified
requirements through FSTAs.
Other bulk consumers may be
allowed partial FSTAs based on
coal availability. Any shortfalls in
requirement not covered by FSTAs
should be met through e-auction
supplies or imports.
• Pithead price of coal under FSTAs
should be revised annually by a
coal regulator on a basis that interalia take into account prices
obtained through e-auction, FOB
price of imported coal (both
adjusted for quality) and domestic
production cost, inclusive of return
based on efficiency standards.
 Replace the practice of grading coal
under wide bands of the empirically
determined UHV by the international
practice of grading coal based on GCV.
This is expected to encourage efficient
use of coal and promote use of washed
coal.
 Coal prices should be made fully
variable based on Gross Calorific Value
(GCV) and other quality parameters.
Reducing Coal Cost
 Rail freight rates for coal transport
should be rationalised. Cross subsidy
surcharges imposed on freight traffic
to benefit passenger fares must be
reduced. Alternate means for moving
coal through coastal shipping, river/
canal movement and coal slurry
through pipeline must be promoted
where feasible.
 Infrastructure status should be extended
to the coal industry. Duties on capital
goods imported for coalmines must be
lowered to put them at par with duties
on imports for other energy sub-sectors.
 There is a need to improve governance
for dealing with malpractices and
corruption in the coal industry. It is
common knowledge that there is asignificant black market for coal
obtained through pilferage and illegal
mining of abandoned mines worked
by local inhabitants. Apart from the
loss of royalty to the state there is,
more importantly, loss of precious lives
resulting from unsafe mining practices.
 Coal companies should be required as
per international practice to “prepare”
and “dress” coal prior to sale.
Facilitating production
 Strategies for matching the growth of
infrastructure needed for movement of
coal to load centres should be aligned
with the growth of coal industry.
 Wherever the techno-economic
parameters of the geological resource
demands development of underground
mine, related technology must be
encouraged by giving incentives to
operators because underground mining
helps preserve the land form and extract
deep seated resource.
 National Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Policy for people affected
by coal/lignite mining projects should
be mooted. Such policy should be
acceptable to all state governments.
 Grounding coal projects is often delayed
due to environmental regulations and
delays in getting approval for the
project’s Environmental Management
Plan (EMP). Simplification of
procedures, preparation of
comprehensive EMPs and
demonstration of environmental
responsibility on the ground can help
reduce such delays. A reserve of
compensatory afforestation built in
advance should be accepted against
specific project-wise commitments to
reduce such delays.
 Notify in-situ coal gasification and coal
liquefaction as end-uses under the
current captive consumption policy.
This will encourage private enterprise
to invest in development of these new
technologies.
Regulation
 Institute an independent regulatory
body to regulate upstream allotment
and exploitation of available coal blocks
to yield coal, coal bed methane, mine
mouth methane, coal to liquid and for
in-situ coal gasification. The proposed
Regulatory Body would, as an interim
measure, approve coal price revisions,
ensure supply of coal to the power
sector under commercially driven longterm FSTAs, facilitate the development
of formulae/indices for resetting coal
prices under long-term fuel supply
agreements, monitor the functioning
of the proposed e-auctions, ensure that
the price discovery through e-auctions
is free of distortions, regulate trading
margins, develop a mechanism for
adequate quantities of coal imports
under long-term contracts to bridge
the gap between supply and demand
thereby assuring that the e-auctions and
consequent price discovery does not
take place in a supply constrained
market and, finally, create the
environment for a competitive coal
market to operate. Once the market
matures, all large consumers (including
power) will become part of a
competitive coal market with purchases
through both long-term FSTAs and eauctions. It is stressed that once a
competitive market develops the role
of Regulator in determining the prices
would become one of merely ensuring
a free and transparent market for coal.
A key responsibility of the Regulator
would be to make India, with the third
largest reserves of coal in the world, a
long-term player in the highly liquid
international market for coal that
realises long-term trades under welltested indices such as the Japan coal
import index.
 The proposed Regulator must facilitate
replacement of current coal linkages
for power plants with FSTAs. As a
step towards abolishing coal linkages
completely, these linkages could be
made tradable in the first instanceThisis expected to make coal movements
more optimal and responsive to market
forces.
 The Regulator must ensure that mines
are planned, designed and developed in
a scientific manner giving due
importance to coal conservation
thereby maximising percentage of coal
recovery from geological blocks.
 The Regulator must standardise norms
of operation, establish benchmarks and
ensure that coal companies raise their
level of competence to be at par with
international standards.
Policies requiring legislative amendments:
 Amend Section 3 of the Coal Mines
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973 to facilitate
(a) private participation in coal mining
for purposes other than those specified
and (b) offering of future coal blocks
to potential entrepreneurs through
competitive bidding.
 Raise the domestic level of trading and
marketing of coal by removing it from
the list of essential commodities.
 Amend the provisions of Contract
Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act,
1970 to facilitate offloading of certain
activities in coal mining for improved
economics of operations.The Indian Petroleum industry is one
of the oldest in the world. Oil was struck at
Makum near Margherita in Assam in 1867.
The industry has come a long way since then.
At the time of independence in 1947, the
country produced about 0.25 Mt of crude oil
in Assam and refined 0.23 Mt of crude oil.
Digboi was the only refinery and the market
infrastructure was confined to urban and well
populated areas.
2. The Indian petroleum industry in the
post independence period (1947-2005) has passed
through three distinct phases
 Early phase (1947 to 1969)
 Development phase (1970 to 1990)
 The economic liberalisation phase
(1991-2005)
3. Historically, the Indian petroleum
industry was controlled by few AngloAmerican companies. They maintained their
dominance till the end of 1950s. After
independence, the newly independent state
wanted to play a significant role in this vital
industry. The industry policy resolutions of
1948 and 1956 had clearly stated the
government’s aspiration and future plans for
core industries like petroleum. All future
development of the petroleum industry was
reserved for public sector undertakings. But
foreign assistance was a necessity at least in the
early stages. It was recognised that majority
ownership and effective control of critical
industries like petroleum should always rest in
Indian hands and the need for developing an
independent and self-reliant petroleum industry
was felt. The industrial Policy Resolution of
1956 specifically increased the role of public
enterprises, and led to the creation of Oil &
Natural Gas Commission (ONGC), for
exploration and production, and Indian Oil
Corporation (IOC) for refining and marketing.
The Government took over the multinational
controlled petroleum companies like Burmah
Shell, Esso and Caltex between 1974-79. Oil
India limited (OIL) which was a Joint Venture
Company with equal share of Burmah Oil
Company and Government of India became a
wholly owned PSU in 1981.
4. The steep increase in oil prices during
1973-74 and hardly any increase in indigenous
production of crude oil put a heavy burden on
the economy due to an escalating import bill.
To meet this challenge, augmentation of
indigenous production of hydrocarbons and
their accelerated exploitation became the key
element of planning and development strategies.
Both ONGC and OIL took up the challenge
and formulated ambitious exploration
programmes. The exploration efforts yielded
results in the form of discoveries of oil and gas
in a number of fields in the Bombay Off-shore
area. Oil was struck in Bombay High in 1974.
This led to substantial increase in the
production of crude oil thereby reducing the
oil import bill considerably. Another
prominent discovery was the South Bassein gas
field. Exploration was extended to other
offshore areas like the Eastern coast and off the
Andaman Islands, with varying degrees of
success.
5. The liberalisation and globalisation
processes started in 1991 have thrown up many
opportunities and challenges for the Petroleum
& Natural Gas Sector in India. To increase
domestic production of crude oil and natural
gas, the New Exploration Licensing Policy
(NELP) was launched in 1997-98. 110 blocks
have been awarded under the five bidding
rounds under this policy. The sixth round of
bidding (NELP-VI) for 55 blocks has recently
been announced. The acquisition of equity oil
& gas abroad in a number of countries is also
Oil and Gas Sector Policybeing pursued by both PSUs and Private Sector
companies. In order to meet the shortfall in
the demand of natural gas, imports from Iran,
Myanmar and Central Asian Countries through
transnational pipelines are being pursued. The
import of gas in the form of liquefied natural
gas (LNG) has already started at the Dahej
LNG terminal in 2005. Other avenues for
import of LNG are also being explored.
6. The consumption for petroleum
products including refinery fuels grew from
2.72 Mt in 1947 to 120.17 Mt in 2004-05.
Excluding refinery fuels, the consumption of
petroleum products in 2004-05 was 111.59 Mt.
India exported 18.21 Mt of products in 2004-05
and product exports have risen to 21.5 Mt in
2005-06. However, domestic consumption in
2005-06 rose only marginally to reach 111.92
Mt. India is now a net exporter of petroleum
products. The crude oil production, which had
increased from merely 0.25 Mt in 1947-48 to
33.02 Mt by 1990-91, has stagnated since then.
The balance requirement has been met through
imports. With the setting up of a number of
refineries over the years, the country is selfsufficient in its refining capacity which
currently stands at 132.47 Mt. A number of
refineries are either expanding their capacity
or planning new investments with a view to
export products. Net of export, domestic
production of crude met about 28% of the
country’s requirement and the balance 72%
was imported in 2004-05. With the increasing
prices of crude oil in the international market,
the oil import bill and oil security are causes of
concern. To reduce the gap between demand
and supply, in addition to enhanced production
of crude oil & natural gas, the oil companies
are seeking opportunities to tap coal bed
methane, blend motor spirit with ethanol and
promote bio-diesel as a diesel substitute and/or
for blending with diesel. However, these efforts
have yet to make any impact.
7. With a view to create competition,
new entrants are being allowed to market
transportation fuels namely, motor spirit, high
speed diesel and aviation turbine fuel since
March, 2002. The Government has issued retail
licenses to Reliance Industries, Essar Oil, Shell,
ONGCMangalore Refineries &
Petrochemicals Limited and the Numaligarh
Refinery.
8. With the recent discoveries in the
Krishna-Godavari basin, domestic natural gas
is expected to become the second most
dominant commercial energy source in India.
Efforts are being made to raise import of
natural gas in the form of LNG and through
transnational gas pipelines. The rising price of
natural gas, though, would make it
uncompetitive for use in the power sector.
9. Till 1975, the prices of petroleum
products were based on import parity prices.
Based on the recommendation of the Oil Price
Committee of 1976, the Administered Price
Mechanism (based on a retention pricing
concept) was introduced. This mechanism was
dismantled in a phased manner starting
October, 1998 to 31st March, 2002. From 1st
April, 2002, the prices of petroleum products
except domestic LPG and Kerosene for Public
Distribution System (PDS) are again being
fixed on an import parity basis. However,
with the recent steep increase in the prices of
crude, the government has put on hold the
increase in prices by the oil companies. The
issue of pricing of petroleum products is under
review.
10. With a view to protect the poorer
section of the society; subsidies on kerosene
and Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) had been
introduced. These subsidies were to be phased
out by 31st March 2002, but this was not
done. A flat subsidy rate under “PDS Kerosene
and Domestic LPG Subsidy Scheme, 2002”
was approved. The subsidy was equal to the
difference between the cost price and issue
price as on March 31st, 2002 and was to be
phased out in 3 to 5 years. The oil marketing
companies (OMCs) were to adjust the retail
selling prices of these products in line with
international prices during this period. Again,
this has not been done and with the
unprecedented sharp increase in the
international prices, the under recoveries of
OMCs on these accounts have been rising and
seriously affecting their profitability. The
Government has been making good these losses,
in partby asking upstream companies to offerdiscounts on the price of domestic crude and
by issuing GOI bonds to the oil marketing
companies.
11. The petroleum and gas sector is also
devoid of any competition or independent
oversight of either its upstream or the
downstream activities. Despite the dismantling
of the Administered Price Mechanism, the GOI
continues to control the pricing of automotive
fuels, LPG, a large part of domestic natural
gas, and PDS kerosene. Again despite the
presence of several domestic, public and private
players as also some foreign groups, there is no
real competition in the sector except in
peripheral products such as lubricants. In fact,
the prevailing pricing & taxation policies and
the market structure provide significant
protection to refineries. The result is that India’s
refining capacity exceeds the demand by 18%
already.
12. Competition is limited in the
downstream sector to cornering retail outlets
and is often wasteful. Efficiencies in retailing
can only be realised if companies are allowed
to set their own prices and entry barriers for
new entrants are dismantled. These barriers
currently include minimum investment
requirements and lack of open access to certain
marketing infrastructure. The Petroleum &
Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 has
already been notified and should, hopefully,
raise the level of competition in the sector on
level terms.
13. On the upstream side, the dominance
of the public sector continues although in
recent rounds of bidding under New
Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) domestic
private sector and state sector participation
and, to a more limited extent, foreign
participation has emerged. India’s currently
known oil and gas reserves will be exhausted
in 23 years and 38 years respectively at current
production levels. While exploration has not
resulted in any significant new oil find, large
gas finds have been reported though uncertainty
still prevails with respect to precise gas
availability. The current upstream regulation
provided by DGH is neither independent nor
comprehensive in a technical sense with respect
to optimal development of the hydrocarbon
resources.
14. Given its lack of success in finding oil
and gas in the Indian sedimentary basin, ONGC
has been successfully acquiring equity oil and
gas overseas. While these are largely commercial
opportunities, they do help energy security
concerns to the extent that they increase access
to a more diversified supply base under certain
eventualities. Indian Oil Corporation has also
successfully tapped retailing and refining
opportunities overseas. Other players have also
looked at various opportunities overseas but
with little success. The risks of the overseas
operations are largely being carried on the
balance sheets of the parent Indian companies.
15. The following policy initiatives are
suggested for the oil and gas sector:
Pricing of Petroleum Products
 Full price competition at the refinery
gate and at the retail level for all
petroleum products should be pursued.
Differential pricing in different markets
may be permitted to reflect the cost of
supply. State governments may choose
to subsidise prices in remote areas in a
transparent manner through their
budgets. Similarly, the Central
Government could subsidise certain
strategic consumption or lifeline energy
consumption transparently through its
budget.
 In case of products wherein demand
far exceeds available supply, exceptions
may be made to the above policy of
full competition. Such products may
need to be allocated for specific enduses and priced differently based on
economically valid arguments. As an
example, the case of pricing and
allocating gas has been detailed under
Chapter V.
 Till such competition is introduced we
may use a pricing mechanism that
mimics it. The pricing mechanism of
petroleum products on import parity
basis needs to be replaced by a trade
ibiidfhih hcountry is a net exporter/importer over
a specified time period should have
export/import parity prices. A product
for which the country is self-sufficient
should have a price in between the two
depending on the price elasticity of
demand for the product in the domestic
market. Trade parity pricing should
ideally be a short-term measure; the
most preferred option being price
competition at the refinery gate and at
the retail level.
 The domestic economy may have to
be protected against short-term
volatility in the International market
caused by speculators and manipulators.
An option to achieve this could be to
allow price adjustments based on
lagging 1-3 month average prices,
thereby forcing oil companies to use
short-term hedging. Another alternative
would be to use long-term supply
contracts linked to a variety of more
stable energy price indices. In a period
of continuously rising prices the
government can adjust the ad-valorem
taxes and levies in a revenue neutral
manner to cushion the price rise for
the consumer. Of course any persistent
price change that cannot be absorbed
by change in taxes and duties, should
be passed on to the consumers.
Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulation
 There is a need to have an independent
regulatory body to regulate upstream
allotment and exploitation of available
oil and gas reserves and provide
downstream regulation that primarily
ensures competition on level terms in
refining, transportation, distribution
and retailing of oil and gas. The
Regulator must review the current
regime that limits competition from
both foreign and domestic private
players in the downstream sectors. A
key responsibility of the Regulator
would be to enforce universal service
obligations by marketing companies
active in a region as well as universal
and subsidised access to PDS kerosene
and LPG by the intended beneficiaries.
The notification of the Petroleum &
Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act,
2006, is thus welcome.
 On the upstream side, Directorate
General Hydrocarbons (DGH), an arm
of the Ministry, oversees allocation and
exploitation of oil & gas reserves and
enforces profit sharing with exploration
& production companies. The current
arrangement needs to be strengthened
and made independent.
Subsidy
 The high price difference between
kerosene and diesel (Rs.21 per litre in
2005-06) leads to large-scale diversion
of kerosene from the public distribution
system to adulteration of diesel.
Similarly, differential pricing of LPG
for domestic and commercial use leads
to leakages increasing the burden of
subsidies. The mechanism for subsidised
supply of kerosene and LPG needs to
be revised so as to make it transparent
and directed only to the targeted
beneficiaries. For this purpose, the
possibility of introducing a coupons
and/or smart/debit cards directly to
the intended beneficiaries should be
explored. This would eliminate dual
prices for kerosene and LPG in the
market. Further, the subsidies on these
products should be charged directly to
the budget and not loaded on to the oil
companies.
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas
(MOP&NG) could bid out available
subsidies for LPG and kerosene to
obtain the lowest price at which a
given amount of these products could
be supplied to a defined number of
targeted beneficiaries or on the basis of
the minimum subsidy at which these
could be supplied in specified quantities
and at specified price to the targeted
number of beneficiaries.Reserve Enhancement and Competition
 The assessment of the sedimentary
basins and development of
unconventional hydrocarbons such as
shale gas, biogenic gas and tight gas
reservoir/basins needs to be accelerated,
and outsourcing of the evaluation of
potential should be undertaken
wherever needed.
 Provide level terms for foreign
operators willing to bring technology
and investment to recover oil/gas from
currently abandoned and/or marginal
fields with the right of first refusal to
acquire any/all of the production on
competitive terms.
 All non-dedicated transportation and
distribution assets in the oil and gas
sector including facilities at ports and
airports should provide services and/
or access to competing suppliers under
common carrier principles.
 Follow international best practices
governing the declaration of
hydrocarbon finds and claims relating
to in-place reserves discovered,
acquisition of required technologies and
pooling of development risks so as to
maximally exploit a reserve in a timely
fashion. This is critical to India’s energy
security concerns.
 The Mumbai High Crude is lighter
and sweeter than general crude average
and can fetch a higher price. Its price
may be discovered through an open
auction wherein Government can mop
up incremental revenue.
 In line with crude oil and coal, Natural
Gas and LNG may also be included in
the category of declared goods so that
a central sales tax of 4% is levied on
them and exemption from any state
sales tax is extended.
 Instead of a piecemeal approach to
reform in the petroleum and natural
gas sector, there is a need to implement
a comprehensive reform package
including pricing, regulation, industry
structure, subsidies, etc.
 Raise the level of diplomacy to access
hydrocarbon reserves overseas and
realise gas pipelines to India.
 Importing LNG through long-term
contracts provides a flexible alternative
to pipelines. Since the global gas market
has developed and LNG trade has
increased, the price of natural gas is
likely to match the opportunity cost
of selling it as LNG.
Strategic Reserves
 Maintain a reserve of strategic-cumbuffer stock equivalent to 90 days of
oil imports and/or buy options for
emergency supplies from neighbouring
large storages such as those available in
Singapore. Operating the strategic
reserves in cooperation with other
countries who maintain such reserves
could also increase their effectiveness.
Natural Gas Allocation and Pricing
 Natural gas price can be determined
through competition among different
producers where multiple sources and
a competitive supply-demand balance
exist. As long as there is shortage of
natural gas in the country and the two
major users of gas, namely fertiliser
and power, work in a regulated cost
plus environment, a competitive market
determined price would be highly
distorted. Such distortions would get
further amplified by the prevailing
regime of fertiliser subsidies & power
sector subsidies and cross subsides. In
such a situation price of domestic
natural gas and its allocation should be
independently regulated on a cost plus
basis including reasonable returns.
 Another option could be to price gas
on a net-back basis. Should a scenario
wherein gas becomes 10-12% of India’s
energy mix materialise by 2031-32,
some 60% of the gas supply will be
used for power generation. This would
mean that beyond the level of gas
consumption in the fertiliser,petrochemical, automotive and
domestic sectors, gas must compete
with coal as the key alternative for
power generation. This implies that
the cost of generating peak or base
electricity using gas cannot exceed the
cost of peak or base electricity from
coal, the cheapest alternative. A
competitive coal market is thus
important for setting a proper price of
natural gas on a net-back basis. An
alternative for a gas producer is to
export gas, in which case the domestic
gas price could be the net realisation of
the domestic natural gas producer after
investing and getting a return on the
investment needed to make the natural
gas tradable across borders through
either a trans-border pipeline or
through liquefaction and shipping
facilities. This suggests that in the shortterm, natural gas prices should be
determined on a cost plus basis by an
independent regulator.
Gas Pipeline Network
 The Petroleum and Natural Gas
Regulatory Board Act, 2006, provides
that the Regulator shall moderate access
to gas pipelines as common or contract
carriers. The Regulator shall also ensure
fair trade and competition amongst
entities, specify the pipeline access code,
ascertain transportation rates for
common or contract carriers and
determine access to city or local natural
gas distribution networks so as to
ensure competition amongst entities as
per the pipeline access code. These
provisions would pave the way for
accelerated development of the gas
pipeline network in the country.
Using Gas Abroad
 In case India can use diplomacy to
access cheap natural gas under longterm (25-30 years) arrangements, it
should consider setting up captive
fertiliser and/or gas liquefaction
facilities in such countries. This would
essentially augment energy availability
for India.In order to achieve sustainability in the
energy chain, it is important to identify,
measure, value, and integrate the environmental
impacts of activities in the energy sector.
Environmental concerns are associated with all
forms of energy including fossil fuels, nuclear
energy, and renewables, throughout the energy
chain from exploration/mining, transportation,
and generation to end-use. However, the precise
nature, intensity, and spatial extent of
environmental impacts varies across different
energy forms. These effects can occur at the
household, local, regional, national or global
levels. India, with its size, diversity and current
pace of growth, needs to use and to develop all
forms of energy sources optimally, in particular
to be able to meet its poverty alleviation goals.
13.1 ENERGY SUPPLY SIDE:
ENVIRONMENT CONCERNS
2. Energy production and use often
involves environmental externalities. These
externalities, as well as any social externalities
such as for example, the social value of
employment created in a bio-diesel programme,
need to be economically valued and
appropriately reflected in the prices of various
fuels and energy sources.
 Studies should be carried out to
determine the economic value of
externalities in the production and use
of different sources of energy.
13.1.1 EXPLORATION, PRODUCTION AND
TRANSFORMATION OF FOSSIL FUELS
3. The environmental impacts of various
energy options are of growing concern owing
to increasing and widespread use of energy.
Coal mining, exploration and production of
oil and gas (both on and off shore) have a wide
range of adverse environmental impacts. Some
of these impacts may be reversible, but many
are irreversible. Some of the adverse
environmental impacts of open cast mining
may be contained, but on the other hand, the
loss of biodiversity due to loss of, or severe
disturbance to, habitats may be irreversible.
Advanced technologies and better management
practices may, however, reduce environmental
impacts. For example, by using the latest
exploration and drilling technologies, the
Energy-Environment Linkages
Table 13.1
Environmental Impacts Associated with Energy Transformation Based on Fossil Fuels
Stage of fuel cycle Natural gas Oil Coal
All stages/all fuels CO2, CH4, N2O, NOx, CO, Reactive organic gases, Hydrocarbons, partial
trace metals, and thermal pollution
Exploration/Mining Drilling accidents, sludge Drilling accidents, Mining injuries, land
sludge, SO2 degradation, SO2, NOx
Processing/Refining Refinery accidents, Refinery accidents, SO2, SPM
waste disposal waste disposal SO2
Transport/distribution Pipeline accidents, Pipeline accidents, SPM, SO2, NOx,
Liquefied natural oil spills, SO2 CO, CO2
gas explosion
Conversion/electricity Ash disposal, SO2 Fly ash SO2, CO2,
generation NOx, Sludgeadverse impact of petroleum exploration on
natural ecosystems can be minimised.
Transportation of coal and petroleum products
by rail, road and sea also causes considerable
environmental damage. Pollutants associated
with the combustion of fossil fuels SPM, SOx,
NOx
, and CO2 either in transformation
activities (to petroleum products or power and
heat combustion) or in end-uses pose a major
threat to both ecological and manmade
resources, and to human health. Additionally
the poor calorific content of Indian coal implies
that the disposal of fly ash generated in thermal
power plants is a major concern. Some of the
environmental impacts associated with energy
based on fossil fuels are summarised in the
Table 13.1.
13.1.2 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF
NUCLEAR POWER
4. While SPM, CO2, SOx, and NOx,
emissions and waste disposal are dominant in
the context of generating energy from fossil
fuels, nuclear power is associated primarily
with risks of radioactive release. Environmental
impacts identifiable at various stages of the
nuclear fuel cycle are: mining (accidents, release
of radon gas and radioactive dust from Uranium
mines and mills), radioactive seepage from waste
and land degradation, processing (accidents),
transport (accidents, risk of proliferation), and
electricity generation (risk of catastrophic
accidents, low and high level radioactive wastes).
Additionally, decommissioning of nuclear
plants entails the disposal of radioactive wastes.
While significant technological development
has been made in the area of radioactive waste
disposal and decommissioning, they are yet to
be proven at large enough scale to satisfactorily
resolve economic issues. However, despite these
risks, global data suggests that of all the
conventional energy options, nuclear energy
has posed the least risks in terms of mortality
per billion megawatt hours of generation.
13.1.3 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF LARGESCALE HYDROPOWER
5. The major impacts of large hydro
projects are rather site specific, and in particular,
centre around submergence of land and
displacement of traditional communities from
their ancestral domains. Such displacement
inflicts a high social cost including change in
the resource base of traditional culture and a
loss of livelihood. In such cases, rehabilitation
efforts can address only a part of the social
costs experienced. In addition, loss of pristine
natural forests and its associated unique
biodiversity may occur due to submergence.
Methane emissions, a major greenhouse gas,
may also be emitted in large quantities if
insufficient care is taken to remove vegetative
matter susceptible to anaerobic microbial
processes from the submerged area.
Submergence of large areas may also increase
the risk of seismic events, for which dams need
Table 13.2
Supply Side, Local and Regional Environmental Impacts
Impact/Option SO2, Solid Liquid Thermal impact Flora, Forest Involuntary
NOxTSPs Waste effluent on receiving Fauna loss resettlement
waters impacts
Thermal power Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(inc. Mining)
Hydro-power N N N N Y Y Y
Nuclear Power N Y Y Y Y Y Y
(inc. Mining)
Petroleum Y N Y Y Y Y Y
(inc. Mining)
Transmission N N N N Y Y Y
& pipelinesto be designed, for if they lead to failure of the
dam structure, it may be catastrophic for
downstream populations. Other adverse impacts
include the spread of water-borne disease, such
as schistosomiasis.
6. Table 13.2 summarises the supply side
environmental impacts of the major forms of
conventional energy options:
13.1.4 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF
RENEWABLE ENERGY
7. Energy from renewable sources is
generally viewed as involving lower
environmental impacts than that based on fossil
fuels, nuclear and large hydropower. The main
environmental benefits of renewable energy
sources is that they avoid the air pollution
emissions from fossil fuels and the catastrophic
risks associated with nuclear plants. Small hydro
projects may also help conserve water supply.
Biomass based systems promote the cultivation
of energy crops in wastelands and help arrest
land degradation. Nevertheless, renewable
energy sources may also cause environmental
degradation of a different kind. Unsustainable
use of biomass leads to depletion of forests,
wind energy may cause noise, result in bird
mortalities, and despoil the aesthetics of
landscapes. Large arrays of solar photovoltaic
panels put considerable demand on land and
impair aesthetics. Use of chemicals in the
manufacture of solar panels and use of lead
acid batteries cause several adverse
environmental impacts. While bio-energy is
generally considered carbon neutral over the
vegetation life cycle, the potential
environmental impacts of such projects can
include impacts on soil and water resources in
addition to an increased competition for landuse. Since net carbon emissions correspond
only to net deforestation, sustainable harvested
biomass fuels do not add to green house gases.
13.2 ENVIRONMENTAL DIMENSIONS
OF DEMAND SIDE IMPACTS
8. The end-use of energy may also impose
severe environmental costs. Industrial and
vehicular emissions have assumed serious
proportions in urban areas. Petrol-driven
vehicles are the major source of CO emissions,
contributing over 85% of total emissions, while
diesel-driven vehicles are the major source of
NOx
, contributing over 90% of total emissions.
Improper use of energy in the agricultural
sector has resulted in the depletion of
groundwater in several parts of the country.
Indoor air pollution due to the domestic
consumption of both traditional and
commercial fuels is most likely the second
largest source of disease, particularly among
women and children, in the country.
9. To understand the demand side of
energy-environment interactions, one can begin
with an impact matrix that classifies each fuel
by key end-use, environmental effects,
indicators, and level of impact. For example,
diesel fuel is (a) commonly consumed in trucks
and buses; (b) has negative impacts on
respiratory health, acid deposition, lead
contamination and related health ailments, (c)
has effluents of CO and particulates that can
be measured; and (d) generates environmental
impacts at the community, local and regional
levels. To go beyond this simple level of matrix
analysis requires an assessment of the causes of
energy related environmental concerns,
information on the physical amounts of
pollution from each source that users are
exposed to, and a quantification of impacts
according to indicators for human health, the
economy, and/or ecosystems.
13.3 UNDERSTANDING THE
DETERMINANTS OF AIR
QUALITY
10. Typically, the exhaust gases from
burning coal and oil contain particulates (SPM),
sulphur oxides (SOx), nitrogen oxides (NOx),
and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). The
concentrations of these pollutants in exhaust
gases is a function of the firing configuration,
operating practices, and fuel composition. Gas
fired plants produce negligible quantities of
total particulates and the level of nitrogen
oxides are about 60 percent compared to plants
using coal. A number of factors during energy
transformation (power generation and use of
petroleum products in transportation) affectair quality. The knowledge of the direction
and size of all these factors and their interaction
is important for developing an effective
mitigation strategy. These factors include:
(1) Composition and characteristics of
emission sources including:
• Absolute emission levels
• Height of emissions
• Location of emissions
(2) Meteorological parameters such as
rainfall, wind velocity, thermal
inversion etc.
13.3.1 LEVELS AND TREND ANALYSIS OF
URBAN AIR QUALITY IN FIVE MAJOR
INDIAN CITIES
11. Historically, the national ambient air
quality standards have differed by land-use,
with the most stringent standards set for
“sensitive” areas, followed by “residential, rural,
and other areas”; and the most lenient standards
set for “industrial” areas. Figures 13.1 and 13.2
provide SPM, RSPM, SO2
 and NO2
concentrations for Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai,
Hyderabad and Chennai from 1993 to 2005.13
12. For the most part, in all five cities
except Chennai, were not in compliance with
the national annual average air quality standards
for residential area for particulate matter during
the period from 1993–2005, and particulate
pollution remains a cause of concern today.
The air quality data takes into consideration
various energy transformation activities in these
cities. However, figures for SPM and RSPM
levels also include other activities such as
construction, etc. In addition, in several cities,
high levels of natural air-borne dust may have
contributed to the SPM/RSPM levels exceeding
the standards.
13. In contrast to particulate matter, annual
average SO2
 concentrations were low during
the same period and in compliance with the
national annual average standards of 60
microgram per meter cube for residential areas.
NO2
 concentrations were also low, except in
Delhi and Kolkata. Overall, by comparison
with SPM, these two gas pollutants do not
seem to be a major problem. However, with
our growing energy requirements and
consumption levels of fossil fuels, the problem
of local and regional air pollution should be an
important concern of energy policy.
13.4 LONG-TERM SUSTAINABILITY
OF INDIA’S ENERGY USE
13.4.1 LOCAL AND REGIONAL IMPACTS
14. The question of long-term sustainability
of India’s energy sector in relation to
environmental impacts at local, regional, and
national level is important. In order that future
growth is sustainable, it needs to be resourceefficient and environmentally accountable. The
challenge is to thus use conventional energy
resources in a manner, which cost-effectively
maintains environmental quality.
 Environmental taxes and subsidies based
on a consistent application of the
“polluter pays” principle or “user pays”
principle can go a long way in
preserving environmental quality. This
would be relatively easily
implementable for organised
establishments.
 In cases where such taxes and subsidies
are not easy to administer and
transaction costs are high, alternative
policies such as setting emission and
energy consumption standards on
equipments may be followed. Some
specific policies are discussed in the
chapter on Energy Efficiency.
 Environmental impact assessment of
power plants, dams, mines,
infrastructure, construction etc., are
already required. Environmental
conditionalities and ameliorative actions
should be specified to maintain the
desired level of environmental quality.
13 Source: For a Breath of Fresh Air, The World Bank, June 2005, updated with recent dataFigure 13.1
Air Pollution in Residential AreasAnnual Average SPM Concentrations
Annual Average RSPM Concentration
Annual Average SO2 Concentration
Annual Average NO2
 ConcentrationFigure 13.2
Air Pollution in Industrial AreasAnnual Average SPM Concentrations
Annual Average RSPM Concentration
Annual Average SO2 Concentration
Annual Average NO2
 Concentration13.4.2 INDIA’S APPROACH TO CLIMATE
CHANGE
15. Climate change, resulting from
anthropogenic emissions and increasing
concentrations of a suite of gases (called
“greenhouse gases” or GHGs) mainly due to
fossil fuel use, certain agricultural and industrial
activities, and deforestation, has the potential,
over the next few generations, to significantly
alter global climatic conditions. This would
result in large changes in ecosystems, leading
to possibly catastrophic disruptions of
livelihoods, economic activity, living
conditions, and human health. On the other
hand, the abatement of GHGs involves
significant economic costs.
16. While climate change is a global
environmental issue, different countries bear
different levels of responsibility for increases
in atmospheric GHG concentrations. Further,
the adverse impacts of climate change will fall
disproportionately on those who have the least
responsibility for causing the problem, in
particular, developing countries including India.
17. Though India is a signatory to the
United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCC), she is not required
to contain her GHG emissions. India’s policies
for sustainable development, by way of
promoting energy efficiency and the use of
renewable energy, changing the fuel mix to
cleaner sources, energy pricing, pollution
abatement, afforestation, mass transport in and
of themselves result in a relatively GHG benign
growth path.
18. India’s GHG emissions in 1994 were
1228 million tonne (Mt) CO2
 equivalent, which
is below 3% of global GHG emissions.14 In
per-capita terms, it is 23 percent of the global
average, and 4 percent of USA, 8 percent of
Germany, 9 percent of UK and 10 percent of
Japan’s per-capita emissions in the same year.
In terms of the GHG intensity of the economy
in Purchasing Power Parity terms, India emitted
a little above 0.4 tonne CO2 equivalent per
1000 US dollars in 2002, which is significantly
lower than those of the USA and the global
average. In terms of primary energy use, India’s
share of renewable energy (with zero net GHG
emission) at 36 percent is far higher than
industrialised countries can hope to reach in
many decades. Since GHG emissions are
directly linked to economic activity, India’s
economic growth will necessarily involve
increase in GHG emissions from the current
extremely low levels. Any constraints on the
emissions of GHG by India, whether direct,
by way of emissions targets, or indirect, will
reduce growth rates, and impair pollution
abatement efforts.
19. Anthropogenic climate change,
significant responsibility for which clearly does
not lie with India, may, on the other hand,
Table 13.3
India Approved CDM Projects
No. of Projects CERs till 2012* Investment (Rs Cr)
Energy Efficiency 98 70,834,710 2973
Fuel Switching 15 28,307,202 4894
Industrial Process 19 71,665,674 558
MSW 7 3,871,096 256
Renewable 72 32,391,075 6934
Renewable (Biomass) 86 29,641,607 3477
Total 297 236,711,364 19092
*CER (Certified Emission Reduction) = One Tonne of CO2 eq abatement
14 Source: India’s Initial National Communication to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Changehave severe adverse impacts on India’s
precipitation patterns, ecosystems, agricultural
potential, forests, water resources, coastal and
marine resources, besides the increase in range
of several disease vectors. Large-scale resources
would clearly be required for adaptation
measures for climate change impacts, if
catastrophic human misery is to be avoided.
20. As the global concern vis-a-vis climate
change grows and as the threat of climate
change is perceived to be real, pressures on
India to contain GHG emissions will rise.
India should be willing to contain her GHG
emissions as long as she is compensated for the
additional cost involved. India acceded to the
Kyoto Protocol on 26 August 2002. The
Government of India established National
CDM Authority (NCDMA) in December 2003,
with its office in Ministry of Environment and
Forests. As of 8th May 2006, a total of 297
projects have been approved by the NCDMA.
These projects expect emissions reduction of
236 Million CERs till 2012 at a potential total
investment of more than Rs.190 Billion. Table
13.3 below gives the sector-wise break up of
approved projects and the expected total
emission reductions.
21. India recognises the possibilities of
selling GHG emission reductions. We should
choose options that permit doing so at a later
date when it is found to be attractive. In any
case, for us the imperative is to push energy
efficiency, promote modern renewables,
develop new technologies that augment our
energy supply such as in-situ coal gasification
that also provides scope for carbon capture,
and emphasise nuclear power. All of these will
automatically help reduce the GHG emissions.India faces an enormous challenge if it is to meet her energy requirement over the coming
25 years and support a growth rate of 8 percent. This challenge can be met with a coherent
approach, which develops all available energy resources. The main areas of action, for which
detailed policy recommendations have been made, are as follows:
 Reducing energy requirements through energy efficiency and conservation.
 Augmenting energy resources and supply.
 Rationalisation of fuel prices to mimic free market prices that promote efficient fuel choice
and substitution.
 Promoting coal imports.
 Accelerating power sector reforms.
 Cutting cost of power.
 Encouraging renewables and local solutions.
 Enhancing energy security.
 Promoting and focusing energy R&D.
 Promoting household energy security, gender equity and empowerment through targeted
entitlements for the poor.
 Creating an enabling environment and regulatory oversight for competitive efficiency.
The broad policy framework and the development thrusts suggested here need to be made
more specific in certain areas. Once the policy framework is accepted, it will be necessary to chalk
out roadmaps of development and draft specific policy measures for implementation.
With implementation of the recommendations of the Committee, India can meet her
energy requirements in an efficient, cost effective way and be on a path of sustainable energy
security.
Concluding CommentNo.M-11011/1/2004-EPU (P&E)
Government of India
Planning Commission
Yojana Bhavan, Sansad Marg,
New Delhi, 12th August 2004
ORDER
SUBJECT: SETTING UP OF AN EXPERT COMMITTEE TO FORMULATE ENERGY
POLICY
In pursuance of the decision taken by Prime Minister and Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission to set up an Expert Committee to prepare an integrated energy policy linked with
sustainable development that covers all sources of energy and addresses all aspects including energy
security, access and availability, affordability and pricing, efficiency and environment, it has been
decided to set up an Expert Committee to formulate Energy Policy.
2. The composition of the Expert Committee is as under:
1. Dr. Kirit S. Parikh, Member, Planning Commission-Chairman
2. Shri Jagmohan Bajaj, ex-Chairman, SERC, UP
3. Prof. Rangan Banerjee, IIT, Bombay
4. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Representative of the Institution of Engineers (India)
5. Sh. Gajendra Haldia, NCAER
6. Mr. Ajit Kapadia, Vice Chairman, Centre for Fuel Studies & Research, Vadodara
7. Dr. Urjit R. Patel, Chief Policy Officer, IDFC
8. Sh. Subimal Sen, Member, West Bengal Planning Board
9. Shri T.L. Shankar, Administrative Staff College, Hyderabad
10 Dr. Leena Srivastava, Executive Director, TERI
11. Secretary, Ministry of Power
12. Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
13. Secretary, Ministry of Coal
14. Secretary, Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
15. Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy
16. Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests17. Secretary, Planning Commission
18. Secretary General, FICCI
19. Secretary General, ASSOCHAM
20. Director General, CII
21. Shri Surya P. Sethi, Adviser (Power & Energy): Convenor
3. The Terms of Reference of the Expert Committee would be to address the following:
i) How to meet demand for energy of all sectors and energy needs of vulnerable sections in
all parts of the country at the least-cost considering different fuels and forms of energy
such as coal, oil, hydro electricity, nuclear power, electricity and various non-conventional
energy sources?
ii) How to ensure that energy input costs in India are internationally competitive?
iii) What policy including pricing policy would lead to efficient use of energy, promote
conservation and at the same time provide incentives to producers to produce adequate
energy to meet the demand without imposing an unsustainable subsidy burden on the
system?
iv) How to ensure energy security against physical as well as financial risks (shocks) with
the desired degree of confidence level at minimum cost using alternatives such as physical
and financial stocks, options contract, acquisition of equity hydrocarbons abroad, in
providing energy security?
v) What is the role and importance of regional and international cooperation in promoting
energy security?
vi) What is the relative role of public and private investments in the development of each
energy source or what is the scope for public-private partnerships to ensure adequate
supply?
vii) What are the institutional, legal and regulatory policies required to ensure competitive
energy markets and effective implementation of suggested policies especially in an
environment where public-private partnership is being encouraged?
viii) How to ensure that exploration for oil, gas, coal and hydrocarbons takes place at the
required level?
ix) What policies are needed to promote development and use of energy technologies?
x) How to accelerate the development of new and renewable sources of energy?
xi) How to ensure environmental sustainability of the energy sector through emission and
effluent control, appropriate choice of fuel, promotion of clean coal technology, energy
conservation, restoration of mine sites, use of renewable resources, etc.?
xii) How to ensure uninterrupted supply of quality power to both urban and rural consumers
on demand?
xiii) How to ensure supply of clean household energy in rural areas to improve the quality of
life of women and reduce the burden of indoor air pollution on them?
xiv) How to provide needed subsidies in non-distorting ways?4. The Expert Group will have the powers to co-opt/associate professionals/domain experts
into the Group. The Expert Group will also have the powers to set up Sub Groups/Steering
Committees of officials/non officials to finalise its views on specific issues. The Expert Group
should, however, encourage active participation of the State Governments in the areas of
concern of the Group.
5. The expenditure of the members on TA/DA in connection with the meetings of the
Expert Group will be borne by the Ministry/Department/State Government to which the
members belong. In case of private members TA/DA will be borne by the Planning Commission
as admissible to the Class I officers of the Government of India.
6. The Expert Group will submit its report to the Planning Commission within six months
from the date of its constitution.
7. The Expert Group will be serviced by the Planning Commission.
Sd/-
(T.R.Meena)
Director(Admn.)
To
All Members of the Expert Group
Copy to:
1. Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission
2. Minister of State (Planning)
3. Members, Planning Commission
4. Cabinet Secretary
5. Secretary to the President of India
6. Pr. Secretary to Prime Minister
7. Joint Secretary to Prime Minister Sh. Jarnail Singh with reference to his
U.O. No.210/31/C/25/04-ES.I dated 15.07.2004
8. Pr. Advisers/Advisers, Planning CommissionGist of Earlier Energy Policy Committees/Groups
The two main committees set-up on energy
policy were the Fuel Policy Committee in
1974 and Working Group on Energy Policy in
1979. A brief on the constitutions, terms of
reference and the gist of their recommendations
is given below:
(I) THE FUEL POLICY
COMMITTEE (1974)
The Fuel Policy Committee was
appointed by the Ministry of Petroleum and
Chemicals, Government of India on 12th
October, 1970. The terms of reference of
committee were as follows:
(a) Undertake a survey of fuel resources
and the regional pattern of their
distribution;
(b) Study the present trends in exploitation
and use of fuels;
(c) Estimate perspective of demand by
sectors (in particular the transport,
industry, power generation industry
and domestic fuel) and by regions;
(d) Study the efficiency in the use of fuel
and recommend:
(i) the outline of a national fuel policy
for the next fifteen years;
(ii) a pattern of consumption and
measures, fiscal and otherwise,
which would help the best use of
available resources; and
(iii) the measures and agencies, to
promote the optimum efficiency
in use of fuel.
RECOMMENDATIONS
(i) General
1. If the energy plans and policies are to
be operationally meaningful, there is a
need for periodic review of the energy
policy. The review may be taken at
least once in three years and the
planning horizon extended at each time
to 15 years.
2. To set-up an Energy Board consisting
of the ministers of concerned energy
related ministries supported by a
suitably structured Secretariat to assist
this board. The board may initiate or
undertake any analysis relevant for the
review or revision of the fuel policy.
(ii) Coal Sector
1. Coal should be considered as the
primary source of energy in the country
for the next few decades and the energy
policy of the country should be
designed on this basic premise.
2. The need for developing an efficient
and adequate transport system, which
would ensure the flow of coal from the
points of availability to the demand
centers should be noted.
3. The coal industry should accept the
responsibility to supply the required
grade of coal on a long-term basis, if
necessary, by changing the source of
coal supply from time to time or by
blending different grades of coal to
make up the required grades.
4. To increase the productivity of
coalmines, studies should be initiated
immediately to determine the optimal
use and maintenance of machines, and
for training coal mines workers in the
use and maintenance of the same.
5. R&D work should be continued on
techno economic aspects of coal
gasification and specific possibilities
should be investigated for using poor
quality coal for gasification.
6. Railways constitute the most economic
way of moving coal for most of theconsuming classes and consumer
locations in India. Adequate attention
should be paid to rail transport
planning in regard to development of
additional line capacity, yard capacity
and signalling and communication
which would facilitate a speedier turnaround time for wagons. The
augmentation of the wagons fleet
should also be considered.
7. The selection of optimal technology
for coal mining should be made on
economic grounds using appropriate
weightages for machine utilisation
under Indian conditions and keeping
in mind the availability of an abundant
labour force.
(iii) Oil Sector
1. India’s oil policy should be based on
an understanding of the international
oil situation. It should be designed with
the specific objectives of
(a) Reducing the quantity of oil
products to be imported;
(b) Reducing the total foreign exchange
expenditure; and
(c) Improving the security of supplies
in crude and oil products required
from sources outside the country.
2. Oil exploration in India should be given
priority attention. The exploration
activities particularly in the offshore
areas and selected onshore areas should
be speed-up. There is an urgent need to
augment the capabilities of ONGC by
providing them with more modern
equipment.
3. All attempts should be made to take
advantage of the complementarities of
the resource endowments of India.
Meaningful bilateral agreements may
be entered into with oil exporting
countries including participation in
crude production.
4. To provide insurance against short-run
breakdowns in the supply of crude to
the country, there is a need to build up
stock of crude within the country
5. While planning refining capacity, there
should be a careful examination of
refinery locations, the product mix
required in each refinery, the extent of
secondary process to be established and
a feedstock choice in the fertiliser
industry.
6. Road and rail transport must be
coordinated in an optimal manner in
order to manage the HSDO demand.
Long distance movement of
commodities by road should be
discouraged while simultaneously
increasing the capabilities of rail
transport.
7. Fuel oil being a valuable raw material
for the production of high cost
petroleum products which have good
export potential or can serve as import
substitute, large quantities of it should
be earmarked for the high value
products like lubes, bitumen, petroleum
coke and wax.
8. The price of HSDO and kerosene
should continue to be kept at par with
each other to avoid diversion of
kerosene for use in transport sector.
9. The production of fertilisers, methanol
and other chemicals based on natural
gas will have to be given preference
over the use of natural gas solely as a
fuel.
(iv) Power Sector
1. Efforts should be made to develop a
more optimal load structure:
(a) By setting up of more pumped
storage schemes.
(b) By shifting production of electricity
intensive industries from peak to
off peak periods.
(c) By general pricing of the industrial
tariff and agricultural tariff to
provide incentive for use of more
electricity during off peak hours.
2. In the overall interest of the economy
and keeping in mind environmental
considerations, more power stations
hld bld ihdDepending on the local conditions,
however, construction of power
stations at load centres can be
considered on merits as a special case.
3. The schemes for setting up of regional
grids and regional load dispatch centres
should be vigorously pursued.
4. A proper pricing policy for the power
supplies to the agricultural loads so as
to encourage the consumers to use the
optimal size of pump sets, and to draw
supplies during off peak hours.
5. In the overall national interest and
given the limited available resources,
the setting up of captive power stations
should not be encouraged.
(v) Domestic sector
1. To take up programmes of afforestation
with quick growing wood species to
increase the availability of firewood.
2. To intensify the popularisation of
‘gobar gas plants’ in view of the social
benefits of the nutrient production,
pollution abatement etc.
3. The problem of substitution of noncommercial fuels with the commercial
fuels in the domestic sector has to be
considered with due regard to the
overall economic implications of the
use of different fuels in this sector.
Pricing and distribution policies should
be based on a full understanding of the
social costs of the use of different fuels.
(vi) Costs and prices
1. The price fixed for any fuel-coal, oil or
electricity should be such that the
particular fuel industry, as a whole, is
enabled to earn a return of al least 10%
on the investment made in the industry.
2. There should be a serious examination
of the need to continue the import
parity formula for pricing of petroleum
products and to evaluate other possible
methods of fixing prices, which will
best serve the national interest.
3. The electricity tariff should be designed
so as to discriminate between the use
of power during the peak periods and
during the off peak periods.
(vii) Technology
1. A National Fuel Efficiency service may
be instituted to ensure improvement in
energy efficiency in the industries.
2. Research and development in areas
relating to combined gas turbine –
steam turbine plants should be
intensified for increasing the overall
efficiency of coal utilisation in thermal
power plants.
3. A long-term programme for
development of coal to oil should be
drawn up.
4. R&D work on coal gasification and
pipeline transport of coal gas should be
undertaken.
5. R&D on solar energy in India may be
concentrated on the development of
thin-film technology, developing low
cost solar water heaters etc.
6. Development of battery powered
vehicles, fuel cell technology, Fast
Breeder Reactors etc. should be
emphasised.
(II) THE WORKING GROUP ON ENERGY
POLICY (1979)
The Working Group on Energy Policy
(1979) was constituted by an order of the
Planning Commission on 6th December, 1977,
with a view to “carry out a comprehensive
review of the present situation in the light of
recent developments both within the country
and outside, to develop a perspective for the
next five to fifteen years and to recommend
appropriate policy measures for optimal
utilisation of available energy resources
including non-conventional sources of energy”.
The terms of reference of the Working Group
were set out as follows:
(a) To estimate the perspective energy
demand in the different sectors of the
economy and regions of the country
by 1982-83 and a decade thereafter;(b) To survey the present and perspective
supplies of energy;
(c) To recommend measures for optimum
use of available energy resources; and
(d) To outline the national energy policy
for the next five years, fifteen years
and the longer term conservation
policy.
RECOMMENDATIONS
General
1. A reappraisal of our economic
development strategies, especially those
elements of the strategy which have a direct
link to energy consumption like technology
choice, location policies, urban growth, and
mechanisation in agriculture etc., with reference
to the new awareness of the energy supply and
demand in future needs to be addressed.
2. Examination of the technological
processes and the achievable levels of efficiency
for each industry or equipment, and to prescribe
the standards of efficiency to be achieved by
energy users or equipment manufacturers.
Oil Sector Policies
1. All efforts should be made to reduce
the demand of oil to levels even below
what is forecast in the Optimum Level
Forecast (OLF). It would be prudent
to plan a pattern of growth of the
economy, which is less dependent on
oil. Demand Management should form
the most important element of oil
policy in the future.
2. The techno-economics of converting
gas into liquid fuels for use in the
transport sector should be examined.
3. Larger investment should be made in
secondary processing like Hydrocrackers, catalytic crackers or delayed
coking equipment, which would
convert the heavy end products to
middle distillates.
Coal Policy
1Planning and construction of coalmines
should proceed on a steady basis
without linking specific mines to
specific consumers.
2. There is a need to develop a welldefined policy towards mechanisation
of coal mines taking into account the
need to increase production very
quickly and with due consideration for
employment and training implications.
In doing so the changes in the share of
open cast and underground mines and
the optimal technology that could be
used in such mines would also deserve
careful consideration.
3. There is a need to synchronise
investment in coal production and coal
transportation by railways with due
flexibility so that transport would not
be a constraint to the use of coal.
4. The idea of washing non-coking coal
should be pursued cautiously and
resorted to only where its technoeconomic benefits are clearly
established. The planning of thermal
power stations based on middlings
should proceed in step with planning
of coal washeries. There are also
possibilities of using the rejects and
middling as raw material for
manufacturing domestic fuels similar
to soft coke.
Power Sector Policies
1. Power planning in the future should
be based on the concept of an optimal
mix of thermal/nuclear and hydro
stations in which the hydro stations
should take the Peak and the thermal
stations provide the base load.
2. With the steeply increasing costs of
power generation, it might become
more remunerative to invest in System
improvements that might reduce losses
in T& D, than investing in additional
capacity and if this is done, it may be
possible to reduce losses still further.
3. Detailed State-wise and region-wise
power planning studies should be
undertaken.4. It is essential that a long-term
transmission plan be prepared for each
region, which could be executed in a
phased and systematic manner.
Rural Energy Policy
1. A comprehensive survey of all the
energy needs in a village community
should be carried out.
2. Pilot installations should be set-up as
early as possible for Micro-hydel
stations to be constructed in rural areas
on irrigation canals.
3. A study should be made to install
community type biogas plants and the
utilisation of gas from such plants for
households, pumping and industrial
applications should be explored.
Cost and Prices in the Energy Sector
1. The energy prices must at least reflect
long-run marginal costs and allow for a
reasonable return. A suitable
institutional framework for regulating,
monitoring and adjusting energy prices
in a mutually comparable manner
should be set-up.
2. A tariff schedule for electricity that
distinguishes between peak and off-peak
consumption on a diurnal and seasonal
basis may be put in place. The relative
prices of different fuels should
encourage the required inter-fuel
substitutions.
Research and Development in the Energy
Sector:
(a) Oil Sector
1. R & D efforts aimed at enhancing our
exploration capability, maximisation of
yield from oil reservoirs and efficient
utilisation in all the consuming sectors
need to be encouraged. In this context,
Secondary and Tertiary recovery
technologies should be developed to
maximise yield from oil reservoirs.
2. The potential of Hydrogen as a
substitute for liquid fuel for the
transport sector should be examined.
(b) Coal sector
1. R&D activities in the areas of
gasification and liquefaction of coal and
their economics under Indian
conditions must be pursued.
2. R & D efforts in the field of coal
combustion (e.g. fluidised bed
combustion) & other technologies
should be reviewed and intensified so
that these technologies are adequately
developed for use in both industrial
and power sector.
3. Research on coal beneficiation for
achieving better coal recovery from
washeries, utilisation of rejects, etc.,
may be intensified.
(c) Nuclear Energy
1. R&D work for development of Fast
Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) being
constructed at Kalpakkam should be
expedited.
2. Development work for fabrication of
reactors based U233 with Thorium needs
to be carried out.
(d) Power Sector
R&D efforts are recommended in the
following areas:
1. Improvement in the methodology
of load estimating and forecasting,
power system planning etc.
2. Reliability of Power Systems
3. Optimisation of System Economics
4. Software development for problems
in power system operation, load
flow, short circuits etc.
5. Research in the problems of
Integrated operation of Power
Systems
6. Improvement in Power System
protection techniques.(e) Other Energy Technology Areas
1. R&D effort should be intensified
for development of alternative
technologies (Solar energy, Wind
energy & biomass) that
appropriately harness these sources
of energy.
2. Research on biomass should be
directed towards identification of
fast growing species, methods of
increasing the photosynthetic
efficiency and development of costeffective processes utilising biodegradable materials for producing
fuels-gaseous as well as liquids with
high priority.
3. R&D to establish the feasibility of
integrated systems based on solar,
wind, biogas, and mini hydro
wherever available, will have to be
expeditiously undertaken.
(f) Sectoral Policies/Prescriptions
(a) Transport
1. The coordination of rail and road
traffic and the extent to which
other less intensive modes like
inland waterways, coastal shipping
etc., can be used should be
understood and encouraged.
2. Accelerated pace of electrification
of the high-density traffic trunk
routes, especially those connecting
Bombay, Delhi, Calcutta and
Madras deserves serious
consideration.
(b) Agriculture
1. Standards of fuel efficiency have to
be prescribed for electrical and
diesel pumps and the manufacturers
persuaded to adopt a time bound
approach of increasing the
efficiency of pumps to the level
suggested in the report. Similarly
in the case of diesel tractors also
there is a need to prescribe fuelefficiency standards.
2. Improve the design of the animal
drawn water lift and agricultural
implements, which would increase
the useful energy delivered by
animal driven appliances/
implements.
(c) Household sector
1. Setting up of standards of fuel
efficiency for manufacture of
lighting and cooking appliances and
introduction of more efficient
chulhas at subsidised rates on a
large-scale.
2. Efforts must be made to maximise
the use of agricultural waste as fuel
directly by burning or by
conversion into liquid/gas fuels by
microbial conversion. Biogas plants
capable of using more of
agricultural waste are to be
developed.
(d) Industry sector
1. In many of the industries the
specific energy consumption is
inversely proportional to the level
of capacity utilisation. Therefore,
the utilisation factor should be
improved with special reference to
conservation of energy.
2. Co-generation holds prospects of
large energy savings in the industrial
sector, as it improves the overall
thermal efficiency. Such possibilities
in existing industries should be
identified and pursued. Further, for
new industries the energy
implications of the technology
chosen need to be studied to select
the least energy intensive option,
particularly with respect to the use
of depleteable sources of energy
and electricity.Calorific Values, Units and Conversion Factors
Calorific Value of Various Fuels
Sl. Name of Fuel Unit Calorific Value
No. (kilo-calories)
1. Biogas M34713
2. Kerosene kg 10638
3. Firewood kg 4500
4. Cow-dung Cakes kg 2100
5. Coal kg 4000
6. Lignite kg 2865
7. Charcoal kg 6930
8. Soft coke kg 6292
9. Oil kg 10000
10. LPG kg 11300
11. Furnace Oil kg 9041
12. Coal gas m34004
13. Natural gas m39000
14. Electricity kWh 860
Conversion Factors
Kilo Calorie 3.96832 BTU, 4186.8 Joules
Kilowatt Hour 3412.14 BTU, 3.6x106 Joules
Btu 0.252 Kilo Cal, 1.055 Kilo Joules
US Gallon 0.833 Imperial Gallon, 0.134 Cu. Feet 0.00378 Cu.M
Imperial Gallon 1.2009 US Gallon, 0.1605 Cu. Feet 0.0045 Cu.M
Cubic Metres 264.172 US Gallons, 219.969 Imperial Gallons, 35.3147 Cu. Feet
Cubic Feet 7.4805 US Gallons, 6.2288 Imperial Gallons, 0.0283 Cu. M
1 BkWh Hydro or Wind Electricity 0.086 Mtoe*
1 BkWh Nuclear Electricity 0.261 Mtoe
1 Mt of Coal 0.41 Mtoe
1 Mt of Lignite 0.2865 Mtoe
1 Billion Cubic Meter of Gas 0.9 Mtoe
1 Mt of LNG 1.23 Mtoe
1 Mt of Fuel wood 0.45 Mtoe
1 Mt of Dung Cake 0.21 Mtoe
*Mtoe conversion factors are taken as per International Energy Agency (IEA) PracticeUnits Name Remarks
BCM Billion Cubic Meter = 109 m3
BkWh Billion Kilowatt Hours
Bt Billion Tonne = 109 Tonne
GWe Giga Watt Electrical
GW-Yr Giga Watt Year = 8.76 x 109 kWh
kcal Kilo Calorie = 4186.8 J or 396832 Btu
kg Kilogram -
kgoe Kilogram of Oil Equivalent -
kW Kilo Watt = 103 Watt
kWh Kilo Watt Hour = 3.6x103 J, also expressed as Unit
M. ha Million hectares
M. ltrs Million litres
MMBtu Million British Thermal Unit Traditional British unit
MMscmd Million Standard Cubic Meters per Day Traditional unit used in gas industry
Mt Million Tonnes = 106 Tonne
Mtoe Million Tonnes of Oil Equivalent -
MVA Million Volt Amperes
MW Mega Watt = 106 Watt or 103 kW
MWe Mega Watt Electrical
MWt Mega Watt Thermal
T Tonne Same as Metric Ton = 1000 kg
tkm Tonne Kilometer tonne of material moved by km
TWH Terawatt Hour
Crude Oil Tonnes (Metric) Kilolitres Barrels US Gallons
Tonnes (Metric) 1 1.165 7.33 307.86
Kilolitres 0.8581 1 6.2898 264.17
Barrels 0.1364 0.159 1 42
US Gallons 0.0032 0.0038 0.0238 1
Natural Gas B Cu. B Cu. Mtoe Mt-LNG Trillion Million
Meter-NG Feet-NG BTU Barrels
of Oil
B Cu. Meter 1 35.3 0.9 0.73 36 6.29
B Cu. Feet 0.028 1 0.026 0.021 1.03 0.18
Mtoe 1.111 39.2 1 0.805 40.4 7.33
Mt-LNG 1.38 48.7 1.23 1 52.0 8.68
Trillion Btu 0.028 0.98 0.025 0.02 1 0.17
Million Barrels of Oil 0.16 5.61 0.14 0.12 5.8 1
Units