File Name: IND-NRER-2011-EN
Year: 2011
Country Name: India
Country Code: IND
Category: NRER
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2011
Start Year: 2011
End Year: 2016
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Identifying areas of mutual interest and cooperation for development of new and renewable energy technologies
Energy Cooperation
September 06, 2011
Memorandum of Understanding On Renewable Energy
Cooperation Between Government of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh AND Government of the
Republic of India
The Power Division, Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources, Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh AND the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of the Republic of India, hereinafter referred to
as ‘The Parties’;
Desiring to enhance traditional ties of friendship between the two countries through development of economic cooperation;
Having identified New and Renewable Energy as a common area of interest; and Desiring to establish New and Renewable
Cooperation in this area with the aim of developing new and renewable energy technologies; Have reached the following
understanding:
Article I OBJECTIVE
The objective of this Memorandum of Understanding is to establish the basis for a cooperative institutional relationship to
encourage and promote technical bilateral cooperation on new and renewable energy issues on the basis of mutual benefit
equality and reciprocity.
Article II MODALITIES OF COOPERATION
Cooperation under this Memorandum of Understanding may take the following modalities.
1. exchange and training of scientific and technical personnel;
2. exchange of scientific and technological available information and data;
3. organization of workshops seminars and working groups;
4. transfer of equipment know­how and technology and technical standards on non­commercial basis;
5. development of joint research or technical projects on subjects of mutual interest;
6. exchange visit of Government officials and technical experts for sharing of experiences on renewable energy practices,
policies, framework, incentive and technologies with financing mechanism;
7. other modalities as may be agreed upon by the Parties.
Article III WORKING GROUP
In order to coordinate the above­mentioned activities and decide upon project proposals related to design and development
of various new and renewable energy technologies such as but not restricted to Solar Energy, Wind Energy and Bio­Energy
the Parties intend to establish a "Joint Working Group" with the objectives of:ministries to the Joint Working Group. For the aforesaid activities, the Joint Working Group shall to the extent possible
conduct its work through electronic communication, but meet alternately in India and Bangladesh, when this is deemed
necessary.
The Joint Working Group can co­opt other members from Government agencies, scientific institutions, research centers,
universities or any other entity, as and when considered essential.
Article IV AMENDMENT
This Memorandum of Understanding can be amended by the Parties through mutual consultation. The amendments shall
be enclosed with this Memorandum of Understanding and shall form an integral part of it thereof.
Article V ENTRY INTO FORCE, DURATION AND TERMINATION
This Memorandum of Understanding will enter into force on the date of signing and shall remain in force unless revoked by
the consent of the Parties.
Either of the Parties may terminate this Memorandum of Understanding by giving the other party a written notice of 90
(ninety) days in advance of its decision to terminate this Memorandum of Understanding. Termination will not affect
activities covered by a collaborative contract between the executive agencies and already underway at the time of
termination.
In witness thereof, the undersigned representatives of the contracting parties being duly authorized thereto have signed this
Memorandum of Understanding.
Signed at Dhaka on the Sixth day of September 2011 in two originals, in English language.
For and on behalf of the
Government of the
Republic of India
For and on behalf of the
Government of the
People's Republic of
Bangladesh