File Name: IRN-CPD-2016-EN
Year: 2016
Country Name: Iran
Country Code: IRN
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 6-9 September 2016
Start Year: 2017
End Year: 2021
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
8 July 2016
Original: English
16-11889 (E) 150716
*1611889*
Second regular session 2016
6-9 September 2016, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Islamic Republic of Iran (2017-
2021)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale ................................ ............... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships ................................ 4
III. Programme and risk management ................................ .... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation ................................ .......... 8 
 Annex
Results and resources framework for the Islamic Republic of Iran (2017-2021)............ 9I. Programme rationale
1. The overarching rationale for the UNDP country programme in the Islamic Republic 
of Iran is to support the Government in achieving its sustainable and inclusive 
development objectives. This rationale, aimed at 'leaving no one behind', is consistent 
with the priorities set out in the country's 6
th Five-Year Development Plan, the United 
Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2017-2021, the UNDP Strategic 
Plan, 2014-2017 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
1
2. The Islamic Republic of Iran is an upper-middle income country. According to the 
Human Development Report 2015, the country has a Human Development Index value of 
0.766, placing it in the ‘high human development’ category, ranked 69 of 188 countries. 
The past few decades have witnessed an impressive reduction of absolute poverty in the
country; only 0.02 per cent of the population are estimated to be living below the $1.25 
per day poverty line.2 According to the Human Development Report 2015, between 1980 
and 2014, life expectancy at birth increased by 21.3 years, mean years of schooling 
increased by 5.9 years and expected years of schooling increased by 5.9 years. 
3. The country has a vast natural resource endowment and can draw heavily upon its 
large, young, tech-savvy and growing population. The diversified Iranian economy 
benefits from the Government's reform agenda. Projected rising incomes and improved 
purchasing power will strengthen the already large urban middle class. Notwithstanding 
some economic barriers, the overall trend is towards greater openness with trade and 
investment facilitators benefiting from sectoral reform packages. An optimistic scenario 
would foresee a rapid recovery in oil export volumes (drawing upon the country's large 
and underexploited oil and gas reserves), a resurgence in consumer spending and 
officially backed trade. These would, following current trends, allow the Islamic 
Republic of Iran to become one of if not the fastest growing economies in the Middle 
East and North Africa region. 
4. While the level of poverty has fallen in absolute terms, relative poverty and noninclusive growth continue to remain challenges. The official unemployment rate reached 
11.4 per cent in 2014 (20.3 per cent for women and 8.7 per cent for men) and was higher 
(25.2 per cent) among those aged 15-24 years.
3 The Gini coefficient still stands at 0.36,
indicating relatively high income inequality.
4 The gap between the leading and lagging 
geographical regions has widened since the early 1990s.5 A key challenge for the 
Government is to continue to diversify the economy and establish a more sustainable 
economic growth paradigm which generates opportunities for sustainable and inclusive 
employment. 
5. Because of the country's dry climate, rapid urbanization (the urban population 
increased from 15.8 million in 1976 to 53.6 million in 2011)
6
and high economic 
dependence on oil and gas production, it faces some particularly acute environmental 
challenges, many of which are expected to be compounded by ongoing climate change
that, among others, will make the region hotter and drier. Unsustainable farming, land use 
and management practices, as well as the unsustainable use of ecosystems, contribute to 
reduced vegetation cover, soil erosion, desertification, shrinking wetlands and loss of 
biodiversity. Groundwater sources are being overused, some rivers have dried out and 
some wetlands are disappearing. The agricultural sector uses the major portion of the 
country's water, but according to official figures, does so inefficiently.7 Ongoing reforms 
that support sustainable natural resource management are therefore required, including 
with respect to better accounting for the value of ecosystem services. Regional 
collaborative action is required to address the problem of unsustainable land and water 
use within the main regional watersheds, many of which overlap Iranian borders. The 
 
1
 As explained in Iran’s national statement following the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals.
2
 Statistical Centre of Iran, 2013.
3
 Statistical Centre of Iran, 2015.
4
 The Income and Expenditure Census 2012, Statistical Centre of Iran.
5
 Statistical Centre of Iran, 2012.
6
Sttitil Ctf I2015DP/DCP/IRN/3
drying out of neighbouring countries to the west is a major cause of the sand and dust 
storms impacting the Islamic Republic of Iran. 
6. The Persian Gulf region contains more than 65 per cent of the world’s known oil 
reserves. Marine environmental problems both in this region and the Caspian Sea are 
mainly the result of numerous oil and related commercial activities undertaken by the 
countries and the multinational companies operating there. Resultant pollution has caused 
significant damage to the ecosystem in coral reefs, mangroves and other habitats. 
7. Populated areas across the country experience high levels of air pollution, with 
attendant negative health impacts. The energy sector has focused its efforts primarily on 
meeting energy demand (which grew by 8 per cent annually during recent years).8 With 
accelerated economic growth expected in the medium term, the country now has now a 
unique opportunity to improve the efficiency of energy production and use, and increase 
the share of renewables in its energy mix. The Government has identified promoting a 
low-carbon economy as one of its priorities in its 6th Five-Year National Development 
Plan. 
8. Non-communicable diseases are a rapidly emerging public health threat in the world 
and in the Islamic Republic of Iran. It is estimated that by 2020, non-communicable 
diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular and cardio-pulmonary diseases and cancers will 
account for over 76 per cent of all premature deaths in the country.
9 Among the main risk
factors such as smoking, alcohol consumption, physical inactivity and inadequate 
nutrition, the highest disability-adjusted life year10 rate is related to nutrition. If not 
adequately managed, non-communicable diseases have the potential to undermine the 
country’s achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 3 (health and well-being). At 
the global level, UNDP and the World Health Organization (WHO) have agreed to 
collaborate on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases.
9. The prevalence of HIV among people who inject drugs is slowly decreasing. 
However, according to a Ministry of Health and Medical Education concept note, during 
2012-2013 the percentage of people identified to have contracted HIV through other 
transmission routes increased almost 1.5 times, from 20 to 30 per cent. The National 
Strategic Plan on HIV/AIDS has recently been revised to align with the global goal 
calling for elimination of the HIV/AIDS epidemic by 2030.11 UNDP has played a 
positive supporting role in helping the Government to develop this plan, in close 
collaboration with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and 
WHO. 
10. While early elimination of falciparum malaria has been achieved in some target areas 
(9 of 11 provinces reported zero cases in the period October 2014-September 2015),
12 the 
country remains concerned about the risk of reintroduction of the disease from 
neighboring countries. Similarly, while the country now has a relatively low rate of 
tuberculosis (according to the 2015 Global Tuberculosis Report, notification rates have 
dropped from 143 per 100,000 in 1964 to 12.9 per 100,000 in 2014), multi-drug-resistant 
tuberculosis is still considered a public health threat, particularly in eastern border areas. 
Over the past decade, UNDP has served as the main channel for Iranian access to 
resources from the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and will 
continue to provide this support. 
11. The Islamic Republic of Iran is considered to be highly disaster-prone. The 2009 
Global Assessment Report on disaster risk reduction put it in the high level of ‘multiple 
mortality risk class’. The country undergoes an average of 4.3 critical natural disasters 
per year. Earthquakes pose the greatest risk, given that 70 per cent of the total population 
live in densely packed urban areas. Given its practical experiences, the Government is 
 
8
Statistical Centre of Iran, 2015.
9 National Action Plan for Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases and Related Risk Factors in the Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 2015-2025.
10 The disability-adjusted life year is a measure of overall disease burden, expressed as the number of years lost due to ill-health, disability 
or early death.
11 F
th Ntil SttiPlHIV Ctl ithIliRblif I2015well prepared for initial relief and response, although more attention is needed to disaster 
preparedness, resilience and risk management. Women require special attention in both 
disaster preparedness and risk reduction and management, given the burden of risk to 
which they are exposed and the pivotal role they play in managing household assets and 
welfare. UNDP has an opportunity to strengthen its disaster risk reduction management 
support by more closely integrating this work with its portfolio of work on the 
environment, and through strengthening synergies with other United Nations agencies 
such as the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat).
12. The UNDP contribution to Iranian development priorities in the previous country 
programme cycle has been in the areas of environment, health and integrated natural 
resource management. Examples include supporting the Government's plans for 
improving rural livelihoods and water and land management; and improving technical 
and administrative support to key partner institutions on HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria
and communicable disease control. 
13. UNDP is acknowledged for its technical and administrative support to the 
Government’s fight against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, as principal recipient of 
funding from the Global Fund, and its contribution to the updating and improvement of 
the Government’s national plans for communicable disease control. UNDP support to the 
Government in formulating macro-level socioeconomic plans and improving institutional 
management capacities for disaster risk reduction has not realized its full potential, in 
significant part because these initiatives were not adequately integrated with other areas 
of UNDP (and wider United Nations) support. 
14. In the light of lessons learned during the last country programme cycle, the country's
upper middle-income status, declining regular resources funding for UNDP programmes 
and country office operations and the agreed priorities for cooperation as set out in the 
UNDAF, 2017-2021, UNDP support to the Islamic Republic of Iran will comprise: 
(a) supporting the Government to address rapidly emerging non-communicable diseases,
in collaboration with WHO;
(b) supporting resource mobilization, advocacy and awareness-raising initiatives for 
achieving country programme outcomes;
(c) supporting government priorities for regional and South-South cooperation, 
primarily through facilitating the development of contacts, cooperation and 
communication mechanisms. Enhanced regional cooperation will be required to help 
address regional watershed management issues, marine pollution and the spread of 
diseases across borders;
(d) supporting the Government in devising policies in areas such as eradication of 
extreme poverty, reduction in inequalities and bringing about a more inclusive and 
sustainable economy;
(e) facilitating technology transfer and mobilization of new and additional financial 
resources. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
15. The country programme for 2017-2021 will support the Government in attaining the 
outcomes of the UNDAF 2017-2021, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
6th Five-Year Development Plan (2016-2020). The three priority areas in the 6th FiveYear Development Plan include: (a) promoting a resilient economy; (b) progress in 
science and technology; and (c) promotion of cultural excellence. The country 
programme will centre its support primarily on promoting a resilient economy through 
four key areas: environmentally sustainable development; health and development; social 
welfare, poverty eradication and sustainable employment; and disaster risk reduction and 
management.
16. In supporting the Government to accelerate its national development efforts in these 
four priority areas, in line with the structure and sequence of the UNDAF outcomes. 
UNDP will give particular focus to supporting government initiatives that address the 
needs of the urban and rural poor and young men and women who need sustainable DP/DCP/IRN/3
government programmes to assist female-headed households, will also be given 
particular emphasis. UNDP will continue its support to the Government through 
engagement with people living with HIV/AIDS, those at high risk of contracting 
tuberculosis or malaria and those most vulnerable to non-communicable diseases. 
Geographically, UNDP will support the Government’s work in disadvantaged and 
environmentally-stressed areas.
17. The overall vision for this country programme is that UNDP will make a clear and 
substantive contribution to advancing the resilience of the Iranian economy through
sustainable and inclusive development, and be a clear partner of choice for both the 
Government and other development partners when seeking to strengthen 
multidisciplinary and multi-agency responses to sustainable development challenges. 
Environmentally sustainable development (Sustainable Development Goals 1, 5, 6, 7, 
9, 12, 13, 14 and 17)
18. UNDP will continue to support integrated natural resource management and 
biodiversity initiatives started in previous country programme period. This will include 
scaling-up of the adopted models for management of wetlands and drylands, as well as 
biodiversity and conservation mainstreaming in all types of ecosystems, including forests. 
Participatory planning and management approaches and the creation of new livelihood 
opportunities, including for disadvantaged and female-headed households, will remain a 
key thrust of the recommended approach. UNDP will work with the Government to 
identify new areas in which pilot initiatives can be developed and implemented, such as 
for water resources management, addressing pollution and urban environmental 
challenges (e.g., air pollution and solid waste management) and sustainable management 
of marine resources. UNDP will seek to work with line ministries, through the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, to strengthen opportunities for regional dialogue and action on crossborder environmental issues such as regional watershed management, sand and dust 
storms, marine pollution and transboundary air pollution. 
19. UNDP will engage at the institutional level to help develop technical capacities, 
systems for and awareness of the better valuing of ecosystem services and natural 
resources and taking these into account in development planning and budgeting. 
Developing an environmentally sustainable growth paradigm, which also impacts 
positively upon sustainable job creation objectives, will help the Government to meet its 
long-term sustainable development ambitions. 
20. UNDP will support government efforts to reduce the economy’s carbon footprint by 
providing access to knowledge products, technical expertise and evidence regarding 
potential solutions, including with respect to core issues such as increasing the efficiency 
of energy production and use; and diversifying energy sources and increasing the share of 
renewable energy. UNDP will continue to assist the Government in preparing its national 
communication on the implementation of the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change. With respect to climate change adaptation, UNDP will inter alia assist 
the Government to develop strategies and plans for making more efficient and effective 
use of water in the agriculture sector, while at the same time protecting the livelihoods of 
small-scale farmers. This work will be undertaken in close collaboration with other 
United Nations agencies including the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United 
Nations. 
21. UNDP will support government efforts to re-establish systems for effectively 
monitoring and managing persistent organic pollutants and to implement the plan to 
phase out use of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), phase 2 of which starts in 2017. 
Initial focus will be on safe disposal of the current inventory of polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCBs) held by the power-generation sector. 
Health and development (Sustainable Development Goals 1 and 3)
22. In the short to medium term, UNDP will continue to help coordinate the United 
Nations response to HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, in close collaboration with 
UNAIDS and WHO, through support to the Government in utilizing Global Fund programmes on promoting cross-sectoral integration and coherence in communicable 
disease response. There will likely remain longer-term opportunities for UNDP to 
provide support to the Government’s HIV/AIDS and other communicable disease 
programmes.
23. UNDP will continue to develop and expand its joint work with the Ministry of 
Health and Medical Education on non-communicable diseases, in collaboration with 
WHO and other United Nations agencies. The primary focus and strength of UNDP 
include: (a) supporting increased collaboration by public health and non-health sectors in 
the national non-communicable disease response; (b) helping to develop the case for 
investment in combating non-communicable diseases; and (c) promoting and supporting 
the expansion and transition of Global Fund activities to non-communicable disease
activities. UNDP would also support joint advocacy for innovative responses to noncommunicable diseases.
24. Given the country's strong track record in combating HIV, malaria and tuberculosis, 
and building on its experience in convening and facilitating the 'G5' group for regional 
cooperation on health system strengthening, opportunities will be explored and proposed 
for developing a more systematic and programmatic approach to allow the Islamic 
Republic of Iran to share its knowledge and experience within the G5 and beyond. 
Resilient economy: Social welfare, poverty eradication and sustainable employment
(Sustainable Development Goals 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10 and 17)
25. UNDP will support the Government to further develop and refine the 
Multidimensional Poverty Index to integrate the concept of multidimensional poverty 
into policymaking and planning processes within key institutions. The purpose would be 
to help the Government to prioritize and target policies and subsequent investments 
aimed at reducing relative poverty and eliminating absolute poverty, both spatially, e.g.,
in disadvantaged provinces and environmentally degraded areas, and among specific 
populations, e.g., youth and female-headed households. This will build on UNDP work
on a national social protection model currently underway.
26. In collaboration with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and UN-Habitat, 
UNDP will support the Government to update the definitions and standards of rural and 
urban poverty, including for housing, and help to promote the use of this data, as 
appropriate, to enhance multisectoral responses to identified needs.
27. Employment generation is a key government priority and is linked to reducing 
relative poverty and promoting inclusive and sustainable growth. While it is anticipated 
that future economic growth and job creation including vocational training will occur in 
the established sectors of the economy, UNDP will support government efforts to 
diversify and deepen job-creation opportunities, with a particular focus on developing 
innovative schemes and programmes, in particularly at local and subnational levels, to
create more small and medium enterprises and social enterprises that also deliver socially 
and environmentally desirable benefits. UNDP support will be linked with livelihoodcreation initiatives supported under the environment outcome. Youth, including young 
women and unemployed graduates, will be a particular focus of efforts for social 
enterprise job creation through UNDP international technical support and seed funding. 
Resilient Economy: Natural disaster management (Sustainable Development Goals 9 
and 11)
28. UNDP will support the Government to improve its disaster risk reduction and 
resilience capacities in the context of the Sendai Framework will continue to work with 
relevant authorities in preparation of a national disaster risk management strategy and 
action plan. Upon the plan’s approval, UNDP will support its effective implementation
through enhancing institutional capacities. Building on experience in the previous 
programme cycle, UNDP will provide technical support and access to international best 
practice/expertise, and facilitate arrangements that promote multi-stakeholder 
participation and cooperation including enhanced synergies of effort between relevant DP/DCP/IRN/3
United Nations agencies including the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian 
Affairs (OCHA) and UN-Habitat. 
29. UNDP will support the Government in the generation, analysis and use of up-to-date 
data on disaster risk. This will likely include support for the preparation and updating of 
national-level disaster risk assessment and vulnerability maps (especially for residents of 
disadvantaged and vulnerable locales), both for individual and multiple hazard risks. 
UNDP will help the designated entities to prioritize the needs of specific populations
such as the disadvantaged, women, the elderly and persons with disabilities in disaster 
preparedness planning, and help to conduct awareness-raising and advocacy programmes
for effectively enhancing community resilience to natural disasters.
30. The Government remains the most critical partner of UNDP, and ongoing priority 
will be given to further strengthening the mechanism by which the Government and 
UNDP collaborate. Key institutional partners are listed in the results and resources 
framework (annex). UNDP will support the achievement of country programme priorities 
through its collaborative working arrangements with other parts of the United Nations
system in the Islamic Republic of Iran, regionally and globally, and with other 
international development partners. Accessing support and expertise from diverse sources 
through collaborative partnership arrangements is at the core of the UNDP approach to 
facilitating and supporting sustainable development goals. 
31. UNDP will support the enhanced regional cooperation required to help address 
regional watershed management issues, marine pollution in the Persian Gulf and the 
spread of communicable diseases across borders, as well as increasing government efforts 
to engage in broader South-South cooperation, for example by sharing its knowledge and 
expertise in controlling communicable diseases and in responding to natural disasters. 
III. Programme and risk management
32. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national 
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results 
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of 
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country 
programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and 
procedures and the internal controls framework. 
33. The UNDP social and environmental standards and screening procedure will be 
applied to ensure benefits are realized and risks appropriately identified and managed. 
Necessary resource allocation in the form of direct project costs will be applied to 
maintain the effective and efficient human resource capacity of the UNDP country office. 
34. The key assumptions underpinning the country programme are that: (a) the 
Government continues to value the UNDP role in supporting its efforts towards a resilient 
economy through sustainable and equitable development and actively supports and 
facilitates implementation of the country programme; (b) UNDP, in partnership with 
Government, can mobilize adequate financial resources to support the operations of the 
county office and funding for specific programmes and projects ; (c) UNDP will continue 
to focus on testing and demonstrating solutions that can be scaled up as one of the key 
approaches across the country programme; and (d) UNDP continues to strengthen 
synergies with other United Nations agencies and its own results-based management 
systems and capacities. 
35. The risks to country programme implementation have been identified as: diminishing 
UNDP programme resources, including for cost-sharing; regional disease outbreaks and
regional watershed management crises; lack of expected funding from the Global 
Environment Facility; and an inability to resolve audit-related issues regarding the use of 
government cost-sharing allocated to UNDP.
36. UNDP will manage risk through a process of ongoing dialogue with the Government 
to ensure that strategic risks are identified, monitored and mitigated in a timely manner. 
Internallyrisk management and mitigation processes are based on established UNDP procedures, underpinned by project specific risk management plans. The country 
programme will be nationally executed. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will represent 
the Government for the purposes of this country programme. A National Steering 
Committee, co-chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and UNDP and comprising 
implementing ministries and other relevant agencies, will hold an annual programme 
review meeting.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
37. All programme interventions will be guided by a measurable, and clearly defined, 
results framework. Data for outcome indicators, including gender disaggregated data, will 
be sourced from the Statistical Centre of Iran. The Government and UNDP may 
nevertheless agree on additional primary data collection and /or additional analysis of 
already available data sources in order to help measure outcome-level progress. UNDP 
will collaborate closely with UNFPA on issues related to strengthening national data 
systems and quality, given their ongoing and active engagement with the Statistical 
Centre of Iran. The Steering Committee will review contributions to national results at 
the end of each year and may endorse necessary adjustments to the country programme to 
ensure that results are met. Output-level monitoring will continue to rely primarily on 
project-level monitoring and evaluation processes, placing greater emphasis on targeting, 
development of robust baselines, joint monitoring and evaluation activities (between 
UNDP, the Government and other United Nations agencies), and maximizing synergies 
across the programme portfolio. Projects will be expected to allocate at least 3 per cent of 
funds to monitoring and evaluation and 1 per cent of funds to communication and 
advocacy activities.
38. To strengthen the quality and relevance of its services, UNDP will devise a multiyear policy research agenda and in coordination with Ministry of Foreign Affairs, will 
work with other development agencies, national research institutes and academia to 
generate and promote evidence to inform policies on critical issues related to sustainable 
development and equitable growth. Upon government request and through the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, UNDP will provide technical support to map the Sustainable 
Development Goals indicators and targets to the relevant government sectoral 
development plans and strategies.
39. The country programme will follow the framework principles as stipulated in 
section 3.2 of the UNDAF, 2017-2021.DP/DCP/IRN/3
Annex. Results and resources framework for the Islamic Republic of Iran (2017-2021)
The results and resources framework is, in spirit and content, subject to the main body of the terms and references of the UNDP country programme document, 2017-2021. 
All figures in the results and resources framework are drawn from national sources of data.
OUTCOME 1: Responsible government agencies formulate, implement and monitor integrated natural resource management, low carbon economy, and climate change policies and 
programmes more effectively (UNDAF outcomes 1.1 and 1.2)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Articles of the 6th National Development Plan (draft)
RELEVANT Sustainable Development Goals: 1, 5, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14 and 17
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1. Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded.
CPD OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS MAJOR PARTNERS 
INDICATIVE 
RESOURCES BY 
OUTCOME ($)
1. Annual emissions of CO2 in 
million metric tons
Baseline (2010): 855 million 
tons
Target (2030): 787 million 
tons (reduction of 8%)
2. Percentage of land area that 
is managed sustainably under 
an in-situ conservation 
regime, a sustainable use 
regime and / or an access and 
benefits sharing regime
Baseline (2015): 10.4% 
Target (2020): At least 17 
per cent 
3.Tons of ozone depletion 
potential (ODP) used
Baseline (2015): 309 ODP 
tons 
Target (2020): 260 ODP tons
4. Disposal of the current 
Ministry of Energy, Department 
of Environment, Ministry of 
Agriculture Jihad official 
records and Statistical Centre of 
Iran data, collected and analysed 
annually
Output 1.1: Strategies and measures that promote sustainable and integrated 
management of natural resources, biodiversity and ecosystem services are developed 
and considered for adoption / implementation by the Islamic Republic of Iran
Indicators:
1.1.1: Hectares of land/rangeland/forest being reclaimed or used sustainably for 
agriculture under pilot projects and scale-up schemes 
Baseline (2015): 109,764 hectares
Target: 200,000 hectares
1.1.2: Number of sectoral guidelines with budget allocation for mainstreaming 
biodiversity conservation into development planning
Baseline (2015): 28 
Target : 40
1.1.3: Number of coordination mechanisms to address trans-boundary issues
Baseline (2015): 0
Target: 2
Output 1.2: Climate change adaptation and mitigation solutions developed and 
considered for adoption / implementation by the Islamic Republic of Iran
Indicators:
1.2.1: Hectares of agricultural land benefiting from water saving measures 
Baseline (2015): 10,000
Department of Environment
Forests, Range and Watershed 
Organization
Ministry of Energy
Ministry of Mines, Industry and 
Commerce
Ministry of Agriculture Jihad
Ministry of Interior
Ministry of Petroleum 
Management and Planning 
Organization
FAO
Regular13
$553,000
Other
$104 million
 Global Environment
Facility (GEF)
STAR:
$16 million, 
 GEF non-STAR: 
$8 million 
 Green Climate Fund
 Government costsharing /cofinancing:
$70 Million
 Third party costsharing: 
$10 millionpersistent organic pollutants 
(POPs) inventory and 
importation control of POPs 
in general and of PCBs in 
particular.
Baseline (2015): 11,000 tons 
of PCB oil and equipment 
(approx.)
Target (2020): 2000 tons of 
low PCB contaminated oil and 
equipment as well as 100 tons 
of highly contaminated PCB 
oil and equipment and 80 
tonnes of agricultural POPs
Target: 25,000
1.2.2: Sustainable adaptive/climate resilient solutions identified and tested in water 
and agriculture sectors 
Baseline (2015): 1
Target: 3
1.2.3: Amount of CO2 equivalent mitigated and energy efficiency/ conservation 
achieved with a focus on industry and residential sectors
Baseline (2015): TBD
Target: TBD
Output 1.3: The Islamic Republic of Iran’s institutional capacities to meet HCFC 
and POP phase out commitments are enhanced
Indicators:
1.3.1. Number of enhanced systems established for control of HCFCs and POPs 
Baseline : 1 (already in place for HCFCs)
Target: 2 (system for POPs re-established and for HCFC enhanced)
OUTCOME 2: The health sector in the Islamic Republic of Iran formulates, implements and monitors policies and programmes on HIV/AIDS, other communicable diseases and noncommunicable disease more effectively (UNDAF Outcomes 2.2 and 2.3)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Articles of the 6th National Development Plan (draft); Islamic Republic of Iran’s Overall Health Policies; and the Islamic Republic of Iran’s Health Transformation Plan (Health Sector 
Evolution Plan)
RELEVANT Sustainable Development Goals: 1 and 3
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 3. Countries have strengthened institutions to progressively deliver universal access to basic services.
5. Percentage of adults and 
children with HIV, 
disaggregated by sex and age, 
known to be on treatment 12 
months after initiation of 
antiretroviral therapy
Baseline (2013): 
- Male: 83.87%
- Female: 87.21%
- Age < 15: 83.58%
- Age 15+: 83.58%
Target: TBD
6. Number of laboratoryconfirmed autochthonous 
malaria cases in target 
districts, disaggregated 
Official database of Ministry of 
Health and Medical Education, 
collected and analysed annually
Output 2.1: Strategies, mechanisms and tools to further strengthen implementation 
of the National Strategic Plans on HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria and other 
communicable diseases are developed and considered for adoption by the Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Indicators:
2.1.1: Number of Universities of Medical Sciences that have developed, budgeted, and 
implemented HIV and malaria action plans 
Baseline (2015): 0
Target: 16
2.1.2: Number of malaria and/or other vector-borne disease control/elimination plans 
coordinated and facilitated by UNDP in Economic Free Zones
Baseline (2015): 0
Target: 4
2.1.3: Number of multisectoral and/or sustainability plans and budgets developed in 
Ministry of Health and Medical 
Education
Prisons Organisation 
Ministry of Welfare
Ministry of Education 
Secretariat of the High Council of 
Free Trade Zones
WHO 
UNAIDS
Regular13
$553,000
Other: 
$14 million
 Global Fund
$7 + $5 million
 Government costsharing:
$2 millionDP/DCP/IRN/3
Baseline (2015): 263
(72% male and 75% over 15 
years old)
Target (2021): 26 
7. Number of foci with local 
malaria transmissions): 
Baseline (2015): 304
Target (2021): 76
8. Number of deaths due to 
non-communicable diseases 
(NCDs) in both sexes and in 
the age groups of 30 to 75 
years old
Baseline (2010): 75,150
Target (2025): 25% reduction 
in morality (based on the 
population of the target year) 
due to NCDs.
Baseline (2015): 0
Target: 2
Output 2.2. Solutions that help address priority NCDs are identified, developed and 
considered for adoption / implementation by the Government.
Indicators:
2.2.1: Number of NCD related multisector plans developed and approved.
Baseline (2015): 0
Target: 2
Output 2.3: Opportunities for Iran to share its experience on HIV/AIDS, malaria 
and tuberculosis elimination /control with other interested countries are developed 
and considered by the Government for implementation.
Indicators:
2.3.1: Number of solutions that are implemented in neighbouring countries involving 
Iranian expertise/national best-practice
Baseline (2015): 0
Target: 4
OUTCOME 3: Relevant government agencies formulate, implement and monitor their social welfare, poverty eradication and sustainable employment policies and programmes more 
effectively (UNDAF Outcomes 3.1 and 3.5)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Articles of the 6th National Development Plan (draft)
RELEVANT Sustainable Development Goals: 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10 and 17
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1. Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded.
9. Multidimensional Poverty, 
disaggregated by urban and
rural areas
Baseline (2015): circa 20% 
(Ministry of Cooperative, 
Labour and Welfare survey)
Target: less than 10%
10. Proportion of working 
poor, disaggregated by age 
and sex
Baseline (year): TBD by 
Ministry of Cooperative, 
Labour and Welfare
Target: TBD by Ministry of 
Cooperative, Labour and 
SCI – unemployment, inequality 
and poverty (yearly reporting)
Ministry of Cooperative, Labour 
and Welfare – poverty (bi yearly 
reporting)
Central Bank – GDP growth 
(yearly reporting)
MPO – planning documents
MIMT surveys (annual)
Output 3.1: Enhanced strategies and measures to achieve inclusive growth and 
poverty reduction are developed and considered for adoption / implementation by 
the Government.
Indicators:
3.1.1 Number of sectors / key national institutions systematically using MultiDimensional Poverty Index data, to inform policy development and investment 
targeting on the poor 
Baseline (2015) - 0 
Target: TBD by Ministry of Cooperative, Labour and Welfare and Management and 
Planning Organization 
3.1.2 Number of sectors and institutions using updated urban poverty definitions, 
standards and maps to inform policy development and investment targeting.
Baseline (2015) – 1 (Ministry of Roads and Urban Development)
Target: TBD by Ministry of Roads and Urban Development; Ministry of Industry
Ministry of Cooperative, Labour 
and Welfare
Management and Planning 
Organization
Ministry of Industry, Mine and 
Trade
Ministry of Roads and Urban 
Development
Directorate of Rural Development 
and Deprived Areas in the
Office of the Vice-President.
Regular13
$590,000
Other
$4.5 million
 Government costsharing:
$2.25 million
 Trust funds:
$2.25 millionWelfare
11. Unemployment rate, 
disaggregated by age, sex and 
province 
Baseline (year):
Unemployment is officially 
12% 
Target: 7% unemployment by 
end of 6th Plan period
12. Number of measures 
adopted by Government that 
ensure most vulnerable groups 
are covered under the new 
multi-layer social insurance 
systems Baseline (year):
TBD 
Target: Comprehensive 
national plan available
Mine and Trade; Ministry of Cooperative, Labour and Welfare 
Output 3.2: Innovative sustainable employment strategies and measures are 
developed and considered for adoption / implementation by the Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Indicators:
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of new jobs and other livelihoods created with UNDP 
support, disaggregated by age, sex and province 
Baseline (2015): 0 National Sustainable Employment Plan indicates fresh start (zero 
baseline) for unemployment reduction. 
Target: National target 1,000,000 new jobs by 2017. 
OUTCOME 4: Relevant government agencies formulate, implement and monitor natural disaster management policies and programmes more effectively (UNDAF Outcome 3.4)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Articles of the 6th National Development Plan (draft); Integrated National Disaster Management Plan
RELEVANT Sustainable Development Goals: 9 and 11
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 5. Countries are able to reduce the likelihood of conflict and lower the risk of natural disasters, including from climate change
13. Number of multisectoral / 
hazard disaster risk 
management plans in place, 
consistent with the Sendai 
Framework for DRR and the 
new National Strategy, based 
on up-to date risk assessment 
data and taking into account 
differentiated impacts on men 
and women and different 
socioeconomic groups
Baseline (2016): 0
Target: 2
14. Number of enhanced 
institutional arrangements / 
regulatory provisions in place 
Data source and responsibility: 
Ministry of Cooperative, Labour 
and Welfare, Iranian Red 
Crescent Society, Management 
and Planning Organization
Frequency of data collection: 
once a year
Output 4.1: Measures and tools that improve the preparation and implementation 
of multi-sectoral and multi-hazard DRR plans are developed and considered for 
adoption / implementation by the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Indicators:
4.1.1: Knowledge, attitudes and practices (KAP) on DRR among partner institutions / 
target groups
Baseline (2016): TBD through KAP survey
Target (2021): 25+ % increase in KAP scores
Output 4.2: Options and mechanisms for effectively enhancing community 
resilience to natural disasters are developed and considered for adoption / 
implementation by the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Indicators:
4.2.1: Number of community-based pilot projects supported by UNDP, and evidence 
of adoption for scale-up by the Government
National Disaster Management 
Organization
Management and Planning 
Organization
Tehran Disaster Mitigation and 
Management Organization
Iranian Red Crescent Society
Ministry of Roads and Urban 
Development
International Institute of 
Earthquake Engineering and 
Seismology (affiliated to Ministry 
Regular13
$590,000
Other 
$2 million
 Government costsharing:
$1 million
 Third-party costsharing:
$1 millionDP/DCP/IRN/3
at national and subnational 
levels for managing disaster / 
climate risks, 
Baseline (2016): 0.
Target: 4
Baseline (2015): 0
Target: 2
of Science, Research and 
Technology)
Ministry of Health and Medical 
Education
Department of Environment
OCHA 
UN-Habitat