File Name: IRQ-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Iraq
Country Code: IRQ
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 3 to 6 February 2020
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2024
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
2 December 2019
Original: English
1920768X (E) 131219
First regular session 2020
3 to 6 February 2020, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Iraq (2020-2024)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Iraq (2020-2024)…………………………………………… 9I. Programme rationale
1. Iraq is an upper middle-income country that ranks 120 out of 189 countries on the 2018 
human development index. Its human development progress has been impeded by wars and 
conflict, compounded by poor governance, corruption, lack of investment in basic social 
services, poor economic management, and major internal divisions and societal fractures. 
Women and youth are disadvantaged and generally score lower in human development 
indicators. The gender inequality ratio was 0.506 in 2017; labour force participation rates of 
women and youth are at 19 and 26 per cent, respectively, versus 74 per cent for men.
1 The 
youth unemployment rate is 18 per cent, compared to the overall formal unemployment rate 
of 8.2 per cent, with young women faring significantly worse than young men, at 24.43 per
cent and 14.76 per cent, respectively.
2
Iraq is the most oil dependent country globally; in 2015, 
hydrocarbon resources contributed to 58 per cent of its gross domestic product (GDP), 99 per
cent of its exports, and more than 90 per cent of central government revenues.
3 However, the 
oil sector generated only 1 per cent of total employment and contributed mainly to public 
sector expansion.
4
2. Iraq is striving to transition from conflict and stabilization to sustainable development. 
While the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has been territorially defeated in Iraq,
the consequences of the war continue to define the country’s ability to move forward as a 
stable, resilient, cohesive state. Conflict and violence, and to a much lesser extent, the spillover of violence from the neighbouring Syrian Arab Republic, resulted in thousands of lost 
lives; increased marginalization and vulnerability – including up to 5.8 million internally 
displaced persons (IDPs) and 255,000 refugees hosted by Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI);
5
the destruction of physical infrastructure that requires $88 billion for recovery and 
reconstruction;
6
the collapse of social and economic services; heightened social divisions and 
tensions along ethnic, sectarian, religious and regional lines; and the further erosion of 
citizens’ trust in the state. Conflict and violence have impacted the economic welfare of the 
affected population due to the destruction of the economic infrastructure, their livelihoods and 
jobs. The incidence of poverty among IDPs is 42 per cent, nearly double the national poverty 
rate of 22.5 per cent,
7 which is already considerably high for an upper middle-income country. 
The conflict and its consequences have more adversely impacted women and youth. Youth are 
disenfranchised and have no voice in decisions that affect their lives. They are faced with a 
dearth of livelihood and employment opportunities, which increases frustration and 
marginalization – a vicious cycle and potential root cause of future conflicts.
3. The Government recognizes the need to address structural challenges and adopt a holistic 
approach to ensure the success of sustainable reconstruction and rehabilitation. It envisages a 
renewed social contract, based on strengthening citizen-state trust, social cohesion, privatesector-led growth and focus on sustainable development.
8
Iraq is committed to the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Iraq Vision 2030, the National Development Plan 
(NDP), 2018-2022, the Reconstruction and Development Framework (RDF), 2018-2027, and 
the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS), 2018-2022, are mostly anchored in the Sustainable 
Development Goals. 
4. The preliminary findings of the UNDP-supported 2018 rapid integrated assessment (RIA)9
of the country’s strategic planning frameworks suggest a significant degree of alignment 
 
1 World Bank Group, 2018. Iraq Economic Monitor: Toward Reconstruction, Economic Recovery and Fostering Social Cohesion. The World Bank. 
Retrieved from: documents.worldbank.org [Accessed November 2018].
2 World Bank Data, 2017. Iraq. The World Bank. Available at: data.worldbank.org/country/iraq [Accessed January 2019]. 
3
Iraq Systematic Country Diagnostic 2017, The World Bank.
4
Ibid.
5 Multi-sector Needs Assessment (MSNA) IV of Refugees Living out of Formal Camps in the KR-I, May 2019, UNHCR.
6 Kuwait International Conference on Iraq, The World Bank, 2018.
7
Iraq MEU April 2019, The World Bank.
8
Iraq Reconstruction and Development Framework, 2018. 
9
“Alignment of Development Plans with Sustainable Development Goals 2030 and Identify Priorities”, workshop report, October 
2018UNDP country office IraqQ
between the strategic priorities of Iraq and KRI – as reflected in existing visions and plans –
with the Goals. There is significant focus on people and prosperity issues, and effective and 
accountable institutions (Goal 16). The RIA shows that 71 per cent of relevant Goals targets 
have corresponding targets in the NDP, 2018-2022, and the Kurdistan Regional Government 
(KRG) Vision 2020. Some gaps, including on inclusion and environmental sustainability, 
deserve attention. A preliminary assessment of the NDP shows that, despite the priority given 
at policy levels, major gaps remain in linking Goals targets with corresponding national 
targets. The National Committee on Sustainable Development (NCSD) is mandated to monitor 
the progress on the Goals and to submit reports on the country’s progress to a “high-level 
follow‐up group”. 
5. The governing institutions of Iraq have a key role in fostering and creating an enabling 
environment for peace. Healing societal divisions and tensions – caused by inequitable 
economic and social opportunities, and exclusion and marginalization of groups based on 
ethnicity, sect and region – will require a comprehensive social cohesion strategy by national 
institutions that responds to the needs and priorities of the vulnerable and marginalized sectors 
of the population, particularly women and youth
6. Corruption, lack of transparency, accountability and inefficiency in public institutions are 
manifest in the poor quality of basic social services and infrastructure.
10 The national PRS 
acknowledges the governance, corruption and accountability challenges and their impact on 
state effectiveness and efficiency in delivering quality public services. Several country 
diagnostics identify the absence of good governance, the spread of administrative and financial 
corruption, and weak accountability/transparency as responsible for low government 
efficiency and effectiveness and the poor quality and responsiveness of public services.
11
Inadequate performance management systems, limited implementation of the decentralization 
framework, and limited capacities of public officials contribute to poor service delivery 
infrastructure planning, management and maintenance. Structural factors such as 
discriminatory practices and centralization further aggravate these system deficiencies. The 
low priority accorded to improving socioeconomic services, compounded by poor and 
deteriorating infrastructure, has worsened the quality and access to amenities, particularly to 
vulnerable populations. Centralized decision-making does not provide the opportunity for 
citizens to have a voice in decisions that affect their lives. These challenges need to be 
addressed through legal frameworks and mechanisms for corruption prevention, strengthened 
oversight and accountability, and enhanced inclusive institutions that are responsive to the 
needs and priorities of vulnerable populations.
7. Despite strong efforts by the Government and development partners, 1.4 million IDPs 
remain displaced. This requires durable solutions to overcome challenges to voluntary return 
and integration of IDPs – due to poor security, destroyed public infrastructure and housing, 
lack of livelihood opportunities and poor law enforcement in the areas liberated from ISIL.
8. Iraq is highly prone to natural disasters and vulnerability caused by environmental 
degradation and neglect, weak legal and regulatory frameworks for environmental 
management, and weak institutional arrangements and capacities. Furthermore, climate 
change and natural disasters pose multiple challenges in the post-conflict context, as a result 
of their impact on poverty and livelihoods and conflict over natural resources. Climateinduced migration from rural to urban areas can potentially trigger conflict and violence as it 
generates competition for (already strained) urban services and resources. Environmental 
challenges also contribute to increased incidence of poverty through loss of livelihoods and 
productivity caused by land degradation, deforestation and desertification.
9. The previous country programme document (CPD), 2016-2020, focused on institutional 
reform of key national institutions; devolution of administrative and fiscal powers to 
 
10 Iraq is ranked 168/180 countries in the Transparency International corruption perception index 2018.
11 Iraq systematic country diagnostic 2017
The World Bankgovernorates; and contribution to safe, voluntary IDP returns through stabilization, peacebuilding and early recovery. Following the ISIL conflict, the programme direction and 
priorities were realigned to meet the humanitarian and stabilization needs. Stabilization 
became the major thrust at a scale and pace not foreseen at the time of CPD formulation.
10. The independent country programme evaluation (ICPE) 2019 acknowledged the UNDP 
contribution to support IDP return under its stabilization programming, the largest 
stabilization programme to-date. Starting in 2015, the programme now operates in eight 
governorates in Iraq and KRI. It has contributed to the return of 4.3 million IDPs and to 
implementation of more than 3,000 infrastructure projects (2,149 completed) and more than 
18,000 housing units. And it has generated more than 35,000 livelihood opportunities in target 
areas. In total, 3.3 million women and girls have benefitted from stabilization assistance. 
11. The ICPE identified a number of valuable lessons learned that will be considered when 
designing and implementing activities under this new CPD, namely: aligning UNDP
contributions to the country’s changing priorities, including a focus on conflict prevention 
through economic diversification, governance, social cohesion, and energy and environment. 
On the management side, the ICPE highlighted the need to strengthen results-based 
management (RBM).
12. The UNDP comparative advantage in Iraq, as highlighted by the stabilization programme,
rests on its ability to support key nationally-led initiatives at the policy and operational levels, 
and in marshalling donor resources. Successful integrity and accountability measures, and 
efficient delivery mechanisms introduced have built strong donor, Government, KRG and 
community confidence and trust that make UNDP a partner of choice to design and implement 
complex programmes in a high-risk environment. UNDP is well-positioned as a strategic 
partner to support achievement of national Goals targets through programme priorities 
elaborated in the following section. UNDP will draw on the global and regional knowledge 
networks to provide policy advice and institutional strengthening.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
13. The country programme is aligned with the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework, 2020-2024, (UNSDCF) and national strategic priorities reflected in 
the NDP, 2018-2022, Iraq Vision 2030, Kurdistan Vision 2020,
12 and the KRG Roadmap to 
Economic Reforms, which are within the framework of the Goals. 
14. UNDP will support the Government vision for a sustainable peaceful Iraq through an 
approach that strengthens societal resilience to better deal with social, economic, 
environmental and political shocks and stresses, while addressing risk drivers. UNDP will 
support four interlinked, inclusive, holistic development pathways, underpinned by a 
resilience-based strategy that addresses the needs of vulnerable segments to contribute to 
sustaining peace and stability. The four pathways in the CPD are: (a) strengthened 
stabilization; (b) diversified pro-poor economic growth for sustainable livelihoods; (c) 
improved governance with accountable institutions that protect the rights of vulnerable groups 
and pave the way for citizen-state trust; and (d) decreased fragility to climate change. These 
pathways are all underpinned by a strategy for achieving social cohesion, protection and 
inclusion, as critical to ensuring the humanitarian-peace-development nexus and forging a new 
social contract in Iraq. 
15. A key strategic thrust for UNDP will be to undertake these activities in a manner that 
builds the capacity of Central, Governorate and local level institutions to manage initiatives 
key to peacebuilding and reconstruction in the near future. UNDP will also strengthen its 
donor coordination mechanisms, especially on stabilization, social cohesion, and security 
sector reform, with donors and other United Nations organizations.
 
12 KRG Vision 2020 is expected to be extended to 2030 with the same policy priorities (based on discussions with KRG officials)Q
16. UNDP will mainstream conflict-sensitive approaches to all programming in order to 
address the underlying challenges of exclusion, marginalization and societal divisions through 
each pillar and to contribute to addressing key drivers of conflict, particularly with regard to 
strengthening the peace-dividends associated with service delivery in order to increase state 
legitimacy, and reduce local tensions in areas of hardest return and identified volatility, most 
of these being the regions covered by UNDP stabilization initiative. UNDP will also adopt 
and introduce innovative approaches to use social media and social local networks to engage 
youth and women to address social and development challenges through accelerator labs and 
use of digital technology. In addition, UNDP will support the Government to develop and 
implement a social cohesion agenda that promotes conflict resolution mechanisms, dialogue 
and trust-building measures; enable peaceful coexistence; and prevent future radicalization 
and recruitment by violent extremist groups. 
17. Gender and youth will be mainstreamed in all programming through dedicated strategies 
and monitoring based on gender and age-disaggregated data. 
18. UNDP will leverage its close relationship with, and the political mandate of the United 
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to develop and implement innovative and 
sensitive conflict approaches, especially with regard to identified priority regions, social 
cohesion, returns, prevention of violent extremism and overall governance reform. UNDP will 
explore partnerships with United Nations organizations – International Organization for 
Migration (IOM), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and World Food Programme 
(WFP) – to offer an integrated approach to social cohesion, especially in conflict flash point 
areas. UNDP will strengthen partnerships with national and local non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), academic institutions and research organizations on awareness 
creation, peace and conflict studies and design of pilot innovative, social-cohesion 
mainstreaming initiatives.
19. Informed by the common country assessment (CCA), and ICPE findings and 
recommendations, UNDP will contribute to achieving UNSDCF outcomes 2.1, 3.1, 3.2 and 
4.1, which reflect Goals 5 and 7 to 17 and are aligned with UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021,
Outcomes 1 to 3. The country programme will focus on the following priority areas.
Stabilization (UNSDCF Outcome 3.2; Goals 9, 16 and 3, 5 and 6) 
20. The current UNDP stabilization initiative has been the main stabilization effort in support 
of the Government’s post-ISIL efforts; there is still major demand for its activities to support 
the transition. Based on its success and lessons learned, the next phase of the stabilization 
pillar (2021-2024) will address challenges related to access to basic infrastructure and services 
in disadvantaged areas most affected by the cycle of conflict and at risk for future conflict. 
The pillar will address restoration of public services, rehabilitation of housing and public 
infrastructure, and implementation of interventions to address service sustainability in critical 
infrastructure sectors, while giving greater emphasis to issues of exclusion, discrimination and 
rights and stronger focus on ‘building back better’. In a conflict sensitive way, this pillar will 
develop stronger synergies with other programme areas, particularly livelihoods, social 
cohesion, environment and governance, while improving strategies for the empowerment of 
women and youth and mainstreaming innovation. UNDP will ensure that the required 
technical expertise of municipalities and local line directorates is built and allocated to sustain 
service delivery efforts in liberated areas and underserved governorates, especially those still 
hosting IDPs, and host communities. 
21. UNDP will leverage its strong partnership with the Government, KRG, governorates and 
local authorities, to strengthen sustainability, national ownership and coordination. In 
implementing its stabilization pillar, UNDP will seek technical collaboration with the United 
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to strengthen environmental safeguards; with the 
United Nations Human Settlement Programme (UN-HABITAT) around housing, land and property rights; and with UNICEF and the World Health Organization (WHO) on education 
and health programming; and the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) on mine 
action
Growing the economy for all (UNSDCF Outcome 2.1; Goals 4, 5, 8, 10, 12, 17)
22. To promote an enabling environment that facilitates inclusive and diversified economic 
growth benefitting citizens at all levels, UNDP will support the strengthening of business 
ecosystems, especially in high-impact, labour-intensive productive sectors. UNDP will 
support the Government to implement its private sector development strategy (PSDS); 
improve access to markets and finance through innovative financing options; establish small 
and medium enterprises (SMEs) and start-ups; promote skills development and job placement; 
and set up a system for asset grant replacement. UNDP assistance will aim to strengthen local 
government capacities for inclusive local-green economic development; support innovative 
solutions through public-private partnerships that stimulate inclusive local economic 
development; provide income and employment opportunities for vulnerable groups,; and 
promote social cohesion and environment-friendly business practices, especially in growthpromising economic sectors that have high impact on employment creation. UNDP will 
support both the central level (for PSDS) and in underserved regions, especially those liberated 
from ISIL, southern governorates and the Baghdad belt. 
23. UNDP will elaborate a sustainable livelihoods strategy that includes a mapping of ongoing 
and future initiatives to identify possible partnerships in this pillar. It will build on its strong 
partnership with municipalities and governorate councils to pioneer public-private partnership 
initiatives, while further exploring partnerships with the private sector and the International 
Labour Organization (ILO) for skills advancement and SME and private sector development.
Women and youth will be key target groups in all these activities.
Strengthen institutions and services (UNSDCF Outcome 3.1; Goals 5, 10, 16)
24. In order to restore citizens’ confidence in governance institutions and State legitimacy, 
UNDP will support accountable, transparent, efficient institutions able to deliver basic 
services, through support to policies and actions for inclusive, participatory and responsive 
planning, budgeting and decision-making processes that reflect the needs and priorities of 
vulnerable groups. UNDP will pilot innovative technology-based solutions that contribute to 
increased efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of governance institutions, systems and 
services at national and subnational levels, including strengthening national anti-corruption 
capacities, sector-specific approaches, and capacity development of relevant national 
institutions and NGOs. 
25. UNDP will improve access to justice and strengthen citizen security, particularly for
women and other marginalized groups, by promoting effective dispute resolution mechanisms, 
and by strengthening security sector reform, the rule of law and national human rights 
institutions. Interventions proposed under this pillar are also intended to provide an enabling 
environment for the achievement of social cohesion and sustainable development.
26. UNDP will partner with government institutions to implement its interventions in this 
pillar at the central and local levels, including the Ministry of Interior and its community 
security machinery; the Integrity Committee and the Parliament for strengthened oversight; 
and governorate councils and municipalities for decentralization efforts. 
Promoting natural resource and disaster risk management, and climate change 
resilience (UNSDCF Outcome 4.1; Goals 5, 7, 10, 12 to 15, 17) 
27. UNDP will support resilient, low-emission, development pathways to cope with climate, 
change and environmental risks and exposure. Key elements include promoting sustainable 
water governance, and sustainable practices of wastewater and solid waste management; 
improving access to clean renewable energy; and strengthening biodiversity. UNDP will offer Q
policy advice and technical assistance to enable national partners to integrate environment, 
disaster and climate risks in resilience-building and recovery planning. UNDP will build 
national and subnational capacities to design and implement strategies to achieve environment, 
disaster and climate-related Goals. UNDP will promote resilience, by supporting 
implementation of the national environment strategy, and accessibility to global climate 
finance instruments. The programme will focus on ecologically-degraded, climate change, 
disaster-vulnerable regions; salinity-affected, water-stressed regions in the south 
Mesopotamian marshlands; designated national protected areas, and the mountain ecosystem 
in the north. It will target disaster and climate-vulnerable communities, IDPs and host 
communities, with priority on women, children, the elderly and disabled. UNDP will provide 
policy advice and technical assistance to assist the Government in meeting its international 
commitments, obligations and conventions and comply with related reporting requirements. 
28. UNDP will draw on its regional and global environment and climate change expertise to 
support evidence-based policy and analysis to inform national policies and action plans. It will 
work with national partners to identify and access climate financing opportunities, including 
vertical funds such as the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Green Climate Fund (GCF), 
the Adaptation Fund and vertical funds which Iraq has yet to fully utilize. UNDP will promote 
South-South and regional collaboration to address cross-boundary environmental, energy and 
water-related threats and challenges, and will partner with the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), UNEP, UNICEF, WHO, the Arab Water Council, 
and the Regional Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (RCREEE) on policy 
advocacy, research, community outreach and programme implementation. 
III. Programme and risk management
29. This CPD outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit 
of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the 
programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and 
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’s 
programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework.
30. The programme will be directly implemented by UNDP. If necessary, direct 
implementation may be replaced by national implementation for parts of this in case of force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be used in a coordinated 
fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. As per Executive 
Board decision 2013/9, cost definitions and classifications for programme and development 
effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
31. In accordance with Board decision 2013/9, all direct costs associated with project 
implementation, including data, information and monitoring, will be charged to concerned 
projects.
32. UNDP is likely to face significant operational and programming risks primarily related to 
the operating environment in the country, characterized by a fragile peace and continued 
security challenges. Sustaining national political commitment throughout the CPD period –
regarding the required security, governance, justice and sectoral reforms and actions contained 
in this programme – will be a challenge, given the situation in Iraq, and may pose a risk to 
achieving programme impact and delivering results. UNDP will maintain close consultations 
with Federal and local Government, KRG, UNAMI and development partners to mitigate risks 
and take corrective measures where possible. UNDP plans to regularly update critical risk 
analysis to ensure timely preventive measures are taken to avoid programme disruption and 
delays. IV. Monitoring and evaluation
33. Data availability, reliability and access, particularly sex disaggregated and subnational 
levels, remains a major challenge in the RBM of the programme and the Goals. Data 
availability assessments conducted under UNDP support for the Voluntary National Review 
indicate a data gap of about 70 per cent for the 230 indicators of 17 Goals.13 Once the process 
of validation of the RIA is completed, and national priority targets are identified, UNDP will 
support the undertaking of a data gap analysis for the Goals. UNDP, with in-house expertise 
at regional and global levels, jointly with other United Nations organizations, especially 
UNFPA, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) and IOM, 
will intensify efforts to support national institutions to introduce modern information 
management techniques and technology to improve data availability, reliability and access to 
enhance the quality of monitoring and reporting on the Goals. Key national partners include 
the Central Statistical Organization and Kurdistan Regional Statistical Office, which are 
mandated to manage national and regional statistics.
14 In partnership with United Nations
organizations and international partners, UNDP will advocate that the “leave no one behind” 
approach be embedded in the national census.
34. UNDP will, to the extent possible, align the country programme and project-level 
indicators with the UNSDCF, the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, and the national Goals 
and national/regional development plan indicators to ensure that data generated through 
United Nations and national sources is consistent and available to meet UNDP monitoring and 
reporting requirements. 
35. UNDP has established a programme management and support unit (PMSU) to strengthen 
its monitoring and evaluation capacity, programme quality assurance and management 
oversight. The PMSU provides a dedicated capacity for management to use project and 
outcome evaluations in managing/adjusting initiatives, documenting lessons learned and 
knowledge-sharing. Each pillar will work in cooperation with PMSU to identify data 
limitations/ availability of reliable data, evidence and analysis to improve results-based and 
adaptive management. 
36. UNDP will conduct risk analysis and analytical research and baseline studies to enhance 
its internal knowledge base for better targeting and to inform programme interventions. It will 
strengthen national staff capacities for effective RBM to ensure compliance with UNDP and 
donor reporting requirements. UNDP will conduct regular monitoring visits to review 
implementation progress and take timely remedial actions. In line with UNDP corporate 
guidance and practice, data and information and project monitoring costs will be included as 
direct costs to project budgets. UNDP will also consider a midterm review of the country 
programme to assess progress and relevance and to inform (re)alignment with emerging 
priorities and needs, if required. 
37. The UNDP gender marker and environmental screening guidelines will be used to monitor 
country programme expenditures and improve planning and decision-making.
 
13 Iraq Voluntary National Report 2019.
14 Iraq systematic country diagnostic
The World Bank2017 (based on assessment of the Iraq statistical system)Q
Annex. Results and resources framework for Iraq (2020-2024)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 
National development priority: 1. Lay the foundations for good governance.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: 3.2. People in Iraq, civil society and communities, particularly women, have improved capacity to lead, participate 
in and contribute to the design and delivery of equitable and responsive services, especially for the most vulnerable populations.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 
Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
UNSDCF outcome 
indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs (including 
indicators, baselines targets)
Major partners / partnerships
frameworks
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome (in 
United States 
dollars)
Indicator 1.1. Number 
of governorates with 
direct participation 
mechanisms for civil 
society engagement in 
all facets of 
development plans for 
the delivery of 
equitable and 
responsive services 
that operate regularly 
and transparently.
Baseline (2019): TBC
Target (2024): 10
Source: TBC
Frequency: TBC
Output 1.1. Infrastructure for basic service delivery 
improved in locations affected by crisis and vulnerable to 
conflict.
Indicator 1.1.1.
15 Number of people from locations affected 
by crisis accessing basic services, gender disaggregated.
Baseline (2019): 9,039,253 (3,968,280 women)
Target (2024): 12,000,000
Source: IOM displacement tracking matrix (DTM); UNDP 
project reports
Indicator 1.1.2. Number of infrastructure projects 
completed in priority sectors in conflict affected 
communities.
Baseline (2019): 2,249 projects
Target (2024): 2,800 projects
Source: UNDP project records
Indicator 1.1.3. Number of families benefitting from 
improved housing.
Baseline (2019): 20,960 (234, Welthungerhilfe)
Target (2024): 25,000
Source: UNDP project records
Council of Minister’s Secretariat 
(COMSEC)
Ministry of Planning (MoP)
Ministry of Finance (MoF)
Relevant technical ministries for 
service delivery
Ministry of Higher Education 
and Scientific Research 
(MHESR)
Governorates
Local authorities
Universities 
Civil society
UNAMI
UNMAS
UN-HABITAT
UNESCO
UNICEF
WHO
UNEP
Regular
 $350,000
Other
$664,000,000Output 1.2: Civil society and academic institutions 
strengthened to promote social cohesion, prevention of 
violent extremism and sustainable development.
Indicator 1.2.1. Number of civil society organizations 
(CSOs) supported to engage in sustainable development, 
conflict prevention and mitigation processes.
Baseline (2019): 25
Target (2024): 50
Source: UNDP project records, NGO Directorate
Indicator 1.2.2. Number of academic institutions with 
increased capacity to promote social cohesion within the 
higher education system in Iraq.
Baseline (2019): 9
Target (2024): 15
Source: MHESR; UNDP project records
Indicator 1.2.3. Number of community-level mechanisms 
for conflict resolution and consensus-building that are 
operational with the engagement of youth and women.
Baseline (2019): 30 (6 women focused)
Target (2024): 80
Source: UNDP project records
Indicator 1.2.4. Number of people engaged in the 
innovative use of social media and local networks to 
address development challenges and social cohesion 
(gender disaggregated).
Baseline (2019): 12,278 (3,472 women)
Target (2024): 30,000
Source: Social media tracking tools; project records
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 
National development priority: 4. Provide the conditions for an enabling environment for all forms of investment and strengthen the role of the private sector; 
7. Reduce unemployment and underemployment rates.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: 2.1. Improved people-centred economic policies and legislation contribute to inclusive, gender sensitive and 
diifid ithith fiiiitd dt k fth d lblltiQ
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 
Outcome 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions.
Indicator 2.1. Number 
of jobs created in 
productive non-oil 
sectors out of total 
jobs by sex and age 
and persons with 
disabilities.
Baseline (2019): 
15,985
Target (2024): 76,213
Source: Ministry of 
Labour and Social 
Affairs (MoLSA)
Frequency: TBC
Output 2.1. Priority policies and partnerships approved and 
implemented for inclusive green economic growth and 
employment creation
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of policy or strategy actions 
implemented to enable private sector development. 
Baseline (2019): 1
Target (2024): 2
Source: High-level Steering Committee on PSDS; Ministry 
of Finance
Indicator 2.1.2.
16 Number of public-private partnerships 
formalized for economic diversification and employment 
creation.
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2024): 3
Source: COMSEC, Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Trade
Output 2.2. Access to livelihood and employment creation 
opportunities increased in locations affected by and 
vulnerable to conflict.
Indicator 2.2.1.
17 Number of people benefitting from 
emergency livelihood support, disaggregated by gender.
Baseline (2019): 58,872 (10,862 women;13,095 youth)
Target (2024). 68,000
Source: UNDP project records 
Indicator 2.2.2. Number of people supported to access
sustainable livelihoods and employment opportunities,
disaggregated by gender.
Baseline (2019): 14,114 (7520 women)
Target (2024): 20,000 
MoF
Ministry of Trade 
Ministry of Industry and 
Minerals
Ministry of Labour and Social 
Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture 
Ministry of Water Resources
Prime Minister’s Office
COMSEC
National Investment 
Commission
Governorate offices 
State-own enterprises 
Private sector and banking 
institutions
Union of Iraqi Chambers of 
Commerce
Iraqi Federation of Industries 
Iraqi Contractors Union
World Bank
International Monetary Fund 
(IMF)
UNEP
ILO
CSOs
Universities and research 
institutions
Regular
 $550,000
Other:
$160,000,000
 Source: UNDP project records; Ministry of Labour and 
Social Services; governorate offices
Indicator 2.2.2.
18 Number of men and women accessing 
financial services.
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2024): 1,000
Source: UNDP project records
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 
National development priority: 1. Lay the foundations for good governance; 10. Lay the foundations for decentralization to strengthen spatial development.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: 3.1. Strengthened institutions and systems deliver people-centred, evidence and needs-based equitable and inclusive 
gender and age-responsive services, especially for the most vulnerable populations, with particular focus on advocating for women’s leadership in decision-making 
processes.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 
Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Indicator 3.1. 
Proportion of the 
population satisfied 
with the delivery of 
improved public 
services, disaggregated 
by sex, age, disability, 
type of service and 
governorates.
Baseline (2019): 5.8%
Target (2024): 2% 
increase every two
years
Source: Satisfaction 
surveys conducted by 
CSOs
Frequency: Every two 
years
Output 3.1. Innovative, digital and data-driven solutions 
for developing evidence-based policies and systems for 
planning, budgeting and monitoring public services 
designed and implemented.
Indicator 3.1.1.
19 Number of systems in place that use 
digital technologies and data for improved public services.
Baseline (2019): 1
Target (2024): 6
Source: UNDP project records; Government partner 
records
Indicator 3.1.2. Number of analytical reports produced on 
progress towards achieving the Goals, disaggregated by 
national and subnational levels.
Baseline (2019): 1 (national); 3 (subnational)
Target (2024): 5 (national); 16 (subnational)
Source: Ministry of Planning; governorate offices
COMSEC
Council of Representatives of 
Iraq
Parliament of the Kurdistan 
Regional Government
MoP
MoF
Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Interior
Governorate offices
Local authorities
Supreme/Higher Judicial 
Council
Supreme Anti-Corruption 
Council
Independent High Electoral 
Commission
Judiciary Oversight Commission
Commission of Integrity
Regular
 $490,000
Other
$106,000,000
 Q
Indicator 3.1.3. Number of solutions to address priority 
social and development challenges tested by the accelerator 
lab.
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2024): 5
Source: Accelerator lab records
Output 3.2. National institutions and mechanisms 
dedicated to promoting social cohesion and prevention of 
violent extremism strengthened.
Indicator 3.2.1. Number of policies or plans of action for 
social cohesion and prevention of violent extremism, 
ensuring the engagement of women and youth, approved.
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2024): 2
Source: Parliament of Iraq; COMSEC, Coexistence 
Committee
Indicator 3.2.2.
20 Number of national institutions to lead 
inclusive processes and initiatives that promote social 
cohesion strengthened.
Baseline (2019): 2 
Target (2024): 5
Source: UNDP project records
Indicator 3.2.3.
21 Number of conflict and development 
analysis conducted with stakeholders to inform decisionmaking and risk management strategies, disaggregated by 
national and subnational levels.
Baseline (2019): 5 subnational level
Target (2024): 10
Source: UNDP project records
Output 3.3. Capacities and systems for transparency and 
accountability improved in key policymaking and oversight 
structures to mitigate the risk of corruption.
Board of Supreme Audit
UNAMI
UNHCR
IOM
CSOs
 Indicator 3.3.1.
22 Level of progress made in 
operationalizing the Parliamentarian Development Institute 
(PDI).
Baseline (2019): No PDI in place
Target (2024): PDI operational, providing capacitybuilding support to officials in the Parliament of Iraq
Source: Parliament of Iraq
Indicator 3.3.2. Number of measures adopted to mitigate 
corruption risks, disaggregated by national, subnational
and/or sector level
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2024): 20
Source: UNDP project records; Supreme Anti-Corruption 
Council
Output 3.4.
23 People’s access to justice increased through 
improved capacities and systems of rule of law, security 
sector and human rights institutions.
Indicator 3.4.1. Number of mid-ranking local police 
officers and criminal investigators trained against prioritized 
and specialized training requirements for improved service 
provision in target locations, gender disaggregated.
Baseline (2019): 829
Target (2024): 3000
Source: Ministry of Interior; UNDP records
Indicator 3.4.2. Number of people in locations affected by 
and vulnerable to conflict who have access to legal services,
disaggregated by sex.
Baseline (2019): 18,069 (14,622 women)
Target (2024): 25,000
Source: Directorate for Combatting Violence Against 
Women (DCWAV); Responsible party reports
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 
 Q
National development priority or goal: 10. Lay the foundations for decentralization to strengthen spatial development.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: 4.1. Strengthened and resourced policies and frameworks are implemented for managing natural resources 
(including transboundary issues), developing renewable resources, and increasing resilience to climate change, environmental stress and natural hazards, and 
human-induced and natural disasters.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 
Outcome 2: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Indicator 4.1. Adopted and 
implemented national disaster 
risk reduction (DRR)
strategies in line with Sendai 
Framework for DRR, 2015-
2030.
Baseline (2019): No
Target (2024): Yes
Source: Office of the 
National Security 
Advisor (ONSA), 
National Disaster 
Policies
Frequency: TBC
Output 4.1. National capacities improved for climate 
change adaptation and mitigation.
Indicator 4.1.1.
24 Number of gender-responsive
policies or frameworks developed or updated for
conservation, sustainable use, and equitable access to 
and benefit-sharing of natural resources, biodiversity 
and ecosystems.
Baseline: 3 
Target (2024): 7
Source: MoHEn
Indicator 4.1.2. Number of initiatives on renewable 
energy supported.
Baseline (2019): 3
Target (2024): 7 
Source: UNDP project records; MoHEn
Indicator 4.1.3. Number of reports on Iraq’s 
international commitments submitted.
Baseline (2019): 1
Target (2024): 4
Source: UNDP project records; MoHEn
Indicator 4.1.4. Number of ecologically vulnerable 
locations in which the 3X6 approach is piloted for 
ecosystem conservation and restoration.
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2024): 4 
Prime Minister’s National 
Operations Centre (PMNOC)
Prime Minister’s Advisory 
Council (PMAC)
Ministry of Water Resources 
(MoWR)
Ministry of Health and 
Environment (MoHEn)
Joint Coordination and 
Monitoring Centre
Joint Crisis Coordination 
Centre, KRG
WHO
UNICEF
UNEP
FAO
Arab Water Council
Regional Centre for Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency 
(RECREE)
Civil society
Regular
 $1,000,000
Other 
$63,000,000Source: UNDP project records; MoHEn
Indicator 4.1.4. Extent to which the mechanism for 
water governance in drought prone areas, which are 
vulnerable to conflict, are strengthened.
25
Baseline (2019): 1
Target (2024): 3 
Source: MoWR; governorate offices
Output 4.2. Disaster risk management and resilience 
strengthened with multi-stakeholder engagement, in 
geographic locations at high risk of human-induced or 
natural disasters.
Indicator 4.2.1. Number of gender-responsive 
disaster preparedness plans designed and approved for 
priority governorates, disaggregated by type of 
disaster.
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2024): 3
Source: PMNOC; UNDP project records
Indicator 4.2.2. Level of implementation of 
mechanisms for critical infrastructure protection from 
disasters.
Baseline (2019): Mechanisms not in place.
Target (2024): Mechanisms in place for five critical 
infrastructure.
Source: ONSA