File Name: KAZ-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Kazakhstan
Country Code: KAZ
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 August – 4 September 2020
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
5 July 2020
Original: English
2008919 (E) 280720
Second regular session 2020
31 August – 4 September 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Kazakhstan (2021-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Kazakhstan (2021-2025) 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework
1. Kazakhstan is an upper-middle-income country which, after two decades of growth and 
steady socioeconomic progress, has reached a critical juncture. To meet its ambitious goal of 
becoming one of the 30 most developed nations in the world by 2050,
1 Kazakhstan seeks to 
further modernize its institutions and reformulate policies to rebuild trust with citizens, 
address social vulnerabilities, diversify the economy and develop low-carbon alternatives for 
its growth pathway. While Kazakhstan has achieved a very high Human Development Index 
value of 0.8172and has significantly reduced poverty levels, inequalities persist as a result of 
unbalanced development across regions and social groups, especially pronounced in the 
country’s cities and remote rural areas.
2.The country’s economy is driven by exploitation of natural resources and is based mostly 
on industry and services. Agriculture contributed only 4.2 per cent of gross domestic product 
(GDP) in 2018.3 A series of economic shocks in the last decade has revealed structural 
vulnerabilities – social, economic and environmental – that threaten sustainability and 
inclusive growth.4Integration within the regional and global economies is limited by trade 
barriers and distance to global markets. The dominance of state-owned enterprises further 
hinders economic diversification and weakens incentives for private investment.5 Foreign 
direct investment is growing, but with periodic slowdowns.6 Plummeting oil prices and the 
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis in early 2020 have exposed and deepened these 
vulnerabilities. As a result, the economy is expected to contract by 2.5 per cent in 20207and 
the dual crises could impact the vulnerable even more. 
3.The Government has increasingly emphasized the need for a knowledge-based and lowcarbon development pathway to alleviate the economy’s dependence on extractive and 
carbon-intense industries. This requires a transformational change, by aligning education and 
industry to respond to the needs of the future of work with the appropriate human capital and 
productive capacities, supported by technology, innovation, research and development. 
4. As Kazakhstan seeks a sustainable recovery pathway, clear strategies on low-carbon 
development and climate change adaptation are not yet in place. Its ambitious vision to 
promote renewable energy is hampered by various barriers related to markets, financing and 
technical capacity. Meanwhile, climate change is taking its toll on the agricultural sector, 
water resources, grazing lands and forests. More than 50 per cent of the current glacier mass 
is expected to be lost by 2100, and climate-related disasters such as mudflows, floods and 
droughts have increased in frequency and scale, a trend expected to continue in the next 
decade. Climate change is projected to cause a steep decrease of water resources (up to 22
per cent) by 2100, leading to water stress in all of the country’s eight basins. Kazakhstan is a 
major supplier of wheat, but yields are expected to decrease by between 13 and 49 per cent 
by 2050,
8 with a total annual economic loss in this sector estimated at $700 million.
5.Beyond these socioeconomic and environmental challenges, low levels of accountability 
contribute to mistrust between citizens and institutions. Despite recent improvements, 
Kazakhstan ranks 113 of 180 countries in the Transparency International Corruption 
Perceptions Index.
9 The country has undertaken important institutional reforms, but despite 
1
https://strategy2050.kz/en/
2
http://hdr.undp.org
3
http://economy.kz
4
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/kazakhstan/publication/economic-update-winter-2019
5
Ibid.
6
Foreign direct investment dropped in 2016-2018 (as a percentage of GDP).
7
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2020/04/14/weo-april-2020)
8
https://unfccc.int/documents/28937
9
https://wwwtransparencyorg/country/KAZvisible progress, investments in e-government have not yet yielded the desired effects. The 
COVID-19 pandemic gives new impetus to the need for a more comprehensive public sector 
transformation, to one that is people-centred, service-oriented and accessible, especially by 
the most vulnerable. It also calls for building resilience to disruptions that could be ensured 
by disaster and pandemic preparedness, response and recovery capabilities.
6. Kazakhstan steadily reduced its Gender Inequality Index value from 0.405 in 2000 to 0.202 
in 2015, bringing it below the regional average.10 However, rankings on other indices for 
political representation, labour force participation,11 gender-related biases and wage 
differences indicate a need to further reduce gender gaps12 and unlock the potential of women. 
Currently, only 22 per cent of parliamentary seats are held by women. Gender-based violence 
remains prevalent.13 Although Kazakhstan keeps a steady record and compares well with 
other countries, the gaps between male and female labour force participation and wages are 
not narrowing.14
7.These challenges are particularly acute for the nation’s most vulnerable population groups, 
as revealed during the COVID-19 outbreak. The Government categorizes, among others, 
people with disabilities, large families, youth, women and the elderly as vulnerable. This is
determined by such factors as geography, climate, access to services and discrimination. 
Rural citizens face harsh climate conditions, are remote from markets and suffer from 
declining employment in agriculture. These conditions leave youth in remote areas 
particularly vulnerable to unemployment. People in disaster-prone areas, with high risk of 
flooding, remain particularly vulnerable.15
8. Kazakhstan has begun to chart its sustainable development path within the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the “Kazakhstan 2050” strategy. The Government has 
created a high-level institutional mechanism to oversee the implementation of the Sustainable 
Development Goals and has taken bold steps towards integrating them in national policies 
and sectoral programmes.16 However, stronger political will and sustained action are needed 
to effectively translate strategies into reality on the ground. The country’s sustainable 
development agenda has informed the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework (UNSDCF), which identifies Goals 5, 10, 13, 16 and 17 as focus areas. 
9. UNDP has earned a unique position and value as a trusted long-term partner of the 
Government in supporting national policymaking, institutional capacity development and 
design and implementation of critical reform efforts, thanks to its convening role among 
partners, strong global technical capabilities and local presence. The long and successful 
UNDP track record facilitates governmental buy-in and commitment, promising to make the 
work of UNDP more sustainable and less exposed to shifts in political priorities. UNDP is 
recognized by evaluations for its neutrality, discipline in utilization of government funding, 
effective procurement systems and transparent decision-making.17 It is acknowledged for its 
ability to mobilize cross-sectoral national and international expertise, forge strong 
partnerships within the United Nations and with other development partners, bring new 
modalities of implementation and leverage financing. 
10. This country programme document (CPD) reflects several novel aspects that point to the
unique role of UNDP in the United Nations system. These aspects will be applied across all 
six UNSDCF outcomes, especially in the areas where UNDP has a clear comparative 
10 http://hdr.undp.org/en/GSNI
11 https://www.weforum.org/reports/gender-gap-2020-report-100-years-pay-equality
12 https://www.adb.org/documents/kazakhstan-country-gender-assessment-2018
13 Ibid.
14 Ibid.
15 Common Country Analysis, United Nations, 2019.
16 Ibid.
17 UNDP Independent Evaluation Office
Independent country programme evaluation: Kazakhstan2019advantage, namely in strengthening effectiveness and accountability of institutions;
facilitating citizens’ engagement in decision-making; supporting resilience-building, green 
growth and inclusive economic development; and fostering climate action.
11. The first novelty is the four-fold approach of UNDP to catalyse impact through:
(a) Thought leadership. UNDP will apply modern data and analytics, using its rich 
global innovative tools to interconnect social, economic and environmental analysis across 
multiple Sustainable Development Goals, and apply new forecasting and visualization 
instruments to support transformative and evidence-based approaches to solving complex 
development problems;
(b) Leveraging resources and partnerships through platforms. UNDP will bring multiple 
stakeholders together around targeted national platforms, including by attracting nontraditional stakeholders such as businesses and foundations to seek integrated development 
solutions. These platforms will be linked to regional and global networks to leverage
resources from a broad range of partners through South-South and triangular cooperation.
Existing platforms on the civil service and the Sustainable Development Goals will be 
expanded to include a green finance accelerator, among others, aiming to leverage resources 
for investment in green technology and services through new partnerships with the 
Government, the private sector and international financial institutions (IFIs.);
(c) Innovation. The UNDP approach to innovation involves sense-making, solution 
mapping and experimentation towards institutionalization and scaled-up impact. Using the 
above-mentioned platform approach, UNDP will apply innovation to test solutions and 
support acceleration for transformational change. For example, through the new platform on 
green finance, UNDP will test new financing solutions to inform policy and help leverage 
partnerships and resources for a low-carbon development pathway. UNDP will apply 
innovation in other areas, including through facilitating digitalized platforms for efficient and 
participatory public service delivery, enhancing citizen engagement18 and community-based 
police modernization;
(d) Connecting policy results to solutions of scale. All of the above would catalyse 
impact by scaling up and feeding into policy and legal frameworks. As a member of the 
Government’s coordination councils on the green economy and on the Sustainable 
Development Goals, UNDP will continue providing high-level policy advice connected to 
scaled-up development actions to reach the most vulnerable. UNDP will support public sector 
reform, digitalization and labour market transformation efforts, with special attention to 
supporting the United Nations response to post-COVID-19 socioeconomic recovery. 
12. The second novel aspect of the country programme is its offer of four integrated 
solutions: (a) human capital; (b) quality services; (c) green economy; and (d) integrated local 
development. These will be applied to remove bottlenecks and introduce policy measures 
with multiplier effects across all programme areas. For example, human capital development 
is expected to improve skills and productive capacities for a knowledge-based economic 
transformation while allowing the country to address emerging inequalities around access to 
advanced education and technology. Improved quality of services will contribute to building 
trust between citizens and the State, but also helping address the needs of the vulnerable and 
preparing institutions to be more resilient to shocks like COVID-19. A sustained focus on the 
green economy is expected to generate new jobs and support economic diversification, in 
addition to addressing environmental issues. Integrated local development will improve 
conditions for local businesses and value chains, while creating space for inclusive 
governance, fostering productive citizen engagement and creating opportunities for youth and 
women.
18 https://www.akorda.kz/en/addresses/addresses_of_president/president-of-kazakhstan-kassym-jomart-tokayevs-state-of-the-nation-address-september2-201913. The third novel aspect is the strengthened substance of programme interventions 
through: (a) better anchoring in the Sustainable Development Goals framework, with 
emphasis on data and knowledge; (b) expanded focus on governance with emphasis on local 
governance, the judiciary and police; (c) redefining climate resilience with emphasis on 
climate finance and the private sector; (d) renewed focus on economy, entrepreneurship and 
skills with emphasis on knowledge and future jobs; (e) strengthened focus on women and 
youth as development partners; and (f) a deepening focus on social policy with emphasis on 
addressing inequalities.
14. Across all areas of work and in support of the UNSDCF, UNDP will promote knowledge
exchange networks and cooperation between Kazakhstan and other countries. Through 
regional and interregional cooperation, Kazakhstan can raise its profile, sharing its own 
experience and learning from best practices. Institutionalization of an official development 
assistance system is imminent. UNDP will support the evolution of the regional Astana Civil 
Service Hub into an innovative platform to accelerate progress in civil service, anticorruption, gender equality and integrated local development. The Sustainable Development 
Goals platform will expand to bring together countries in the region to better anchor policies 
with data and exchanges on innovative financing. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
15. Guided by the Sustainable Development Goals, UNDP will support Kazakhstan to 
realize national priorities enshrined in Kazakhstan 2050, the 2025 Strategic Development 
Plan and other key strategies and plans. These priorities include searching for a new model 
of economic growth and increased productivity; boosting the business environment and 
scaling up new technologies across sectors; improving institutional performance and 
effectiveness of key state and sectoral programmes and budgets; modernizing law 
enforcement and judicial systems; improving the quality of education and health care; and 
supporting regional economic development, especially in remote areas.
16. The work of UNDP will cut across these national priorities, supporting Kazakhstan in 
sustaining its growth trajectory by diversifying the economy, modernizing institutions, 
reducing inequalities and sustainably managing natural resources. The application of the six 
UNDP signature solutions will be key to helping the country accelerate structural 
transformations and better prepare for future shocks. In particular, UNDP will assist the 
country in four main areas described below.
Addressing social vulnerabilities and inequalities
17. The Government has been devoting increased attention to social protection and has 
created new large-scale initiatives to achieve social protection for all, especially the most 
vulnerable. UNDP will support testing and scaling-up of new models of social protection 
platforms for better targeting, focusing and strengthening service provider capacities. It will 
continue supporting digital solutions allowing for a tailor-made approach in service delivery 
at scale to people with disabilities, the elderly and large families. Digitalization of such 
services will be tested for emergency situations to ensure uninterrupted delivery to vulnerable 
groups. 
18. The work on vulnerable groups will feed into policy support for developing national 
social support systems. In the health sector, UNDP will continue to ensure more efficient 
procurement of high-quality medicines, while supporting system-wide resilience of health 
services to prepare for, respond to and recover from crises. 
19. UNDP will have a specific focus on youth. Together with other United Nations agencies, 
it will expand the regional initiative on preventing violent extremism conducive to terrorism. 
While enlarging geographical coverage, the work will reach a wider target age group and 
experiment models to improve community resilience. This work will contribute to the employability of vulnerable young women and men and, in collaboration with youth resource 
centres, will introduce social and green entrepreneurship activities to raise awareness for 
sustainable development.
Rebuilding trust of citizens through more effective and accountable institutions, free of 
corruption
20. UNDP will support the “Listening State”
19 concept aimed at regaining citizens’ trust in 
institutional reform. This will include improving public administration through digitalization, 
crises preparedness and resilience. Anti-corruption work will include innovative preventive 
measures ranging from sectoral risk management and introduction of behavioural insights to 
better delivery of e-services and citizens’ engagement in budgetary spending and public 
procurement. 
21. National-level work will be complemented by advancing local self-governance, 
emphasizing inclusive and gender-sensitive approaches to planning, budgeting and 
monitoring, for meaningful citizen participation to better address inequalities and 
discrimination. This will include supporting capacities in local authorities (Akimats) to 
uphold integrity and engage citizens in local development. Partnership with the Parliament 
will be re-energized for advancing the 2030 Agenda.
22. UNDP will scale up engagement in judiciary and law-enforcement system reforms 
prioritized by the country’s leadership. UNDP joint work on quality of justice with the 
Supreme Court and the High Judicial Council will expand to new areas including judicial 
administration. UNDP will provide further support to police modernization and community 
policing. Rule of law will remain a priority and growing area of engagement, focused on 
enhancing the National Torture Prevention Mechanism. It will also include assistance to the 
Government in the realization of its commitments related to the universal periodic review, 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and related processes.
23. UNDP will expand its partnerships on the 2030 Agenda, offering a platform-based 
approach. UNDP will support the Government in mainstreaming Sustainable Development 
Goal targets and indicators into national systems of strategic planning and development 
financing, working closely with the Government’s Coordination Council. It will help 
Kazakhstan identify potential additional financing by: (a) deploying analytical support 
through its global policy network; (b) leveraging development resources from the public and 
private sectors and international organizations; and (c) supporting policy reforms to diversify 
and increase financial resources. UNDP will further advocate for a holistic and long-term 
development finance strategy.
24. UNDP will continue helping Kazakhstan to become a recognized global player, 
providing support for a national development cooperation system and associated initiatives, 
such as women’s empowerment and civil service excellence. Concerted efforts will be made 
to raise the international profile of the Astana Civil Service Hub, support South-South 
cooperation, develop a regional Sustainable Development Goal platform and facilitate 
regional dialogues to share the experiences of Kazakhstan on the green economy, sustainable 
energy and other areas.
Fostering high-productivity, diversified and knowledge-based economic growth
25. The Government recognizes the need to develop human capital in pursuit of a new 
economic growth model and higher productivity. Work will focus on establishing a country 
platform on a knowledge-based economy, to bridge the gap between education and 
employers’ needs by reskilling and upskilling the labour force, and to foster research and 
innovation to meet future demand induced by new technologies. In collaboration with 
technical-vocational and education institutions, businesses and social incubators, UNDP will 
19 https://www.akorda.kz/en/addresses/addresses_of_president/president-of-kazakhstan-kassym-jomart-tokayevs-state-of-the-nation-address-september2-2019strengthen the professional and entrepreneurial skills and employment-related resilience of 
young women and men.
26. UNDP work on modernizing the labour force and the economy will be linked to broader 
efforts to enhance private sector development and market competitiveness. UNDP will 
facilitate the introduction of new technologies and practices to promote value-chain 
enhancement and integration, with due consideration of interrelated environmental, economic 
and social effects, starting with the agricultural and ecotourism sectors. To foster the enabling 
environment for local economic development, UNDP will support the design and 
implementation of territorial development programmes for the most deprived areas of 
Kazakhstan. This work will also introduce tools to mainstream the Sustainable Development 
Goals in local plans and budgets. 
27. UNDP will collaborate with agencies including the United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development and the International Trade Centre to improve value chains with trade 
relations in view of their potential for the post-COVID-19 economic recovery to support 
economic diversification through regional economic cooperation. 
28. This focus area is closely related to the workstreams on social vulnerabilities, climate 
and disaster resilience. Preparing for the economic future includes consideration of new 
vulnerabilities and inequalities potentially generated in the absence of appropriate social 
policies and with disruptions introduced by the COVID-19 pandemic. UNDP will work with 
diverse partners to support Kazakhstan in pursuing a holistic approach to strengthen resilience 
against possible economic shocks and long-term transformation in the labour market and 
business. 
Supporting climate and disaster resilience and nature-based, low-carbon growth
29. UNDP will help Kazakhstan honour its Paris Agreement commitments by supporting 
the expansion of the green economy to tap into new opportunities for jobs and businesses. It 
will partner with other United Nations agencies to provide technical expertise to translate 
strategies into action, establish a monitoring framework for climate change adaptation and 
mitigation, and develop plans for transition to green energy, land management, biodiversity, 
reforestation, disaster risk reduction and waste management. 
30. UNDP work on climate action will centre on developing and scaling up financing 
mechanisms for clean technologies and low-carbon business development, via a green 
finance accelerator. This will build on financing mechanisms for energy efficiency and 
renewable energy already piloted with the Damu Entrepreneurship Development Fund, with 
a view to expand to other sectors. Low-carbon business development will be promoted 
through green bonds, renewable energy auctions and carbon trading, among other innovative 
mechanisms. 
31. In continuing its work on biodiversity, pastoralism and irrigated agriculture, UNDP will 
introduce and scale up new solutions and more efficient farming techniques, including for 
saving and harvesting water. Through private sector engagement, these technologies are 
expected to increase agricultural productivity that will partially offset the decreased yields in 
drought years. As natural hazard risks increase, UNDP will work with the Emergency 
Situations Committee to develop policies, capacities and a natural disaster prevention and 
response system, while aiming to generate new jobs. 
32. UNDP will support gender equality and women’s empowerment across all the abovementioned areas. It will provide assistance to strengthen the gender machinery, advance 
implementation of key gender-related legislation, improve national capacities to address 
gender-differentiated impacts of climate change and disasters and support women’s 
participation in decision-making in Parliament, business and public administration. UNDP 
will seek to raise women’s skills and catalyse opportunities in emerging sectors, including 
green energy and digital services. To help prevent sexual and gender-based violence, UNDP will advance policy dialogue and seek legislative reform, linked with efforts in police and 
justice sector capacity development.
III. Programme and risk management
33. During the 2016-2020 cycle, the national budget was a primary source of co-financing, 
covering nearly 30 per cent of the total programme budget. Government cost sharing was 
allocated on an annual and project basis, without a predictable mechanism. The majority of 
funding came from vertical trust funds and, for regional projects, directly from donors. The 
shrinking donor space in Kazakhstan requires UNDP to rethink its financing modality. To 
overcome the unpredictable, complex and tiered process of government cost-sharing 
approval, UNDP and the Government will aim to sign an agreement on predictable funding, 
to be reviewed annually for yearly allocation across strategic focus areas. The main decisionmaking body will be the Strategic Advisory Council, coordinated by the Ministry of National 
Economy as national executing agency for this country programme.
34. Economic recession or change in the Government’s development priorities may hamper 
the country’s ability to allocate resources for UNDP programmes or office presence. UNDP 
will manage this risk by seeking to diversify its strategic partnerships, targeting new 
development financing from IFIs, business and the non-governmental sector, and applying 
innovative programming instruments. If funding does not materialize in full, programme 
targets and interventions will be revised by UNDP and the Government to meet resource 
requirements and manage related risks. UNDP will monitor the risks of crises such as natural 
disasters and public health emergencies. Should these occur, based on a government request 
for assistance, operations will be adjusted in line with the UNDP corporate processes. The 
experience of the unfolding socioeconomic developments related to the COVID-19 crisis 
demonstrates the possibility of nimble and effective responses to emerging development 
challenges by leveraging resources from IFIs and global instruments.
35. This CPD outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary 
unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to 
the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and 
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’s 
programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework.
36. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
37. Mainstreaming of Sustainable Development Goal targets and indicators into the national 
system of strategic planning and the UNSDCF provides an opportunity to measure the 
effectiveness of joint work. UNDP will utilize national data systems to assess development 
progress and help the country strengthen national data quality and availability. Through joint 
work with the Accounts Committee, National Committee on Statistics, Economic Research 
Institute and other relevant institutions and civil society organizations, UNDP will invest in 
national monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacities to better capture results of national 
programmes and lessons learned. The new and innovative methodologies used by UNDP
such as sense-making, rapid integrated assessment and development finance assessment, as 
well as big data collection and visualization, will provide instruments and comparative 
advantage for UNDP to be a partner of choice for the national monitoring system upgrade. 38. Internally, UNDP will increase its M&E capacities. Together with its implementing 
partners, UNDP will conduct joint reviews of annual progress of programme implementation. 
M&E quality control will be ensured through independent audits and evaluations, to be 
conducted in line with UNDP policies and procedures. UNDP and partners will implement 
an evaluation plan, applying new techniques to ensure cost-effective compilation of 
appropriate evidence. A robust monitoring plan will be established utilizing the enhanced 
analytics and upgraded staff capacities already planned by the country office, with key 
associated risks factored in as part of the country programme risk log.Annex. Results and resources framework for Kazakhstan (2021-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strategy 2050: New principles of social policy - social guarantees and personal responsibility
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: 1.1. By 2025, effective, inclusive and accountable institutions ensure equal access for all 
people living in Kazakhstan, especially most vulnerable, to quality and gender sensitive social services according to the principle of leaving no one behind
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF 
DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines, 
targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY 
OUTCOME ($)
(SDG 1.a.2) Proportion of total 
government spending on essential 
services (education, health and social 
protection)
Baseline: 50% (2019)
Target: 55% (2025)
(SDG 1.b.1) Proportion of government 
recurrent and capital spending to 
sectors that disproportionately benefit 
women, the poor and vulnerable groups
Baseline: 21.7% (2019)
Target: 25% (2025)
• National Committee on Statistics 
(CommStat) (annually)
• Ministry of Finance (MinFin)
• MLSP
Output 1.1: Marginalized groups, 
particularly the poor, women, 
people with disabilities and 
displaced have better access to 
quality basic services
• Indicator 1.1.1: % satisfaction 
of vulnerable groups for public 
services supported in seven 
oblasts and three cities in 
Kazakhstan (disaggregated by 
sex, age, disability, geography)
Baseline: N/A (2020)
Target: 85% (2025)
Data source, frequency: 
national survey by Civil 
Service Agency, annually
• Indicator 1.1.2: Number of 
vulnerable people benefiting 
from procured lifesaving 
medicines 
Baseline: 22,000 (2019)
Target: 43,000 (2025)
Data source, frequency: project 
report, annually 
Output 1.2: Capacities developed 
for progressive expansion of 
inclusive and sustainable social 
protection systems
• Indicator 1.2.1: Instruments 
developed for better targeting, 
Ministry of Labour Social 
Protection (MLSP)
Ministry of Internal 
Affairs (MIA)
Ministry of Health 
Civil Service Agency
United Nations agencies 
(IOM, UNODC, UNICEF)
NGOs and youth centres
Research institutions
Regular: $258,800 
Other: $10,000,000monitoring and evaluation of 
social services for the 
vulnerable
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 3 (2025) 
Data source, frequency: MLSP, 
annually
• Indicator 1.2.2: Number of 
sectoral gender-sensitive social 
policies designed and 
implemented
Baseline: 1 (2019)
Target: 5 (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP, 
annually
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strategic Plan 2025: Reform 4. A rule of law state, without corruption.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: 2.2. By 2025, state institutions at all levels effectively design and implement gender-sensitive, 
human rights and evidence-based public policies and provide quality services in an inclusive, transparent and accountable manner
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development 
Perception of the level of corruption by 
the population (link to 16.5.1 (G))
Baseline: Score 34 (2019)
Target: Score 38 (2025)
Proportion of businesses that had at 
least one contact with a public official 
and that paid a bribe to a public 
official, or were asked for a bribe by 
those public officials during the 
previous 12 months (16.5.2 (G))
Baseline: 12.1% (2019) 
Target: 9% (2025)
16.6.2 (G) Proportion of population 
satisfied with their last experience of 
public services 
Baseline: 74.8% (2019)
Target: 78%
• Transparency International (annually)
• Anticorruption agency
• Ministry of National Economy (MNE)
(annually)
• CommStat (annually)
Output 2.1: Systems and capacities 
to implement the 2030 Agenda 
through participatory and inclusive 
budgeting and planning are 
enhanced 
• Indicator 2.1.1: Share of 
districts that adopted structured 
approaches to participatory 
planning and budgeting 
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 20% (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP, 
annually
Output 2.2: Institutions and systems 
enabled to develop and implement 
institutional reforms towards more 
effective, transparent and inclusive 
governance and service provision at 
the national and local levels
• Indicator 2.2.1: Number of 
effective measures adopted to 
- MIA
- President’s 
Administration 
- Prime Minister’s Office
- MNE
- Economic Research 
Institute 
- Civil Service Agency
- Parliament
- High Judicial Council
- SDG Council
- Anticorruption Agency 
- Resident Coordinator’s 
Office and United 
Nations agencies 
- Asian Development 
Bank
- European Union
 
Regular: $313,200
Other: $18,500,00017.14.1 (N) Mechanisms in place to 
enhance policy coherence of 
sustainable development 
Baseline: Coordinating Council for the 
Promotion of the Sustainable 
Development Goals created under the 
Government of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan comprised of 
representatives of Government, civil 
society and international organizations 
(2018)
Target: The SDG Council enabled the 
full-scale integration of SDGs into the 
National Strategic Planning and 
Budgeting system
Baseline: 80% (Rapid Integrated 
Assessment 2019)
Target: 100% (2030)
5.5.1 (G) Proportion of seats held by 
women in (a) national parliaments and 
(b) local governments
Baseline: 
(a)27.6% (2018)
Target: 50% (2030) 
Baseline:
(b) 22.2% (2018)
Target: 50% (2030)
Proportion of digitalized public 
services (link to 16.6.2):
Baseline: 74% (2019)
Target: 98% (2025)
assess, mitigate and remedy 
corruption risks (at national, 
subnational or sectoral level)
Baseline: 1 (2019) 
Target: 6 (2025)
Data source, frequency: Civil 
Service Agency, annually
• Indicator 2.2.2: Proportion of 
supported CSOs delivering 
innovative solutions to social 
service needs
Baseline: 20 (2019)
Target: 50 (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP, 
annually
• Indicator 2.2.3: Number of 
digital and big data 
technologies introduced by 
public services with UNDP 
support
Baseline: 1 (2019)
Target: 5 (2025)
Data source, frequency: Civil 
Service Agency, annually 
Output 2.3: Capacities, functions 
and financing of rule of law and 
national human rights institutions 
and systems strengthened to 
expand access to justice and 
combat discrimination, with a 
focus on women and marginalized 
groups • Indicator 2.3.1: Number of 
districts with a functional 
community police system in 
place
Baseline: 1 (2019)
Target: 30 (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP, 
annually• Indicator 2.3.2: Proportion of 
population satisfied with 
judicial services provided
Baseline: 72% (2015)
Target: 85% (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP, 
annually
• Indicator 2.3.3: (SDG 5.2.1.1.) 
Reductions in reported 
incidents of domestic violence 
against women
Baseline: 26.8 % (2018)
Target: 30% (2023)
Data source, frequency: 
CommStat, annually 
Output 2.4: Triangular 
development initiatives are in place 
to support the positioning of 
Kazakhstan, with a focus on 
empowerment of women
• Indicator 2.4.1: Number of 
Kazakhstan-led international 
and regional cooperation 
initiatives supported by UNDP
Baseline: 1 (of which focused 
on gender equality: 1) (2020)
Target: 10 (of which focused 
on gender equality: 5) (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(MFA), annually 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Kazakhstan 2050: A diversified knowledge-based economy in which competitive entrepreneurs make effective and sustainable use of the country’s natural 
resources. 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: 3.1. By 2025, all people in Kazakhstan, especially the most vulnerable, benefit from inclusive, 
resilient, and sustainable economic development with improved productive capacities, skills and equal opportunities for sustainable and decent jobs, livelihoods, and businesses 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Proportion of youth (aged 15–
24 years) not in education, 
employment or training 
(link to 8.6.1(G))
Baseline: 6% (2018)
• CommStat (annually) Output 3.1: Skills development 
opportunities, policies and platforms 
facilitated to strengthen labour force 
resilience 
- Ministry of Trade
- MNE
- MLSP
- Customs 
Regular: $174,500
Other: $21,500,000 Target: 4% (2030)
Kazakhstan rank in the Global Labour 
Resilience Index 
Baseline: 60 (2020)
Target: 50 (2025)
Kazakhstan rank in the Global 
Knowledge Index
Baseline: 64 (2019)
Target: 59 (2025)
7.3.1 (G) Energy intensity measured 
in terms of primary energy and GDP
Baseline: 0.4 (2018)
Target: 0.39 (2025)
• Indicator 3.1.1: Number of NEET 
youth engaged in community 
resilience programmes, benefiting 
from engagement platform 
(disaggregated by age and gender)
Baseline: 7,400 (2019) 
Target: 40,000, (of which 8,000 
girls) (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP, 
annually.
Output 3.2 Policies and partnerships 
in place to support economic 
diversification and transition to 
knowledge-based economy
• Indicator 3.2.1: Number of new 
cross-sectoral cooperation and 
knowledge-sharing initiatives 
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 10 (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP, 
annually.
Output 3.3: Local economic 
development enhanced through value 
chain integration and facilitation of 
regional development programmes • Indicator 3.3.1: Number of 
businesses supported/green jobs 
created in biodiversity, agriculture 
and ecotourism
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 100 businesses (30% led 
by women) (2025)
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 100 green jobs created 
Data source, frequency: UNDP, 
annually
-Education 
institutions
-United Nations
agencies (ILO, 
UNCTAD) 
International 
Finance 
Corporation
- Start-up, social 
incubators
MinFin
- Ministry of 
Digitalization
- Government of 
JapanNATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strategic Plan 2025: Reform 6. Green economy and environment 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4:3.2. By 2025, all people in Kazakhstan, in particular most vulnerable, benefit from increased 
climate resilience, sustainable management of environment and clean energy, and sustainable rural and urban development.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Official development assistance 
(ODA) and public expenditure on 
conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity and ecosystems
(a) ODA to Kazakhstan 
Baseline: $3.01 million (2017)
Target: $3.23 million (2030)
(b) Public expenditure on specially 
protected natural areas (15.b.1 N)
Baseline: 8,566.2 million tenge 
(2018)
Target: 13,300.0 million tenge (2025) 
• CommStat (annually)
• MFA
• MinFin (annually)
Output 4.1: Solutions developed, and 
resources mobilized for more 
sustainable use of ecosystems for the 
improvement of the well-being of 
local communities and nature
• Indicator 4.1.1: Proportion of 
specially protected natural areas 
with added value as a local 
livelihoods resource
Baseline: 9.6% of country land 
area (2018)
Target: 10.6% (2023)
Baseline: 221,600 beneficiaries 
(2019)
Target: 397,000 beneficiaries 
(disaggregated by gender) (2023)
Data source, frequency:
CommStat, annually
• Indicator 4.1.2: State spending for 
maintenance of specially 
protected natural territories
Baseline: 8566.2 million tenge
(2018)
Target: 13,300.0 million tenge
(2025)
Data source, frequency: 
CommStat, annually
• Indicator 4.1.3: Proportion of 
arable area with increased 
productivity benefiting rural
communities
Baseline: Degraded land with low 
productivity (2% on average of 
soil humus content) in pilot areas
with farmers bearing economic 
losses (2020)
Target: At least 2.8% of pilot 
degraded land rehabilitated with 
- Ministry of 
Ecology, Geology 
and Natural 
Resources 
(MEGNR)
- Ministry of Energy 
(MinEnergy)
- Ministry of 
Agriculture (MoA)
- MNE
- Committee of 
Emergency 
Situations 
- Damu
Entrepreneurship 
Development Fund
- Astana International 
Financial Centre 
- International Green 
Technology Center
- IFIs
- European Union
- United Nations
agencies
Regular: $125,500
Other: $29,800,000Renewable energy share in the total 
final energy generation
Baseline 1.3 (2018) 
Target: 3% (2020), 6% (2025), and 
10% (2030)
12.5.1 (N) Industrial waste recycling 
and disposal to their generation ratio
Baseline:32.2% (2018)
Target: 38% (2021)
12.5.1.1 (N) Solid waste recycling 
and disposal to their generation ratio
Baseline:11.5% (2018)
Target: 40% (2030)
productivity increased (10 % of 
soil humus), benefiting at least 
5% of farmers and empowering 
women of pilot regions (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP,
MOA, annually
Output 4.2: Solutions developed, 
financed and applied at scale for
structural transformation of energy 
sector and improved public health • Indicator 4.2.1: Volume of CO2 
emissions and polluting 
substances avoided through the 
introduction of new energy-
efficient and renewable energy 
supply solutions
Baseline: 0 tons (2020)
Target: 1.8 million tons/130 
million kilograms per ton (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP/
MinEnergy, annually
• Indicator 4.2.2: Installed new 
capacity from wind and solar 
power (megawatts) and Renewable energy production (megawatt hours) increased
Capacity Baseline: 0 megawatts (2020)
Target: 9.5 megawatts (2025)
Generation baseline: 0 megawatt 
hours (2020)
Target: 25.4 gigawatt hours (2025) 
Data source, frequency: 
UNDP/MinEnergy, annually
Output 4.3: Environmentally sound 
chemicals and waste management 
system aligned with international 
standards and obligations • Indicator 4.3.1: System of 
sustainable waste management in 
placeThe establishment of an integrated 
policy/strategy/plan providing 
adaptation to the adverse impacts of 
climate change, and foster climate 
resilience and low greenhouse gas 
emissions development in a manner 
that does not threaten food production 
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: One national adaptation plan 
and nationally determined 
contribution implementation plan 
addressing gender dimensions are in 
place (2030)
Baseline: 0 strategic documents 
(2020)
Target: 2 (2023)
Baseline: 0 chemicals recycling 
systems (2020)
Target: 1 (2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP/
MEGNR, annually
Output 4.4: Climate change measures 
integrated into national policies, 
strategies and planning • Indicator 4.4.1: Low emission and 
climate resilient objectives 
incorporated in national, sub-
national and sectoral development 
plans and policies to promote 
economic diversification and 
green growth
Baseline: 6 (2020)
Target: >6 (2025)
Data source, frequency:
UNDP, annually
• Indicator 4.4.2: Public/private 
investments for the transition to a 
sustainable, low-carbon, climate 
and disaster-resilient economy 
budgeted/leveraged 
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target:$100 million (70%/30%)
(2025)
Data source, frequency: UNDP, 
annually 