File Name: KGZ-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Kyrgyzstan
Country Code: KGZ
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August to 1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
5 July 2022
Original: English
2210511X (E) 210722
Second regular session 2022
29 August to 1 September 2022, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Kyrgyz Republic (2023-2027)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for the Kyrgyz Republic (2023-2027) ...................................... 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework
1.The Kyrgyz Republic is a mountainous lower-middle-income country that aspires to 
accelerate socioeconomic development for higher levels of human development and 
wellbeing of citizens, economic prosperity by 2040, and net zero climate neutrality by 2050.
Due to it being landlocked, small in size, and with low levels of industrialization and trade 
dependency, the country is vulnerable to external shocks. The combined impact of 
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, international economic decline, domestic 
instability, and regional conflict have taken a toll on the resilience of people in recent years. 
An estimated one-quarter of the population live below the poverty line and estimates suggest 
that a majority of the population are vulnerable to income poverty, with significant 
disparities in regional inequality and between urban-rural areas.1 A weak domestic private 
sector and limited investments mean labor markets cannot absorb a rapidly growing young 
population and the 1.1 million Kyrgyzstanis, 59 per cent of which are women, who migrate 
for work. Labour remittances make up 31 per cent of the country’s gross domestic product 
(GDP) and are largely channeled into consumption.
2
2. Vulnerability to climate change risks are high with climate-related disasters affecting
agricultural production, food security, water management, and health,
3
and
disproportionately impacting women and rural populations. While people and the economy 
depend on water and other natural resources for livelihoods and energy supply, ageing
infrastructures and weak governance mechanisms hinder efficiency of use. The Government 
faces challenges in sparking a green transition towards a modernized, green economy based 
on resilient and renewable sources of energy. Stimulating a development agenda for the 
regions on a platform of climate change adaptation and ecosystem protection, with attention 
to the impact of glacial melt, will also be central for preventing conflict and managing
environmental risks, including toxic hazards such as uranium tailings and mining waste.
3.Climate, environment, and other risks transcend national borders. The southern region of 
the Kyrgyz Republic, with its ethnically diverse population, is part of the fragile Fergana 
Valley that has limited socioeconomic opportunities, weakened public services, and high 
levels of outward migration. The region is vulnerable to poverty, crime, radicalization, and 
violent extremism, and its socioeconomic parameters differ from the North. The region is in 
want of sustained investment and new development models for shared prosperity that can 
overcome or mitigate population pressures, the complexity of progressive border 
demarcation, mosaic-like settlements, and transboundary nature of infrastructures. These
continue to place social cohesion at significant risk, as seen in growing cross-border tension.
4. Since independence, the Kyrgyz Republic experienced presidential systems of governance 
and parliamentary democracy, and the COVID-19 pandemic further fueled divisions and 
social unrest. The competitive 2020 parliamentary elections triggered political turmoil and a 
transition which, following presidential elections, a constitutional referendum, transition of 
electoral and legal systems, government restructuring, and renewed parliamentary elections
in 2021, concluded with the centralization of powers under the President. Current democratic 
aspirations include the quest for a unified national identity that bridges modern and 
traditional trends and recognizes the country’s multidimensional diversity.
4 This will require 
continued efforts in civic education, supporting the country’s vibrant civil society, and
assistance to institutional capacity development and sustained reforms in state structures.
5. The United Nations system in the Kyrgyz Republic will respond to these major challenges 
by applying systems approaches based on development accelerators and a more focused 
approach to Sustainable Development Goals integration. This will address root causes and
1 World Bank data.
2 Assessment of Local Authorities’ Attitudes Towards Returned Migrants.
3 Climate Risk Country Profile: Kyrgyz Republic.
4
“Kyrgyz Zharany” Conceptsupport transformational change towards more equitable access to social services and 
protection, greater prosperity and resilience, and inclusive approaches to climate action, 
governance of natural resources and prevention of disasters, as well as support national 
efforts to build just, accountable and inclusive institutions. Particular care will be placed on 
ensuring country ownership, leveraging United Nations norms and standards, as well as 
attending to transboundary concerns—all are important objectives already embedded within 
the UNDP portfolio.
6. Within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), 
UNDP has an important backbone function as the United Nations agency with the largest 
portfolio at the country level that cuts across strategic sectors. Under the overall leadership 
of the United Nations Resident Coordinator, working with a United Nations country team 
(UNCT) inclusive of several non-resident agencies, UNDP will partner with and offer to 
integrate the work of other agencies for maximum combined impact to ‘Leave No One 
Behind’ across all UNSDCF outcomes with focuses on green growth (Outcome 2), climate 
change (Outcome 3), and governance (Outcome 4). UNDP will contribute to three out of the 
four UNSDCF outcomes and explore potentials for joint programming to leverage the 
combined comparative advantage of the United Nations system where appropriate, 
contributing active leadership in joint results groups to ensure coherence at thematic levels.
7. During the previous cycle, UNDP considerably strengthened programme quality and
policy advisory work, both underpinned by a strong evidence base for programming. The 
evaluation of the previous country programme concluded that UNDP is strategically 
positioned as a reliable, credible, responsive and trusted development partner, supporting 
multi-level changes in politically sensitive areas and delivering change at policy, 
institutional, and grassroots levels. UNDP contributed significantly to enabling policy 
frameworks such as nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and mechanisms for 
sustainable, resilient, and inclusive economic growth, which is catalytic for the new Country 
Programme Document (CPD) cycle. Policy advice and advocacy contributed to improved 
enabling environment especially in areas such as elections, governance, prevention of violent 
extremism, and peacebuilding, as well as justice, gender equality, health, and natural 
resources governance. Moreover, UNDP was recognized for its expertise, consistent 
resource mobilization capacity, community engagement, and for extending support to the 
COVID-19 pandemic response and socioeconomic recovery beyond the regular programme. 
8. UNDP will build further on its core value proposition as an impartial policy advisor and 
integrator of Sustainable Development Goals solutions to help the government and other 
stakeholders advance inclusive, fundamentally sound development solutions and reforms in 
complex settings, and continued contributions to conflict prevention, social cohesion, and 
peacebuilding. This will help manage risks and progressively realize greater prosperity, 
resilience, and social cohesion.
9.The country context warrants additional UNDP support to raising public sector and 
institutional capacities in the implementation of development projects, as well as long-term, 
strategic efforts to help develop national capacities at all levels. This will prompt UNDP to 
invest in knowledge exchange platforms, strategic financing facilities, incubation-type 
services, and other entry points for helping develop sustainable capacities in the public and 
private sectors. It will also be important to continue investing in the performance of high 
quality, timely procurement support and service delivery.
10. UNDP will use its global knowledge network and technical offers to harness partnerships 
for the delivery of solutions at greater scale, including leveraging investments and specific
development finance solutions for the Kyrgyz Republic to make progress on green structural 
transformation. The Accelerator Lab will help UNDP foster strategic innovation, nurture 
collaborative learning and offer experimental approaches to identify simple, scalable 
solutions to enhance outcomes and accelerate impact.11. Building on the strong track record of the Kyrgyz Republic in digitalization and UNDP 
achievements this cycle, UNDP and the International Telecommunication Unit will provide 
technical leadership to the UNCT in mainstreaming this strategic enabler to apply digital 
solutions in all programming areas, making good on the UNDP offer to go ‘digital by 
default’ and help the country advance with digital transformation. The application of 
digitalization approaches will help generate efficiencies and unleash the potential for 
leveraging data, statistics, and analysis for climate action, reducing corruption, eliminating 
discrimination and improving justice outcomes, and strengthening public transparency for
stronger outcomes.
12. Alongside the UNCT, UNDP will work with Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
and other United Nations organizations to place a joint geographic emphasis on the Fergana 
Valley and mountainous villages, fostering people-centered, adaptation and ecosystem-based
approaches for development in the regions. Approaches will ensure inclusive participation 
and transparency that foster conflict sensitivity especially at the community level and lead to
equitable access for women, ethnic minorities, and vulnerable groups in decision making. A
particular focus will be placed on youth in all programming.
13. The partnership survey demonstrated strong UNDP performance in the empowerment of 
women and mainstreaming of gender equality across programmes, particularly in access to 
justice. UNDP will continue to leverage this comparative advantage and work within the 
United Nations Gender Theme Group and UN Women to contribute to the political and 
economic empowerment of women across a broader set of country programme results.
Enabling women to contribute to leadership roles for climate action will be a priority.
14. The independent evaluation of the UNDP country programme for the previous cycle, 
while acknowledging that UNDP must continue to support the empowerment of vulnerable 
groups, also recommended UNDP increase its partnership and cooperation with the private 
sector, especially in green economy and renewable energy, and to engage diaspora networks
more actively in local development. During this cycle, UNDP will develop new 
programming on affordable, sustainable energy in cooperation with the World Bank and 
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, as well as work with the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) to help leverage the benefits of migration and human 
mobility, themes jointly identified by the UNCT as powerful Sustainable Development 
Goals accelerators.
5
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
15. This country programme outlines the UNDP ambition to assist the Kyrgyz Republic in 
its aspiration to emerge as a socioeconomically resilient and socially cohesive nation. Three 
programmatic outcomes—green growth, governance and climate action—have an integrative 
impact on social cohesion in the Kyrgyz Republic and will contribute to overcoming
geographic, socioeconomic and other disparities. The country programme was developed 
through a consultative process with Government, civil society, and the private sector, and 
concluded with a national validation workshop.
16. The theory of change puts social cohesion, peace and stability at the center of UNDP 
development efforts. It is based on interrelated assumptions that promote inclusive and 
peace-positive digital transformation and green economy accompanied by adequate policies 
of adaptation to, and mitigation of, climate change. Inclusive and people-centered 
policymaking and access to public services, including justice, supporting the vulnerable in 
reaching their economic, social and political potential, and strengthening their ability to 
become more resilient to a variety of shocks. 
17. The country programme reflects the priorities of National Development Program of 2026 
and National Development Strategy of the Kyrgyz Republic 2018–2040. It is fully aligned 
5 MAPS Reportwith the UNDP Strategic Plan and UNSDCF 2023-2027 and contributes to implementation 
of Sustainable Development Goals in Kyrgyz Republic. UNDP will apply its signature 
solutions to help the country catalyze green and inclusive structural transformation in a 
manner that is risk-informed and evidence-based. 
18. For all three programmatic outcomes UNDP built lasting partnerships with bilateral and 
multilateral partners, as well as United Nations agencies. UNDP will scale up adaptation and 
green financing initiatives in partnership with International Finance Institutions (IFIs) and 
local investment platforms. This will include supporting the Kyrgyz Republic in creating an 
enabling environment for private investment in green recovery and structural transformation. 
Building on previous successes in biodiversity finance and support to debt management, 
UNDP will support the Government in establishing a credible conservation finance platform 
to explore ‘debt for nature’ swaps.
19. Building on progress in development finance, the operationalization of the Integrated 
National Financing Framework by national counterparts that is supported by the UNCT, 
UNDP, United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) will be an 
important vehicle for better planning, monitoring and coordination of various Sustainable 
Development Goal financing mechanisms in the public and private sectors. This will be done 
by streamlining financing systems and enabling policies, budgeting, and results tracking in 
support of Sustainable Development Goals, as well as mobilizing private sector finance for
the development agenda. Civil society and parliament will play a key role in making and 
managing demands for transparent reporting.
20. UNDP will support the Government in leveraging resources from the Global 
Environmental Facility, Green Climate Fund, and other vertical, multilateral, and bilateral 
funds to achieve country priorities under the Paris Agreement and other climate/environment 
frameworks. UNDP will also partner with the national Climate Finance Center, as well as the 
financial sector to ensure access to public and private climate financing mechanisms, reduce 
Greenhouse Gas emissions, and increase community resilience to climate and disaster risks, 
vulnerabilities, and shocks.
21. Building on existing partnerships with the Global Fund, the Country Coordination 
Mechanism, civil society, and competitively selected sub-recipients, UNDP will continue 
strengthening the national health system for stronger human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
and tuberculosis responses and this includes helping develop capacities for sustained future 
service delivery in cooperation with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS 
(UNAIDS), World Health Organization (WHO), Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) 
GmbH, and United States Agency for International Development (USAID). Lessons learned 
from the COVID-19 response demonstrated the importance of cooperation with United 
Nations agencies and bilateral service providers in ensuring coherence and effectiveness of
assistance. Being able to draw on flexible support from the Global Fund and UNDP global 
procurement system were determinant factors for UNDP to deliver early COVID-19
response support locally.
22. New and continuing strategic bilateral partnerships will help UNDP improve governance 
and access to justice, inequalities, local governance, and women’s empowerment. UNDP 
will also underwrite joint United Nations approaches to the prevention of hate speech and 
support to civil society, leveraging United Nations system support to national civic 
engagement. UNDP leadership and contribution to joint engagements with youth, building 
on and expanding national youth centers established successfully by UNDP, in areas such as 
sustainability and climate awareness, will leverage stronger national responses.
23. Working with the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, international partners, and UNDP 
country offices throughout the region, will see UNDP contribute to peacebuilding and
conflict prevention, fostering economic prosperity and social cohesion in Fergana Valley and 
nationally. UNDP will encourage regional, South-South and triangular cooperation for sustainable management of water, energy, and other resources, as well as contribute support 
for regional cooperation mechanisms where applicable.
Green economic transformation and inclusive development 
24. Contributing directly to Sustainable Development Goals 1, 3, 5, 8, 11, and indirectly to 
9, 10, and 12, UNDP will provide technical support to mainstreaming and accelerating
Agenda 2030 and Sustainable Development Goals in national implementation. This will 
include developing inclusive growth models resilient to global trends and disruptors driven 
by new technologies, climate change, environmental degradation, resource scarcity, 
urbanization and migration.
25. Building on UNDP support to updated NDCs and related analytical work, UNDP will 
assist the Kyrgyz Republic in accessing investment opportunities for initiating a transition to 
low-carbon development, climate resilience, and energy technologies.
26. UNDP will leverage innovative mechanisms for equitable access to finance and support
the development of integrated and transformative policy and programme solutions to 
empower informal businesses and vulnerable population, facilitate their pathways to decent 
jobs with a strong emphasis on the economic empowerment of ethnic minorities, youth, and 
women. Building on successes in the Aid for Trade programme, UNDP will strengthen 
productivity of small businesses, including green and creative industries, by improving 
access to local and global value chains, incubation and business development support with a 
particular focus on digital solutions, coupled with efforts to close the digital divide. 
27. Working within the United Nations Migration Framework and Migration Network at the 
country level, UNDP and IOM will support migrants in contributing to build more 
sustainable and resilient communities. Concurrently, UNDP will enhance the capacities of 
local authorities to generate employment opportunities, incentivizing people to uphold and 
contribute to social cohesion. Within the United Nations Youth Thematic Group, UNDP will 
support curriculum development and scale up existing successful youth center models and 
information technology hubs as spaces for innovation, co-working, and advocacy.
Accelerating climate action and nature-based solutions for protecting fragile 
ecosystems
28. Contributing directly to Sustainable Development Goals 7, 13, 14, 15, and indirectly to 1, 
2, 3, 5, 8, and 12, UNDP will support the Kyrgyz Republic in moving towards low-carbon, 
risk-informed resilient development, sustaining and protecting healthy ecosystems to realize 
international commitments. Stronger governance of natural resources will contribute to 
conflict prevention at local levels and in the context of trans-boundary cooperation.
29. UNDP will assist the Kyrgyz Republic in elaborating its long-term low-emission 
development strategy and support the government in accessing international climate and 
environmental financing. UNDP will accelerate climate action and invest in capacities for 
adaptation to climate change and mitigation measures. UNDP will support efforts to 
mainstream adaptation into development planning and budgeting at all levels and, along with 
UN Women, help women to play leading roles in decision making and implementation.
30. UNDP will work to raise awareness of climate impacts using data, evidence and analysis, 
empowering youth through education, and contributing to strengthen national capacities for 
climate science. UNDP will introduce low-carbon, off-grid, renewable energy solutions, as 
well as support energy saving, increase energy efficiency in the building sector and promote 
enhanced waste management.
31. Building on existing successful projects on climate-resilient irrigation, UNDP will 
support national efforts to improve water governance and increase water efficiency by
strengthening the capacities of local administrations and water-user associations to reinforce 
cycles of enhanced accountability and integrity around fair distribution principles, service delivery, and fee payment. This will help address unsustainable agricultural practices and 
improve irrigation infrastructure. UNDP will also support prevention efforts around waterrelated conflict risks and, where possible, support Integrated Water Resources Management.
32. UNDP will continue to support the government to expand the protected areas network 
and implement gender responsive nature-based conservation plans that protect biodiversity 
and generate eco-friendly livelihoods. UNDP will help introduce approaches to access and 
benefit sharing in accordance with the Nagoya Protocol and support the development of
models and enabling frameworks for the equitable distribution of gains from ecosystem 
services.
33. UNDP will contribute to the implementation of national disaster risk reduction plans, 
focusing on strengthening resilience to multi-hazard, climate-aggravated disasters by
strengthening early warning, preparedness, emergency response and recovery capacities at 
national and local levels, in particular through leveraging innovative technologies. UNDP 
will promote the integration of risks into development strategies and plans and facilitate 
investments into national and local disaster and crisis preparedness and response
programmes, including the application of disaster risk financing tools to strengthen the 
protection of vulnerable communities.
Strengthening inclusive, accountable and democratic governance
34. Capitalizing on existing active engagement with the government and civil society, UNDP 
will contribute directly to Sustainable Development Goals 16 and 5, and indirectly to 3 and 
10, in providing support to strengthening democratic processes, and national and local 
governance systems for ensuring participatory, inclusive, people-centered, and human rightsbased decision-making and services in a conflict sensitive manner.
35. Building on comprehensive parliamentary assistance in the present cycle, UNDP will 
strengthen the capacities of the seventh convocation of parliament with a view to support 
parliamentary legislative, oversight, and representative functions and improve transparency, 
accountability, accessibility, and public engagement in decision-making processes, including 
mainstreaming the digital transformation agenda. UNDP will assist parliamentary 
committees in performing oversight functions, especially on national budget processes, 
advancement of the 2030 Agenda, strengthening parliamentary interactions with civil 
society, and promoting the civic education and national gender equality strategies.
36. Continuing successful support for access to justice, UNDP will promote rule of law by 
fostering a more strategic, coordinated, responsive, gender-sensitive, and sustainable 
implementation of national legal and judicial reform processes, including preventing and 
responding to violence against women and girls. UNDP will support the Government to 
strengthen the sustainability of the state-funded legal aid system, introduced through UNDP 
support, and to assist national efforts aimed at improving equal access to justice and due 
process in line with international human rights standards. 
37. UNDP will assist the Government, and key stakeholders from private sector and civil 
society to promote a more responsible, human rights-compliant, law-abiding and 
environmentally conscious business environment that includes environmental and human 
rights due diligence practices and related access to remedies.
38. Based on lessons from recent multi-dimensional crises and to further leverage the digital 
agenda, UNDP will support state efforts in shifting towards e-government and digitalization 
for enabling more effective, inclusive, transparent and uninterrupted public services, while 
ensuring the privacy of citizens’ digital identity.
39. In building on the vibrant tradition of civic participation and active civil society in the 
Kyrgyz Republic, and working closely with other United Nations Development System
entities, UNDP will support the emergence of a new generation of accountable nongovernmental organizations as partners in the national development processes at all levels.40. As part of implementing programmes at the local level, UNDP will tackle a range of 
issues in local self-governance such as strengthening civic participation, promoting 
inclusive, transparent, and accountable governance, and improving the capacity for local 
development and service delivery.
41. To address multi-dimensional and multi-layered challenges to social cohesion and 
peaceful coexistence amongst communities, UNDP will work to support the development of 
national capacities and architecture for conflict prevention and resolution, especially in the 
Fergana Valley, and to ensure policy making is conflict-sensitive and inclusive of the needs 
of minority groups.
42. UNDP will build upon successful work in women’s political participation, as well as 
joint efforts to reduce gender-based violence in support of implementing the national 
strategy on gender equality and promoting women’s leadership and participation. 
III. Programme and risk management
43. This CPD outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit 
of accountability to the Executive Board for alignment of results and resources assigned to 
the programme at country level. Managerial accountabilities at country, regional, and 
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’s 
Program and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control Framework. 
44. UNDP nationally execute and/or directly execute the programme. Harmonized 
Approach to Cash Transfers, will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations
agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to concerned projects.
45. UNDP will participate in joint Government-United Nations coordination mechanisms 
and exercise joint responsibility for the programme and UNSDCF indicators. Programme 
and project boards will be established in line with social and environmental standards and 
accountability mechanisms. When necessary, a project level accountability mechanism will 
be accessible to address stakeholder concerns through coordination and partnership, 
advocacy, and policy dialogue. UNDP will employ innovative programming instruments to
explore and launch experimental solutions, utilize digital technologies where suitable, and 
apply joint programming to increase overall United Nations relevance and portfolio-based 
approaches while delivering the programme and ensuring appropriate business processes are 
in place.
46. Successful implementation of this programme builds on the active mobilization of noncore resources from a multitude of sources. Active resource mobilization mechanisms, 
including partnerships to access joint United Nations facilities and leverage global funds, 
will secure the achievement of results. The risk of negative impact to resource mobilization 
patterns from regional and global developments will be mitigated through active outreach to 
non-traditional partners and programming for self-sustaining mechanisms.
47. The COVID-19 crisis underscored the need to address existing vulnerabilities and layers 
of fragility. Such risks will be addressed by strengthening conflict sensitivity, risk prevention 
and management systems, as well as engaging within the peace-humanitarian-development
nexus.
48. Dedicated initiatives to empower youth will be mainstreamed in all programming with 
monitoring based on gender and age-disaggregated data. Risks related to gender inequality 
and discrimination against women and girls will be addressed through the implementation of 
the Gender Equality Strategy and, in particular, sustained awareness-raising and sensitization 
of a UNDP programme where young people and community members address harmful 
practices that violate the health and development rights of women and girls.49. UNDP will regularly monitor political, socio-economic, and regional security issues,
along with the pandemic while adhering to its Social and Environmental Standards and 
Accountability Mechanism. UNDP will use risk monitoring as a tool for early warning, risk 
management and decision-making. 
50. A business continuity plan is in place for regular monitoring and updates to ensure staff 
safety and security, as well as maintain the continuity of essential functions during critical 
incidents of any type. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
51. Outcome indicators are derived from UNSDCF outcome level indicators. Output 
indicators are a combination of nationalized Sustainable Development Goal indicators and 
qualitative indicators in line with national sector strategies. They are aligned with the 
UNSDCF and UNDP Strategic Plan for 2022-2025.
52. The National Statistics Committee (NSC) of the Kyrgyz Republic, collects and publishes 
data on the Sustainable Development Goals. Out of 102 indicators for which data is 
available, 57 are disaggregated by region, 32 by sex, and 21 by age, income, and education.
6
With United Nations partners, UNDP will help the Government integrate Sustainable 
Development Goals indicators and targets into the national system and continue 
strengthening the capacity of the NSC to collect, produce, and disseminate data.
53. The evaluation plan will be updated over the course of CPD implementation. UNDP will 
undertake assessments and analyses, as well as independent evaluations to facilitate learning 
and evidence-based decision-making. Monitoring and evaluation will be carried out through 
UNSCDF mechanisms and engage United Nations organizations, Government and 
development partners. UNDP will promote national ownership of indicators aligned with the 
Sustainable Development Goals throughout the results chain and as per the national 
monitoring and evaluation system.
54. Adequate human and financial resources will be allocated to effectively implement 
actions and achieve results related to gender equality and monitor and report on genderrelated progress towards results. The UNDP gender marker will monitor country programme 
budget and expenditures to improve planning and decision-making, ensuring at least 15 per 
cent of financing is set aside for interventions that achieve results in gender equality and 
women’s empowerment.
55. Inclusive methods of monitoring and evaluation will inform decision-making, promote 
learning among stakeholders, and ensure the accountability of UNDP activities in the
Kyrgyz Republic and contribution to development results.
6 National Statistical Committee of Kyrgyz RepublicAnnex. Results and resources framework for the Kyrgyz Republic (2023-2027)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Enhanced prosperity and resilience of the population through inclusive green socioeconomic development. Sustainable Development Goals 1, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 2:
By 2027, the well-being of the population of the Kyrgyz Republic will have improved through the further rollout of a green economy based on sustainable and healthy food systems natural 
resource management, and effective migration processes, by accelerating the use of innovation and entrepreneurship.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2) No one left behind, centering on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF 
DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines 
targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST 
BY OUTCOME
(US dollars)
Outcome indicators: 
• Proportion of population living 
below the national poverty line, by 
sex and age.
Baseline (2020): 25.3 per cent
Target (2027): 20 per cent
• Share of employed in small and 
medium enterprises of the total 
employed population in the 
economy.
Baseline (2018): 3.6 per cent
Target (2027): 5.8 per cent
Output 2.1.: Polices and mechanisms in 
place for equitable access to finance 
and decent employment create 
opportunities, especially for women, 
youth, and other vulnerable groups.
•
Indicator 2.1.1.: Number of 
women-led businesses with access 
to green finance
Baseline, 2020:0
Target 2027:300
Data source: NSC 
• Indicator 2.1.2.:
Number of youths supported with 
employment and training 
Baseline, 2020: 0
Target 2027: 500,000-800,000 
Data source: NSC 
Ministry of Economy and Commerce, 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), Ministry 
of Finance (MoF), Ministry of Digital 
Development, Energy (MoE), Ministry of 
Natural Resources, Ecology and 
Technical Supervision (MoNRETS)
NSC
Civil society organizations (CSOs)
Private sector
FAO, International Labor Organization, 
UN Women
Finland, Russian Federation, IFIs
Regular: $ 1,000,000
Other: $ 3,600,000
Output 2.2.: The adoption and 
dissemination of digital and green 
technologies are supported to create 
decent jobs and build skills. 
• Indicator 2.2.1.: Number of jobs 
created through green 
technologies
Baseline, 2020: 0
Target 2027: 1,250
Data source: NSC, Government
• Indicator 2.2.2.: Proportion of 
women and youth with 
Regular: $ 1,200,000
Other: $ 8,100,000DP/DCP/KGZ/4
information and communications 
technology skills, by type of 
skills. 
Baseline, 2020: to be determined 
(TBD)
Target 2027: 23
Data source: Government
Output 2.3.: Local and regional authorities 
and stakeholders empowered to lead local 
sustainable development and to build more 
resilient, economically sustainable 
communities.
• Indicator 2.3.1.: Number of local 
authorities capacitated to support 
migrant investments. 
Baseline, 2020: 0 
Target 2027: to be agreed with the 
Government 
Data source: Government
• Indicator 2.3.2.: Regional 
Governance Index
Baseline, 2020: 0,54
Target 2027: this is to be agreed with 
the Government 
Data source: Kyrgyzstan Government 
Index
Regular: $ 1,500,000
Other: $ 6,000,000
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Promotion of inclusive approaches to climate action, disaster risk management and environmental protection to conserve natural resources and leverage ecosystem 
benefits for sustainable human development. Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 3: By 2027, the Kyrgyz Republic started the transition to low-carbon development and riskinformed climate resilience, contributing to people’s fair and equitable access to ecosystem benefits and to empowerment of vulnerable communities in the governance of natural resources and 
disaster prevention.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 3) Building resilience to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk.
Outcome indicators:
• Kyrgyz Republic communicated the 
establishment or operationalization 
of an integrated policy/strategy/plan 
which increases their ability to adapt 
to the adverse impacts of climate 
change, and foster climate resilience 
and low greenhouse gas emissions 
development in a manner that does 
Output 3.1.: National and subnational 
government improved capacities to 
implement low carbon, people-centered 
climate change mitigation and 
adaptation actions, utilizing efficiencyenhancing measures in access to clean 
sustainable energy and water.
• Indicator 3.1.1.: Low-carbon and 
adaptation objectives incorporated 
Parliament 
MoNRETS, MoA, MoE, MoF, Ministry 
of Emergency Situations 
Department for Development of Drinking 
Water Supply and Sanitation 
State Agency for Construction and 
Regular: $ 1,300,000
Other $ 30,000,0000not threaten food production 
(including a national adaptation 
plan, nationally determined 
contribution, national 
communication, biennial update 
report or other SDG).
Baseline (2023): 1
Target (2027):4
• Kyrgyz Republic has adopted and 
are implementing national disaster 
risk reduction strategies in line with 
the Sendai Framework for Disaster 
Risk Reduction 2015-2030.
Baseline (2023): 0
Target (2027):1
• Area of protected areas (national 
nature reserves and parks) from the 
total area of the country.
Baseline (2019): 6.5 per cent
Target (2025):6.7 per cent
in national, sub - national and 
sectoral development plans and 
policies to promote green growth.
Baseline, 2020: 0
Target 2027: 4
Data source: Government
• Indicator 3.1.2.: Low-carbon 
development and adaptation 
solutions and mechanisms 
introduced.
Baseline, 2020: 0
Target 2027: 7
Data source: Government
Architecture
Local selfgovernments,
CSOs, private sector
WHO
FAO, World Food Program, UNICEF 
Japan, Russian Federation, IFIs 
Output 3.2.: National and subnational 
mechanisms and systems are in place to 
introduce solutions for improved 
conservation of biodiversity and 
management of natural resources. • Indicator 3.2.1.: Number of 
improved policies and 
frameworks adopted on the 
conservation and sustainable use 
of natural resources.
Baseline, 2022: 0 
Target 2027: 7
Data source: Government
• Indicator 3.2.2.: Hectares of 
ecosystems/lands rehabilitated or 
sustainably managed, including 
through rural community-based 
solutions and plans.
Baseline, 2020: 226,621 
Target 2027: 621,905 
Data source: Government
Regular: $ 1,000,000
Other $ 5,400,000
Output 3.3.: National, institutional, 
legal and policy frameworks are in 
place for risk-informed development 
and building resilience to disaster and 
climate risk, including through 
transboundary cooperation. • Indicator 3.3.1.: Number of 
regions covered by 
comprehensive monitoring 
Regular: $ 1,350,000
Other $ 18,000,000DP/DCP/KGZ/4
system. 
Baseline, 2020: 1
Target 2027: 7
Data source: Government
• Indicator 3.3.2.: Number of 
regional risk-reduction plans 
updated
Baseline, 2020: 0
Target 2027: 8
Data source: Government
• Indicator 3.3.3.: Number of 
sustainable community initiatives 
to reduce multi hazards with 
improved preparedness and 
infrastructure. 
Baseline, 2020: 0
Target 2027: 7
Data source: Government
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Just, accountable, and inclusive institutions and civil society promoting peace, cohesion, and human rights for all. Sustainable Development Goals 3, 5, 10, 16.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4: By 2027, all people in the Kyrgyz Republic enjoy the benefits of fair and accountable 
democratic institutions that are free from corruption and apply innovative solutions that promote respect for human rights and strengthen peace and cohesion.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1) Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions.
Outcome Indicators:
• Individual corruption perception of 
state bodies and local governance.
Baseline (2021): rank 144/180
Target (2027): improvement of
the country’s global
ranking and/or
overall score
• Executive branch of the government 
satisfaction index.
Baseline (2019): 27.3
Target (2027): to be provided 
• Proportion of seats held by women 
in a) national parliaments; b) local 
councils.
Baseline (2020): (a) 16.7 per cent; 
(b) 10per cent
Output 4.1.: Capacity of national and 
local governance institutions 
strengthened to deliver responsive and 
accountable public services to all 
without any discrimination. 
• Indicator 4.1.1.: 
Public assessment of state 
institutions and LSG performance.
Baseline 2020: 25.2 points
Target 2027: 40 points
Data source: NSC
• Indicator 4.1.2.: 
Legal frameworks are in place to 
promote, enforce and monitor 
equality and nondiscrimination on 
the basis of sex.
Baseline 2020: Partially
Target 2025: Yes
Parliament 
President Administration 
Ministries of Justice, Interior, Health, 
Education and Science, Labour, Social 
Protection and Migration, MOF
State Registry Service 
State Agency on Local Self- Governance 
(LSG) and Inter-Ethnic Relations
NSC
Ombudsman
Judicial bodies, Prosecutor General, 
Supreme Court 
Regular: $ 1,000,000
Other: $ 7,000,000Target (2027): to be provided Data source: Government
• Indicator 4.1.3.: Number of 
Multidrug resistant tuberculosis
patients enrolled to second line 
tuberculosis treatment.
Baseline, 2020:948
Target 2027: 1,850
Data source: Global Fund 
LSGs 
CSOs, media
(United Nation’s Population Fund) 
UNFPA, UNICEF, 
UN Women, Office of the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), UNAIDS, 
WHO
Finland, Japan, Switzerland, United 
Kingdom, United States of America, 
European Commission
Output 4.2.: Justice system and national 
human rights institutions are 
strengthened to ensure equal access to 
justice and due process, reduce 
corruption, promote the rule of law and 
human rights for conflict prevention 
and sustaining peace to address drivers 
of fragility.
• Indicator 4.2.1.: Number of
people who received access to 
justice through free legal aid 
(FLA) services, by sex, age, 
people with disabilities.
Baseline (2020): 43,577 legal 
consultations provided by FLA
Target: (2027): 45-50,000 
consultations with FLA
Data source: FLA
• Indicator 4.2.2.: Number of 
victims of domestic violence by 
gender.
Baseline, 2020: 8,308
Target 2027: 6,000
Data source: FLA, NSC
Regular: $ 1,000,000
Other: $ 5,000,000
Output 4.3.: Civil society and 
vulnerable groups, especially women, 
youth and people with disabilities, 
benefit from strengthened and inclusive 
social dialogue and are empowered to 
equally participate in national and local 
decision-making and development, 
fostering resilience.
• Indicator 4.3.1.: Number of 
inclusive policies and 
Regular: $ 1,650,000
Other: $ 10,900,000DP/DCP/KGZ/4
mechanisms for pre-emptive 
governance and risk-informed 
development, civic participation, 
and social dialogue with focus on 
most vulnerable women and 
youth, to strengthen social 
contract at national and local 
levels.
Baseline 2020: 0
Target 2027: 1 policy, 3 
mechanisms
Data source: Government
• Indicator 4.3.2.: Number of 
relevant CSOs and vulnerable 
groups empowered to jointly 
advocate their needs and 
participate in national and local 
decision-making and regional 
development (Rating scale from 0 
to 3, where 0 - no capacity, and 3 
- good).
Baseline 2020: 0
Target 2027: 30
Data source: CSOs