File Name: KHM-CPD-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Cambodia
Country Code: KHM
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 21 - 25 January 2019
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2023
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

 
Executive Board of the 
United Nations Development 
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
 
Distr.: General 
21 November 2018 
Original: English 
1820011X (E) 261118 
First regular session 2019 
21 - 25 January 2019, New York 
Item 3 of the provisional agenda 
Country programmes and related matters 
 
Country programme document for Cambodia (2019-2023)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex 
Results and resources framework for Cambodia (2019-2023) 10I. Programme rationale 
Country context 
1. The gross domestic product of Cambodia has more than tripled since 2000 with annual economic 
growth averaging 7.4 per cent and the country attaining lower middle-income status in 2015.1
Cambodia is rapidly modernizing, and its economy continues to transition from agriculture to 
industry and services. The Government has supported this transition through sound macroeconomic 
management, increasing foreign direct investment (FDI), high labour force participation, growing 
domestic resource mobilization and improved public services. 
2. Strong performance has reduced poverty and improved human development. The poverty rate 
declined from 53.2 per cent in 2004 to 13.5 per cent in 2014;2 Cambodia has experienced one of the 
fastest human development index rates of improvement in the region;3 growth is relatively inclusive, 
with inequality remaining in check. 4 Cambodia has not adopted a national measure of multidimensional poverty, but international data suggest that, although falling, the level is higher than 
income poverty.5
3. The Government has clearly articulated the country’s development objectives. The Rectangular 
Strategy, 2019-2023, places good governance centre-stage and prioritizes human resource 
development (HRD), economic diversification, private sector employment, and inclusive and 
sustainable development. This agenda is made operational through the National Strategic 
Development Plan (NSDP),6
 which integrates the Sustainable Development Goals7 and long-term 
development aims articulated in the Government’s Vision 2030,8
 a roadmap towards upper middleincome status, and Vision 2050, when Cambodia aspires to become a high income country. 
Development challenges 
4. The country’s fundamental development aim is to continue its socioeconomic transformation 
driven through high levels of growth with shared prosperity, alongside improved governance, 
human development and better environmental outcomes. Cambodia faces a set of complex, 
frictional pressures associated with the middle-income transition. 
5. Recognizing this, the Government is implementing policy reforms, strengthening public service 
delivery and transitioning to a more sustainable growth model. Rising domestic revenues have 
reinforced these efforts, though policy, resource and capacity challenges remain. Ensuring better 
governance, human rights and rule of law is critical. The United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework (UNDAF) recognizes governance as the lynchpin to achieving national development 
objectives and the Goals.9
6. Although growth has been high and inclusive, there is a need to promote productivity and 
competitiveness, and ensure a more sustainable and resilient economy. The narrow industrial base 
and persisting low value-added production (mainly garments and agriculture) underpin these 
concerns.10 Similarly, for households, although poverty is reducing and labour force participation is 
high, the proportion vulnerable to falling back into poverty has increased, and most employment 
remains informal.11 
 
1
 World Bank, 2016. 
2
 Ministry of Planning (MOP), National Institute of Statistics (NIS). 
3
 UNDP Human Development Report (HDR), 2017. 
4
 The Gini coefficient has fallen from 0.38 in 1994 to 0.27 in 2014 (MOP/NIS). 
5
 Data for 2014, suggest that 33 per cent of the population are multi-dimensionally poor (Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, 2017). 
6
 NSDP in force at the time of writing covers 2014-2018. NSDP 2019-2023 is being drafted. 
7
 Rapid integrated assessment (RIA) 2016; mainstreaming, acceleration, policy support (MAPS) report 2016. 
8
 Vision 2030 and Vision 2050 remain unpublished but are referenced in speeches by the Prime Minister: http://cnv.org.kh/selected-impromptucomments-at-the-graduation-and-diploma-presenting-ceremony-of-the-royal-university-of-phnom-penh/#more-4239. 
9 Cambodia ranks 161 out of 180 on Transparency International’s corruption perception index, NSDP 2014-2018. 
10 World Bank, Cambodia Economic Update, April 2017. 
11 Participation rates are 82 per cent for men and 80 per cent for women. 7. Such non-poor but vulnerable groups face multiple challenges, and disparities, especially spatial 
ones, remain significant.12 Exclusion concerns extend to disadvantaged groups. For example, while 
persons with disabilities (10 per cent of the population)13 are increasingly considered in national 
policies, they still experience discrimination and challenges due to limited physical infrastructure 
and social services. People in remote areas risk exclusion, especially those living where mines and 
explosive remnants of war (ERW) remain a threat; indigenous people and forest dependent 
communities have seen their livelihoods adversely impacted by socioeconomic change.14
8. The status of women, though improving, is still highly challenged. Disparities in primary and 
secondary education, maternal mortality and gender inequalities in decision-making have all 
narrowed.15 However, violence against women persists: one in five ever-partnered women have 
experienced physical or sexual violence by their intimate partner at least once.16 Challenges the 
Government has prioritized include tackling gender-based violence, enrolment in tertiary education, 
economic empowerment and increased participation in public and professional life. 
9. The country’s demographics present threats and opportunities: two thirds of the population are 
aged under 30 and youth constitute 43 per cent of the working age population.17 Yet over 50 per cent 
of employed youth are undereducated and engaged in low-skilled labour, and a majority of the 
workforce are poor or in vulnerable employment.18 Many Cambodians migrate to find better jobs 
internally and abroad, specifically in Thailand.19 The challenges are to provide quality education 
and skills and create decent employment so that the demographic dividend enables a successful 
middle-income transition. 
10. Rapid development has exerted increasing pressure on natural resources and biodiversity in rural 
areas and led to higher levels of waste and air pollution in urban areas. The degradation of natural 
resources has adversely impacted rural livelihoods and reduced capacity for climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, including to reduce emissions from deforestation and degradation 
(REDD+).20 In 2017, the Government consolidated protected areas totalling more than seven million 
hectares (or 40 per cent of total land). A number of other legal and policy measures now in place to 
promote environmental sustainability. The primary need now is to assist national efforts to 
successfully translate these policy measures into action. 
11.Cambodia is among the world’s most vulnerable countries to climate change.21 Floods in 2011 
and drought 2015-2016 are examples of severe weather events that are forecast to become more 
frequent and extreme.22 The Government has responded with mitigation and adaptation measures 
but requires further support. 
Alignment to the Goals 
12.The Government is committed to the Goals. The Ministry of Planning (MOP), with UNDP 
support, has produced the Cambodia Sustainable Development Goals Framework that nationalizes 
the Goals and includes an 18th goal (end the negative impact of land mines and explosive remnants 
of war, and promote victim assistance).23 The Goals are to be fully integrated with national plans, 
 
12 Although Cambodia is urbanizing, 80 per cent still live in rural areas (where 90 per cent of those in poverty are located). 
13 Cambodian Demographic Health Survey, 2014, NIS. 
14 Cambodia common country assessment, 2017. 
15 UNDP, HDR 2016. 
16 The Government, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNWomen), 2015, National Survey on Women’s Health and Life Experiences in Cambodia. 
17 UNFPA, 2017. 
18 Lower secondary education completion is 48 per cent for both men and women. 
19 CDRI and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2017, Interrelations between Public Policies, Migration and 
Development in Cambodia. 
20 Forest cover declined to 48 per cent (2016) from 73 per cent (1965), UNDP, HDR 2016. A total of 2.96 gigatonnes of carbon is stored in Cambodia’s 
ecosystems (Ministry of the Environment, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) submission 2017). 
21 Climate change vulnerability index, 2017; United Nations University global risk index 2017; Standard and Poor, climate change vulnerability index 
2014. 
22Crowthers, L. 2016: https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/animals-die-cambodia-worst-drought-decades. 
23 RIA and MAPS mission reports, 2016. through UNDP support to the Council for the Development of Cambodia (CDC) and the Ministry 
of Planning. 
UNDP contributions: learning from the past 
13.UNDP impact is greatest when it builds on its comparative advantage in providing focused, 
relevant and effective technical support and its trusted relationship with government.24 UNDP has 
made significant contributions to policy initiatives and institutional reforms. The national industrial 
development policy adopted a human development perspective in providing institutional support to 
a rigorous results-based approach linked to budgetary reforms.25 With the support of the European 
Union, Sweden, the United States and Japan, UNDP supported the establishment of the National 
Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD), an inter-ministerial body to promote sustainable 
development. This strengthened overall leadership while enabling line ministries to climate-proof 
their programmes.26
 
14.Policy work must be underpinned by analysis guided by the Government’s priorities.27 The 
Cambodia development finance assessment (DFA) identified potential new funding sources to 
inform national planning and partnerships for the Goals.28 The climate public expenditure reviews 
(CPERs) mobilized national commitment by analyzing and prioritizing adaptation investments.29
15. The need for strong links between policy and impact is a fundamental lesson. The theory of 
change acknowledges the risk that policy and ground-level realities can diverge. Partnering with 
local communities and civil society organizations is essential to mitigating this. Rigorous impact 
analysis and sound political economy analysis are also key to ensuring the programme delivers 
tangible results. 
Opportunities to effect change 
16.The Government has clearly articulated its vision to integrate 2030 Agenda in its plans and 
ensure a secure, inclusive and prosperous society, eliminating poverty and leaving no-one behind. 
To achieve this, the Government recognizes the need for effective public institutions and a robust 
private sector. Drawing on its global network, UNDP will work with the United Nations country 
team to engage with the Government on attaining the Goals. 
17. In accordance with the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021,30 and as an “integrator”31 for the Goals 
in United Nations development system reform,32 UNDP will help to create financing models to 
deliver higher volume, more effective investment. UNDP will move from funding towards 
financing, leveraging investment in the 2030 Agenda particularly from the private sector, through 
sustainable special economic zones and investments in affordable housing.33 By 2025, it is estimated 
that 80 per cent of all financing for the Goals will come from domestic sources and FDI.34 UNDP 
will therefore continue to explore with the Government new ways to increase domestic and private 
sector financing for development. 
18. Taking the economic transition and sustainable natural resource management as entry points to 
expand UNDP engagement on governance, the programme will work to find ways in which public 
officials can better address delivery to citizens in line with the Government’s commitments to 
improve performance and accountability. 
 
24 UNDP outcome evaluation of the country programme action plan, 2011-2015, mid-term review, 2011-2015. 
25 Ibid. 
26 Ibid. 
27 Poverty thematic evaluation, 2016. 
28 Cambodia DFA, CDC, 2017. 
29 CPERs, 2013-14, 2015, 2016. 
30 UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021. 
31 “Integrator” refers to a mechanism bringing together efforts to achieve the Goals. 
32 General Assembly resolution 72/279, “Repositioning of the United Nations development system”. 
33 For example, UNDP collaboration on affordable housing, https://www.khmertimeskh.com/50502676/undp-supports-ppsezs-housing-project. 
34 Cambodia DFA
CDC2017II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
19. UNDP country programme is aligned with the Rectangular Strategy and NSDP. The programme 
positions UNDP as a strategic partner to government with the objective of adapting and 
implementing the Goals to support transition to upper middle-income status through sustainable 
growth, eliminating poverty and leaving no one behind. This draws on the UNDP Strategic Plan, 
2018-2021, and is an integral part of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
(UNDAF) 2019-2023. 
20. Building on existing models, UNDP will bring in greater public and private investment. UNDP 
can help private investors do well by doing good, and realize the potential financial and social 
returns in the 2030 Agenda. UNDP will partner with financing institutions, including international 
financial institutions (IFIs), to create and test new investment vehicles for the Goals, and support 
delivery of concessional loan financed programmes. 
21. Using finance as an integrator for the Goals, UNDP can provide a platform for other United 
Nations organizations to participate in innovative collaborations. Through the common chapter of 
their respective strategic plans, 2018-2021, UNDP will work with UNFPA, the United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment 
of Women (UN-Women), and others on social protection, youth employment, women’s 
empowerment, forest protection, climate change, and access to justice for persons with disabilities. 
22. In a break from the supply-driven capacity-building of the past, UNDP will work with 
government to create incentives for civil servants and citizens to find their own ways to improve 
services. In each part of the programme, UNDP will support the Government to find innovative 
solutions to long-standing institutional challenges. 
23. The programme aims to deliver on the pledge to leave no-one behind, targeting development 
results that include and empower those below or near the poverty line, and vulnerable groups, 
including women and girls, unemployed youth, persons with disabilities, sexual minorities, and 
people living with HIV (PLHIV). 
24.The programme consists of three inter-dependent pillars: prosperity, planet and peace. 
Prosperity: expanding economic opportunities 
25.The core objective is to support national transition towards upper middle-income status through 
sustainable and inclusive growth pathways. The Rectangular Strategy prioritizes transformation 
towards a greener, skills-based economy linked to innovation and the Fourth Industrial Revolution. 
UNDP signature solutions – (1) keeping people out of poverty, (4) sustainable planet, and (5) closing 
the energy gap – underpin the theory of change and programme formulation.35
 
26.UNDP will maintain support for the CDC, Ministry of Planning and the Ministry of Economy 
and Finance (MOEF) to plan, finance, coordinate and monitor the NSDP, working with the support 
of Australia, the European Union and Sweden. This will include embedding tracking and 
accountability mechanisms within national and sub-national systems and programmes. 
27. Maximizing equitable and green economic growth. The national industrial development policy 
provides a roadmap towards structural transformation, greater productivity, higher value-added and 
diversification. UNDP will continue partnering with the CDC to support implementation, 
recognizing that Cambodia is likely to begin preparations for graduation from least developed 
country (LDC)36 status in the next decade. UNDP will continue to work with ministries of Mines 
and Energy, Environment, and Economy and Finance to develop renewable energy solutions. 
Working with the private sector, UNDP will focus on de-risking solar investments. 
 
35 UNDP six signature solutions: poverty, governance, resilience, sustainability, energy and gender equality. 
36 LDC status is defined by the Committee for Development Policy: https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/least-developed-country-category/ldccriteria
html28. Creating greater value and combating rural poverty. Upgrading agricultural value chains is 
essential to improving agricultural productivity and helping the rural poor become more resilient to 
external shocks. Using blended finance and working with the Ministry of Commerce (MOC), UNDP 
will facilitate improvements in farm-level productivity and profitability to expand and enhance 
value-chains and promote export diversification, especially in the cassava sector. UNDP will 
support government efforts to meet the national Goal 18: end the negative impact of mines and 
explosive remnants of war, and promote victim assistance. Working with the Cambodian Mine 
Action and Victim Assistance Authority (CMAA), with the support of Australia, Canada and 
Switzerland, UNDP will support making land safe and productive. UNDP will develop graduationbased models of social protection to help end extreme poverty by boosting household productivity. 
29. Upgrading the skills of the next generation. To maximize the demographic dividend, remain 
competitive, and ensure growth stays inclusive, working age people need to be able to access skills 
training while remaining in employment. 37 With Switzerland, Sweden, United Nations 
organizations, and research organizations, UNDP will strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of 
Labour and Vocational Training (MOLVT) in policy-focused research, information management, 
innovation, monitoring and communications. UNDP will work with the National Employment 
Agency (NEA) and private sector on expanding work opportunities for young people, through 
entrepreneurship and using innovative tools and media. 
30. Recognizing women’s contribution and securing their economic empowerment. In collaboration 
with the Ministry of Women’s Affairs, Sweden and the Cambodia Development Resource Institute 
(CDRI), UNDP will provide a gender-based analysis of the national economy to inform gender 
equality policies and enhance economic performance. UNDP will sponsor initiatives to empower 
women and girls as entrepreneurs and within the labour market. 
Leveraging private finance. UNDP will deepen its Goals-related engagement with the private sector 
and chambers of commerce, including the expansion of social impact finance. UNDP will work with 
the Phnom Penh Special Economic Zone (PPSEZ) on low-cost housing, clean energy, waste 
recycling and upgrading skills through the Sustainable Special Economic Zones initiative. 
Planet: sustainable living 
31. In line with the Rectangular Strategy and UNDP signature solutions (3) building resilience and 
(4) sustainable planet, UNDP will support environmental protection, working with the Government 
to ensure sustainable natural resource management and build climate resilience. This pillar is closely
associated with the peace, participation and accountability theme, which addresses governance 
issues to improve environment and natural resource management. 
32. Strengthening institutional capacities. Through the Ministry of Environment and NCSD, and
with the support of the European Union, Sweden and the United States, UNDP will continue to 
support policy formulation and capacity development for more environmentally sustainable 
development. In addition, UNDP will support the Government to ensure effective enforcement of 
Environment and Natural Resource Code38 and related laws and regulations. Partnerships with the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Supreme National Economic Council (SNEC) will 
analyze and institutionalize an economic case for sustainable development. 
33. Promoting climate adaptation and mitigation. Through the Global Environmental Facility 
(GEF) Green Climate Fund, and the Forest Partner Carbon Facility (FCPF), and with the Ministry 
of Environment and NCSD, UNDP will continue to support line ministries in adopting and 
implementing gender-responsive climate action. UNDP will support REDD+ to enable the 
Government to access results-based payments for reducing emissions from forestry. UNDP will 
continue to support the Government on disaster preparedness, operationalizing early warning and 
monitoring systems and establishing and strengthening regional collaboration with the Mekong 
River Commission, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and others for climate 
data -sharing. UNDP will support the Ministry of Environment, NCSD, the Ministry of Mines and 
 
37 “Development goals in an era of demographic change”, Global Monitoring Report, World Bank 2015-2016. 
38 Environmental codes (draft)
Ministry of EnvironmentEnergy, and the National Committee for Sub-national Development (NCDDS) to promote a green, 
circular economy through sustainable waste management, sustainable transport management, 
improved energy efficiency, and the adoption of clean energy. 
34. Strengthening conservation and environmental services. The programme will continue to 
support the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries 
(MAFF) for the sustainable management of natural resources and biodiversity conservation while 
strengthening capacities of local authorities and community-based organizations to improve rural 
livelihoods, food security and effective climate responses. GEF, BIOFIN 39 and Payment for 
Ecosystem Services initiatives will introduce incentive-based innovations that strengthen watershed 
restoration, biodiversity conservation and natural resource management. 
35. Leveraging private finance. In partnership with the Government, the programme will leverage 
private sector investment for scalable climate initiatives and a circular economy. 
Peace: participation and accountability 
36. Just as good governance underpins the wider Rectangular Strategy, the ‘peace’ pillar is central 
to the success of the other two. Improved state institutions, with more effective government-topeople delivery, can improve the quality and inclusiveness of economic growth, through social 
protection and protection of the rights of minorities. Environmental outcomes can be improved 
through more effective local governance. UNDP will explore innovative ways to empower citizens 
and work with Government incentive structures to help build demand for better service delivery. 
This pillar utilizes signature solutions (2) effective, accountable and inclusive governance, and 
(6) gender equality. 
37. Strengthening institutional capacity for the Goals and accountable public services. Working 
with the Ministry of Planning and the Government as a whole, UNDP will support the development, 
adoption and monitoring of the national Goals and their integration within national planning and 
sector budgeting. This will include assisting the Government to prepare a voluntary national 
review.40 With Government and other partners, UNDP will assist in strengthening public service 
accountability and feedback mechanisms, and informing government reforms and innovations to 
implement and monitor the Goals. 
38. Promoting gender equality. With support from Sweden and others, UNDP will continue policy 
and institutional support to the Ministry of Women’s Affairs to address social norms that 
discriminate against women, and to promote their economic empowerment, leadership, and 
participation in decision-making. Together with UN-Women and UNFPA, UNDP will contribute to 
national efforts to eliminate violence against women, including through revision of domestic 
violence law. 
39. Supporting rights and leaving no one behind. Rapid social and economic progress risks 
excluding minority, marginalized and vulnerable groups. Building on a United Nations joint 
programme,41 UNDP will work with the Ministry of Justice (MOJ) and the Ministry of Social 
Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation (MOSVY) on legal reforms to protect and include 
persons with disabilities. Through the regional programme ‘Being LGBTI42 in Asia’, UNDP will 
work with national networks, supporting social tolerance and openness to promote the rights of 
sexual minorities. Following up on the Universal Periodic Review, UNDP will develop rights-based 
initiatives on which the Government is able to engage. UNDP will support national commitments 
to expand social protection for the vulnerable, specifically persons with disabilities and PLHIV. 
 
39 Biodiversity Finance Initiative (BIOFIN): http://www.biodiversityfinance.net. 
40 Voluntary national reviews are encouraged as a basis for regular review by the high-level political forum. 
41 Disability Rights Initiative Cambodia, UNICEF, UNDP, WHO, Australia, 2014-2018. 
42 Lesbian
gaybisexualtransgender/transsexual and intersex (LGBTI)III. Programme and risk management 
40. The programme will be nationally executed. Implementing partner selection will be guided by 
an assessment of capacities to maximize relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability of 
interventions. The harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) framework will be used in 
collaboration with other United Nations organizations to assess and manage financial risks. Project 
implementation modalities – national implementation, national implementation with UNDP 
support, or direct implementation – will be determined in consultation with the Government based 
on assessed risk ratings further to the HACT assessment of potential implementing partners, and 
selected to maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of UNDP contributions to development 
results. In all cases, the implementation modality will be grounded in strong national ownership. In 
accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/32, all direct costs associated with project 
implementation will be charged to concerned projects. Long-established working relations and 
excellent communications with CDC will ensure a results focus, effective programme management 
and proactive risk response. Project formulation will provide an opportunity for dialogue with the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance to explore options for national funding. UNDP active engagement 
in the country team and collaboration with the resident coordinator allow risks to be identified and 
managed in partnership with the Government by adhering to United Nations norms and conventions, 
including those related to human rights. 
41. UNDP will seek to manage political risks by maintaining a strong relationship with the 
Government and stakeholders, while maintaining a strictly impartial stance and adhering to the 
normative values of the United Nations. UNDP will regularly share information with other United 
Nations organizations and development partners. UNDP will undertake regular monitoring through 
its own mechanisms as well as via the United Nations Department of Safety and Security (UNDSS) 
and will deploy appropriate measures in the event of emerging challenges. UNDP will adopt 
context-sensitive, do-no-harm principles to guide design and implementation of this programme. 
42. UNDP will manage resource mobilization risks by widening the funding base to include new 
partners, including private and public domestic sources. Taking advantage of improved rules and 
regulations, UNDP expects to improve delivery speed and quality. Implementation and results are 
monitored monthly, including ensuring resource mobilization and management are prioritized. For 
efficient delivery, UNDP will continue to reduce administrative costs.
43. This CPD outlines the UNDP contribution to national results and serves as the primary means 
of accountability to the Executive Board for alignment and resources assigned to the programme at 
country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with 
respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations 
policies and procedures and the internal control framework. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation 
44. UNDP is committed to ensuring that development policy work is based on learning and 
evidence. At the project design stage, reflection and adaptation will form part of a rigorous, fullyresourced evaluation strategy. Projects will be based on theories of change linked to results 
articulated in the country programme, NSDP and the Goals. Evaluation will allow projects to 
respond to lessons learned and new opportunities. Communication and outreach to a diverse 
audience will continue, including use of multiple platforms and media. 
45. UNDP will ensure close monitoring and oversight, including spot checks, audit, field visits and, 
where possible, community monitoring and evaluation. UNDP social and environmental standards 
and accountability mechanism will be applied. 
46. To strengthen and use national monitoring systems for the Goals, UNDP will partner with the 
Government to design and implement a policy-relevant research agenda, including use of innovation 
and new technologies in data generation, capture, mapping, analysis and reporting. UNDP will 
promote disaggregation of data (gender, age, vulnerable groups and by geographical location) within programming. Partnerships with local research and policy institutions will ensure impartial 
monitoring and evaluation while introducing new perspectives. 
47. The monitoring and evaluation plan is aligned with the national Goals, UNDP Strategic Plan, 
2018-2021, NSDP and UNDAF, 2019-2023. Outcome results will be monitored according to 
coordination mechanisms agreed between the Government and country team. DP/DCP/KHM/4 
10 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Cambodia (2019-2023) NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Capacity building and human resource development; Poverty reduction and inclusive growth; Social protection; Revitalizing aginfrastructure; Competitiveness; Private sector development and employment. Sustainable Development Goals: 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 17, 18UNDAF OUTCOME 2: By 2023, women and men in Cambodia, in particular those marginalized and vulnerable, benefit from extechnological innovations; and participate in a growing, more productive and competitive economy, that is also fairer and envirRELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions.
UNDAF outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines, targets)
Major p
Strategic Plan Outcome 1.1a. Proportion of men, women and children of all ages living in poverty in all dimensions, by selected measures of multi-dimensional 
poverty. Baseline: 33% (2014) 
Target: TBC UNDAF Outcome 2.1.1.Employment to population ratio: (a) men/women; (b) youth (15-30) men/women; (c) PNH/other rural/ urban 
Baseline: 
(i) 89.2%/78.8% (2016) 
(ii) TBC (iii) 78.6%/85.4%/80.4% 
(2016)
Target (2023): 
(i) Base +0.5% annually 
(ii) Base +2% annually (iii) Base +0.5% annually
UNDAF Outcome. 2.1.3. Human capital formation, numbers of people 
benefiting from: (a) TVET; (b) 
entrepreneurship programmes 
Baseline:
1.1a. MPI-based on government data. 
2.1.1. Cambodia Socio-economic SurveyCSES; Cambodia Labour Force Survey 2.1.3. CSES; MOEYS/MoLVT/ILO 
Output 1.1: Extreme poor, disadvantaged 
populations, including PLHIV and people 
with disabilities (PwDs), have access to improved RGC social protection. 1.1.1. Number of people 
participating in social protection programmes supported by UNDP.Baseline (2017): Total: 5900; 
PLHIV: 5900 (no gender disaggregation); Others: 0 Target: Total: 27,700; PLHIV: 17,700 (no gender disaggregation); Others (including PwDs): 10,000 (50% women) 
ID poor database, project reports
Output 1.2. Government fosters 
productivity alongside inclusive/ 
sustainable growth 1.2.1: Number of adopted relevant 
RGC policies, plans and strategies supported by UNDP 
Baseline (2018): 2
Target: 7 
National reports
Governm
CDC MoP MoEF SNEC CMAA Ministry Vocation
NEA 
Ministry Urban PlConstrucCivil socCDRI Centre foCambodOrganizaPLHIV nUnited NILO Australia SwitzerlaSweden UNICEF WHO UNAIDS UNIDO(i) 21,740 (F: 36%) (2016-2017) (iii) 6,276 (50%/50%) Target: Base +10% UNDAF Outcome 2.2.1. RGC economic strategy fully integrates SDGs/2030 approach and socioeconomic rights, via adoption of: (a) CSDG-based NSDP 43
Baseline (2018): No 
Target: Fully UNDAF Outcome 2.3.1. Improved official statistics on gender and vulnerability adopted: (a) Gender – adjusted wage gap men/women; (b) Gender - time use/valuation of unpaid work; and (c) Cambodia-specific multi-dimensional poverty metric.44
Baseline: Not in place
Target: Developed and in place
UNDAF Outcome 2.3.2. Number of 
participating in government-targeted 
United Nations-supported poverty eradication/economic inclusion 
programmes, including social 
protection and mine action 
Baseline (2018): 0
Target: at least 100,000
2.2.1. NSDP 2019-2023 2.3.1. Data/report from NIS 2.3.2. Government administrative data
Output 1.3. Left-behind and mine 
affected communities have access to safe land for better livelihoods.  1.3.1: (a) Area of mine-affected land 
released (km2); (b) Number of 
people benefitting from UNDP 
assisted mine action programme 
Baseline (2017): (a) 216 km2; 
(b) 908,958 (50% women); Target: (a) 281 km2; (b) 1,064,302 
(50% women); CMAA 
Output 1.4. Young women and men have 
opportunities to progress through access to information, skills development and improved employment policies.  1.4.1: Number of young women and 
men (a) accessing online information, (b) using multi-media content, and (c) skills certification
Baseline (2018): (a to c) 0 
Target: (a) 20,000; (b) one million; and (c) 3,000 (50% women for all) Project data/NEA 
 1.4.2: Number of youth and genderresponsive government employment 
policies
Baseline (2018): 0 
Target: 1 Government gazette, project reports 
Private sPP-SEZ Green LeGrab 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Revitalizing agriculture; Climate change, natural resources management and biodiversity co(environmental sustainability, deforestation and degradation); Capacity-building and HRD. Goals: 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13UNDAF OUTCOME 3: By 2023, women and men in Cambodia, in particular the marginalized and vulnerable, live in a safer, he
balanced environment with improved livelihoods, and are resilient to natural and climate change related trends and shocks.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.UNDAF Outcome 3.1.1. Extent of land and natural resources tenure 
3.1.1. MLMUPC annual reports Output 2.1. Targeted cities and urban 
centres prepare and operationalize solid 
GovernmMoE
3 No/partially/fully. 4 Not in place/developed/developed and in place. DP/DCP/KHM/4 
12 
security, measured in: (b) Number of total members of registered community fisheries and forestry with tenure rights to fisheries and forestry resources 
Baseline (2017): 43% 
Target: 58%UNDAF Outcome 3.1.3. Percentage of communes vulnerable to disaster shocks and climate change 
Baseline (2014): 49% 
Target: 35%UNDAF Outcome 3.2.3. Extent to which natural resources are protected, conserved and sustainably managed, measured in: (a) percentage of forest cover; (b) percentage of protected area (Strategic Plan 2.9a); 
Baseline: 48.14% (2016); 41% (2018) 
Target: TBD UNDAF Outcome 3.2.4. Adoption of innovation, clean technology, sustainable energy and sound chemical management, minimizing GHG, wastes and pollution generation, measured in: (a) GHG emission saving from the manufacturing industry (Gg CO2eq);45
(b) percentage of POPs reduction release 
Baseline: 405 (2015); 0% (2017) 
Target: 508; 5% UNDAF Outcome 3.3.1. Number of multi-sectoral policies, legislation, 
plans and strategies relevant to 
sustainable production and living, which are developed/updated 
Baseline (2018): 7 
Target: 15
3.1.3. CSDG 3.2.3. CSDG 3.2.4. National communication, BUR, NDC CSDG 3.3.1. Endorsed policies, legislation, plans and strategies 3.3.2. CPERs, CSDG 
waste management plan to reduce environmental pollution impact from solid waste. 2.1.1: Number of cities/urban 
centres with operational Solid Waste Management Plans 
Baseline (2018): 0
Target: 5 project reports
Output 2.2. Climate and weather information is available for public and utilized by policymakers for national, sectoral and sub-national planning, and transboundary communication in the region.  2.2.1: Number of national, sectoral 
and sub-national plans informed by accurate/ up-to-date climate information 
Baseline (2017): 0 
Target: 2 planning documents, 
budgets referencing forecasts and products 
 2.2.2: End-to-end multi-sectoral 
EWS to limit the genderdifferentiated impact of natural hazards is operational (Strategic Plan 3.3.1.1 A) 
Baseline (2018): No 
Target: Yes Project report 
Output 2.3. Rules and regulations 
formulated and adopted for forest/natural resource management and market solutions developed for conservation and renewable energy  2.3.1: Number of rules and 
regulations developed and adopted for forest/natural resource management 
Baseline (2018): 3 
Target: 8, MoE 
NCSD 
MAFF 
NCDD-S 
Phnom PprovinciaMoWRAMRD MEF Ministry 
NCDM 
Civil soc
GGGI GERES RECOFIConservaWCS Oxfam CBOs WWF RUPP GCCC United NFAO UNEP WFP UNIDO JICA EU SIDA World BADB Private sPP-SEZ 
5 Data are based on the Second National Communication (2015), data for 2023 are not available. The target in the NDC is 727 Gg CO2eq by 203UNDAF Outcome 3.3.2. Percentage of increase of public expenditure for key areas: (a) public expenditure for climate action as % of GDP 
Baseline (2016): 0.9% 
Target: 1.6%
 2.3.2: Number of market solutions 
for conservation and renewable energy in place 
Baseline (2018): 0 
Target: 4, project reports 
 2.3.3: Number of households 
benefitting from clean, affordable 
and sustainable energy access (Strategic Plan indicator 1.5.1); 
Baseline: (2018): 0 
Target: 250 (at least 50 headed by women); programmatic data 
Output 2.4. Climate smart/proofed (rural) 
infrastructures and services benefit rural 
population, especially poor and vulnerable 
 2.4.1: Value of investments in target 
ministries going through climate change screening processes 
Baseline (2017): $17.8 million 
Target: $50 million Project report 
 2.4.2: Number of climate 
smart/proofed infrastructures built targeting poor and vulnerable communities and number of households benefiting 
Baseline (2017): (a) 122; (b) 16,828 
Target: (a) 400; (b) 29,828 Project reports 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Good governance (combating corruption, deforestation and degradation, public financial m
Goals: 5, 10, 16, 17, 18
UNDAF OUTCOME 4: By 2023, women and men, including those underrepresented, marginalized and vulnerable, benefit from legislative and governance frameworks that ensure meaningful and informed participation in economic and social development RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.UNDAF Outcome 4.1.1. Number of 
public laws and policies developed 
with support from the United Nations that involve participation of rightsholders, especially women and discriminated groups 
4.1.1.
- Programmatic data - New laws, prakas, sub-decrees and policies adopted and published - Royal Gazette 
Output 3.1. Government builds an 
evidence-based monitoring, evaluation and reporting system supportive of delivering the Goals
 3.1.1: CSDGs adopted and voluntary 
national report (VNR) submitted.
GovernmMoWA MOP 
NCDD-S 
MCS MoSVY DP/DCP/KHM/4 
14 
Baseline (2018): 13
Target: 37
UNDAF Outcome 4.3.1. Number of selected laws and policies that have 
been adopted, amended and 
implemented to comply with recommendations of UPR, treaty 
bodies, special procedures and the 
International Labour Organization (ILO) mechanisms 
Baseline (2018): TBC
Target (2023): TBC
Strategic Plan Outcome 2.2b.Proportion of women in managerial 
positions Baseline: Minister 15%; Secretary and 
Under-secretary of state: 25%; Public sector-director of department and above: 12-13%Target: Minister: 20%; Secretary and Under-secretary of state: 30%; Public sector-director of department and above: 17-18%
4.3.1.  - Laws and policies adopted, amended and 
published 
- Reports of CEACR, ILO and government reports
Baseline (2018): CSDG framework 
not adopted; VNR not reportedTarget: CSDG adopted and 1 VNR submitted 
National gazette 
Output 3.2. Women have improved status in leadership and decision-making  3.2.1: Number of studies produced, 
and policies adopted to promote gender equality and address genderbased violence 
Baseline (2017): 0 
Target: 3 studies; 2 policies, national gazette, project reports 
 3.2.2: Percentage of women in 
management positions in at least four line ministries supported by UNDP 
Baseline (2017): 25%
Target: 33%MCS 
Output 3.3. Subnational administrations are able to deliver services in a transparent and inclusive manner responsive to constituents’ needs  3.3.1: Percentage of local 
administration councillors and officials reporting improvement in their performance as a result of training and other capacity development support from the 
project (by sex)Baseline: 0
Target: 70% Project data, 2020 
 3.3.2: Extent to which the design/ 
development of key UNDPsupported local governance services is inclusive and participatory
Baseline: 1-Llimited Extent
Target: 3-Great Extent Programmatic data 
Disabilit(DAC) Civil socSilaka Oxfam Committin PoliticAssociatAdminisCDPO CCC Youth neLGBTI nUnited NUN WomUN-OHCUNAIDS UNFPA DFAT SIDA Republic Output 3.4. Capacity of PwD 
organizations and networks improved to advance the rights of PwDs  3.4.1: New national disability 
strategic plan and other strategic documents developed with PwD organizations
Baseline (2018): Limited 
consultations with PwD organizations Target: Key recommendations from PwD organizations reflected in the approved NDSP and other 
policies/plans
Official Gazettes/national policies on disability, project reports
 3.4.2: Number of PwDs, 
disaggregated by gender, with access to justice through formal and informal systems (Strategic Plan indicator 2.2.3)
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 50 (50% female)Project reports 