File Name: KOR-CPD-2010,-EN
Year: 2010,
Country Name: Korea, DPR
Country Code: KOR
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 21 June to 2 July 2010,
Start Year: 2011
End Year: 2015
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the 
United Nations Development 
Programme and of the 
United Nations Population Fund 
Distr.: General 
9 April 2010 
Original: English
1030982 () 290410 
Annual session 2010 
21 June to 2 July 2010, Geneva 
Item 16 of the provisional agenda 
UNFPA – Country programmes and related matters 
UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND 
Draft country programme document for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 
Proposed indicative UNFPA assistance: $9.7 million: $6 million from regular resources 
and $3.7 million from co-financing modalities 
and/or other, including regular, resources 
Programme period: Five years (2011-2015) 
Cycle of assistance: Fifth 
Category per decision 2007/42: B 
Proposed indicative assistance by core programme area (in millions of $): 
 
Regular resources Other Total
Reproductive health and rights 4.0 3.2 7.2
Population and development 1.5 0.5 2.0
Programme coordination and assistance 0.5 0.0 0.5
Total 6.0 3.7 9.7 I. Situation analysis
1. The population of the Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea was 24 million in 2008. In the 
1990s, the country experienced economic 
difficulties and a series of natural disasters that 
reversed the economic and social progress made in 
earlier decades. Life expectancy fell, and maternal 
and infant mortality rose. Flooding in 2007 
increased the vulnerability of women and children, 
in particular. 
2. In 2008, the life expectancy of women was 
72.6 years, down from 75.2 years in 1995. Health 
indicators also deteriorated. The maternal mortality 
ratio increased from 50 deaths per 100,000 live 
births in the 1990s to 77 deaths per 100,000 live 
births in 2008. The infant mortality rate also 
increased, from 13.9 deaths per 1,000 live births in 
1993 to 19.3 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2008. 
3. The total fertility rate in 2008 was 
approximately two children per woman. The annual 
population growth rate was estimated at 0.86 per 
cent during the last 14 years. More than 60 per cent 
of the population resides in urban areas. 
4. The sex ratio at birth ranges from 104 boys 
per 100 girls to 106 boys per 100 girls. People over 
65 years old account for 8.7 per cent of the 
population, an increase of 3.3 per cent since 1993. 
The ageing of the population is due to the decline 
in fertility and the high mortality rate among young 
children. 
5. According to the 2006 reproductive health 
survey supported by UNFPA and the United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the 
contraceptive prevalence rate was 58.5 per cent for 
modern methods, of which 82 per cent were
intrauterine devices. The unmet need for family 
planning was 9.6 per cent, and the abortion rate 
among married couples was 121 abortions per 
1,000 live births. According to the 2004 
reproductive health survey, 85 per cent of induced 
abortions could have been avoided if adequate 
resources for family planning had been available. 
6. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 
reported a reduction in reproductive tract infections 
among married women from 18.8 per cent of 100 
women in 1997 to 11.2 per cent of 100 women in 
2006, a percentage which is still considered high.
Currently, there are no official statistics on 
HIV/AIDS. 
7. A 2008 study on cervical cancer supported by 
UNFPA, with technical assistance from the 
International Planned Parenthood Federation and 
the University of Queensland, Australia, suggests 
that cervical cancer is the second most common 
cancer among women and the most common cause 
of cancer deaths in women, over 300 per year. 
8. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 
is a State party to the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women and has endorsed the Programme of Action 
of the International Conference on Population and 
Development. The family law and the public health 
law help to ensure equality and equity for women. 
Despite commitment at the policy level, a 
comprehensive gender assessment has not yet been 
conducted. 
II. Past cooperation and lessons learned
9. UNFPA assistance to the Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea began in 1985. Since then, 
UNFPA has supported four country programmes 
and annual programmes (2004-2006). The 
programmes focused on maternal and neonatal 
health, family planning, and population and 
development. 
10. Guided by the United Nations Strategic 
Framework, 2007-2010, and the national 
reproductive health strategy, 2006-2010, the fourth 
UNFPA country programme, 2007-2010, helped to: 
(a) develop national emergency obstetric and 
neonatal care training manuals for pre-service and 
in-service training; (b) support emergency obstetric 
and neonatal care services (including essential 
medical supplies and training) in four provinces, 
covering 11 county hospitals and 273 village 
clinics; (c) ensure an uninterrupted, nationwide 
supply of two essential reproductive health drugs to 
reduce maternal mortality; (d) strengthen the 
national logistics capacity, using the national 
logistics management information system 
established in the central medical warehouse and in 
three provincial medical warehouses; (e) support 
studies on reproductive tract infections and cervical 
cancer; (f) strengthen the capacity of the Central 
Bureau of Statistics to conduct surveys and the 
2008 population and housing census; and (g) provide emergency reproductive health services 
in 250 village clinics and 10 county hospitals in 
response to the 2007 floods. The 2006 programme 
supported a reproductive health survey to establish 
a baseline for the subsequent country programme. 
UNFPA will conduct an end-line reproductive 
health survey in 2010. 
11. Lessons learned during the previous country 
programme indicate the need to: (a) consolidate 
capacity-building at the central level while seeking 
funds to scale up essential emergency obstetrical 
and neonatal care services at the subnational levels, 
where needs are most pressing; (b) ensure that 
quality standards are applied to reproductive health 
services, and that adherence to such standards is 
monitored; (c) ensure that high-quality, 
comprehensive reproductive health services are 
replicated; (d) promote joint activities and seek 
opportunities for joint programming with other 
United Nations organizations, to avoid duplication 
of efforts and to increase impact; (e) strengthen the 
capacity of national institutions to analyse and 
utilize survey and census results for planning and 
policy formulation; and (f) continue to support the 
joint contingency plan for natural disasters and to 
ensure the availability of emergency reproductive 
health kits. 
III. Proposed programme
12. The proposed country programme will 
support the national goal of restoring the quality of 
life of the people to the level achieved before the 
economic and humanitarian difficulties of the mid1990s. The programme contributes to the 
achievement of the United Nations Strategic 
Framework, 2011-2015, and its three priority areas: 
(a) social development; (b) partnership for 
knowledge and development management; and 
(c) climate change and environment. The 
programme is harmonized with the programme 
cycles of UNDP and UNICEF. 
13. Building on the results achieved and lessons 
learned the programme will be carried out at the 
national level to: (a) develop capacity in the use of 
population data for national planning; (b) establish 
a national policy, guidelines and standards for 
reproductive health services; and (c) scale up 
essential and basic reproductive health services 
through cost-effective interventions. At the grassroots level, the programme will seek to enhance the 
quality of reproductive health services and to 
respond to reproductive health emergency 
situations in programme areas. 
14. The programme includes two components: 
(a) reproductive health and rights; and 
(b) population and development. Gender issues will 
be mainstreamed in both programme components. 
The reproductive health and rights component will 
focus on the quality of reproductive health services. 
The population and development component will 
support the utilization of gender-disaggregated data 
and research on population and development. 
15. UNFPA and the Government will collaborate 
with other United Nations organizations to monitor 
the Millennium Development Goals, provide 
maternal and child health services, and conduct 
joint planning and monitoring. 
Reproductive health and rights component
16. This component has one outcome to be 
achieved by 2015: increased utilization of essential, 
high-quality reproductive health information and 
services by women and men, as well as neonatal 
care. It contributes to two priority areas of the 
United Nations Strategic Framework: social 
development, and climate change and environment. 
Two outputs will be achieved under the 
reproductive health and rights outcome. 
17. Output 1: Improved availability of and access 
to essential, high-quality reproductive health 
information, counselling and services, including the 
prevention and treatment of reproductive tract 
infections and screening for cervical cancer, in 
programme areas. The strategies to achieve this 
output include: (a) advocating the formulation of 
national reproductive health policies, guidelines 
and standards; (b) strengthening the capacity of the 
Ministry of Public Health to implement and 
monitor these policies, guidelines and standards; 
and (c) enhancing the capacity of service providers 
in 11 counties assisted in the previous country 
programme in order to provide high-quality, 
comprehensive reproductive health services and to 
ensure the sustainability of these services. 
18. At the national level, the programme will, in 
collaboration with United Nations organizations: 
(a) support the implementation and monitoring of the national reproductive health strategy, 2011-
2015; (b) ensure that reproductive health indicators 
are integrated into the national health management 
information system; (c) formulate national quality 
standards for antenatal and post-natal care, a 
national policy and guidelines on preventing and 
treating reproductive tract infections, and national 
family planning eligibility criteria; and 
(d) formulate, implement and monitor a national 
cervical cancer screening policy. 
19. In 11 county hospitals and 273 village clinics 
in four provinces, the programme will: (a) conduct 
refresher training for health service providers on 
emergency obstetric and neonatal care; (b) conduct 
training for service providers, based on national 
quality standards for antenatal and post-natal care, 
national eligibility criteria for family planning, and 
the national policy and guidelines on preventing 
reproductive tract infections; (c) update essential 
reproductive health equipment and supplies for 
comprehensive reproductive health services, 
including modern contraceptives and supplies to 
treat reproductive tract infections; (d) conduct 
training in behavioural change communication for 
reproductive health, targeting families and service 
providers; and (e) conduct client-oriented 
supervision and monitoring. 
20. Output 2: Improved access to essential 
reproductive health commodities to reduce the 
maternal mortality ratio in programme areas. The 
strategies to achieve this output are: (a) scaling up 
the minimum reproductive health service package, 
focusing on basic emergency obstetric and neonatal 
care throughout the country and in programme 
areas most in need; and (b) enhancing the capacity 
of managers in provincial and county health 
bureaux and hospitals to supervise and monitor the 
use of reproductive health commodities. 
21. At the national level, the programme will: 
(a) continue to seek additional funding to provide 
two essential reproductive health drugs, oxytocin 
and magnesium sulphate, nationwide; 
(b) implement a logistics management information 
system at the central medical warehouse and at 10 
provincial medical warehouses; (c) forecast 
national needs for essential reproductive health 
drugs; (d) conduct overseas and local training of 
health bureau and hospital managers at the 
provincial and county levels on reproductive health 
commodity management; and (d) conduct field 
monitoring and supervision at hospitals. 
22. In selected counties, the programme will: 
(a) seek additional funding to provide basic 
emergency obstetric and neonatal care supplies to 
hospitals and clinics; (b) conduct basic emergency 
obstetric and neonatal care training; and 
(c) distribute information, education and 
communication materials on emergency obstetric 
and neonatal care. 
23. The programme will continue to support joint 
United Nations planning for emergency 
preparedness to stock emergency reproductive 
health commodities in the central medical 
warehouse and in provincial medical warehouses. 
Population and development component
24. The outcome of this component is: enhanced 
utilization of sex-disaggregated population data and 
research related to population and development for 
planning and policy formulation, including 
monitoring the Millennium Development Goals, by 
line ministries and national institutions. It 
contributes to two priority areas of the United 
Nations Strategy Framework, namely: 
(a) partnership for knowledge and development 
management; and (b) climate change and 
environment. Two outputs will contribute to the 
population and development outcome. 
25. Output 1: Strengthened capacity of academic 
institutions to teach and to undertake research on 
the linkages between population and social
development. The strategy to achieve this output is 
to strengthen the academic programme in 
demography at Kim Il Sung University to ensure 
that there will be a sufficient number of graduates 
in the field of population who understand the 
linkages between population and social 
development. 
26. The programme will: (a) provide fellowships 
to university professors to pursue graduate degrees 
in demography and population-related fields; 
(b) provide research and teaching tools, particularly 
academic textbooks, journals and software to the 
demography department of the university, to 
enhance the capacity of academic personnel and 
students to undertake research; and (c) invite 
international demographic experts as guest lecturers to provide state-of-the-art knowledge on 
the linkages between population, socio-economic 
development and the environment to university 
teachers. 
27. Output 2: Enhanced capacity of line 
ministries in evidence-based national planning, 
policy formulation and the monitoring of national 
development goals, including the Millennium 
Development Goals. The strategies to achieve this 
output include: (a) advocating, among 
policymakers in line ministries, the utilization of 
gender-disaggregated population data for policy 
formulation; and (b) strengthening the national 
capacity to monitor the Millennium Development 
Goals. 
28. The programme will: (a) train policymakers 
in key ministries of the Government, including the 
State Planning Commission, on integrating 
population factors into national plans and 
programmes; (b) conduct research utilizing 2008 
population census data and other data needed to 
formulate strategies on adapting to climate change; 
(c) develop and maintain a spatial database on 
population; (d) support an inter-agency group to 
evaluate estimates of Millennium Development 
Goal indicators; (e) conduct primary data collection 
to address data gaps to monitor and report on 
progress in achieving the Millennium Development 
Goals, specifically Goal 3 on gender equality and 
women’s empowerment and Goal 5 on improving 
maternal health; and (f) support the formulation of 
the country report on the achievements of the 
Millennium Development Goals by 2015. 
IV. Programme management, monitoring 
and evaluation
29. The national coordinating committee for 
UNFPA will coordinate the proposed programme. 
UNFPA will implement the programme in 
collaboration with the State Planning Commission, 
the Ministry of Public Health, other line ministries, 
national non-governmental organizations and 
research institutions. 
30. UNFPA will monitor and evaluate programme 
implementation using a results-based approach, in 
accordance with established UNFPA guidelines and 
procedures, within the context of the United 
Nations Strategic Framework. The national 
coordinating committee, collaborating 
organizations and the UNFPA country office will 
monitor activities through field visits, interviews 
and the use of qualitative and quantitative 
indicators. The programme will support 
reproductive health surveys in 2013 and 2015, 
which will serve as inputs for midterm and end-line 
studies. UNFPA will conduct quarterly and annual 
programme reviews, a midterm review and, 
towards the end of the programme, an independent 
evaluation. 
31. In accordance with the approved 
country office typology, the UNFPA office in 
Pyongyang consists of a non-resident UNFPA 
country director based in Beijing, China, an 
international programme coordinator, an 
international operations manager, a national 
programme officer, a national project 
professional, and support staff. UNFPA will 
earmark programme funds for two shared 
support staff posts in the UNFPA China office 
to provide logistics and programme support for 
the country programme in the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea. The UNFPA China 
office and the UNFPA regional office based in 
Bangkok, Thailand, will mobilize the technical 
support needed for programme implementation 
and humanitarian assistance. RESULTS AND RESOURCES FRAMEWORK FOR THE DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE’S R
National priority: improve the quality of life of the population United Nations strategic outcome: (a) improved access to and utilization of essential, high-quality health services at the primary and children; and (b) improved national capacity in disaster management and strategies for adapting to and mitigating climate chaProgramme component 
Country programme outcomes, indicators, baselines and targets 
Country programme outputs, indicators, baselines and targets 
Reproductive health and rights 
Outcome: increased utilization of essential, high-quality reproductive health information and services by women and men, as well as neonatal careOutcome indicators: 
• National reproductive health 
strategy is updated and implemented 
• National policy on cervical cancer 
is developed and implemented 
• National policy on reproductive 
tract infection is developed and implemented 
• Unmet need for modern 
contraceptive methods is reduced 
• Maternal mortality ratio is further 
reduced 
Output 1: Improved availability of and access to essential, highquality reproductive health information, counselling and 
services, including the prevention and treatment of reproductive tract infections and screening for cervical cancer, in programme areas Output indicators: 
• Percentage of ri (village) clinics in programme areas 
prepared (with adequate stocks and trained providers) to provide at least two modern family planning methods 
• Percentage of clients with reproductive tract infections 
who are appropriately diagnosed, treated and counselled 
• Percentage of doctors and midwives in targeted areas 
providing antenatal care based on national quality standards 
• Number of county hospitals with the capacity (in terms of 
equipment and trained providers) to conduct visual inspections using acetic acid to detect cervical cancer 
• Percentage of deliveries in county hospitals and village 
clinics that manage third-stage labour 
Output 2: Improved access to essential reproductive health 
commodities to reduce the maternal mortality ratio in programme areas Output indicators: 
• Functioning logistics management information system in 
the central medical warehouse and in 10 provincial medical warehouses 
• Number of county hospitals and village clinics in 
geographical areas affected by the 2007 floods that have no stock-outs of emergency obstetric drugs ational priority: (a) improve the quality of life of the population; and (b) strengthen knowledge capacity-building for the sustain
mprovement of people’s living standards
nited Nations strategic outcome: (a) strengthened human resource capacity in national institutions for strategic planning and th
mproved national capacity in disaster management and strategies for adapting to and mitigating climate change
rogramme 
omponent 
Country programme outcomes, indicators, baselines and targets 
Country programme outputs, indicators, baselines and targets 
opulation and 
evelopment 
Outcome: Enhanced utilization of 
sex-disaggregated population data and research related to population and development for planning and policy formulation, including monitoring the Millennium Development Goals, by line ministries and national institutions Outcome indicators: 
• National plans and policies 
that include population dynamics, reproductive health and gender equality 
• Resources mobilized for 
population activities 
Output 1: Strengthened capacity of academic institutions to teach and to undertake research on the linkages between population and social development Output indicators: 
• Number of students who graduate with a university degree on 
population studies 
• Number of trainees with a master’s degree on population 
studies 
Output 2: Enhanced capacity of line ministries in evidence-based 
national planning, policy formulation and the monitoring of national development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals Output indicators: 
• Number of studies on the relationships between population, the 
environment and climate change 
• Annual report from the national surveillance system on 
maternal and infant mortality 
• Millennium Development Goal country report published • Spatial database system established and functional 
_____________________________ 