File Name: KWT-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Kuwait
Country Code: KWT
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 3-6 February 2020
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2024
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
27 November 2019
Original: English
1920519X (E) 131219
First regular session 2020
3-6 February 2020, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the State of Kuwait
(2020-2024)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for the State of Kuwait (2020-2024) ..................................... 9I. Programme rationale
1.The State of Kuwait is a high-income country with a per capita gross domestic product (GDP) of 
$33,538 in 2018.
1 Kuwait has a total population of 4.13 million,2 of whom approximately 30 per cent
are Kuwaiti nationals and the remainder are expatriates.3 The oil and gas sectors account for 90 per cent
of total revenue and half of GDP. With surging oil prices, the Kuwait economy experienced high levels 
of economic growth with per capita income standing at $31,430 in 2017.
4 Kuwait succeeded in 
converting its resource wealth into a high standard of living for its people. Between 1990 and 2017, its 
Human Development Index value increased by 12.6 per cent to 0.803, putting the country in the “very 
high human development” category and positioning it at 56 of 189 countries and territories.5
2.The country’s long-term development priorities are set forth in New Kuwait “Vision 2035” and the 
Sustainable Development Goal-based Kuwait National Development Plan (KNDP), the latter prepared 
with UNDP support.6 The KNDP (2020–2025) aims to promote the transformation of Kuwait into a 
regional financial hub through seven key pillars: (a) effective public administration; (b) economic 
diversification; (c) modern infrastructure; (d) sustainable living environment; (e) high-quality health 
care; (f) creative human capital; and (g) enhanced global positioning. 
3.The Government is committed to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals through 
implementation of the KNDP. According to the country’s voluntary national review,
7 progress has been 
made for most of the Goals but is lagging for industry/innovation (Goal 9), responsible consumption and 
production (Goal 12), climate (Goal 13) and life under water (Goal 14). Kuwait has complete data only 
for Goal 1, affecting its ability to comprehensively track progress. With overall guidance from the 
Government, represented by the General Secretariat of the Supreme Council for Planning and 
Development (GSSCPD), UNDP supported the establishment of the National Observatory on 
Sustainable Development (NOSD) to track achievement of the Goals and an interministerial steering 
committee headed by the GSSCPD to guide preparation of the voluntary national review.
4.The key to achieving the goals of the KNDP will be the development of policies and strengthening of 
institutions to implement these policies, while also taking steps to create the policy and regulatory 
environment which stimulates public-private partnerships. 
5.The country’s natural resource-based economy presents two interrelated challenges: the need to 
diversify the economy to broaden the revenue base and mitigate the impact of potential external shocks;
and managing public expenditures at sustainable levels. The drop in oil prices in 2014 led to a fiscal 
deficit in 2015-2016 of about 15 per cent of GDP, which will require $116 billion over the next six years 
to finance.8 Kuwait has been able to absorb such shocks through domestic and international bond issues 
and drawdowns from its General Reserve Fund.9 However, the economy could be affected at a time of 
external shocks by policies which virtually guarantee public sector employment and provide generous 
subsidies and cash transfers to citizens. These benefits accounted for more than 50 per cent of the total 
budget in 2016-2017,10 which puts pressure on resources available for public services and investments 
linked to the KNDP and Sustainable Development Goals. Over 70 per cent of Kuwaiti citizens are under 
age 34 which, in the absence of reform, will increase fiscal pressures,11 and less than 15 per cent of 
 
1 World Bank, Trading Economics (https://tradingeconomics.com/kuwait/gdp-per-capita)
2
Ibid.
3 Kuwait Public Authority for Civil Information (http://stat.paci.gov.kw/englishreports/#DataTabPlace:PieChartNat), June 2018. 
4 World Bank, Country Profile, gross national income per capita based on purchasing power parity (PPP), Sept 2017. See also 
http://www.forbes.com/places/kuwait/
5 UNDP, Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update. 
6 Government of Kuwait, Vision 2035, October 2017. 
7 Government of Kuwait, draft voluntary national review on implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
8
International Monetary Fund, Article IV Consultation.
9 The General Reserve Fund is part of the Kuwait sovereign wealth fund whose total assets are estimated at close to $600 billion in 2016. 
10 Tri-International Consulting Group (TICG), Increasing Private Sector Employment of Nationals in the GCC, 2017.
11 United Nations Country Team (UNCT) Kuwait
Kuwait Common Country AssessmentMay 2018nationals entering the labour market over the next five years are expected to be absorbed by the private 
sector.12
6.While overall unemployment is low (2.1 per cent in 2018),
13 significant labour market reforms will be 
necessary to address imbalances between public and private sector employment. Approximately 80 per 
cent of Kuwaiti nationals in the workforce are employed by the public sector. Kuwaiti nationals make 
up only 5 per cent of the private sector workforce,14 with the remainder comprised of expatriates. The 
root causes for this imbalance include the fact that public sector work is guaranteed for nationals and 
better paid, expatriate workers tend to engage in manual labour and the service industry, and workers’ 
skills often are not aligned with the needs of the private sector.15
7. Public sector employment and compensation are not necessarily effectively linked with performance 
management. The country stands at the forty-ninth percentile for government effectiveness16 and ranks 
41 of 193 Member States on the United Nations e-Government Development Index.
17 This contributes 
to inefficiencies and gaps in government policy coordination, implementation and responsiveness. The 
current state of transparency, accountability and oversight mechanisms has raised concerns of potential 
corruption across the branches of government and public enterprises.18 Kuwait is ranked 78 of 180 
countries in the Transparency International 2018 Corruption Perceptions Index, up from 85 in 2017.
19
The Government has established a national anti-corruption authority and strengthened the anticorruption policy framework. 
8.The status of women highlights a disconnect between education and employment, as significantly 
more women than men complete secondary and tertiary education. On the World Economic Forum 2018 
Global Gender Gap Index, Kuwait is ranked 74 of 149 countries for the educational attainment of women 
and 127 of 149 for women’s economic participation and opportunity.20 In 2005, the National Assembly
passed the bill for women’s suffrage and the country has demonstrated progress in narrowing gender 
gaps among professional and technical workers. Yet, Kuwait is ranked 146 of 149 for women’s political 
empowerment,
21 largely due to their underrepresentation in leadership; only 16 per cent of legislators, 
senior officials and managers are women.22 Cultural traditions and structural barriers continue to impede 
more rapid progress and existing laws and policies have not been able to adequately address the needs 
of women subjected to violence.23
9.Rapid urbanization and waste generation have created additional challenges that are compounded by 
climate change. Temperature rise above the global average has been accompanied by increased 
frequency of dust storms and changing rainfall patterns.24 This puts upward pressure on energy 
consumption, which is one of the highest per capita rates globally, although Kuwait is well positioned 
to pursue clean energies. Higher industrial demand for water could pose challenges to balancing water 
supply and demand, which is one of the highest per capita rates in the world.
25 To address these issues, 
UNDP has helped to build capacities in energy-related analysis and forecasting to produce the Kuwait 
Energy Outlook report, which identified key data and policy gaps. Kuwait also has one of the world’s 
 
12 International Monetary Fund, Country Report No. 18/21, January 2018.
13 World Bank https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.ZS)
14 Tri-International Consulting Group (TICG), Increasing Private Sector Employment of Nationals in the GCC, 2017 (table page 3).
15 Ibid.
16 World Bank, World Governance Indicators, 2018. https://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/Home/Reports
17 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations e-Government Survey 2018. 
18 Ibid. Kuwait’s National Assembly, however, enjoys relative independence and constitutional oversight powers, though this is limited to 
the actions of the Prime Minister and ministers.
19 Kuwait Times https://news.kuwaittimes.net/website/kuwait-improves-seven-ranks-in-corruption-index/
20 World Economic Forum, The Global Gender Gap Report 2018. (http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2018.pdf) 
21 Ibid (page 149) 
22 World Economic Forum, The Global Gender Gap Report 2015.
23 UNDP Kuwait. Project document: support to the State of Kuwait in the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 5 on gender 
equality, 2017.
24 UNCT Kuwait, 2018.
25 Per capita energy consumption is 8.9 tons of oil (vs. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average of 4.1. source: 
UNDP Kuwait Energy Outlook 2019), per capita water consumption is 478 litres/day (source: Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Stat: Water 
Statistics Report in GCC Countries highest per capita waste generation rates, yet lacks an integrated approach to waste management, leaving 
recycling business opportunities untapped. In the meantime, urban development trends and continued 
prominence of the extractive sector threaten the country’s unique ecosystems and biodiversity.
26
10. Kuwait is ranked 46 of 141 countries for overall global competitiveness and ranked 108 for 
innovation capability by the World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Index.
27 To support 
economic and energy diversification and public administration reforms, the civil service will require the 
capacities to develop and implement innovative policies in partnerships with the private sector and civil 
society. The Government has established the Kuwait Policy Appraisal Lab (innovation unit) as part of 
the Kuwait Public Policy Centre (KPPC). Continued support is required for its institutional capacity 
development to continue evidence-based policy analysis and further application of innovations for 
effective implementation of policies. 
11. In 2014 the Secretary-General recognized the humanitarian leadership of His Highness the Amir of 
Kuwait. The Government has been increasing its leadership role in the region and beyond to support 
crisis prevention, peacebuilding and stabilization efforts in other countries. Kuwait has successfully 
played the role of mediator within the Gulf Cooperation Council and hosted mediation efforts between 
the parties to the conflict in Yemen. Kuwait has advanced its leadership role in providing humanitarian
support, including the hosting of international pledging conferences for the Syrian crisis and for Iraq. 
Kuwait also contributes 2 per cent of its GDP to official development assistance.28 The Government is 
exploring ways to build on this legacy and expand the country’s role and prominence as a strategic donor 
to advance the sustainable development agenda abroad.
12.According to an independent evaluation of the previous country programme, UNDP has become a 
key partner in providing transparent project implementation support for addressing a range of 
development priorities,
29 including for energy efficiency and environment (with the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP)), drug prevention and anti-corruption (with the United Nations Office 
on Drugs and Crime), empowerment of youth (with the United Nations Population Fund) and traffic 
strategy and automation. UNDP supported the digital strategy for inclusion for persons with 
disabilities,
30 which requires further support for implementation in partnership with the private sector. 
UNDP supported the establishment of the KPPC to improve evidence-based policymaking processes, 
continued to develop pathways for increased women’s participation and prepared the ground for a future 
strategy to address violence against women (with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the 
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women)).
13. The evaluation highlighted three key recommendations: (a) provide more strategic support in a 
high-income country context through increased policy advocacy and application of innovation for 
development impact; (b) employ more nimble and responsive portfolio/project development in support 
of the KNDP; and (c) maximize the convening role of UNDP to expand partnerships with civil society, 
academia and the private sector for development dialogue and implementation of solutions. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
14. The Government has exhibited strong national ownership of UNDP programming. In consultations 
about the new country programme, the Government has indicated its continued commitment to work 
closely with UNDP and build on collaboration begun under the previous programme towards the 
objectives of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. As a high-income country, Kuwait 
increasingly looks to its international partners for cutting-edge policy advice, advocacy and partnerships. 
The new country programme responds to this call and will focus on strengthening policy processes and 
advocacy, institutional capacities, innovation, knowledge transfer, expanded engagement with civil 
 
26 UNDP Kuwait, Technical Support Mission Report: Energy and Environment, May 2019.
27 World Economic Forum, The Global Competitiveness Report 2019. 
28 $135.2 billion in 2014. Source: Independent Evaluation Office, UNDP, Independent Country Programme Evaluation – Kuwait, August 
2018.
29 Ibid.
30 UNDP
Disability-Inclusive Development in UNDP2018society and the private sector, and support to the country’s regional and global leadership initiatives. The 
country programme is aligned to the KNDP, which is based on the Sustainable Development Goals, and 
will adopt an integrated programmatic approach to improve the inter-connectedness of interventions. 
15. This country programme will contribute primarily to the three outcomes of the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), 2020-2025, specifically outcome 1
(public administration and economy), outcome 2 (living environment) and outcome 3 (international 
positioning). The country programme will also contribute to outcome 2 (accelerate structural 
transformations for sustainable development) and employ signature solutions 2, 4, 5 and 6 of the UNDP 
Strategic Plan, 2018-2021.31
16. Particular emphasis will be placed on increased South-South and triangular cooperation between 
entities in Kuwait and other programme countries. Collaboration with civil society and the private sector 
will emphasize increasing their role as partners in development solutions for achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals. Central to all UNDP policy work will be mainstreaming the principle
of “leaving no one behind” into national policy design mechanisms by supporting the collection of
disaggregated data and application of innovations to accelerate efficiency in achieving the Goals. 
Supporting more effective public administration 
17. This priority area will strengthen institutional capacities for improved evidence-based policymaking 
across government institutions in general (Goal 16), public administration reform and anti-corruption 
(Goal 16), women’s and youth empowerment (Goals 5, 10), persons with disabilities (Goal 10), and 
environmental, urban, and energy sustainability (Goals 7, 11, 13). 
18. UNDP will continue to strengthen the institutional capacities of the KPPC for producing evidencebased policy briefs to inform the implementation of the KNDP; expanding public engagement in 
policymaking processes; improving collaboration across government institutions to inform crosssectoral policies; brokering partnerships with internationally reputed academia to ensure high-quality 
knowledge management; and strengthening the link between research findings and KNDP 
objectives/reforms. The KPPC will experiment with sector-specific and system-wide innovations in 
pursuit of custom solutions for its economic and public administration transformation. This will include 
providing institutional and technical capacity-building support to the NOSD to address data gaps (in 
cooperation with the Central Statistical Bureau (CSB) as required) in monitoring progress under the 
KNDP and the Goals; utilization of big data and reporting; prototyping policy innovations and 
establishing interinstitutional linkages for greater cross-sectoral integration; and a feasibility study on 
practical applications of artificial intelligence in pursuit of development solutions. The work will be 
informed by behavioural insight research to be undertaken by the Kuwait Policy Appraisal Lab (the 
KPPC innovation unit) in cooperation with regional experts in behavioural economics. 
19. To support the Government in implementing the KNDP, UNDP will also support institutional 
capacities to implement policies and strategies. First, UNDP will support the establishment of a technical 
support office within the GSSCPD to provide project management and implementation support and 
project-related capacity development training for relevant government entities. Secondly, UNDP will 
contribute to supporting the development and implementation of national policies and strategies in line 
with the KNDP. This includes a national integrity and anti-corruption strategy; a national strategy for 
persons with disabilities with the Public Authority for the Disabled to increase employment of persons 
with disabilities; and a national strategy to combat violence against women. To advance women’s 
empowerment, UNDP will work with the Women’s Research and Study Centre on increasing women’s 
political participation and economic empowerment; strengthen the capacity of the CSB, upon their 
request, to produce disaggregated data; and, in close partnership with UN-Women, scale up the Gender 
Seal initiative for public and private sector entities to integrate gender equality considerations in their 
institutional/corporate structures. 
 
31 https://www
undporg/content/undp/en/home/six-signature-solutionshtml20. In partnership with the GSSCPD, UNDP support for institutional capacity development will focus 
on addressing some of the underlying and root causes of challenges to public administration. This 
includes strengthening performance management systems to promote a more merit-based system; 
supporting improved strategic planning processes to ensure more coherent KNDP project design and 
screening; project implementation support; and coordination towards the objectives of the KNDP and 
2030 Agenda. 
21. Through partnerships with the GSSCPD, KPPC, other national institutions and the private sector,
UNDP will provide integrated advisory support for the Government’s multisectoral coordination role. 
UNDP will support the KPPC, NOSD and the Centre for Knowledge Economy to help improve national 
policymaking capacities and processes regarding data, analysis, cross-sectoral integration, coordination 
and implementation, particularly in pursuit of the objectives of the KNDP and the Sustainable 
Development Goals, together with other United Nations agencies. 
Supporting the global positioning of Kuwait
22. UNDP will help to build institutional capacities and polices, while facilitating national and 
international partnerships, for Kuwait to leverage its national wealth and international engagement as a 
humanitarian leader. UNDP will support Kuwait in advancing the humanitarian, development and
peacebuilding nexus and stabilization support beyond its borders (Goal 17) together with UNHCR. Key 
initiatives utilizing the global UNDP networks, anchored in its field presence, will form the core of 
partnerships between UNDP and Kuwait to deliver sustained results on the ground. First, UNDP will 
partner with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Kuwaiti non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and 
foundations active in supporting other countries to share good practices and lessons learned in the area 
of conflict prevention, which in turn will contribute to informed decision-making by Kuwaiti donor 
entities for replication, scale-up and greater impact. This will be accompanied by establishment of a 
centre to provide real-time and demand-based analysis related to conflict prevention and resolution in 
consultation with the United Nations Department of Political and Peacekeeping Affairs (DPPA) in 
support of the Government’s efforts to champion humanitarian leadership.
23. Secondly, UNDP will support the Government’s communications strategy to inform the public 
about the vision for the enhanced international role of Kuwait and the impact of its assistance to other 
countries. This will be accompanied by capacity-building support for the collection of relevant data on 
the external assistance provided by Kuwait, and ensuring that this data is updated and available to 
relevant stakeholders. Thirdly, UNDP will help to enhance recognition of Kuwait as a pioneer of 
renewable energy and low-carbon development as part of its strategy to increase the share of renewable 
energy of the total energy generating capacity to 15 per cent by 2030 (Goal 7) by promoting innovative 
public-private partnerships to promote energy efficiency. UNDP will help Kuwait to showcase its 
experiences in developing low-carbon solutions through investments in renewable energy systems in
other countries, in part through cooperation with the One Planet Sovereign Wealth Fund Working Group, 
whose members32 scale up investments in companies that factor climate risks into their corporate 
strategies.
24. The GSSCPD and UNDP will continue to invest in the next generation of Kuwaiti leaders in
international organizations by scaling up the Junior Professional Officer (JPO) project. The country 
office will continue to work with the UNDP JPO service centre, United Nations Secretariat and other 
entities to give young Kuwaiti professionals the opportunity to serve the United Nations system.
Partnerships with the private sector for sustainable energy and environment
25. UNDP will help to build the national capacities required to develop the data infrastructure and 
policies to support clean energy (Goals 7 and 9).To lay the foundations for greater diversification of the 
Kuwaiti economy and energy supply and for long-term stability, UNDP, in cooperation with GSSCPD, 
the Higher Council for Environment, Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research and NOSD, will fill energy 
data gaps building on the success of the Kuwait Energy Outlook initiative. To promote the innovations 
 
32 Abu Dhabi
New ZealandNorwayQatar and Saudi Arabianecessary to move Kuwait to a more low-carbon economy, UNDP support raising public awareness and
bring public and private actors together to exchange and incubate new ideas and innovative solutions for 
sustainable energy investment with a potential for scaling-up. It aims to minimize financing costs, reduce 
energy consumption and develop new business opportunities in an expanding sustainable energy sector. 
26. UNDP will partner with the private sector and NGOs on creative advocacy and communication 
efforts to raise environmental awareness and promote actions to achieve the national targets for 
Sustainable Development Goals 7, 11, 12, 13 and 14 aligned with the United Nations Communication 
Strategy. This involves inter alia addressing the policy gaps which have been highlighted by KPPC 
research papers; using behavioural science to raise the awareness of the public and business of recycling
and environmental protection; and making Kuwaiti cities greener. For example, UNDP will help to 
develop a recycling strategy, leveraging the interest of private companies.
III. Programme and risk management
27. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned 
to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and 
headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme 
and operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework. The programme will be 
nationally executed. UNDP support to the national execution modality will be continued as an added 
value of this programme to lessen the operational burden on government counterparts. The harmonized 
approach to cash transfers may be used if a project involves advance payment to national entities. As per 
Executive Board decision 2013/9, cost definitions and classifications for programme and development 
effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
28. UNDP will adopt a portfolio approach to managing the country programme which will shorten 
timelines for the design and approval of interventions. This will help to ensure that appropriate valueadded linkages are made across areas of intervention for programmatic coherence. UNDP will leverage 
recent changes to corporate policies to streamline recruitment and procurement processes to provide 
responsive and timely support on policy advocacy and innovation initiatives. The demand-driven nature 
of the UNDP relationship with the Government of Kuwait in a net contributor country context means 
that UNDP will retain programmatic and operational flexibility to respond to emerging opportunities.
29. The successful implementation of this country programme will require the management and 
mitigation of several potential risks. The first is the risk of a further drop in oil prices which may pose a 
challenge to implementation of the KNDP. This might also delay progress in addressing women’s 
labour-force participation due to reduced political will for reform. The second potential risk is the limited 
awareness on the part of the general public of environment and energy issues. UNDP will utilize 
behavioural insights to design tailored public awareness activities while making an argument, based on 
data, that sustainable energy makes economic sense. UNDP will also strengthen the Government’s 
capacities for advance planning by utilizing macroeconomic modelling established by the KPPC. 
30. An internal risk to UNDP is the potential unavailability of the technical and substantive expertise to 
necessary to ensure that UNDP policy advisory services meet the needs of Kuwait as a high-income 
country. This will be mitigated by increased involvement of expertise sourced from the UNDP regional 
and global policy networks (especially related to women’s economic empowerment) in designing UNDP 
interventions and advocacy efforts. Enhanced and empowered local staff capacity would also contribute 
to the shift towards more balanced support across project planning and implementation, as well as timely 
provision of policy advocacy/innovation service lines. Establishment of a technical support office at 
GSSCPD will help to ensure timely delivery of projects under the KNDP with a capacity development 
principle at a core.IV. Monitoring and evaluation
31. Monitoring and reporting of the country programme will be done in a more integrated fashion within 
the broader context of United Nations support to Kuwait. UNDP will ensure that monitoring and 
evaluation frameworks are aligned with programme priorities, including strengthening the capacities of 
implementing partners in data collection and usage. UNDP will develop results frameworks aligned with 
the KNDP and UNDP Strategic Plan. 
32. Outcome-level results groups for the UNSDCF will be utilized for monitoring progress under the 
country programme. The results groups will prepare multi-year workplans for each outcome in 
consultation with GSSCPD and engage partners in identifying key implementation issues and emerging 
opportunities, undertake capacity assessments for achievement of results, and monitor outputs and their 
contributions towards the outcomes of the country programme, UNSDCF and KNDP.
33. UNDP will work with the GSSCPD, NOSD, CSB and KPCC to strengthen capacities for the 
collection, dissemination and use of data and statistics. The emphasis will be on data disaggregation for 
monitoring impacts on target groups, prioritizing youth, women and persons with disabilities. The 
country office will ensure consistent use of the UNDP gender marker to monitor expenditures and 
improve gender-based planning and decision-making. UNDP social and environmental standards will be 
rigorously applied to ensure that development remains inclusive, human rights-based and 
environmentally sustainable.
34. To facilitate evidence-based programme design and support the United Nations-wide engagement 
to broaden the debate on the national development agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals, a 
multi-year research agenda will produce policy briefs, discussion papers and periodic reports, including 
the Kuwait Energy Outlook and national Sustainable Development Goal and human development 
reports, on themes related to economic and public administration transformation. 
35.In order to increase the transparency, visibility and impact of the partnerships between UNDP and
the State of Kuwait. UNDP will intensify efforts to communicate its achievements and results to the 
general public inside Kuwait and beyond through traditional and non-traditional media with real-life 
stories, innovative and user-friendly formats and social media tools to reach diverse audiences.Annex. Results and resources framework for the State of Kuwait (2020-2024)
 
33 Baselines and targets will be included upon the Government of Kuwait approval of the UNSDCF.
34 Budget allocations will be included upon the Government of Kuwait approval of UNSDCF
Kuwait National Development Plan (KNDP) Goal: 
Effective Public Administration: Reform administrative and bureaucratic practices to reinforce transparency, accountability and efficiency in the government.
Sustainable Diversified Economy: Develop a prosperous and diversified economy to reduce the country’s dependence on oil export revenues.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: By 2023, there is a policy and regulatory environment for private-sector-led economic diversification that is transparent and promotes fairness and 
technological innovation
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
UNSDCF outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)33
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme 
outputs (including indicators, 
baselines targets)
Major partners / partnerships
frameworks
Indicative resources by 
outcome ($)34
Indicator: Existence of new/revised 
regulations to facilitate key aspects of 
business regulations and enforcement 
(e.g. starting a business, construction 
permits, credit access)
Baseline:
Target:
Indicator: N
o. New micro-, small and 
medium-sized enterprises registered 
(non-hydrocarbon sectors)
Baseline: 
Target:
Indicator: Manufacturing value added 
(as proportion of GDP and per capita) 
(Goal 9.2.1) – or - % Medium and 
High-tech industry value added in total 
value added (targeted sectors) (Goal
9.b.1) 
Baseline: 
Target:
Indicator: Firms with female 
participation in leadership (% of firms) 
(World Bank)
World Economic Forum, Transparency of 
government policymaking (annual) 
Output 1.1: Effective public 
institutions enabled to develop 
evidence-based policies and systems 
that respond to the needs of the 
people.
Indicator 1.1.1: Number of policy 
papers for public discussions and 
implementation for KNDP. 
Baseline:10
Target: 20
Source: GSSCPD
Indicator 1.1.2: Number of KNDP 
pillars where behavioural insights is 
applied.
Baseline:0
Target: 5
Source: KPPC
Indicator 1.1.3: Number of full-time 
KPPC personnel 
Baseline: 2No
Target: 5
Source: UNDP
Government: 
» GSSCPD, Kuwait 
Environment Public 
Authority (KEPA), 
Kuwait Foundation for 
the Advancement of 
Sciences (KFAS), 
Kuwait Policy Appraisal 
Lab (KPAL), Public 
Authority for the Disabled 
(PADA), CSB, Ministries of
Finance; Commerce and 
Industry; Labour and Social 
Development, 
Civil Society/NGOs: 
» Kuwait Institute for 
Scientific Research (KISR), 
Private sector employers and 
workers organizations; 
Chambers of Commerce; 
NGOs 
FAO, ILO, IOM, 
UN-Habitat, UNODC, World 
Bank 
Regular $ 0
Other Baseline: 
Target
Indicator: 16.7.2 Proportion of 
population who believe decisionmaking is inclusive and responsive, by 
sex, age, disability and population 
group 
Baseline:
Target:
GSSCPD (annual) 
GSSCPD (biannual)
Output 1.2: Effective KNDP 
monitoring and reporting systems 
established. 
Indicator 1.2.1: Use of big data to
monitor KNDP
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Source: CSB
Indicator 1.2.2: KNDP reporting 
system in place and improved
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
Source: GSSCPD
Indicator 1.2.3: KNDP communication 
strategy in line with Sustainable 
Development Goals in place and 
implemented.
Baseline:0
Target: 1 (in place), 2 (Implemented)
Source: GSSCPD 
Indicator 1.2.4: Number of KNDP 
policies and strategies implemented 
with UNDP support. 
Baseline: 0
Target: 10
Source: GSSCPD and UNDP 
Indicator 1.2.5: Number of reports 
developed that track Sustainable 
Development Goal achievements
Baseline: 2
Target: 4
Source: National Observatory for 
Sustainable Development
Output 1.3: Government, CSOs and
private sector entities have improved 
capacities to enable sustainable 
development. 
Indicator 1.3.1: number of entities 
with performance reviews and improved institutional governance 
structure 
Baseline: 0
Target: 10
Source: GSSCPD 
Indicator 1.3.2: Functional GSSCPD 
Technical Support Office in place.
Baseline: No
Target: Yes (2020)
Source: GSSCPD
Indicator 1.3.3: Number of people 
with disabilities benefiting from 
UNDP-private sector partnerships 
Baseline: 0
Target: 250
Source: 
Indicator 1.3.4: Number of innovation 
initiatives for Sustainable Development 
Goals jointly implemented with the 
private sector and KFAS
Baseline: 0
Target: 8
Source: GSSCPD
Output 1.4: Public institutions’ 
capacities strengthened for improved 
talent management and performance 
measurement. 
Indicator 1.4.1: Government 
performance management strategy in 
place 
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
Source: UNDP
Indicator 1.4.2: National Integrity and 
Anti-corruption Strategy implemented.
Baseline: No 
Target: Yes
Source: GSSCPDWRSC (Annually)
KPPC (Annually) 
Indicator 1.4.3: National Strategy to 
Combat Violence against Women 
developed
Baseline: No
Target: Yes 
Source: Women’s Research and Study 
Centre (WRSC) 
Indicator 1.4.4: Number of private 
institutions that adopt the inclusion of 
persons with disabilities strategy
Baseline: 1
Target: 10
Source: PADA and UNDP
Output 1.5: Female leadership 
enhanced 
Indicator 1.5.1: % of female leaders in 
legislative, executive and judicial 
branches 
Baseline: 12% 
Target: 20% 
Source: WRSC
Indicator 1.5.2: % of female chief 
executive officers (CEOs) and deputy 
CEOs in the private sector 
Baseline: 15%
Target: 20%
Source: WRSC 
Output 1.6: National policymaking 
is developed and tested with the 
support of an Innovation Unit
Indicator 1.6.1: # of policies which 
are designed and implemented by 
applying behavioural insights of KPAL 
Baseline: 0
Target: 10
Source: KPPCKNDP GOAL: Global Positioning: Enhance Kuwait’s regional and global presence in spheres such as diplomacy, trade, culture and philanthropy.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #6: By 2023, the State of Kuwait is a major player in global bodies and international cooperation efforts
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Indicator: Net official development 
assistance (as % gross national income) 
(Goal 17.2.1)
Baseline: 
Target: 
Indicator: % Change foreign direct 
investment for Sustainable 
Development Goal-related initiatives in 
partner countries (Goal 17.3.1)
Baseline: 
Target: 
Indicator: Dollar value of financial 
and technical assistance (including 
through North-South, South-South and 
triangular cooperation) committed to 
developing countries (Goal 17.9.1)
Baseline:
Target:
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, GSSCPD, UNDP 
(Biannually) 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, GSSCPD and 
UNDP (Biannually)
Output 2.1: Communication for 
Kuwait’s development assistance to 
other countries enhanced 
Indicator 2.1.1: Knowledge 
platform/centre established and 
operational for Kuwait government 
entities, foundations and civil society to 
help them support other countries 
Baseline: 0
Target: 1 (2020)
Source: GSSCPD, MOFA and UNDP 
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of reports 
developed on Kuwait’s development 
assistance 
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Source: GSSCPD, MOFA and UNDP 
Output 2.2: South-South and 
triangular cooperation initiatives 
promoted to contribute to 
development solutions.
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of SouthSouth initiatives established between 
Kuwait and counterpart entities to 
support HDP nexus, stabilization and 
conflict prevention.
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Source: GSSCPD, MOFA and UNDP 
Indicator 2.2.2: Regional or global 
conferences hosted by Kuwait, with 
technical support from UNDP
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Source: GSSCPD, MOFA and UNDP
Government: 
» Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
GSSCPD
» Ministry of Information and 
Kuwaiti Media
» KEPA, KFAS, Kuwait Fund 
for Arab Economic 
Development 
» Line ministries
» Parliament
» Investment entities
Civil Society/NGOs: 
» KISR, Universities, Policy 
Think-tanks 
DPPA
UNHCR
UNEP
UN-Habitat
DESA
Regular $ 0Indicator 2.2.3: Number of SouthSouth renewable energy projects 
implemented with technical or/and 
financial support from Kuwait in other 
countries
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Source: UNDP, KEPA, KPPC, KISR
Indicator 2.2.4: Number of JPOs 
deployed to international organizations 
Baseline: 9 (2019)
Target: 11 per year
Source: UNDP
KNDP GOAL: Sustainable Living Environment: Ensure the availability of living accommodation through environmentally sound resources and tactics.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2023, there is stronger implementation, monitoring and enforcement of environmental andurban policies, laws, and regulations .
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Indicator: Investments in energy 
efficiency (public and private) as % 
GDP (Goal7.b.1) 
Baseline:
Target:
Indicator: National recycling rate/ 
tons of material recycled (Goal 12.5.1) 
Baseline: 
Target:
Indicator: % Land area designated as 
nature reserves/ protected areas for 
biodiversity preservation (proxy 
Goal15.1.2)
Baseline: 3%
Target: 20%
Indicator: Availability of data for 
public expenditure on conservation and 
sustainable use of biodiversity (proxy 
Goal15.b.1)
Baseline: No (2018)
Target: Yes (2023)
KEPA, KISR, CSB (annually) Output 3.1: Data infrastructure on 
energy and environment, 
strengthened: 
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of knowledge 
products produced on low-carbon 
development/renewable energy 
Baseline: 1
Target: 4
Sources: KISR
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of 
partnerships to generate real-time 
monitoring of energy and 
environmental protection
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Source: KEPA and CSB
Indicator 3.1.3: Number of energy 
diversification and environmental 
management plans and projects 
developed 
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Source: KEPA, KISR, Higher Council 
for Environment
Government: 
KEPA
KISR
Supreme Council for
Environment
Civil Society/NGOs: 
EN.V
Kuwait Diving Team
UNEP
UN-Habitat
FAOIndicator:
Baseline: 
Target
Indicator: Renewable energy share in 
the total final energy consumption. 
(Goal 7.2.1)
Baseline:
Target: 
Indicator: Energy intensity measured 
in terms of primary energy and GDP 
(Goal 7.3.1)
Baseline:
Target:
KPPC (biannually)
KEPA (annually), NGOs 
Output 3.2: KNDP policy on ecocities awareness strengthened 
through green building and
infrustructure and smart technology 
effectively supported 
Indicator 3.2.1: Percentage of 
renewable energy of total electricity 
demand 
Baseline: 0.4% (2018) 
Target: 12% (2023)
Source: Kuwait Energy Outlook Report 
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of advocacy 
initiatives/campaigns to promote green 
infrastructure and smart technology per 
KNDP
Baseline: 0 
Target: 5
Source: UNDP
Indicator 3.2.4: Number of studies on 
innovations in low emission technology 
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Source: KISR
Output 3.3 KNDP Policy on 
integration of solid waste 
management implemented. 
Indicator 3.3.1: Value chain analysis 
for recycling business in place
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Source: UNDP
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of new 
recycling-related businesses created 
with UNDP assistance 
Baseline: 0
Target: 4 
Source: KEPA 
Indicator 3.3.3: Existence of a national 
recycling policyKuwait Environment Public Authority 
(annually) and the private sector
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Source: KEPA 
Output 3.4: National/local 
institutions have improved policies, 
systems, and partnerships to protect 
biodiversity and marine environment 
Indicator 3.4.1: Number of joint 
initiatives with CSOs and the private 
sector with UNDP assistance 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 2
Source: KEPA and the private sector