File Name: LAC-NREP-2010-EN
Year: 2010
Country Name: Latin America and the Caribbean
Country Code: LAC
Category: NREP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2010
Start Year: 2010
End Year: nan
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents
U.S. Export Council for Renewable Energy
A. John Armstrong, Esq. & Dr. Jan Hamrin
Disclaimer
The report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United
States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, make any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any
legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information apparatus, product, or process
disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial
product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its
endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of
authors herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.
UNITED STATES EXPORT COUNCIL FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY
This document can be at:
http://solstice.crest.org/renewable/usecre/manual.html
Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
PREFACE
CONCEPTUAL APPROACH
INTRODUCTION: Trends in Energy Policy, Deregulation, Energy Markets and Technology
CHAPTER 1. RENEWABLE ENERGY OVERVIEW
a. POLICY BENEFITS OF RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITIES
b. COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF RENEWABLE ENERGY
CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING GOALS & OBJECTIVES IN THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR
CHAPTER 3. ENCOURAGING PRIVATE-SECTOR INVESTMENT
CHAPTER 4. GOVERNMENT’S ROLE IN THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR
a. GOVERNMENT’S LEGISLATIVE ROLE
bGOVERNMENT’S REGULATORY ROLEb. GOVERNMENT ROLES IN UNIVERSAL ELECTRIFICATION
c. PARTNERSHIPS IN UNIVERSAL ELECTRIFICATION
CHAPTER 6. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
a. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
b. SOCIAL FACTORS
c. INFORMATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
APPENDIXES
Appendix A. Description of Renewable Energy Technologies
Appendix B. List of Contacts and Resources
Appendix C. Example Basic Power Purchase Agreement
Appendix D. Renewables Portfolio StandardACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Published by:
United States Export Council for Renewable Energy
122 C Street
Fourth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
Phone: 202-383-2558
Fax: 202-383-2555
Editor-in-Chief:
Mark Lambrides
Project Coordinator
Renewable Energy in the Americas (REIA)
ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
Unit for Sustainable Development and Environment
1889 F Street NW Washington DC 20006 Tel: (202) 458-6261
Fax: (202) 458-3560 E-mail: mlambrides@oas.org
Arthur John Armstrong, Esq.
Arthur John Armstrong, P.C.
1364 Beverly Road, Suite 300
McLean, VA 22101
Phone: 703-356-3100
Fax: 703-356-3150
Dr. Jan Hamrin
Center for Resource Solutions
Presidio Bldg. 49
P.O. Box 29512
San Francisco, CA 94129
Phone: 415-561-2100
Fax: 415-561-2105
Contributors:
CMP International Consultants
&
CtiThtStBd& MilRoss Pumfrey, USAID
Judith Siegel, US/ECRE
Kevin Rackstraw, AWEA
Ann McKinney, GEA
Debby Stone, NHA
Alia Ghandour, NBIA
Peter Lowenthal, SEIA
Funding for this Manual was provided by:
The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID)
Photographs courtesy of the Photograph Information Exchange (PIX). The PIX collection of
renewable and energy efficiency technology photographs was developed and is maintained for
the U.S. Department of Energy at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in Golden,
ColoradoPREFACE
United States Export Council for Renewable Energy (US/ECRE), a trade group representing
six United States renewable energy trade organizations, commissioned the preparation of this
Manual in order to assist energy policy makers in formulating policies designed to enable
private-sector investment in renewable energy generation facilities. The objective of the Manual
is to improve the climate for investment in a nation’s renewable energy sector by consolidating
information about the renewable resources, identifying barriers to private-sector investment in
renewable technologies and suggesting how these barriers may be bridged.
US/ECRE invites readers to contribute their comments regarding the content of this
Manual. The policy recommendations contained in this document are based on the
experience and research of the authors. Incorporation of a wide range of experiences
from around the globe will substantially improve its quality, accuracy and effectiveness.
The Manual is intended for use by a broad range of energy policy strategists - officials in the
executive and legislative branches of government, utilities and other agencies or businesses with
a role in formulating energy policy. Mindful that the development of energy policy always involves
weighing competing considerations, policy strategies in the Manual are set forth in context of
narratives or discussions designed to provide the reader with insight into the underpinning
considerations so that generalized policy strategies may be more easily adapted to local
circumstances. In evaluating whether to include a given analysis or strategy, the authors have
elected to focus on those issues which may be determinative of whether a developer or investor
will opt to invest in renewable resources in a country. Policy strategists may find that by asking
whether a proposed energy policy promotes or discourages investment is a sound way to
evaluate whether that policy will produce the desired effect.
Due to the rapid legal, technical and economic developments now occurring in the renewable
energy industry around the world, US/ECRE recognizes the need of a sourcebook that provides
energy policy specialists with up-to-date policy guidelines. For that reason, this Manual is
published in a single, loose-leaf volume that can be updated on a regularized basis.CONCEPTUAL APPROACH
An undertaking that attempts to provide renewable energy policy guidance to policy
strategists who operate across a spectrum of national energy systems inherently
contains both the flaws and the strengths of “universal” or general concepts. Readers are
asked to apply broad conceptual ideas in a specific national context. The authors have used
operative or normative words with the objective of describing concepts neutrally - without
implying conceptual bias. This objective is difficult to achieve - especially for multi-language
translations. When possible, normative words are defined the first time they are used in the text.
... be consistently mindful of the difference between means and ends.
The authors have articulated the thesis that policy strategists must consistently be mindful of the
difference between means and ends.
• The term “goal” is used in the sense of the end toward which effort is directed - the
terminal point.
• The term “objective” is used in the sense of steps toward the goal - i.e.,
sub-goals.
• The term “ policy” is used in the sense of a government statement of the goals (or
ends) selected from among alternatives and in light of given conditions to guide and
determine present and future decisions. Within context the term “policy may be used
to mean the definite course of action or method of action to guide decisions. Policy
issues meriting special consideration by decision makers are highlighted by a check
(“ “).
• The term “strategy” is used in the sense of the science and art of employing
political, economic, scientific and psychological forces to afford maximum support to
adopted policies.
• The term “mechanism” is used in the sense the process or the technique elected
from among alternatives to achieve objectives.
• The term “program” is used in the sense of a specific application of a mechanism.
Communicating ideas to policy strategists with a diverse range of national issues and
backgrounds requires equal care on the part of the writer as well as the reader not to
superimpose unintentional layers of meaning or to allow ambiguous meanings. Readers are
invited to contact US/ECRE with suggestions which may avoid such flaws.INTRODUCTION: Trends in Energy Policy,
Deregulation, Energy Markets and
Technology
During the last quarter of the twentieth century, two developments have served as catalysts for
change in the national energy policies of countries throughout the globe:
• steadily increasing demand for electric energy created requirements for new
capital investments which exceeded the ability of governments to provide; and
• concern about local and global environmental degradation resulting from the
burning of fossil fuels and their effect on global warming, acid rain and other
air pollution problems created pressures to spend funds to address these
issues.
These two catalysts have affected the institutions and energy framework of virtually every
country. In the majority of countries, the predominant electric institution is the electric utility
monopoly - characterized by some degree of government ownership and control. In many of
these countries, self-generation supplements the electric supply. To the extent that existing
institutions have been unable to create new sources of funding for new electric-sector capacity
and new sources of funding to cope with environmental imperatives, governments are turning to
the private sector.
Power from renewable resources is especially well suited to the rapidly changing electric
industry
Power from renewable resources is especially well suited to the rapidly changing electric
industry. Renewables tend to be modular. Solar and wind technologies in particular have a short
lead-time from installation to operation, they provide a flexible option for adding generating
capacity in “distributed” (decentralized) and community-scale applications. Biomass,
geothermal and hydro (that does not require building a dam) can also be constructed fairly
rapidly. The primary long-term benefit of grid-connected renewables such as biomass, hydro and
geothermal is that once a renewable project has been constructed, and fully depredated, it
becomes a permanent, environmentally clean, and low cost component of a country’s energy
system. Renewable fuels, once developed, are essentially free, and their use reduces
dependence upon imported fuels. In effect, the construction of a renewable energy project
provides future generations a low cost, energy facility that produces power with minimal
environmental degradation. In the wholesale-supply market, renewable resources provide notRenewable generating facilities are commonly built and operated by the private sector
contributing its expertise and additional sources of investment capital. However, in order for a
government to generate private-sector money, the economic and political environments and the
legal system of the country must allow private-sector investors to invest in, and make a profit
from the building of new generation, transmission and distribution facilities. This course of action
implies some degree of private-sector ownership and control and the relinquishment of existing
government ownership of the utility monopolies.
Fundamental and sweeping legal, regulatory and institutional reforms have been required in
order to enable a partial or total shift from public-sector to private-sector ownership and control of
the electricity sector. Among the more significant reforms have been the creation of legal
regimes enabling the sale of government ownership in electricity facilities and the restructuring of
the electricity business.
A number of countries have instituted a new electricity structure designed to rely on the open
market: known as an “unbundled, competitive electricity market.”
In an “unbundled” electricity market, the electric power industry is divided into three distinct
functions: generation, transmission and distribution. This division allows “arms-length”
(“competitive”) sales of electricity or services among companies in the three sectors. The
continuation of government ownership in any of these three sectors varies from one legal regime
to another as does the authorization for cross-sector ownership. Independent power producers
(“IPPs”) are allowed to enter the market freely in order to provide competition for the previously
government-owned companies. Although details vary from one country to another, this model
system typically relies on competitive forces to establish electricity market prices and on
private-sector owners to conduct long-term planning. Since no one in this market structure has
any “obligation to supply,” in the usual utility sense of being required to plan and acquire
adequate generating capacity to meet future demand, new capacity will be built only when
somebody thinks that new capacity will provide a favorable return on investment relative to
projected prices.
Among the 193 nation states and 57 overseas territories and dependencies, there are
countless combinations and permutations of electricity systems.
Such sweeping reforms have not been universal. Indeed, this is not a monolithic world, and
among the 193 nation states and 57 overseas territories and dependencies there are countless
combinations and permutations of electricity systems. Although the electric utility monopoly is
still the predominate electric power industry model, this situation is changing rapidly. The level of
government participation in different countries falls along a shifting spectrum defined (i) on the
one extreme by total government ownership and control of the utility; (ii) in the middle by
government regulation of privately-owned companies; and (iii) at the other extreme, by less
regulated privately-owned generation and regulated transmission facilities which may be off-grid
or allowed to supplement the grid supply. In many countries the electrical energy sector isintegrated state-owned utilities is not necessarily relevant in a privatized system organized along
one of the variations of the totally unbundled, competitive model.
In the competitive market for private-sector capital, keep in balance the country’s need to
develop its own indigenous resources and to assure its energy sector is developed in an
environmentally friendly manner.
This Manual seeks to identify those issues that are the most relevant to countries that are
seeking to attract private capital to their electricity sector - and in particular to the renewable
energy sub-sector. In some cases, the relevancy of an issue will depend upon the structure of a
country’s national electric system. In other cases, the issues and recommendations may have
more universal application. Where the issues are specifically related to system structure, an
attempt has been made to identify the structure that is being discussed and to indicate the
applicability of the discussion to countries that incorporate that particular structure.
The international financial community has significant capital available for investment in energy
projects. But an increasing number of countries are vying for this capital - and capital is not
infinite. Countries seeking investment dollars are entering into a competitive market in which
countries will compete for international debt and equity investments. To be competitive in this
milieu, a country will be required to demonstrate a legal, political and commercial host
environment that reduces risk and provides investors with good reason to believe they will
receive a fair and reasonable rate of return on their debt or equity investment.
The policy makers whose task it is to create an environment in which the private sector
shoulders the task of moving a country’s electric power system into the twenty-first century are
challenged to identify and bridge the local barriers which impede the development of electricity
from renewable resources. This Manual is designed to assist these policy makers.
• Chapter I (Renewable Energy Overview) is a primer on the essentials of
renewable energy resources - their costs and benefits.
• Chapter II (Identifying Goals and Objectives in the Electricity Sector) presents
a top-down analytic approach. Electric sector objectives flow from national goals and
by understanding both, the policy maker is situated to determine how to employ
renewable energy resources to achieve goals and objectives.
• Chapter III (Encouraging Private-Sector Investment) discusses the hurdles to
private-sector investment in renewable resources in urban and rural environments
and explores mechanisms available that the energy policy strategist may use to
overcome those hurdles.
• Chapter IV (Government’s Role in the Electricity Sector) recognizes that in
virtually every jurisdiction, legislation and regulation are the two primary tools for
achieving public interest goals. This chapter explores how legislation may remove• Chapter V (Universal Electrification Policy) deals with how the policy maker may
use renewable energy to provide a sustainable, long-term level of electrification to
isolated areas.
• Chapter VI (Program Implementation) analyzes the institutional issues that are at
the heart of sustainability, and provides guidelines for the policy maker designing a
renewable energy program country-wide.
The policy makers whose task it is to create an environment in which the private sector
shoulders the task of moving a country’s electric power system into the twenty-first century are
challenged to identify and bridge local barriers.CHAPTER 1. RENEWABLE ENERGY
OVERVIEW
a. POLICY BENEFITS OF RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITIES
b. COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF RENEWABLE ENERGY
What are “Renewable Resources”?
The term “renewable” is generally applied to those energy resources and technologies
whose common characteristic is that they are non-depletable or naturally replenishable.
Renewable resources include solar energy, wind, falling water, the heat of the earth
(geothermal), plant materials (biomass), waves, ocean currents, temperature differences in the
oceans and the energy of the tides. Renewable energy technologies produce power, heat or
mechanical energy by converting those resources either to electricity or to motive power. The
policy maker concerned with development of the national grid system will focus on those
resources that have established themselves commercially and are cost effective for on-grid
applications. Such commercial technologies include hydroelectric power, solar energy, fuels
derived from biomass, wind energy and geothermal energy. Wave, ocean current, ocean thermal
and other technologies that are in the research or early commercial stage, as well as non-electric
renewable energy technologies, such as solar water heaters and geothermal heat pumps, are
also based on renewable resources, but outside the scope of this Manual.
For the purposes of establishing a legal regime governing and encouraging private-sector
investment in renewable resources and technologies, the policy strategist will make use of three
conceptual approaches. As well as the foregoing technical definition, both political definitions
and legal definitions, factor into a policy definition of what resources deserve discrete treatment
as “renewable resources”.
Broadly define “Renewable Resources, then clarify that definition by defining each
specific renewable resource (e.g., “‘geothermal energy’ means the heat of the earth.”)
From the political perspective, renewable energy resources can be divided into numerous
categories depending upon the political goals or objectives under consideration. For example, in
a given country, renewable resources may be distinguished by categorizing those which are well
established versus those which are underdeveloped; those which have immediate development
potential versus those which do not; and those with potential rural versus those with urbanAvoid operational definitions. For example, if different types of hydropower are to be
treated differently for political or legal reasons, address such treatment in operational
language, not by definition.
From the legal perspective, existing laws such as land use, water, mining, and hydrocarbon
laws need to be scrutinized to determine their potential jurisdiction over and applicability to
renewable resources. It is important to define what technologies are to be considered
“renewable” for the purposes of any piece of legislation. Such legislation can define “renewable
resources” as appropriate, given the state of development of the natural resources in that
country. If a court, legislator or executive interprets a law strictly, the term “renewable resources”
as used in a piece of legislation means what that specific piece of legislation says it means, but
only for the purposes of that specific legislation. Thus, if a law defines coal as “renewable”, but
omits wind, this legal definition will prevail without reference to the technical characteristics of
either fuel. In most legal regimes, however, the term “renewable energy” is used to distinguish
naturally replenishable fuels from those fuels of which the earth is endowed with fixed stocks.
The main examples of stock-limited resources are the fossil fuels (principally coal, petroleum,
natural gas, tar sands and oil shales) and the nuclear fuels (principally uranium, thorium,
deuterium and lithium).
Can all Renewables be governed by a common policy?
Policy makers should be cognizant of the similarities as well as the variations among
renewable energy resources.
From the perspective of the policy strategist, it may be important to determine whether and to
what extent energy plans, laws and regulations may be developed using the generic concept
“renewable resources”:
• Are the differences among the renewable resources and their applications such
that legislation may properly address renewable resources technology by
technology?
• Are there sufficient commonalities that renewable resource development may be
handled as a generic issue?
The commercial renewable energy technologies
Establish an objective, specific to each renewable resource, which is designed to achieve
national goals.
Fundamentally, the answer depends on why the question is being asked, and in which country
the policy is being applied. There are, however, guidelines which may prove useful to policy
strategists making this determination in any country. Essentially, form must follow function. In
other words, it is essential that the policy strategist understand the nature of each of the
bld thtf thbhih h f thidifferent that laws and regulations governing these resources usually deal with each resource on
an individual basis - treating each resource as unique. At present, the major commercial
grid-connected renewable resources are hydroelectric, geothermal, biomass, wind energy and
solar. In the majority of legal regimes, hydroelectric and geothermal resources are identified as
owned in common by the people of the country and husbanded by the government for their
benefit.
• Geothermal resources require extraction (and reinjection). Drilling for geothermal
resources involves many of the same discrete considerations involved with drilling for
petroleum (hydrocarbons) and individual treatment is prudent.
Geothermal resources
• Hydroelectric resources are inextricably linked with surface water rights, including
potable water, navigation, irrigation, navigation and recreational rights. The historical
complexities of sorting out these juxtaposed rights usually dictate individual treatment
of hydroelectric resource issues.
Hydroelectric resources
• Wind energy and solar draw on resources - wind and sun energy - generally
thought of as being free for the taking. The principal resource issue with both of
these renewables is surface land. Therefore there is no general technical
requirement for individual treatment.
Wind energy and solar
• Biomass is a broadly inclusive term, often encompassing wood and wood waste,
agricultural waste and residue, energy crops, and - sometimes - landfill gas
resources. Resource availability and cost can be highly variable, and resources may
require management of a type not frequently required for other renewables.
Individual treatment is one method of addressing this complication.
Biomass
What are the renewable energy applications?
Renewable energy applications generally break down into two categories or applications,
“on-grid” and “off-grid”.
• A “grid” may be defined as an integrated generation, transmission, and distribution
system serving numerous customers. Characteristically, a grid is a portfolio of
generating units operating under the control of a central dispatch center. Grids may
be national, regional or local (in the latter case they are typically referred to as
“mini-grids”).
“Ongrid” and “offgrid” are terms which describe how electricity is deliveredcustomer such as a mine, a manufacturing plant or an agribusiness. Hydroelectric,
biomass and geothermal facilities tend to be economical at capacity levels well in
excess of one megawatt (1 MW) and, therefore, are typically - but not necessarily -
developed and financed as “base load” electricity resources (i.e., the normally
operated generating facilities within a utility system) and connected to a grid. Solar
arrays and “wind farms” also can be grid-connected.
• “Off-grid” applications, in general, serve only one load, such as a home or small
business. Off-grid applications can take many forms, from photovoltaics for an
individual village home to centralized windmills to power a village water pump or a
commercial battery charging facility. These off-grid applications are most generally
used in remote or rural settings.
• “Mini-grids” have begun to be developed by system engineers over the past few
years, for isolated communities. These systems may integrate wind, solar energy
and, in some cases, diesel generators and/or storage systems to provide power from
a mix of resources to more than one customer, typically a village or cooperative.
For more discussion of off-grid and mini-grid issues, see below, Chapter 5a (Universal
Electrification Policy: Renewable Technologies & Universal Electrification Efforts). The following
charts illustrate common on-grid. and off-grid applications for which renewable energy is best
suited.
On-Grid Uses
Hydro Wind PV Geo-thermal Bio-mass Solar thermal
Bulk Power • • • • • •
Grid support • • • • • •
Demand-side management • • • • • •
Distributed generation • • • • • •
Cogeneration • • •
On-Grid Uses
• In addition to generating bulk electricity, the renewable energy technologies can
serve a number of other valuable on-grid roles.
- For grid support, a power station is constructed somewhere along a
transmission line to remedy high resistance in the line. This reduces
transmission losses and prevents expensive substation equipment from
being degraded by excessive heat (this application is a type of
“distributed generation”).
Iditibtd tid ttl ttiti- Biomass and geothermal are well-suited to regeneration.
• This table is not exhaustive. There are many other uses of each technology.
Off-Grid-Uses
Hydro Wind PV Goo-thermal Bid-mass Solar thermal
Mini-grid power for village, island,
industry, military, tourism, etc.
• • • • • •
Individual systems for house,
clinic school, store, more
• • • • •
Water pumping, water treatment • • • • •
Unattended loads (e.g., telecom) • • • • •
Space heating, water heating • • • • •
Process heat, cogeneration • • •
Off-Grid Uses
• This chart is not comprehensive, but lists some of the common off-grid applications
for which renewable energy is best suited.
- Power and heat for remote villages, islands, tourist facilities, industrial
and military installations, houses, clinics, schools, and stores.
- Water pumping, disinfection, and desalination.
- Communication stations, navigational aids, and road signals.
• For most types of energy applications, on-and off-grid, one or more of the
renewable energy technologies is cost-competitive.
• Worldwide, millions upon millions of dollars are wasted by utilities, governments,
businesses, and individuals that ignore opportunities to improve cost-effectiveness
through the use of renewable energy.
• Energy decision-makers can improve their energy costs and performance by giving
full and informed consideration to the renewable energy sources every time they
choose an energy technology.
a. POLICY BENEFITS OF RENEWABLE ENERGY
FACILITIESRenewable resources are environmentally benign.
Renewable energy facilities generally have a very modest impact on their surrounding
environment. The discharges of unwanted or unhealthy substances into the air, ground or water
commonly associated with other forms of generation can be reduced significantly by deploying
renewables. Clean technologies can also produce significant indirect economic benefits. For
example, unlike fossil-fuel facilities, renewable facilities will not need to be fitted with scrubbing
technology to mitigate air pollution, nor will a country need to expend resources in cleaning up
polluted rivers or the earth around sites contaminated with fossil-fuel by-products. Furthermore,
they provide greenhouse gas reduction benefits and should a worldwide market for air emission
credits emerge as has been predicted, countries with a strong portfolio of renewable energy
projects may be able to earn pollution credits which can be exchanged for hard currency. Finally,
having a clean environmental profile enhances the attractiveness of renewable projects in the
eyes of investors, especially the multilateral development agencies, many of whom operate
under guidelines that require the promotion of non-polluting technologies.
Renewable resources promote energy diversification.
Development of a diverse portfolio of generation assets reduces both a country’s dependence on
any one particular form of technology or fuel and its vulnerability to supply disruption and price
increases.
The primary long-term benefit of renewable technologies is that once a renewable project
has been constructed, and fully depredated, it becomes a permanent, environmentally
dean, and low cost component of a country’s energy system. In effect, the construction of
a renewable energy project provides future generations a low cost, energy facility that
produces power with little or no environmental degradation.
Renewable resources are sustainable.
Renewable technologies are designed to run on a virtually inexhaustible or replenishable supply
of natural “fuels.” Expanding a nation’s electricity supply by attracting investment to renewable
energy projects is, by defintion, a strategy for sustainable growth, since operation of the facilities
does not deplete the earth’s finite resources.
Renewable energy facilities enhance the value of the overall resource base of a country by using
the country’s indigenous resources for electricity generation. Moreover, since these facilities
operate on “fuels” that are both indigenous and renewable (as distinguished from imported fossil
fuels), they may reduce balance-of-payment problems. Reduced dependence on fuel imports
reduces exposure to currency fluctuations and fuel price volatility. The construction and
operation of renewable projects normally generate significant local economic activity, often in
previously “resource poor” areas of a country. Renewable energy projects thus act as engines
for regional economic development. In the case of large scale, on-grid projects, easements willeconomic activity in a multiplier effect and adds value to the local tax base.
Appendix A provides concise descriptions of renewable energy technologies, their applications
and environmental impacts. Readers interested in gaining additional knowledge with respect to
any of these technologies should also consult US/ECRE’s sponsoring trade associations, also
set forth in Appendix B of the Manual.
b. COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF RENEWABLE
ENERGY
The ultimate question for the policy strategist is whether power generated from a
renewable energy source is affordable given the service it is providing.
Universally, the goal of electric power generation planners is to deliver electricity to the maximum
number of customers at the lowest possible price. The political acceptability of power generated
from any source will depend upon the ultimate tariff to the consumer relative to the benefits
delivered.
Does renewable energy generate affordable power?
On a total cost basis, a new, renewable energy, generating facility is often cost competitive with
a conventional fuel facility provided that the cost calculation considers long-term fuel costs - and
even more so when one considers environmental costs and benefits. Since this generalization is
not true in every situation confronting the policy planner, the policy planner will need to apply
cost-effectiveness criteria adapted to each situation.
What are the applicable cost-effectiveness evaluation criteria?
Any given electric generating technology (including renewables) may be cost effective in one
market or application and not in another. There is no simple calculus a policy maker can apply,
but a number of established criteria will assist in determining the financial viability of renewable
energy generation.
The quality and quantity of the resource. Quality and quantity of renewable resources may be
determined by a government-conducted resource assessment, but private-sector developers
commonly have their own pre-feasibility and feasibility studies which can be more accurate
measures of the commercial viability of a given project. The measures of resource quality and
quantity are unique to each resource, but for each of the renewables, resource quality and
quantity affects the energy input to, and the effective capacity of a generation facility. In
geothermal resource development, for example, the temperature of the resource and the
dissolved impurities determine the requisite production equipment. The cost of production
equipment, in turn, affects the installed cost and the per-kilowatt-hour cost of delivered power. In
biomassthe quality and BTU content of the fuel will influence installed costsand operationsIn the case of geothermal, the depth of the resource is a major cost factor. For the hydro, wind
and solar technologies, climatic variations (rainfall, cloud cover, intense storms) affect cost. For
biomass, transportation distances between the fuel source and the generating facility may
significantly affect the electricity cost.
Government-imposed costs. For the private-sector developer, time is money. The time
expended in responding to bid proposals, in obtaining requisite permits, licenses and
concessions, and in negotiating contracts increases the costs of renewable projects. The policy
maker should consider policies that organize and simplify the local institutional processes. Such
policies may prevent adding major costs and time delays to what would otherwise be a highly
cost-effective facility. Similarly, government-imposed taxes, fees, tariffs and royalty payments are
all passed to the electricity consumer and effect the kilowatt-hour cost of delivered power.
The development process is sufficiently similar that for many purposes the renewable resources
may be treated similarly. The development process employed by hydroelectric, geothermal, wind
energy, biomass and solar renewable technologies may be described and analyzed in three
discrete stages: “reconnaissance”, “exploration” and “exploitation”. Each technology may
use different terms for these three stages, but the concepts are similar.
• Reconnaissance is an activity which determines by visual observation and
scientific studies whether an area may be a source of commercially exploitable
resources. It does not affect the present surface use of the land.
• Exploration is an activity which demonstrates the dimensions, position,
characteristics and extent of resources by scientific studies. It may affect the present
surface use of the land. An extensive outlay of capital may be required for exploring
the potential of some renewable resources such as geothermal and, to a lesser
degree, wind and hydro resources. Where resource exploration is expensive, this
may necessitate that exclusive rights to the relevant renewable resources in the area
be awarded to the explorer. These rights may be granted for a limited term, but if
exploration proves the commercial viability of the resource, a private-sector
developer will require that the temporary exploration rights be converted to long-term
exploitation rights.
• Exploitation is an activity which enables electricity to be produced from renewable
resources, either through the intermediate production of steam or the direct
production of electricity from a chemical or mechanical process. Exclusive, long-term
rights are prerequisite to the sustainability of this production.
The expense associated with each phase of resource development has a direct impact on the
cost-effectiveness of the electricity produced. The first generation facilities developed in any
resource area are almost always going to cost more per kilowatt hour produced than will later
facilities, since most of the reconnaissance and exploration costs will be included in the cost of
the first facility. If, however, there is some assurance of a market for power from additionalg , pjpy 
initial capital cost, and will be incurred before the project ever comes on line. The cost of a
renewable energy is in the technology effort exerted at the outset of a project and all of the
renewables share “front-end-loaded” cost profiles. Consequently, the majority of new
generation facilities are funded through project financing, whereby the principal and interest (and
profit) are paid from the proceeds of the project.
Cost of Electricity
Power purchase agreement. The “power purchase agreement” - the power and capacity
contract between the owner of a generating facility and its customers - rather than the
credit-worthiness of the developer, collateralizes the loan. Since renewable energy projects are
front-end-loaded, the costs of capital significantly affects installed cost. High risk factors
associated with initial projects developed in new resource areas also translate into higher costs
of capital. The challenge for the country policy maker - especially in a country which seeks to
attract initial projects to a new resource area - is to implement new mechanisms to lower
financing costs. Development of such mechanisms may prove more productive if done in
consultation with the private-sector developer. For example, in some situations, municipal
customers may have access to tax-exempt or low interest bonds that can be used to finance
energy projects at a lower cost than if they were financed with conventional borrowing.
In a rapidly advancing technological era, the most prudent course for a decision maker is
to avoid reliance on old information as to whether a given renewable technology can fulfill
a given energy need.
System costs. The cost or cost-savings of integrating a given renewable energy generator into
a system is difficult to quantify. By diversifying the energy supply mix, a system can protect or
buffer the ratepayer from the potential financial risks and volatility of changing fuel prices,
changing environmental requirements, and common design flaws that can result in large
operational and maintenance costs. Reliance on imported fuels may be eliminated and balances
of payment problems thereby reduced. With the exception of biomass, there are no intrinsic fuel
costs for an established renewable energy generating facility. Consequently, an established
renewable facility serves as a hedge against inflation in an inflationary market.
For an example of a renewable facility as an inflationary hedge one may examine the history of
the older hydroelectric power dams. The following chart illustrates the renewable technologies
which are currently available in the marketplace.
Important Characteristics
Options Status Capacity
Small hydro Low to high head turbines
and dams.
Run of river.
Virtually all are commercial. Factor Intermittent to
base load.Solar Photovoltaic.
Active thermal (low to high
temp for heat or electricity).
Passive thermal.
Most commercial.
Some under development
or refinement.
W/o storage:
<25%, intermittent
W/thermal storage:
40 to 60%, intermediate.
Geothermal Cycles:
Dry steam,
Flash, and
Binary
Commercial.
Exploration and drilling
improvements underway.
High, base load.
Bioenergy Combustion. Fermentation.
Digestion.
Gasification.
Liquefication.
Many commercial.
More under development or
refinement.
US wood plants average
95+%.
Intermediate, peaking
also possible.
Important Characteristics of the Renewable Technologies
• All six renewable energy sectors offer technologies which are proven and are
available in the marketplace. All can be purchased today in forms that are reliable
and cost-competitive.
• “Capacity Factor” summarizes the output patterns.
- Geothermal and most biomass plants provide baseload energy.
- Most hydro and some biomass plants are highly dispatchable, offering a
range of options from baseload to peaking.
- Run-of-river hydro is intermittent, but variations in its output tend to be
slow and predictable.
- Solar ranges from intermittent to intermediate, depending on how well it
matches the pattern of energy usage.
- Wind is intermittent, but studies have found that most grids can add an
intermittent source up to 15% of their capacity without requiring any
compensatory action. Higher shares from intermittent sources are usually
easy to accommodate.CHAPTER 2. IDENTIFYING GOALS &
OBJECTIVES IN THE ELECTRICITY
SECTOR
Energy policy is an extension of national policy. National policy is the touchstone in
evaluating, establishing and defending a national renewable energy policy. Therefore, it is
essential that renewable energy objectives be a logical extension of national goals.
In identifying the national goals relevant to establishing renewable energy policy objectives,
identify the key goals for the nation and how the electricity sector fits among its priorities. Most
nations engage in a planning process that expresses a vision for its economy. This vision
generally includes the improvement of the quality of life for all of its citizens. Many nations have
recognized that in order to attain this objective of a better life, it is necessary to develop a broad
strategy based on human development and international competitiveness. To fulfill such
broad-based strategies, nations will, among other avenues, look to their electricity sectors to help
fuel the desired economic growth and enhancement of the general well being of the population.
In order for a country to achieve the goal of economic growth and elimination of poverty, it is
generally necessary to achieve the objective of improving the availability and reliability of its
electricity system. This objective has in turn, sub-objectives such as lowering energy costs for
the present as well as for the future, using indigenous resources to prevent an outflow of capital,
and complying with national and global environmental standards.
As a threshold action, articulate the hierarchy of national goals, clearly differentiating
between the desired ends and the means devised to reach those ends.
How may a national electricity plan be formulated based on underlying national goals?
The following approaches can be helpful in identifying where activities in the energy and
electricity sectors can play an integral part in achieving the underlying national goals of any
country. In formulating a renewable energy policy, test each potential objective against the
national policy goal it is designed to advance.
Determine, within the overall goals of the nation, the importance of developing the
electricity sector, and the means for its growth and operation. The following questions are
examples only, and not exhaustive. The exercise is to identify the underlying goals of the
national policies.
• What are the government and private-sector investment goals for national growth What are the goals for development of rural and remote areas?
• What are the national goals for the development of new industries?
• What are the national goals for resource self-reliance?
Set forth national, regional or utility electricity objectives in a plan. In countries with highly
centralized governments, national electric-sector objectives are typically incorporated in
comprehensive national plans. Planning for the national electricity system takes many forms. In
decentralized systems, planning - whether such planning is by utilities, central plants, or
committees composed of generators, transmitters and distributors - is essential to continuing
viability and profitability. A comprehensive national plan is not a key to success, nor is its
absence fatal. The United States has never had a national plan for its electricity system, yet its
national grid is considered successful. Nevertheless, electric-sector planning remains a valuable
tool, and policy strategists will need to determine the role of government in establishing the
overall objectives for this sector. In particular, policy makers in countries undergoing shifts from
public-sector to private-sector ownership of the electricity sector will need to ensure that, if
electric system planning is turned over to the private sector, safeguards are in place. Such
safeguards should be designed to ensure that long-term energy security objectives will continue
to be achieved, and the growth and diversity of generation, transmission and distribution capacity
will be optimized.
A coordinated or comprehensive plan is more easily accomplished in those countries which have
strong public controls over the electricity sector. However, such a plan is not inappropriate in a
privatized, market setting - especially when a government is seeking to implement broader
sustainable development goals. A government’s establishment and promotion of national
priorities are neither inconsistent nor antagonistic to a market-driven system.
How may a national renewable energy policy be formulated based on a national energy
plan?
As part of its energy policy, a country will determine its objectives with respect to the use of
renewable energy resources. These objectives may be expressed as a commitment to having a
certain percentage of the overall energy base come from renewables or may be a commitment to
having a certain percentage of the available renewable energy resources developed within a
certain time frame. In either event, the commitment should be reflective of the country’s strategic
goals.
Mindful of national goals, the plan should determine whether renewable resource development is
a national energy objective. For example, if replacing government expenditures with private
investment monies is a primary objective of the electricity sector, encouraging private-sector
investment in renewable- resource development is properly envisioned as a means to that end.
On the other hand, if development of indigenous resources is the sector objective, the mix
between government-sector and private-sector investment may be different. In many countries,
hbjiill ddhhil lil fbA hypothetical example of such a policy statement follows:
ACHIEVEMENT OBJECTIVES AVOIDANCE OBJECTIVES
What? Provide rural citizens with services
and the generation of more electricity
What? Environmental damage.
When? Within “y” years. When? Bureaucratic process delays
Where? Urban and remote sectors. Where? Failure to develop rural sectors.
How? Through indigenous resources. How? Rely on imported fuels.
Through private-sector investment Using public expenditures on urban
electricity development
How do renewable resources fit into a country “generation mix”?
Determine how renewable energy promotion achieves sector objectives
By understanding electricity sector objectives, the policy maker is better situated to
determine whether, and to what extent, employing renewable energy resources may
achieve these objectives. As part of this analysis, however, the policy maker will require an
understanding of which renewable resources are available and at what cost and benefit.
Translating electricity sector objectives into a rational generation mix requires constructing a
supply/demand/needs analysis. The electricity sector objectives for growth of the electricity
system identifies new generation, transmission and distribution needs for both the urban and
rural sectors. The policy strategist will want to identify the mix of technologies that might
effectively be deployed in meeting the country’s energy needs for the short-term and the
long-term. Objectives might include development of a sustainable electricity sector with low cost
fossil fuels using advanced dean burning technologies, and a given percentage of generation
from renewable, indigenous resources. This combination of generation resources is often
referred to as a country’s “generation mix”. Multilateral development agencies, various
non-governmental organizations, private consultants and existing utilities have provided
assistance to countries in analysis and development of objectives for its generation mix.
Select the most appropriate technology by assessing such variables as resource
availability, life-cycle cost, demand and environmental considerations.
How does a country develop an infrastructure resource base?
The critical issue for the energy strategist is how to develop human skills and material support
infrastructure when a new renewable technology is introduced into a country. How does one
“jump start” a technician and infrastructure resource base? In general, national institutions must
develop (or hire) technical experts who train local technicians. Targeted training enables
development of a skilled technical work force. Pre-commercial infrastructure development is
more problematicIf a policy planner can identify existing local supplyproduction andDevelop incountry technical capacity which is essential for ongoing system support.
Local implementing institutions generally have a fundamental knowledge of the local market, but
they often require hardware, technical assistance, and capital at the initial stages of program or
project development from outside institutions. International linkages have been particularly
effective in providing scarce capital, management techniques and newly commercialized
technologies. The policy strategist may seek to encourage linkages between local institutions
and technical laboratories, bilateral aid agencies, product suppliers, project developers, and
international non-governmental organizations. If encouraged, such linkages promote technology
transfer and develop local skills.
• Sustainability is dependent upon the availability of local, competent technical support -
both human expertise and quality repair parts.
In-country technical capacity is essential for on-going system support. Sustainability of any
technology installation is dependent upon the availability of local, competent technical support -
both human expertise and quality repair parts. Technical skill can be developed through
on-the-job experience. Material support capacity will evolve as the level of installations of a given
technology allows commercial investment in marketing or manufacturing material in-country.
• Technical skill can be developed through training and on-the-job experience.
How may a public/private partnership advance policy formulation?
In most countries, a government/private-sector partnership strengthens the national ability to
attract private investment and to implement rational development of national energy resources
and national, universal electrification.
• Material support capacity will evolve as the size and number of installations of a given
technology allows commercial investment in marketing or manufacturing material
in-country.
The political strategist would be well advised to include representatives of all the interested and
effected stakeholder groups in the development of a plan. A broadly based task force or advisory
group instituted to prepare and develop a plan may include not only representatives of the
relevant governmental agencies, ministries and utilities, but also legislators, unions, developers,
equipment manufacturers, local officials, NGOs, lending institutions (including multilateral
development agencies), bankers, lawyers, engineers, consumers and any other group having a
vested interest in the plan. This level of involvement is critical to the success of the plan. If all
interested parties have participated in the development of the plan, they will be more likely to
become invested in its success. Legislators will generally desire to be involved with the executive
branch in moving the planning process forward. Additionally, through the planning process all
may become better educated and knowledgeable concerning issues related to the development
of renewable energy resources and electrification.g, ppppy gp
Early in the electricity policy-making process include representatives of all the interested
and affected stakeholder groups.
In national policy planning, many energy and electricity sector policy strategists have effectively
involved the office of the national chief executive early in the policy making process.
Commitment of the office of the head of state to supporting a plan of renewable energy
development enhances chances of achieving planned objectives. In a government environment
where there are often competing demands on agencies’ limited fiscal and human resources,
chances of achieving planned objectives will be greatly enhanced if those involved recognize the
support and commitment of the top levels of government.
A fundamental institutional objective is to transfer necessary skills to local implementers.
Opportunity exists for training at all levels of the sector, from utility leaders to system
users.
Renewable energy sector objectives will also address how electricity will be provided to those
isolated areas not connected to a national system. This aspect of the plan will address the
methodology and technologies which will be utilized to accomplish the identified objectives for
these areas. This Manual discusses the specific needs of the rural and remote sectors in later
sections.CHAPTER 3. ENCOURAGING
PRIVATE-SECTOR INVESTMENT
If private-sector investment in renewable energy resources development proves either
essential or desirable to meet a country’s urban or rural electric-sector policy goals, the
next step is to identify the hurdles to be overcome.
Policy strategists may prudently follow three lines of inquiry:
• Does the domestic economic, legal and regulatory regime create an appropriate
environment to attract private investment?
• Does the domestic economic, legal and regulatory regime create a “level playing
field” for the renewable technologies?
• Does the domestic economic, legal and regulatory regime impede or enable the
development characteristics unique to each of the renewable resources
How does the policy maker bridge hurdles to renewable energy development?
At the same time as hurdles are identified, the policy strategist will need to identify mechanisms
which may address the impediments identified, and thereby enable the achievement of
renewable energy policy objectives in establishing a national competitive environment and a
level playing field for energy development.
The issue of a “level playing field” - meaning an environment in which every private-sector
player has an equal opportunity to succeed and in which no artificial barrier affects the results - is
best analyzed on an individual country basis. In every country the electricity sub-sector is shaped
by the resources, economics and history unique to that country.
In general, new technologies are seldom on an equal footing with established technologies;
subsidized technologies have an advantage over unsubsidized technologies; and technologies
with front-end-loaded capital costs are disadvantaged in an economic regime with a short-term
pricing structure. Nevertheless, the policy strategists in each country will need to examine the
status quo - the existing state of the electricity industry on the day of the inquiry - to determine
whether, and to what extent, barriers exist which unfairly favor investments in oil, gas and coal
over investments in the renewables.
The impediments to grid-connected renewable generation and the potential mechanisms to
bridge those impediments can be illustrated by comparing the unbundled, competitive electricity
market model and the more traditional government utility modelIn the case of the unbundledpy
The privatization of utility systems has brought a degree of market discipline and economic
reality to the electricity business of many nations and has fostered conditions generally
conducive to private investment. However, the shift to a short-term market for wholesale
electricity may hamper development of new renewable energy generation projects in previously
undeveloped resource areas except in those countries that have implemented special policies to
offset this result.
Projects that depend oh short-term markets for all or most of their revenues are known as
“merchant plants”. Merchant plants are built with the understanding that they have not
specifically identified buyers to purchase their output at fixed prices over a long-term (typically
15-20 years). Instead, they sell into the short-term market and receive whatever price the market
dictates for that particular week, day, hour or half hour.
An electricity market that offers only short-term prices constitutes an inhospitable climate for
building new, renewable energy projects. In the absence of long-term capacity expansion
planning, the dynamics of the short-term market cause a country’s electric capacity expansion to
be based on short-term economic principles. Experience has shown that under these conditions
new capacity needs will be met by thermal projects having the lowest capital costs and the
shortest lead times for construction. The problem is not that renewable on-grid generation cannot
be competitive in such a market, rather that financial markets are resistant to financing
capital-intensive facilities unless there is some assurance of a revenue flow that returns principal
and interest.
In a short-term market, governments may have to build a bridge to encourage the
development of renewable energy projects that deliver long-term benefits.
A short-term market assigns absolutely no value to the fact that a renewable energy generation
will essentially be free once its debt has been retired. Consequently, renewable energy
generation is vulnerable to the short-term market price choice of a gas-fired combustion turbine
despite its high fuel cost and short life.
Developers of inexpensive thermal plants can survive in a purely short-term market environment
because:
• thermal plants typically recover their operating cost since a major portion of their
cost is fuel related, and since short-term markets tend to track fuel prices;
• the lower debt load on their projects leaves them with a far lower financial exposure
to a prolonged slump in market prices; new fossil plants with low per kilowatt capital
costs are likely to recover those costs before fuel prices rise to a level that affects
their viability; and
• the very short construction lead times of thermal plants provides timing flexibility,In a shortterm market system, a major barrier to the acquisition of new renewable resource
generation is the lack of buyer (utilities, distribution companies, etc.) motivation. Short-term
electricity prices are based on electricity generated by existing plants, the capital costs of which
are already absorbed. The initial electricity prices offered by new plants coming on line will
invariably exceed the current short-term price for electricity. It is therefore difficult to envision
how a short-term market system will enable new generating capacity unless the wholesale
buyers in the system project electricity prices for completing generation over a term of years, and
contract for energy for that long-term period. Electricity from new renewable generation facilities
will frequently be higher than any current short-term market price, but will be competitive
(cost-effective) if long-term contracts are considered.
To date, lenders have not been willing to provide debt capital for renewable energy merchant
plant projects dependent on short-term markets in countries whose newly established markets
have yet to achieve a solid track record. Since lenders require that renewable projects
demonstrate steady, predictable cash flows to meet debt-service requirements over a long-term
period, the significant price risk created by unpredictable, fluctuating short-term prices effectively
preclude financing under present market conditions.
What mechanisms attract private-sector development and bridge the impediments to the
development of renewables?
In assessing the impediments to attracting private-sector investment to the power sector, the
energy strategist needs to be mindful of the dynamics which occur when a country shifts from
using sovereign credits for new infrastructure facilities to using private debt and capital on a
project-specific basis. Grid-connected generation projects are capital intensive, easily running
into the tens of hundreds of millions of dollars to construct. Few developers can underwrite
individual generation projects that cost hundreds of millions.
Private-sector developers, no matter how well capitalized, do not have the credit capacity to
underwrite the debt on a portfolio of projects whose total capital cost can run into the billions of
dollars. Accordingly, third-party debt is essential to most private-sector financing for electricity
generation.
Remove legal barriers which may prevent the private sector from developing, owning, and
operating power generating plants.
The project financing format shifts a lender’s credit analysis from the project sponsor to the
project itself. To be deemed a creditworthy investment by potential lenders, a private-sector
project must meet three basic criteria:
• revenue flows from the project must be deemed likely to meet pro forma
expectations;
• interruptions to revenue flows must be deemed a manageable risk; and• Does the government exercise restraint in making adjustments in government
policies of private investors?
• Does the legal environment contain explicit governmental authority for the types of
public-private transactions contemplated?
Enact renewable resource laws designed to promote private-sector development.
In this context, the policy strategist may identify the impediments to private-sector investment by
inquiring whether, and to what extent, the legal rights and obligations of the domestic economic,
legal and regulatory environment impede, enable, or encourage project financing. To bridge the
impediments so identified, the policy strategist may construct an incentive package. To identify
appropriate incentives, the energy strategist may profitably initiate a three-fold inquiry:
• Identify existing and potential incentives which may apply broadly to all private
investors in any infrastructure project;
• identify incentives which may apply exclusively to private investors in renewable
energy power generation; and
• identify incentives which may apply to unique situations of a specific renewable
resource.
As a final measure, the strategist may consult with potential developers and financiers to
evaluate incentives.
The needs of both the public and private sectors merit scrutiny. The more significant
considerations include the following:
• Authority to generate electricity. Private-sector investors need the authority to
engage in a given public activity (e.g., electric generation) together with, independent
of, or on behalf of, the government.
• Authority to select private parties. Public entities need the authority both to
select the private party which will perform the “public” activity of providing generation
as well as to enter into legally binding relationships designed to produce a firm,
reliable stream of payments to support project financing.
• Exemption from taxes. In recognition of their environmental and other benefits,
one can make a good case for substantially lowering taxes and duties for renewable
energy technologies, while taxing conventional energy industries’ supplies in
accordance with standard principles of tax policy. Experts have also long argued in
favor of imposing corporate and sales taxes on electricity on the grounds that it is a
fairly price-inelastic product.
• Foreign loans and contractsForeign investors need the right to remitat therepresented by investments shall not be expropriated except in the interest of
national welfare and upon prompt payment of just and adequate compensation.
• Judicial stability. Lending institutions sometimes require a judicial stability
agreement to the effect that the tax regimes and the foreign exchange regimes valid
at the granting of a concession will remain unchanged during the lifetime of the
concession.
• Reduction or Elimination of Import Duties. Much of the equipment for renewable
generation must be imported into host countries. High capital import duties and tariffs
distort the market, artificially raising the price of renewable technologies, and
discouraging their adoption. Temporary waivers may remove this impediment and
allow renewable technologies to compete on an equitable basis. Such waivers may
be justified either on the basis that renewables are a “pioneer” (or start-up) industry
or on the basis that payment of such duties and tariffs by a generating company will
ultimately be passed on either to the rural poor or to the government.
• Remittance of earnings. Foreign investors need the right to remit earnings from
foreign investments in the currency in which the investments were made and at the
prevailing exchange rate at the time of remittance.
• Repatriation of investments. Foreign investors need the right to repatriate the
entire proceeds of the liquidation of their investments in the currency in which the
investments were made and at the prevailing exchange rates at the time of
repatriation.
• Requisition of investment prohibited. Foreign investors need legal certainty that
property represented by investments shall not be requisitioned except in time of war
or national emergency and only for the duration thereof. In the event of such
requisition, provisions need to be made to ensure that just compensation shall be
determined and paid either at the time of requisition or immediately after the
cessation of the state of war or national emergency.
Determine under which circumstances to treat all indigenous resources equally, and
under which circumstances to differentiate between resources which are part of a mature
industry and those which are presently undeveloped.
What are the affects of subsidies on renewable energy development?
Policy strategists will need to consider whether, and to what extent, government
intervention is appropriate.
In a short-term market electricity system that effectively precludes projects with long-term
benefits, the government may have to build a bridge to achieve policy objectives favoring
environmentally benign renewable energy projects that deliver such long-term benefitslong-term benefits of renewables or to account for the impact of continuing government fuel
subsidies when making these investments. Policy makers electing to encourage renewable
energy systems as part of an energy mix will be more certain of attaining their objective if they
strive for decisions based on a comprehensive and long-term comparison of the costs and
benefits of all alternatives.
Develop a policy of strengthening the development of indigenous resources to attain
energy self-sufficiency.
Some governments have sought to promote the provision of affordable modem energy services
in rural areas by subsidizing particular forms of energy. Although well intentioned, such policies,
if not designed appropriately, have often proved to be counterproductive for the following
reasons:
• Such policies work against consumers making least-cost choices, and in doing so,
can undermine investors’ efforts to provide alternate energy forms.
• Widespread recourse to unnecessary subsidies has frequently proved to be fiscally
unsustainable. When coupled with price restrictions, subsidies eventually limit energy
companies’ investment programs.
• Subsidies can discourage efficient energy use.
In some extreme cases, country legal regimes have simultaneously subsidized imported diesel
fuel and imposed high import duties on renewable technology equipment. Such trade barriers
result in making renewable energy systems uncompetitive with fossil-fueled generators. In these
circumstances, energy planners are motivated to continue to purchase diesel generators
regardless of whether they prove to be much more costly, unreliable, and environmentally
damaging in the long run.
Countries electing to operate primarily through short-term or spot markets will need carefully to
tailor policies if they wish to expand their base of renewable energy projects successfully.
In much of the world, perhaps the most fundamental consideration developing a strategy for new
electricity generation is whether to finance new generation projects on a project basis or a
sovereign-credit basis. Although traditional sovereign-lending activity has diminished in recent
years, it is nevertheless incumbent on government policy makers to ask the critical question: Is
government-financed generation infrastructure a better model than government-financed loans
based on sovereign credit? The following chart illustrates barriers to alternative energy
technologies.
Barriers to Alternative Energy TechnologiesBarriers to Alternative Energy Technologies
• Technology Awareness
- Lack of up-to-date info on the costs, benefits, applications of Renewable
Energy
• Financing/Risk Perception
- Perceived Risk
- High Capital (Low Operations and Maintenance)
- Non-Recourse Financing
- High Relative Overhead Cost
- Inflation Rates
- Currency Convertability
- Pre-Investment Funding
• Policy
- Not a level playing field
- Subsidies for traditional fuels
- Tariff Barriers for Renewable Energy
• Institutional
- Don’t have in-country organizations/networks in place to identify,
develop and follow through on projects from concept to implementation to
Operations and Maintenance.
• Requirements for Accelerating Utilization
- User Understanding and Acceptance
- Appropriate Financial and Legal Structures
- Equitable Policy Environment
- Better Resource CharacterizationCHAPTER 4. GOVERNMENT’S ROLE IN
THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR
a. GOVERNMENT’S LEGISLATIVE ROLE
b. GOVERNMENT’S REGULATORY ROLE
c. GOVERNMENT’S ROLE IN THE RESOURCE CONCESSION PROCESS
d. GOVERNMENT’S ROLE IN THE MARKET
e. TECHNOLOGY SPECIFIC POLICY STRATEGIES
Risk reduction is one of government’s most important roles in promoting private
investment in the electricity sector. Reducing the number of potential unknowns is especially
important where there is little or no experience with renewable technologies at the national or
local level.
How can Government take a leadership role in risk reduction?
Government leadership in risk reduction can take many forms. Areas where it may be
appropriate for the government to play a role include:
• national energy planning;
• resource evaluation;
• market evaluation;
• least-cost-planning;
• providing access to expertise;
• eliminating obstacles to equitable markets;
• project oversight and evaluation; and
• assistance in providing access to capital and financing.
One of the challenges in creating public-private partnerships is for governments to create an
appropriate environment to attract private investment. When governments act in their sovereign
role as guardians of the public welfare, they are essentially providers of public goods and
services, which in turn may be delivered through public or private channels. When governments
implement policy decisions and resolve political conflicts through the legislative and regulatory
process, their role is objectively to carry out the will of the body politic.
The essence of public-private partnership is the arrangement for private capital to finance
dd ihih tditillhbidd bblititicommercial interests in favor of even-handed implementation of its political and policy objectives.
a. GOVERNMENT’S LEGISLATIVE ROLE
Legislation and regulation are two primary tools used for achieving public interest goals.
A legal regime provides the underpinnings for commercial transactions to take place. Legislation
can help to remove legal, economic and social barriers to investments in new technologies and
investments in specific market sectors. It can provide a framework for the ownership and
financing of infrastructure improvements and can provide incentives to encourage greater
investment and use of goods with public interest benefits. Clear legal and regulatory guidelines
contribute to a stable and predictable market within which the financial community - both
domestic international - feels comfortable in investing.
What legislative features promote private-sector investment in the energy sector?
Statutory and legal standards which dearly define and assign the authority and role of the
government and its various ministries, departments or agencies regarding the electricity sector
will enhance the attractiveness of the electricity market for potential investors.
Ensuring transparency of government decision-making treatment of all developers maximizes
competition. “Transparency” refers to procedures in which all factors and values are known
ahead of time, allowing all the participants in a project to understand the criteria upon which
discussions will be based. The potential participants in a project may include a combination of
private-sector, public-sector and quasi-public-sector entities - such as private developers, a
national or local government entity, non-governmental organizations (“NGO’s”) and private or
quasi-public lenders.
The following eight-step process may be useful for legislative strategists establishing
renewable energy policy:
Step 1. Articulate the hierarchy of broad national economic, infrastructure and energy
goals, clearly differentiating between the desired ends and the means devised to reach
those ends. Use this statement as a touchstone in evaluating, establishing and defending a
national renewable energy policy.
Step 2. Determine objectives in the electricity sector.
Step 3. Establish the role of renewable resources in the energy mix. Identify the available
or potential renewable resources. Determine whether such a supply and demand analysis
supports a goal of attracting new capital investment into new renewable resource generating
capacity. Define the term “Renewable Resources”. Clarify that definition by setting forth the
specific resources and defining each separate renewable resource. Incorporate technical,
political and legal concepts.Step 5. Identify existing and potential impediments.
Step 6. Identify the available mechanisms to remove the barriers to achieving renewable
energy policy objectives. Identify incentives which may apply broadly to all private investors
in any infrastructure project. Identify incentives which bridge hurdles to private-sector
investment in renewable energy power generation and which may apply to unique situations of
a specific renewable resource.
Step 7. Design a legal vehicle. Strive for expedited implementation of the policy objective, but
ensure that government undertakings may be relied on without frequent ministerial, judicial, or
arbitral interpretation.
Step 8. Design a regulatory vehicle. Implement the policy objectives established in the law.
Test proposed laws and regulations in the affected community before finalizing.
A useful strategy is to test proposed laws within the community which the law will govern
before the law is finalized. This test may simply involve distributing a proposed piece of
legislation to the affected community for comment, and it may involve executive-branch or
legislative-branch hearings before a law is enacted. Under either approach, potential
misunderstandings may be resolved. Strive to overcome impediments at the outset of
putting a legal regime into motion before course correction becomes difficult if not impossible.
In this process, the strategist may find three drafting issues critical:
• the guidelines for government decision making,
• the treatment of similarly situated parties, and
• the protection for investors.
Guidelines for government decision making.
Predictability in government decision-making is critical to investment. In every step in which the
government must establish a statutory or regulatory process, the investment community will
examine the standards that the government will apply in making decisions. Vague or nonexistent
standards are viewed with skepticism by an investment community aware of the problems often
inherent in laws allowing arbitrary and capricious government decision making. Furthermore, the
lack of time-forcing decisions is also often an issue discouraging investment A bureaucracy
without time limits creates time delays costly to the private sector.
Encouraging international private-sector investment.
Equal treatment of domestic and foreign parties is essential if foreign investors are to be
encouraged. In some legal regimes, it is a valid objective to give statutory preference to nationals
over foreign investors. In a resource development regime, in which foreign private-sector
investment is a major objectiveunequal treatment will have a chilling effect on theThe constitutional and legal investment climate is an essential component in investment
allocation decisions. A foreign investor will seldom place its capital in countries unless, when,
taken together, the body of laws in a country allow private investors to repatriate their profits and
compete fairly with nationals.
National constitutions that respect and protect private property rights and enable laws that
provide for private participation in the ownership and control of energy generation facilities are
generally a prerequisite to outside investors and the international lending community. This
generality does not mean that a country should necessarily have laws which allow for total
ownership by the private sector. The investor is concerned primarily with exercising the right to
make critical economic decisions free from governmental and political interference. Accordingly,
a law that provides for majority (at least a 50.1 percent) ownership by the private sector will
generally be acceptable to the international community. There are many additional ways to give
the private sector the control it seeks while protecting the public interest in the facility. In the
United Kingdom, for example, the government retains a “Golden Share” (which is a limited
non-majority ownership interest) which allows it to veto certain fundamental changes.
What legislative features promote private-sector investment in the Renewable resource
sector?
A renewable resources law serves three principal functions:
1. A law that focuses on renewable energy resource development allows a country to
put together a systematic approach to the development and utilization of these
resources. A focused and systematic approach has the best chance of achieving the
policy objective of producing electricity from renewable resources.
2. A renewable resources law supports renewable resource investments. It helps
establish the predictability necessary for investors to evaluate the risks of investment
and to allow investment in a country’s renewable resource sector.
3. Each of the renewables - hydro, geothermal, biomass, wind and solar - are unique
resources. Rational exploitation of individual renewable resources requires
resource-specific development laws.
For a country to be successful in bringing a policy goal to concrete reality, every implementing
law, every implementing regulation, must make the achievement of that goal easy, practical and
possible. Experience worldwide teaches that countries who try to develop renewable resources,
relying only on a patchwork of unrelated laws, have generally not succeeded.
For example, geothermal energy may be defined as the “heat of the earth”. It is a unique
resource and as such requires a particular set of development laws. There are significant
differences between the extraction of minerals, water or hydrocarbon resources and the
extraction of geothermal resources. Internationally, attempts to develop geothermal resources
pursuant to mineralwater and hydrocarbon laws have proven difficult or impracticalOf equalppggg pj
• the exclusive right to explore and extract or use the relevant resource in an area
that he can access; and
• the right to generate and sell electricity (and other products) from any resource
developed.
Financial institutions insist that such rights be secured by law.
The only way that a hydro, geothermal, biomass, wind or solar private-sector power developer
can make money - pay its debts and earn a profit - from developing a renewable resource, is to
convert that resource to electricity.
Therefore, in order for an entrepreneur to finance a renewable energy project, it must first secure
the legal right to enter the land, the right to explore for, extract, or use its renewable resource,
and the right to convert that resource to electricity and sell electricity to a customer. Furthermore,
these legal rights must be firmly in place before a developer can obtain financing.
A legal regime consists of laws, regulations (and subordinate procedural documents) and
contracts. The following discussions review the elements of those four elements of a legal
regime.
How does the legislator identify the requisite legal rights and duties?
It is essential that legal draftsmen understand the nature of the resource and the nature of
the renewable resource development process. Form must follow function. To be effective,
laws must be consistent with real world situations.
For each step of the renewable resource development process identify the developer’s
need, the corresponding legal right required to fulfill that need, and the accompanying
legal duty imposed as a reciprocal responsibility.
The policy-maker should endeavor to identify the developer’s need, the corresponding legal right
required to fulfill that need, and the accompanying legal duty imposed as a reciprocal
responsibility. For each step of the development process, a law that is designed to foster
renewable resource development sets forth legal rights which address the needs of the
developer. Each right has a concomitant or accompanying duty.
As previously discussed in Chapter 1b (Renewable Energy Overview: Cost-Effectiveness of
Renewable Energy), one can identify three distinct stages in renewable energy development.
From these three discrete development stages: “reconnaissance”, “exploration” and
“exploitation” flow three related areas of legal rights and duties.
Reconnaissance. Developers of geothermal, hydropower, biomass, wind and solar technologies
in grid applications may need access to relatively large areas in which resources may exist.
Reconnaissance activities have minimal impact on the environment of the landIt is in the mutual, qgp
that resource. The government, in turn, needs to ensure that a speculator does not claim a vast
track of land, then sit on it without any intention to develop it - thus establishing a “use or lose”
policy is prudent. Exploration activities often require building roads to haul heavy equipment.
They may also require temporary surface rights to the land on which to set resource measuring
equipment (such as wind anemometers or stream flow gages), excavation equipment or drilling
rigs. Therefore, during the exploration phase, developers need rights of way and the use of a
relatively small amount of surface land. The government, in turn, is concerned that compensation
to the owner of the surface rights is equitable for both the developer and the surface land owner.
With the absence of an easement or other surface right acquisition mechanism, some
surface-right owners may attempt to extract an excessive fee from the developer. Furthermore,
some private-sector developers may be less experienced than others. Therefore, it is in the
interest of the public that the government impose duties - standards of safety - on the less
competent developers and ensure environmental protection compliance on all parties.
Reconcile currently existing or projected laws to integrate renewable resource
development policy objectives into a comprehensive and comprehensible whole.
Exploitation. Installation of a generating facility requires the use of a definite land area for a long
time period - perhaps indefinitely. Rational resource use often requires the government to
legislate safeguards. In the case of hydropower, the government may want to ensure that the
volume of water flow in the river is not impacted to such a degree that other uses for the
resource, such as agricultural irrigation are impeded. Likewise, in the case of geothermal
development, the government may want to ensure that the fluids carrying the geothermal energy
are not depleted but are re-injected. The government may also need to protect the geothermal
field developer from competitors drilling into adjacent areas and “dipping their straws” into the
resource it has developed - thereby reducing field pressure. All renewable resource developers
in grid-connected areas need to be certain that the electricity from developed resources has the
right to be carried over transmission lines, to supply the national grid, and to be distributed to
customers.
What legal tools may be used to establish a renewable energy legal regime?
Develop a clear set of renewable resource laws.
A country may elect among a package of legislative and regulatory tools in the drafting of
a renewable resource law: laws, presidential decrees, ministerial resolutions, regulations, or
amendments to existing laws. Mechanisms must be balanced both for the political ease of
execution and the legal security of a potential developer. The clarity, reliability, specificity and
predictability of the legal and regulatory framework surrounding the electric sector in a country
strongly influences the commitment of private investment to that sector. A legal framework is not
the only factor necessary to attract private investment, but it is among the most important factors.
Investors naturally seek to minimize their risk. Vague or contradictory laws and regulations may
diitftht tttijtgpppy j
The policy strategist may consider a number of approaches designed to overcome these
hurdles:
Ease of drafting and implementing, however, should not be at the sacrifice of a high degree of
certainty that government undertakings may be relied on without frequent ministerial, judicial, or
arbitrary interpretation. Resource laws are but one element in a legal regime governing the
electricity sector. In most countries separate legislation establishes the electricity system,
privatization, mechanisms, and fiscal policies (to cite three of many pieces of legislation which
impact renewable resource development). Currently existing or projected laws will need to be
reviewed, integrated and reconciled to ensure that renewable resource development policy
objectives are integrated into a comprehensive and comprehensible whole.
Develop a clear mechanism for applying renewable resource laws.
It is useful to establish a single government entity with the responsibility and authority for
all aspects of resource development and interagency coordination.
Provide procedures for dispute resolution between project proponents and State
agencies.
Defining a clear and uncomplicated path for the renewable resource developer to follow is a key
to expeditious, cost-effective project development. Ideally, the country will establish a single
government entity with the responsibility and authority for all aspects of resource development. If
that objective proves politically impossible in a given country, responsibility and authority for
interagency coordination ought to be an achievable objective.
In many jurisdictions, the responsibility of agencies is overlapping, and the lines of authority and
jurisdiction are confusing. For example, many countries distribute oversight functions for power
projects among agencies, with no one ministry authorized to make final derisions relating to a
specific project. In such an uncoordinated system, the ministry of finance, for example, may
impose requirements on a project developer in terms of its relationship to a lender or in the form
of reserve requirements for purposes of an unrelated law, which completely frustrates
achievement of the objectives of a resource development law. This irrational interaction of laws
in which the objectives of one law negate the objectives of another robs project development of
the predictability necessary to attract capital. Furthermore, project development is often slowed
or even stopped because of political fighting among state bureaucracies. Accordingly, laws and
regulations which provide clear procedures for dispute resolution between project proponents
and State agencies (and among State agencies themselves) will assure investors that projects
will not be unreasonably delayed.
Government resources may be invested in prefeasibility or feasibility investigations.
The extent of government involvement in pre-feasibility, feasibility, and development, determinesbids in order to have data sufficient to convince developers that sufficient potential exists to
justify development in the proposed concession. In an open bid situation, the host country
generally can be well-served by doing significant resource measurement and evaluation
designed to provide baseline data for the developer who will often be required to do additional,
more extensive feasibility investigations on its own. Government-funded exploration can be a
positive factor from the private-sector perspective in the development of such resources as
geothermal, in which exploratory drilling is not easily financeable and requires private-sector
equity investment.
Government-funded exploration in such circumstances, may speed resource development. The
government, of course, may seek reimbursement for these efforts. The amount of, and
mechanisms for, such reimbursement is a policy issue to be considered.
Governments may require security to assure long term productivity.
Every country is concerned with the long-term viability of resource development. In those
situations where the developer will build and operate the project only for a certain period of time
and then transfer the project to a governmental authority (a process known as “BOT” -
build-own-transfer), the country is justified in requiring security to assure long-term productivity.
Regulating for Diverse Rights
Rights to various resources on the same land may be licensed or let by concessions. This
multiple-license situation is known as “juxtaposed diverse rights”. To the extent that a resource
concession may interfere with other surface or subsurface uses, the regulatory regime may
make specific provisions for juxtaposed diverse rights. In some jurisdictions, the problem may
require resolution in the organic law.
In the event that an application for renewable resource rights is presented for a resource area
in which there are previously registered rights of a different legal origin and judicial nature (such
as rights derived from legislation pertaining to hydrocarbons, or mining or electricity), the bearer
of a renewable resource right should exercise its rights in a manner to avoid creating material
damage to the holder of the other rights.
In the event that the holders of different renewable concessions of the same nature determine
that these concessions, for example, may overlie the same interconnected geothermal
resource, or may interfere with the same hydro resource, or may affect each others’ wind
source, it is essential that mechanisms be established to reconcile such competing interests as
well as to ensure rational resource development
Consider requiring security to assure long-term productivity for BOT-type projects.
However, in situations in which the developer will build, own and operate and (perhaps) transfer
the facility - processes known as “BOO” or “BOOT” - such security may not be needed orqgy 
policy maker.
Certain national resources, such as geothermal and hydro, are held in trust for the benefit of the
populace. To allow their development without receiving payment from the developer may prove a
political impossibility in some jurisdictions yet it is the energy users in the populace who, in fact,
are paying for the resource use, although indirectly. Moreover, the government will have
expenses in establishing a resource regulatory regime. By establishing a payment requirement
on the developer the government may be able to fund these regulatory costs - again at the price
of imposing an indirect tax on the electricity user. The policy maker should be mindful, however,
that any solution which imposes different costs on different classes of energy generators will
change the competitive cost of delivered power.
What fiscal incentives to promote renewable resource development are available to the
legislative drafter?
The following are some of the legislative mechanisms that can be promoted depending upon the
structure of the electricity system and the goals and objectives within a country.
Impose a tax on sales of electricity generated from carbon-based fuels with resulting tax
revenues dedicated to development of renewable resources.
Carbon-based tax.
One option may be to tax sales of electricity generated by polluting fossil fuels and use the
revenue to pay a premium to generators utilizing non-polluting renewable energy sources. While
this option may not provide the maximum amount of security desired by lenders, it will provide
additional enhancement to the projected revenues received by a “merchant plant,” thereby
improving the financeability of the project.
Collaborative financing approaches.
The government may also elect to step up efforts to assist private developers in securing
financing or credit support from the multilateral development agencies. These agencies
recognize the need to encourage the development of non-polluting and indigenous sources of
electricity in emerging nations. With the participation of the large multilaterals, governments may
be able to induce local lending institutions and capital markets to participate in financing. The
more participants in a project, the more risks are shared. In market regimes which do not enable
long-term power contracts, the lending community sees significant risk. If that risk can be shared
among a greater number of parties, it enhances the likelihood of a project’s being financed. One
can envision a renewable energy, merchant plant project finance scheme in which venture
capital provides 30 percent equity and 70 percent debt is shared among a consortium of local
banks (thus significantly reducing local currency exchange issues) and more traditional lending
sources. This approach could include guarantees by a partnership between the national
government and one or more multilateral development agenciesGuarantees by thepy g gy pj
Credit mechanisms.
Other possibilities would include the creation of a “guarantee fund”, sponsored by the national
government and the multilaterals, which, although not project specific, would be available to
lenders of failed projects which had qualified to be covered by the fund. Revolving funds consist
of a dedicated pool of monies contributed by the government for the purpose of providing debt or
equity capital for investment in renewable resources projects. As funds are invested and repaid
(including a rate of return which approximates market conditions) the fund grows, thereby
facilitating financing of more projects.
Create a national guarantee fund or revolving fund which is available as credit support to
all qualified developers of renewable energy facilities.
Feebates or environmental dispatch.
“Feebates” are a revenue-neutral strategy (for the wholesale market) that places a pollution fee
on electricity generated by more polluting technologies and gives rebates to electricity supplied
by cleaner technologies. “Environmental dispatch” uses a pollution index to adjust the
resource cost and dispatch power. The difference between the pollution index and the feebate is
that the pollution index is not necessarily revenue neutral.
Both the feebate and environmental dispatch mechanisms can be instituted at either the state or
national (federal) level and both are compatible with either a monopoly or market-based utility
model. Both mechanisms affect all generation resources sold in the wholesale market, and
internalize environmental costs in the short-term as well as the long-term market. The challenge
in establishing either of these mechanisms is the difficulty of agreeing on a set of specific
pollution indices (environmental externality values).
Provide fiscal incentives that will allow renewables to compete in an open-market system.
Fiscal incentives.
Fiscal incentives will always serve to attract private investors. They make renewable energy
projects more financeable by reducing the capital costs and thereby providing greater comfort to
the lenders that there will be sufficient revenues to pay the debt. Examples of fiscal incentives
are: accelerated tax depreciation, removal or reduction of trade barriers on renewable energy
equipment and investment-tax credits for capital costs.
Government purchase.
One of the strongest forms of influence is by example. If government entities such as schools,
hospitals, government buildings and water districts, use electricity from renewable sources, this
usage sets an important example for others. It also allows people to gain direct experience in
working with various types of renewable energy facilitiesPortfolio standard.
The government may mandate that all distribution companies have a certain amount of
renewable energy capacity in their portfolio by requiring them to enter into long-term power
purchase agreements with renewable energy project sponsors. These contracts could be for a
term of years, renewable at the option of the distribution company. The distribution companies
would be able to enjoy the economic benefits of a renewable project after its capital costs have
been retired, a potentially valuable hedge in the event of an increase in the wholesale market
price for electricity. New renewable energy facilities brought on line through a portfolio mandate
may result in higher energy prices in the short-term, but the impact of the mandate will diminish,
and the economics of these projects will “turn around” as the debt-service costs of these facilities
are retired.
Appendix D contains a more detailed explanation of the renewables portfolio standard
approach.
b. GOVERNMENT’S REGULATORY ROLE
The private sector will not invest money into electricity generation (or any other aspect of
the electricity sector) unless and until there is regulatory stability. Since regulators
implement the law, regulatory actions become the framework within which electricity
sector investments are made. The business community looks for a constant set of
regulations and guidelines upon which investment decisions depend for their viability.
This section deals specifically with economic regulation and the regulation of natural resource
use. Environmental regulation can also affect the electricity sector, but is outside the scope of
this paper.
When is Government regulation necessary in a competitive environment?
Economic regulation.
The goal of regulation is the promulgation and preservation of the public interest
When a sector of government owns and operates the electricity industry, it is assumed that the
public’s interests will be expressed and protected through existing government processes. This
assumption, however, is not always valid - as evidenced by the numerous examples in which the
political process, particularly the influence of special interest groups, has subverted the public’s
interest in the policies that govern operation of the electric sector. When some or all of the
electric industry functions are privatized or capitalized, or where competition is otherwise
introduced into one or more of the electricity functions, the need for independent regulation
emerges. In these situations, independent regulation is necessary because it is believed that the• ensure reliable power at the lowest price;
• establish processes that result in sufficient revenues to attract additional investment
in electricity infrastructure as required to ensure reliable power at a reasonable price;
and
• design rate structures (tariffs) and incentives (price signals) to encourage the wide
use of electricity.
Privatization and Capitalization.
One can bring new private-sector money in to dean up, re-power, and replace an existing
government-owned electricity system base by restructuring the electric sector to allow the sale,
in whole or part, of existing faculties to private-sector investors. Governments can either rely
exclusively on the profit motive to ensure the desired upgrades, or they can couple the sale
with the condition that revenue will in part be piled back into the requisite up-gradation. In either
event, the sale of such facilities ends the existing government-monopoly structures. The terms
applied to these types of enabling mechanisms are “privatization” and “capitalization”.
“Privatization” involves the transfer of state-owned utility assets to the private-sector. For
example, the state may sell assets to private investors who then have 100% ownership. The
private-sector investor’s purchase price goes into the country’s treasury to be used to plug the
fiscal deficit or other state spending priorities. Privatization may or may not involve me
structural unbundling of the vertically integrated utility and may or may not introduce
competition into the utility system. Privatization alters the means of monitoring managerial
behavior. Privatization of a monopoly industry also involves development of a regulatory
structure to correct market imperfections and to prevent abuse of monopoly power.
“Capitalization” involves the government’s contributing a given state asset to be matched by a
capital contribution from an investor equivalent to the market value of the company. Under the
capitalization scheme, generally a new corporation is formed which is jointly owned by the
government and the private-sector “strategic investor”. The private investor administers or
manages the new corporation as its single largest stock holder. Under the capitalization
scheme, the capital remains with the company and can be entirely channeled into new
investment and production. This is a less commonly used mechanism than privatization.
What type of government organization administers regulations?
In many of the countries that are just introducing competitive markets into the electricity sector
there is little regulatory experience. Experience indicates that in virtually every electricity sector
that is attempting to move to a fully competitive market type, some independent system of
regulation or oversight has been necessary to guide this new market to ensure competition
actually developsFrequently governments determine that separate regulatory agencies are bestquasi-independent regulatory bodies, although susceptible to political pressure from a variety of
sources, tend to be more independent and better informed about implementation issues than
legislative bodies.
Regulatory commissions also serve as arbitrators who settle disputes that necessarily arise from
time to time concerning contractual relationships among the key stakeholder groups.
This Manual does not attempt to discuss all the aspects of developing an effective independent
regulatory regime. Rather, the guiding principles are highlighted and regulatory activities
specifically related to the development of independent investments in the electricity sector (and
specifically renewable generating facilities) are noted.
How does the economic regulator design a regulatory regime to promote renewables
while protecting other public interest issues?
The policy strategist designs regulations to promote developmental investment in the renewable
energy resources, while simultaneously establishing reasonable standards for the protection of
the people and the environment of the country.
In developing regulation, the two primary tasks are:
• identifying the public’s interest that is being fostered or protected; and
• identifying the mechanisms and tools that can accomplish this task with the least
disruption to the market and the least-cost to the public.
In most cases the basic policy goals and directions are established through the legislative
process then implemented through the regulatory process. Workable rules and regulations
coupled with training of regulators and their staffs are critical components of an effective
regulatory regime.
Experience indicates the primary economic regulatory areas specifically associated with the
development of renewable resources include:
• calculation of the total value of renewable resources to the electricity system;
• analysis and comparison of various types of power within the resource planning
process and how to account for the environmental benefits of renewable resources in
the planning process;
• how to design technology-neutral requests for proposals for generation to be
developed by independent power producers;
• how to develop standardized contracts for purchasing power from renewable
resource facilities;
• how to provide fair and open transmission access for intermittent renewableresource development?
The regulatory structure conclusively establishes how a country’s resource policy will be
implemented in practice. Every experienced investor understands that the laws of a country are
only first-level indications. Sometimes, for example, a development incentive which has been
established as a matter of policy - in a law - has never been implemented as a matter of practice
- in a regulation.
The following natural resource development policy strategies have proven sound in the drafting
of new regulatory regimes in countries which are attempting to lay the groundwork for renewable
resource development:
• Regulations while promoting resource development should also be designed to
strike a balance between development and protection. Regulations must prevent
waste and ensure the environmental integrity of the resources while they are being
developed.
• Policy strategists can learn valuable information from countries that have already
developed their resources; however, resource development regulations should be
tailored to the environment of the country. What works in one country will not
necessarily work in another.
• Adhere to the rule “don’t over-regulate what you don’t have”. Regulations should
not prematurely attempt to duplicate a regulatory system in place in a country which
has extensive renewable resource development.
• Strike a balance between essential monitoring and over burdensome and costly
reporting. Inspection and reporting requirements add to the costs of a project and
thereby may dilute its economic viability. For the investor “time is money” and every
moment spent in a reporting process represents an expenditure of time and money
which results in additional project costs as well as delays.
• Both economic and natural resource regulations must be adaptable to tomorrow’s
technology. Regulations must be technically sound by today’s standards, but today’s
technology must not be locked in.
Regulations must be technically sound by today’s standards, but today’s technology
should not be locked in.
The following guidelines for developing renewable energy resource regulatory policy provide a
reference for the policy strategist.step for the policy strategist is to articulate the goal of the legislation which underlies all
implementing action. Then, in order to ensure that the legislative goal is enabled, it is essential
that the policy strategist articulates a conceptual objective for the regulations consistent with
the legislative goal.
For example, the conceptual regulatory objective may be two-fold:
• to avoid micro-management of a resource which is not yet developed; and
• to promote a self-regulatory, private-sector environment with the minimum amount of direct
government participation, while still ensuring operationally safe and environmentally sound
conditions.
In other words (using a geothermal example), if it is dear that a safe and sound blowout
prevention program is required, and if the conceptual objective is to minimize direct
governmental participation, the regulations and norms may be directed to establishing
compliance standards, penalties for non compliance, and bonding procedures for restitution in
case of an incident rather than to establish on-scene, government oversight Other objectives
produce different results.
Step 2. Determine the organizational structure within the responsible agency. The renewable
resource regime may provide a single ministry with the authority to promulgate regulations and
to grant authorizations and concessions. Within this context, it is essential to understand how
the designated ministry allocates the promotional and the compliance regulatory functions
between itself and its directorates; how the checks and balances - both formal and informal -
have been instituted; and how the internal decision-making and appellate apparatuses function.
Concomitantly, legislated interfaces among ministries need to be identified. In particular,
fine-tuning the relationship between the ministry designated to oversee renewable resource
development and other ministries is critical in the drafting of the regulations for the various
renewable resources.
Step 3. Identify other laws with potential bearing on the renewable resource regulations.
It is critical to ensure the integration of regulations into the country’s legal regime. For purposes
of standardization, subject matter to be addressed in regulations should be carefully reviewed
to ascertain their coverage in other laws and regulations. The renewable energy resources law
and the proposed regulations should be scrutinized and a check list made of issues that may
be the subject of other laws or regulations. Pertinant laws or regulations can be
cross-referenced or pertinant provisions can be inserted into the renewable resources
regulations in parallel language.
For example, such issues as determination of rights of way, establishment of a record registry,
and provision of environmental standards may be the subject of other laws or regulations.norms. A threshold understanding of the desired allocation of content among laws, regulations
and norms will prevent needless over-drafting of regulations.
Step 5. Draft regulations and subordinate rules as a single package. In many countries, a
regulatory regime is a time-tiered system and a regulation must be in place before a
subordinate rule is finalized. Nevertheless, for reasons of consistency and understanding of the
regulatory concept, a total package should be drafted. Once drafted, they can be refined in
context of regulatory changes, but without seeing and reading a preliminary detailed package
spelling out how a regulatory provision is to operate, the ultimate effectiveness of a regulatory
concept is difficult to envision.
Step 6. Incorporate a legal/technical translator on the regulatory team. A resources
regulatory project designed to attract foreign investment typically includes the drafting of a
definitive regulation and an accurate (not definitive) translation into other languages - English,
Japanese, German, etc. Translations by a translator without a legal background consistently
contain linguistically “accurate” but legally misleading translations - creating text which is
misleading to readers.
Step 7. Encourage a team approach. The government of the policy strategist should be
encouraged to incorporate persons from the private sector, from sister agencies, and from the
legislative branch to participate in an advisory capacity on a regulatory drafting task force.
There are potential risks with this approach - e.g., perceived violations of the rule of separation
of the executive and legislative branches, turf issues between sister agencies, etc.
Nevertheless, the value of incorporating possible “opponents” early-on in the decision-making
process outweighs the potential down-side.
Step 8. Solicit input from industry. In the case of a law designed to promote private-sector
development of a resource, the advice of the potential developers whom the law is designed to
attract and whom the regulations are designed to regulate is invaluable to the policy maker.
Step 9. Allocate sufficient time for the political process. Laws and regulations are not
drafted in a vacuum. Political consensus and will to proceed is based on confidence, and
confidence-building is a time-consuming exercise. Sufficient time must be built into the project
Step 10. Draw on but do not be a slave to, precedent The understanding of regulatory
precedent ‘ from a variety of jurisdictions is essential; however, regulations in one jurisdiction
can seldom be transposed directly into another.
For example, the governments of two countries may concur mat blowout prevention in a
geothermal site is an essential regulatory task; nevertheless, the concept of one government
(that its role as a protector of people requires a regulator to be on site for every well drilled)
may be at odds with the concept of another government (mat the private-sector must be made
responsible for self-regulation).One of the more important regulatory elements is the resource concession process - that
process which allows private sector involvement in most countries’ energy sectors.
What are resource concessions, and how are they granted through the regulatory
process?
Viewed in its broadest context, a concession is any right or privilege which a private developer
must secure from a government before engaging in a business activity. More technically, a
“concession” is a grant of special privileges by a government allowing a private party to exploit
government land or resources.
Most nations proceed on the principle that since the country’s natural resources belong
to the nation as a whole, exploitation of the resources must be controlled by the
government through a rational process of issuing concessions to qualified parties.
Governments consistently issue concessions to generate electricity, operate and maintain
transmission or distribution systems or operate utility systems in discrete sectors of their country.
In many countries governments grant concessions for the right to utilize a water resource or
extract geothermal energy. Some countries may require several concessions to construct, own
and operate a generation project. For example, one may need a concession to explore a
geothermal resource, and then another concession to utilize the resource for the generation of
electricity. In the context of rural electrification, concessions may be offered to private investors
allowing them to develop vertically integrated, privately owned electricity systems for geographic
areas defined in the concession.
Establish objective criteria upon which the selection of the resource concession award
will be based.
In attracting private investment for renewable energy development, the structure of the
concession is extremely important. For example, concessions may be structured so as to attract
private investors, while at the same time the terms of the concession may be structured to
assure that the entity holding the concession completes the proposed objectives (e.g., timely
completion of development).
The following sections describe regulatory principles which are important from both the private
investor’s and the country’s perspective in any concession structure.
Regulations need to state objective criteria upon which the selection of the resource
concession award will be based.
The private investor looks for assurances that the process for granting concessions is fair. From
the private investor’s perspective this means that in the event of competition for a concession,
the government will award the concession to the most qualified applicant, through a transparenttechnical, developmental, and financial perspectives  as well as to evaluate the proposals
responsiveness to the other objectives expressed in the concession offering - will give the
investor greater confidence that its proposal will be fairly evaluated.
Establish objective, qualified panels or committees to oversee competitive awards.
Temporary resource concessions allow candidates for permanent concessions to
evaluate project commercial feasibility.
Where concessions are granted for the development of energy projects and include the right to
construct, own and operate an electricity generating project, the process typically provides for
granting a temporary concession prior to granting a permanent concession. It is in the interest of
all parties to allow developers the time and support to conduct thorough project feasibility
studies. The purpose of the temporary concession is to give the selected developer sufficient
time to undertake more extensive feasibility studies so the developer can assure itself and its
investors that the proposed project makes sense in the final analysis. By linking a temporary
resource concession with a pre-emptive right for the developer to obtain the permanent resource
concession, the government may increase the developer’s confidence that the money spent on
expensive feasibility studies will not be spent in vain. Temporary concessions, although time
limited, are exclusive. For a given project, no more than one temporary concession should be
outstanding at any one time. The holder of the temporary concession needs to be assured that it
will be entitled to a permanent resource concession for the site, so long as it complies with the
terms of the temporary concession. These measures are necessary to ensure that the
concessionaire has the proper motivation to expend the funds necessary for a feasibility analysis
which is sufficient to satisfy a project lender.
Utilize temporary concessions linked to a permanent concession to allow candidates for
permanent concessions to evaluate project commercial feasibility.
A concessionaire needs to know what its rights are and what it must do to maintain them
throughout the period of the concession.
A concessionaire needs complete access to the project site and to all information in the
possession of the government regarding the site, so that it can adequately evaluate the project.
An investor will need confidence that if it obtains a permanent concession it will have the legal
right to acquire, for fair market value, all land and other property (such as riparian rights) needed
for attaining the objective of the concession. An investor will also look closely at the regulations
to see if they provide for a quick and equitable way to resolve disputes between the land owners
and the concessionaires regarding the determination of fair market values. For example, a
dispute resolution process may be put into place which allows the concessionaire to proceed
onto the property if it places a bond or other security instrument as collateral for the ultimate
determination of value. Failure to provide for eminent domain rights leads to situations where an
isolated local landowner can unreasonably delay project development. In the case where a law
requires more than one concession to complete a projectthe investor will want to know exactlyConcessions are often supplemented by secondary instruments (known variously as permits,
licenses, warrants, etc.) empowering the guarantee to do some act, not forbidden by law, but not
allowable without such authority. Many jurisdictions require the holders of concession rights to
obtain secondary permits from various governmental agencies at the local, provincial and/or
federal level. The project developer would like to be assured that, if its proposal conforms to the
requirements of the concession offer, it will be able to obtain the necessary permits at all levels
in a timely and cost effective manner. Investors prefer laws which empower a single agency with
comprehensive authority over all matters, including permits that are needed to proceed with the
proposed project. In many countries multiple agencies require multiple permits and the rules for
the issuance of such permits are random - without reference to government objectives in the
energy sector. Such situations have a chilling effect on investment. Non-exclusive
reconnaissance permits can effectively attract developers to known resource areas. In unknown
(or “wildcat”) areas or in areas in which there is insufficient data, such permits can be even more
effective in encouraging reconnaissance if developers are given an exclusive or preferential right
to convert a reconnaissance permit to a non-competitive concession, or a right to match the
highest bid if the concessions are awarded through competitive bidding.
In resource concessions, establish both the best use of the resource and standards for
determining which concession applicant will meet those needs.
Governments are usually concerned that development make the best use of the available natural
resources. In some instances, equipment efficiency is the paramount issue, as in the case of
hydro and geothermal generation. In other instances, there is a specific task to be performed,
such as pumping water or running certain equipment, and (so long as the task is accomplished
at an acceptable price) efficiencies may be a less important factor. The best use of the resource
may also involve multiple uses. Country objectives for hydroelectric development may include
energy production, flood prevention, irrigation and recreation. Development of solar and wind
projects may need to be consistent with the agricultural uses of the land on which they are
located. It is incumbent upon the regulatory strategist to define in each concession what the
government considers to be the best use of the resource and to develop standards for
determining which concession applicant will best satisfy those defined uses.
A “use or lose” policy requires balancing several considerations.
While the concessionaire may be motivated by a date-specific commitment to provide electricity
under a power sales agreement, the government may establish and monitor timelines. To assure
that the concessionaire is working diligently towards construction of the project, the government
may require that certain milestones be met by the concessionaire in order to retain its
concession rights. This “use or lose” policy assures that developers will not “bank” projects to
prevent other developers from competing for a limited resource or limited market place. By
balancing a “use or lose” policy with government flexibility on excusing unintentional developer
delays (e.g., time consumed by the government, third parties or natural forces), realization of
final project completion may be better assuredIt is generally acceptable to the internationalp
return on its investment, the country’s concerns, while not necessarily in conflict with the private
investor’s, may be broader in scope.
d. GOVERNMENT’S ROLE IN THE MARKET
In countries in which vertically integrated utilities under state ownership or control
predominate, long-term planning is relatively easy. Resource planning allows design of a
capacity expansion program that includes renewables in the country’s generation mix. The
primary challenge under this model is designing a solicitation system that attracts private
investors, fulfills the desired quota of renewables, obtains the utilities’ expected output at
competitive prices and yields projects that are creditworthy. A second critical element of any
resource acquisition process is the power purchase agreement.
How are on-grid, renewable projects best solicited in a state-owned or monopolistic utility
system?
Although there are almost as many different styles of bidding solicitations as there have been
solicitations, most utilities are familiar with all-source bidding procedures: the utility issues a
solicitation seeking bids from project sponsors for capacity and energy, with the bid going to the
lowest cost supplier without regard to the project’s fuel source. By this method, the utility seeks a
specific amount of capacity and purchases the associated energy in accordance with a
per-kilowatt-hour formula that normally allows the project sponsor to recover its fuel cost.
Renewables are likely to be less successful in “all-source” bidding solicitations in which all
technologies compete against each other. The emphasis on fixed cost in all-source solicitations
favors the economies of scale of large, stand-alone fossil plants and creates difficulty in
comparing resources with dissimilar attributes.
All-source bidding solicitations favor thermal projects because the costs associated with thermal
projects can be readily determined and are normally not site specific. Thus, a private-sector bid
to supply fossil-fired thermal generation can be prepared with comparatively little time and
expense.
By contrast, renewable energy projects are normally very site-specific and can require many
months of study before cost information can be developed to the point where a bid can be made.
The criteria established to determine the winning bid in most all-source bidding programs
typically fail to take into account the long-term benefits offered by renewable projects and the
different cost patterns experienced in conventional thermal versus renewable projects. Moreover,
a tendency to take a fairly short-term view in weighing the relative costs and benefits of thermal
versus renewable projects also impedes renewables.
In the case of most conventional thermal projects, per-kilowatt capital costs are low whenUtilities tend to make their acquisition decisions on the basis of a projects capacity and energy
costs in the first few years of a multi-year transaction, giving insufficient weight to the long-term
implications of the arrangement. The design of a bidding program will influence the ability of
particular technology types to compete successfully.
Solicitation and bidding models for renewable energy solicitation.
When a utility has determined what it believes to be a fair price to pay for renewable energy, it
can then initiate the process of attracting private investors to develop the available resources.
There are generally four solicitation models which have been used: the site-specific bid, the
tariff-based solicitation, the site-specific tariff bid, which is a hybrid of the first two, and the
negotiated solicitation.
Site-specific bid models. In this model, the utility has a specific site or sites and a specific
energy source in mind, and asks potential developers to enter a bid for the rights to develop the
site -- the lowest bid wins the right to develop the resource. Unfortunately, experience has shown
that this approach is not effective in attracting private developers of renewable projects. The
problem with this model is that the project developer’s chances of winning such a highly
competitive bid are so low, and the costs of a pre-feasibility study are so high, that a project
developer is generally unwilling to undertake a prefeasability effort sufficient to develop a realistic
bid. Prefeasability studies performed by the host country are rarely specific enough for the
developer to undertake more than a sketchy plan for the project. Those developers willing to
participate in this kind of a solicitation are compelled to make assumptions based on worst-case
scenarios which result in a very high bid price. In fact, most developers have simply elected not
to participate in site-specific bid solicitations. The few that do participate submit bids that are
either not creditworthy or so high as to be unacceptable to the host country. This model has
created many problems in the Philippines, which has been attempting to solicit firm bids for the
development of several hydro sites.
Tariff-based models
A variation on this model has fueled dramatic increases in the development of renewable energy
projects in the United States. In this model the utility undertakes its least-cost planning and
determines the rate, or tariff, it is willing to pay for renewable energy resources. It is critical that
least-cost planning take into consideration all benefits and costs associated with various energy
fuel sources. Predictably, the use of this model will establish rates which are different as
between renewables and non-renewables as well as among the various types of renewables.
Most importantly, the utility determines, on a reasoned basis, and after accounting for all benefits
and costs, the value of its resources.
Once this price is established the utility offers to purchase a set amount of capacity for the
various energy sources at the tariffed price. Assuming developers respond to the solicitation,
they will submit applications to develop specific sites. The utility can then select the proposals
hich best meet the criteria established bthe tilitand aard temporarconcessions giingsolicitation. Or, the utility may conclude that the resource does not provide sufficient value in the
current marketplace based on the originally established criteria and therefore abandon the
particular resource until market conditions change.
Hybrid, site-specific tariff bid models.
Again the utility undertakes least-cost planning and determines the price it is willing to pay for a
particular energy source. This price can then be included in a solicitation for site-specific
renewable projects, with the understanding that the price included in the solicitation will be the
ceiling price. Developers can then submit bids based on a percentage of the ceiling price. This
method seeks to ensure that the utility will fulfill the goal included in the Comprehensive Plan
regarding the expansion of the nation’s base of renewable resources, while at the same time
bringing competitive pressure to bear on project sponsors to constrain bids. However, this
method presents similar problems associated with the first model: the feasibility studies supplied
to investors may be based on unreliable or incomplete data, making it very difficult to develop
firm bids. The effort could ultimately prove futile if no bids are received or may even need to be
repeated if the received bids turn out to be impracticable.
Pre-qualification/negotiation models.
This model begins with a pre-qualification process whereby the utility establishes transparent
criteria for qualification. These criteria should include not only technical ability and experience,
but factors related to financial capability and the ability to obtain necessary financing for the
construction of the project.
Once the participants in the process have been pre-qualified, the utility can then prioritize the
successful qualifiers according to another set of criteria. That set of criteria should be based
partly on the relative merits of the pre-qualification criteria as well as such criteria as the party’s
willingness to involve the utility and government in certain aspects of decision-making. the
willingness of the party to provide incentives and equity participation to workers and employees
and other matters that may be of particular importance to the government. Once the qualified
parties are ranked, negotiations can begin with those at the top of the list according to a strict
schedule requiring progress on such negotiations. Negotiations must be transparent and
arbitrary rankings would need to be prohibited. This model has been used successfully in some
counties, but has recently come into disfavor because of perceived or real favoritism in the
process. A verifiable means of assuring transparency is critical to the success of this model.
A variation on this approach is to use the pre-qualification process to establish a bidder’s list.
The pre-qualified bidders then submit proposals addressing a discrete set of project attributes
and requirements. Bids are evaluated on the basis of price and non-price factors and the bidder
with the highest score wins the bid.
Certain energy projects are either too small to justify inclusion in a solicitation of utility-grade
projects, or are able to deliver energy only on an intermittent basis, and special rules should beElectricity, not the renewable resource, is the product of value.
What is the role of power purchase agreements in private-sector development of
renewable resources?
The success of a country in attracting private capital is directly related to its sensitivity to the way
in which private investors generate investment capital in the world markets. In particular, the
renewable resource industry uses project financing for grid-connected systems.
“Project financing” is a mechanism whereby a developer borrows money and repays it from
the revenues generated by the project.
The single most important key to project financing is a power purchase agreement. A “power
purchase agreement” is the contract between the owner of a power-generating facility and its
customers. In this agreement, the customer promises to pay a pre-negotiated rate for power and
capacity over a period of years, assuming that the generation facility performs as promised.
The importance of the power purchase agreement to a developer may be more dearly
understood by looking at these agreements from a developer’s perspective. A geothermal
energy investor, for example, has to spend money to explore for geothermal resources much the
same way one does in prospecting for gold or oil - however, the geothermal prospector cannot
export hot steam abroad. Similarly, the hydropower energy investor has to spend money to
create a reservoir and the biomass, wind and solar developers have to invest in technology that
converts a source of potential natural energy into electricity. Electricity. not the resource, is the
product of value. Therefore bankers must be assured that someone in the producing country will
buy electricity at a price that will generate sufficient revenues to repay borrowed monies - or that
the electricity will be exported and bought by a customer in a neighboring country. For example,
during the 1990’s Mexico has been exporting approximately 500 megawatts of
geothermal-generated electricity to Southern California.
Electricity, not the renewable resource, is the product of value.
Streamline and standardize the legal and regulatory procedures for power purchase
agreements between the utility and private power producers to minimize costly delays
and complications in contract negotiations.
A power purchase agreement is a means to an end. If the policy objective is to enable
private-sector entrepreneurs to develop renewable energy, grid-connected facilities to sell power
in a country, a power purchase agreement is the most effective mechanism presently in use to
allow financing of private-sector generation facilities. Power purchase agreements are effective
tools only in countries in which national legislation or practice allows entities other than the
national utility to generate electricity.
What is the role of power purchase agreements in the renewable energy context?process, but will also place bidders on notice regarding the terms and conditions of the contract.
Since, from the developer’s perspective, contract terms translate directly into costs and benefits,
communicating the terms sought by the utility to prospective bidders permits the bidders to
embody a complete assessment of the economics of the transaction in their bids. Without a firm
understanding of these factors, bidders will be forced to rely on guesswork in formulating their
bids, undermining the entire bidding process.
A power purchase agreement for renewables that has substantial monthly capacity
payments can have fairly modest payments for delivered energy.
What policy issues need to be considered by the government in the context of power
purchase agreements for renewables?
In general, the legal and regulatory procedures for power purchase agreements between the
utility and private power producers need to be streamlined and standardized to minimize costly
delays and complications in contract negotiations.
When preparing a standard power purchase agreement, utilities and other power purchasers
should be aware that renewable facilities differ from conventional hydrocarbon-fueled projects in
several ways. Failure to reflect these differences in the power contract will complicate, if not
preclude. the renewable project’s ability to attract financing. Fortunately, these differences can
be accommodated without compromising the power purchaser’s position.
Renewable projects tend to be far more capital-intensive than conventionally fired facilities. The
typical renewable project will have a very high proportion of fixed cost - chiefly in the form of debt
service - and a low proportion of costs that vary with the output of the plant. Given this cost
structure, renewable projects seeking financing need to be able to demonstrate that the power
contract will produce a very steady cash flow over the life of the financing. This demonstration of
commercial viability can best be achieved by negotiating a power contract with some customer -
be it a utility. a distributor or a commercial facility - that has substantial monthly capacity
payments (payments per kilowatt of deliverable capacity). If the capacity payments are sufficient,
then the payments for delivered energy (payments per kilowatt hour of delivered energy) can be
fairly modest. This kind of payment structure presents a relatively low risk profile to investors,
and the resulting lower debt service costs can be reflected in the prices paid by the utility under
the power contract.
Pricing for power purchased from an independent power producer needs to reflect its value to
the purchaser in terms of the power producer’s ability to meet on-peak, off-peak, baseload and
peaking capacity requirements. Given the higher value of electricity generated during peak
demand, the cost difference between peak and off-peak electricity prices needs to be dearly
defined. Alternative capacity payment and dispatching language can be developed and included
for subsequent negotiation.
What are the major source-specific considerations in developing a power purchasejjy ggy y g
fixed output level around the clock. The power contract should include substantial capacity
payments and very low energy payments, reflecting the typical cost structure of these projects.
Capacity testing provisions can be based on the adequacy and regularity of deliveries during
on-peak hours. Dispatching provisions should be limited to a requirement that the unit go to
maximum output if required in the case of emergencies.
As a practical matter, dispatching provisions that allow the utility to reduce the unit’s output
below its normal operating level will result in a waste of the available geothermal energy and can
engender additional operations and maintenance costs, and therefore should not be included.
Hydroelectric Projects. Hydroelectric projects come in two varieties, peaking (or storage)
projects, and run-of-the-river projects. In drafting power contracts this distinction must be kept in
mind.
In the case of run-of-the-river projects, the operator of the project normally has very limited
control over the output of the project: the project’s deliveries vary with the water level in the river.
In these cases, capacity payments can be tied to the results of regular capacity audits of the
facility, or to actual on-peak deliveries. The power contract should not, however, contain
dispatching provisions given the operator’s limited control over the facility’s output.
Power purchase agreement for the renewables should reflect the value to the purchaser
in terms of the power producer’s ability to meet on-peak, off-peak, baseload and peaking
capacity requirements.
By contrast, peaking hydro facilities offer substantial capacity and dispatching benefits. A true
peaking hydro unit will normally have a large reservoir behind its impoundment. Water flowing
into the reservoir can be stored during low load periods such as weekends or evenings. At timesshould be completely subject to utility dispatch.
Wind and Solar Projects. Deliveries from wind and solar projects depend entirely on the
availability of wind or sun at the site, although in many cases generation patterns from these
sources consistently conform to utility load - patterns. Accordingly, contract provisions should
allow for capacity payments in the event that the project demonstrates consistent deliveries of
energy during on-peak (high demand) periods. Dispatching provisions should not be included,
since the operator has very limited control over the instantaneous output of the project.
Biomass Projects. Many biomass projects are operated as cogenerators; they support
production or manufacturing in a nearby industrial facility, such as a sugar or paper mill. In a
typical application, the biomass unit will be both generating electricity (either for the grid, for the
industrial host’s electric load, or for both) and providing process steam to the host facility during
all hours of the day and night. In this kind of operation, the typical biomass facility should be
regarded in the same light as a geothermal plant: it should be expected to run in a base load
pattern (around the dock) and should not be expected to respond to dispatching orders except in
emergency situations, and then only if their design permits.standpoint, these projects can be built and operated most economically in the base load
approach followed by cogenerators.
Utilities requiring generating sources that have the capability to follow load fluctuations can
negotiate with stand-alone biomass projects to obtain such capacity, but should expect to pay
somewhat higher prices than for base load output, given the higher capital and operational costs
encountered in building and operating these types of stand alone biomass projects.
Power purchase agreements are difficult to formulate in the abstract. Each country, each utility,
each generating source is sufficiently unique in that, when coupled with the issue of renewable
resource objectives, a model power purchase agreement, prepared in the abstract, without
reference to concrete issues, can be an irrelevant document. With this very strong caveat, the
agreement outline contained in Appendix C is designed to provide a very basic overview. The
drafters of a country specific power purchase agreement are urged to seek expert technical,
legal and financial counsel.
e. TECHNOLOGY SPECIFIC POLICY STRATEGIES
Depending upon the renewable resources that have been identified as factoring into the national
energy mix, the policy strategist may determine that a resource-specific legal regime may need
to be enacted and that resource-specific incentives may need to be put in place in order to
encourage resource development - especially if a domestic industry is non-existent.
There are two principal resource issues with which the policy strategist will have to be familiar:
the development of the resource (e.g., the need for a geothermal resource extraction law), and
the generation or “dispatchability” characteristics of the resource (e.g., base load, intermittent
load, distributed power, etc.). The legal issues regarding resource development are discussed
below in this section. Dispatchability is especially worthy of note in the context of “intermittent”
resources.
How are intermittent resources built into a generation mix?
Dispatchability is an area of significant interest for policy strategists concerned with the
renewables. The term “dispatchability” refers to the degree of control that the utility will have
over the output of the project. For example, in the case of a project that is fully dispatchable, the
utility will have the right to change the output level of the unit from full output to zero output and
back again whenever it chooses to do so.
For some types of units under certain types of power contracts, full dispatchability can be
accommodated. For example, a hydroelectric unit that can go from full load to zero load without
violating its environmental permits could agree to full dispatchability so long as its power contract
or power purchase agreement had the kind of substantial capacity payments described in
Chapter 4d (Government’s Role in the Market)In the case of a run-of-the-river hydro project or aobtain from the utility is a power contract requiring substantial dispatchability features and with
payments solely for energy delivered.
Intermittent renewable energy is cost competitive with energy from fossil-fuel generating
stations. It must be recognized, however, that the competitiveness of intermittent renewable
fuels is realized over the life-cycle of a generating facility as the low cost of fuel and operations
off-sets the front-end capital costs of a renewable facility.
The following list illustrates the types of incentives which may apply to unique situations
of a specific renewable resource:
Biomass. Create special biomass resource concession for energy use.
Co-Financing of Exploration. Provide government-financed resource development
or identification in whole or part by the government.
Concessional Financing. Allow for pioneer renewable industries with soft loans, or
provide soft loans only in remote areas.
Geothermal Drilling. Provide depletion allowance for drilling investment (based on
income not on capital investment) and expending of intangible drilling costs to offset
exploratory risk factor.
Geothermal Resources. Create a specific law dealing with the unique qualities of
geothermal resources. Geothermal resources cannot successfully be managed
under existing water, hydrocarbon or mining laws.
Infant Industries. Focus on safety and environmental protection when drafting
regulations and avoid micro-management particularly for infant renewable industries.
In circumstances in which governmental action is prerequisite to industry action,
delay on the part of the government should be construed as government approval.
Mini/Micro/Small Hydro. Support the canal or cluster approach.
Watershed. Initiate joint responsibility between the government and the proponent
for the maintenance of watersheds. Especially in rural hydropower projects, water
availability is influenced by a project’s watershed.
Windpower. Establish capacity definitions for intermittent resources.
Windpower/Small Hydro. Establish exemption or streamlined procedures for
environmental mitigation and forestry clearance.
When promoting infant renewable industries, focus regulations on safety and
environmental protection and avoid micro-management.
One critical element in a potential lender’s analysis of project economics is the pricing of goodswill pay an economically viable price for their energy.
In the United States, the financeability of electric energy generation projects was enhanced by
legislation requiring electric utilities to purchase energy at a price equal to so-called “avoided
cost”. The advantage of such an approach is that it establishes a more-or-less objectively
determinable level of prices for the project’s output (i.e., a fixed or determinable revenue stream).
On the other hand, much has been written about the various economic models used to calculate
“total costs,” much of which supports the conclusion that the value of privately-generated
energy is often in the eyes of the beholding economist. Laws may establish a sound framework
for investment of private capital, if they take into account the fact that financial markets require
certainty of revenues, and if they provide concrete guidance with respect to rates payable for
project-financed infrastructure goods and services.
What legislative and regulatory tools are available for Government to take a pro-active
role in creating an environment conducive to renewable resource project development?
The following list illustrates the types of tools that have been applied internationally to
encourage entrepreneurs to develop new renewable generating sites that can provide an
income stream for repayment of principal and interest as well as a - reasonable rate of
return on investment. These strategies can be used to encourage greater use of
renewable resources and can be implemented through legislative, regulatory or
administrative actions depending upon the structure of the government and its
relationship to utility activities.
Capital allowances/depreciation. The book value of assets may be depredated for tax
purposes at liberal rates.
Clear guidelines. Clear and authoritative guideline information may consolidate and set forth the
various laws and regulations for developers to use in developing a private, renewable energy
power project.
Establishment of ombudsman. Designate a person or agency to be responsible for the
promotion of renewable energy sources. Concomitant authority, responsibility and access to high
level decision-makers is essential.
Income tax holiday. Renewable energy firms may be fully or partially exempt from income taxes
for a sufficient number of years to allow either accelerated principal and interest payments or a
reasonable rate of return on investment.
Investment credit. A percentage of every dollar invested in a renewable energy resource
project development may offset future tax owed.
Labor. Renewable energy firms may employ foreign nationals without limitation. Employment of
domestic labor may be encouraged by allowing an additional deduction from taxable incomeAOne-stop shopping. Governments may consolidate the oversight of all application and approval
processes and the oversight of all rights and penalties consolidated in a single agency. This
consolidation is called “one-stop shopping” or “single-window clearance”. To the extent that such
consolidation is impractical or impossible (e.g., the functions of the customs agency will typically
be separate) such single-source ministry may act as coordinator, ombudsman, or as chairman of
an inner-ministry agency.
Performance undertakings. To the extent that a government-owned or controlled entity is the
purchaser of electricity, lending institutions have consistently required a “performance
undertaking,” i.e., the affirmation that the obligations of the entity involved carry the full faith and
credit of the country and a guarantee to ensure that the entity will discharge such obligations at
all times as they fall due.
Set-asides. The country may determine that an established percentage of its energy-mix shall
be from the renewable resources within a specified time frame. Several incentive approaches
may stimulate or mandate this objective:
• Distributors may be required to buy a specified percentage of their energy from
renewable energy sources in order to maintain their concession. These distributors
need to be protected from unreasonable power purchase rates.
• Distributors may be allowed, and encouraged, to own renewable resource
generators.
• Distributors may be provided an additional tax exemption for the purchase of
electricity from renewable energy generation sources (similar to the “tax credit”
concept, above).
• Generators may be required to generate in accordance with a set energy portfolio
mix (see Appendix D).
Simplification of customs procedures. Renewable energy firms may be entitled to simplified
customs entry procedures.
Standardized power purchase agreements. The government may provide a standard power
purchase agreement which is established as the mandatory structural and pricing contract for
long-term agreements between distributors and renewable resource generators.
Tax and duty exemption on imported capital equipment. Renewable energy firms may be
exempt from customs duties and national internal revenue tax payable for the importation of
machinery and equipment and spare parts for a sufficient number of years to allow the
establishment of full commercial operations.
Tax credit. For each kilowatt of hour of electricity purchased from a renewable generation facility
per year the purchaser or distributor is allowed a percentage tax credit.spare parts.
Use or lose. Ensure that no speculator may claim and hold a resource for an indefinite period of
time without developing it.CHAPTER 5. UNIVERSAL
ELECTRIFICATION POLICY
a. RENEWABLE TECHNOLOGIES & UNIVERSAL ELECTRIFICATION EFFORTS
b. GOVERNMENT ROLES IN UNIVERSAL ELECTRIFICATION
c. PARTNERSHIPS IN UNIVERSAL ELECTRIFICATION
Nearly two billion people - more than one third of the planet’s population - lack access to
electricity according to estimates by the United Nations and World Bank. Broken down by
regions these figures are even more dramatic - fully 90% of Africans have no access to
electricity. With the Earth’s population expected to double by the year 2042, the potential
unserved population could rise above five billion. The numbers themselves are startling, but the
overall social and environmental impacts could be disastrous.
We consume energy in all aspects of our lives: cooking, heating and cooling, pumping water,
producing goods and illumination. When electricity is not available, biomass - firewood, crop
residues and animal dung - is most often the fuel of necessity. These fuels are not energy
efficient and the requisite high consumption for basic needs contribute to deforestation, soil
depletion, and higher mortality rates from smoke and particulate inhalation. These problems will
only worsen as the unserved population grows, unless there is an increased emphasis on
providing electrification.
Electrification is a key to economic development and growth, a fact underscored by the
international community’s use of the rate of electrification as a primary measurement of a
country’s overall development. Electricity is the building block of a sustainable community. A
government that supplies electricity for water pumps and simple production machinery, provides
the means for creating enough local wealth to expand electricity coverage to homes, schools and
employment centers. Improving the local standard of living and ability to earn a living provides a
reason for citizens to remain in their villages and on their farms. Bolstering remote and rural
economies, in turn, stems the migration to urban centers, reducing population pressures on cities
and the urban problems that often accompany overcrowding - civil unrest - crime, pollution and
health hazards.
Renewable technologies are suited in size and technical scope to off-grid applications.
National polices designed to provide electric service to an entire population, however, havey, gy gpp()
to extend the existing grid, or (ii) to distribute diesel generators and subsidize the purchase and
transportation of diesel fuel. Grid extensions tend to be very costly and, unless new generating
sources are added to the system, extensions can cause a system-wide service degradation. The
diesel approach has also proven unsatisfactory. Fuel and transportation subsidies must be
continued indefinitely. Diesel units require constant maintenance and are difficult to run efficiently
at remote sites. In addition, air, ground and water pollution problems are endemic to the fossil
fuels that power diesel generators.
Renewable technologies, on the other hand, offer a real solution because they are suited in size
and technical scope to off-grid applications. Renewables, by their very nature, operate using the
pollution-free energy sources immediately available in the village and rural agriculture settings.
When wind, solar, geothermal and mini-hydro resources are located near remote users, these
resources can provide sustainable, long-term levels of electrification to isolated areas.
Electrification projects in remote and rural areas are by their very nature expensive and the
populations they serve almost exclusively poor. The energy policy planner seeks to maximize
service at a price that is affordable to the local population. From the perspective of the energy
strategist, the words “affordable to the local population” express a concept fundamental to
successful universal electrification.
From the perspective of the energy strategist, the words “affordable to the local
population” express a concept fundamental to successful universal electrification.
Experience has shown that users will not use electricity efficiently and economically unless they
pay for service. Payment imparts value. Even in areas in which incomes are low, there is some
level at which electric service can be made affordable. Renewable technologies are ideally
suited to such a challenge. They can be tailored to meet the needs and incomes of individuals,
villages, cooperatives or isolated commercial sites.
The following sections deal with “lessons learned” from past programs that may assist in
developing new universal electrification programs, describe the populations commonly served by
universal electrification, and discuss emerging universal electrification programs and policies. An
appreciation of the history, the target population and new development ideas can assist the
energy strategist in defining the most effective types of electrification programs to meet different
rural and remote population needs.
What historical “lessons learned” may governments apply in developing a universal
electrification program?
During the latter half of the twentieth century - international finance and development
organizations have actively supported rural electrification efforts; however, for decades their
efforts focused on grid extensions - linking unserved populations to a national transmission and
distribution network. Lending institutions have encouraged state-owned utility companies tothose costs over a long-term basis (usually greater than ten years). The historical decision to
encourage rural electrification through grid extensions has hampered the development of
alternative, cost-efficient electrification options, including renewable technologies.
Evidence suggests that people are willing to spend a significant portion of their incomes
on higher quality energy services that improve their quality of life.
In many circumstances grid extension is not an economical option, either because of distance
from the grid or general low-load densities. In such circumstances, mini-grid systems have often
been designed and constructed. These systems have been designed to re-create the grid model
on a local scale. In the typical mini-grid system, power is distributed to consumers from a central
source located in the community, usually a diesel or gasoline generator. Projects of this type
frequently require government subsidization to off-set fuel and infrastructure costs These
subsidies have led to inefficient energy use and reliance on non-indigenous fuel sources.
Consequently, many countries have been forced either to raise revenues to cover the costs of
subsidies or to face limiting the growth and scope of rural electrification programs. Moreover,
those countries which have opted for a diesel fuel electrification option, are confronted by the
problems and limitations inherent to diesel generation:
• dependence on foreign fuel markets;
• increased local costs due to high costs of maintenance and repair;
• increased outages due to operations and maintenance problems;
• unreliable and unpredictable transportation of fuel;
• environmental degradation due to fuel emissions;
• retardation of the development of generation options (i.e., renewables);
• retardation of the development of least-cost planning techniques and models; and
• health risks.
Renewable energy projects face serious obstacles in countries in which government policies and
subsidies artificially lower the price of conventional generation sources and focus on short-term
economics. In making energy choices some countries have opted for carbon-based systems
such as oil or diesel units, using economic analyses that either fail to take into account the
long-term benefits of renewables or the impact of continuing government fuel subsidies when
making these investments. Policy makers electing to encourage renewable energy systems as
part of an energy mix will be more certain of attaining their objectives if they ensure that
decisions are based on a comprehensive and long-term comparison of the costs and benefits of
all alternatives.
Programs that build on the knowledge and abilities of the local community tend to
succeed.
Evidence from studies in rural areas suggest that people are willing to spend a significant portion
of their incomes on higher quality energy services that improve their quality of life or enable themelectricity, fiscal stresses and inefficient energy use.
To date, all universal electrification programs have required some type of subsidy. The key is to
devise policies and programs that are effective in providing the appropriate level of services to
the desired population and that address market failures. The policy strategist designing universal
electrification policies and programs is generally confronted with the challenge of high start-up
costs and the risks and external costs inherent to providing electricity to rural and remote
populations.
The lessons learned from past experiences offer the energy strategist valuable insight into what
works and what does not. Programs that build on the knowledge and abilities of the local
community and that take advantage of local institutions tend to succeed - particularly if these
programs allow flexibility in the choice of generation; if they are built around wider development
efforts (e.g., road building, irrigation, education); and if they provide for continuous education -
training and oversight.
What populations are served by universal electrification
Whom are we talking about? Every policy maker recognizes that proper nomenclature is an
essential tool in analysis and communicating. If the goal is to bring electricity to populations
currently not served by a grid, the policy analyst will identify the constituents of the target
population in order to establish the best mechanism for reaching country objectives.
In general, the population which is not served by the grid are in isolated areas “isolated” in the
sense of not being sufficiently near the grid to be connected. For analytical purposes, the remote
or off-grid population - the potential recipients of “universal electrification”, can be categorized
in three subgroups:
- disbursed families,
- population centers, and
- production centers.
• “Disbursed families” refers to people sited too far either from other families or from other
population centers being served by a grid, for it to be efficient to use shared generation. Since
disbursed families most often work in agriculture, this population is often termed “rural” in the
literature.
• “Population centers” refers to people sited in sufficiently close proximity to one another that
common use of generation facilities is cost-effective. These populations tend to be concentrated
in villages - generally organized farming communities of between ten and 500 households,
however, larger population groups, towns or even cities, may be sited far from the grid and
therefore “isolated”. Moreover - such populations need not be agricultural. Large nomadic
population dusters may be included in the off-grid sector. The literature usually uses the term
“remote” to describe such population centers, but often, the term “rural” is also applied to
villagesused for the purposes of this Manual.
• “Universal electrification” is the term used to describe the goal of bringing electricity to all of
these isolated populations in a given country.
• “Universal service” refers to providing some minimum level of electricity service to all
customers regardless of their ability to pay.
Low-income households in developing countries typically use electricity mainly for lighting,
television, radio, and ironing. With slightly higher incomes refrigerators and other appliances
become affordable. The biggest sources of demand for electricity in rural areas and towns is
usually for irrigation pumping, water supplies, crop processing, refrigeration, and motive power.
These uses of electricity are both socially and economically valuable thereby justifying the
economic investment in providing these services.
a. RENEWABLE TECHNOLOGIES & UNIVERSAL
ELECTRIFICATION EFFORTS
The limitations of centralized (grid-connected) programs, coupled with the growing
adoption of Least-cost planning models and a global trend towards privatizing
state-owned enterprises, have focused attention of national energy strategists on the use
of renewable technologies for universal electrification. In addition, the major advances in
design, efficiency and production that have significantly lowered the cost of renewable
generation have also captured the attention of the managers of isolated commercial production
centers.
Renewable technologies require less maintenance than conventional generation sources,
are far less harmful to the environment, and make use of plentiful and free indigeneous
fuel sources.
Renewable technologies such as solar photovoltaics, wind (aeolic) power, small geothermal,
small biomass and micro-hydro, are clean, efficient and highly adapted to the needs of dispersed
populations. They can be installed as part of a mini-grid system or placed in individual homes or
enterprises. In some locations, larger geothermal and hydro-power facilities can power isolated
production centers at costs considerably more economical than the diesel alternative. Moreover,
excess power from such facilities can be used in communities surrounding production centers
that are self-generators.
Renewable technologies require less maintenance than conventional generation sources, are far
less harmful to the environment, and make use of fuel sources that are indigenous, plentiful and
free. See Appendix A for a more detailed description of renewable energy technologies
applications in the isolated sectors.py g 
Grid Extensions. Grid extensions continue to be one of the most common means of universal
electrification. Because of economies of scale, electricity from large, centralized power plants
may be cheaper than that from small generating plants typically used in villages and farms. The
problem is that, while the energy itself is inexpensive, considerable costs are usually incurred in
transmitting and distributing this electricity to rural areas. To make possible the maximum use of
inexpensive grid energy, the policy maker will have to focus on reducing the cost incurred in
conveying electricity to the user.
Many analysts have concluded that one of the principal reasons for the high costs of distribution
and grid extension is that these systems are usually designed and built by national utilities that
tend to focus their activities on the electrification of urban areas. For the electrification of rural
areas, national utilities have generally adopted urban standards in their expansion plans.
Consequently, systems are oversized, some materials are inappropriate, and costs are further
increased because of politics, lack of staff motivation, and bureaucratic delays. Clearly, cheap
centralized power can benefit rural populations where it is available. Unfortunately, few utilities
have the motivation or interest to incur the expense of expansion to remote areas.
Key variables to consider when assessing the grid extension option include distance and
terrain for required line extension, population density of the community to be electrified, and the
available capacity and reliability of existing generation sources. Grid extension is often the
least-cost electrification option where load density is high (greater than five users per
kilometer), consumption per user is high (more than 100 kWh per month), and where the
extension distance is short (typically less than five kilometers).
Renewable energy minigrids.
Renewable energy mini-grids are a proven alternative to fossil-fueled mini-grids. Technical
options include small hydro, biomass-powered generators, small geothermal, solar photovoltaics
(PV), solar thermal, wind turbines, and hybrids consisting of more than one technology (with the
possible inclusion of fossil-fuel-powered generation.) All small, community-wide electric systems
- be they hybrid, micro-hydropower, photovoltaic, wind, or biomass - are dependent on a local
distribution grid to transmit energy from the source to the consumer.
If rural or remote consumers are to have access to electricity at the lowest possible cost, policy
strategists need to focus on reducing the cost of transmission and distribution from mini-grids.
Key variables to consider when assessing the renewable mini-grid option include the
available resources, the population density for distribution of power, and service and load
requirements, including productive uses.
Dispersed renewables energy options.the available resources, service and load requirements, and financing mechanisms which
amortize the initial investment.
Diesel generation. Isolated diesel (or gasoline) generators are widely deployed in remote areas
for rural electrification because of their relatively low initial costs and simple installation.
Key variables to consider when assessing the diesel option include:
• they often operate at well below full capacity, and thus do not achieve maximum efficiency;
• they are dependent on transporting fuel, and this dependence results in high cost and
unreliable resource supplies;
• they require diligent maintenance, regular oversight, and are generally unreliable; and
• they generally have negative environmental impacts.
Replacement of diesel by renewable technologies may be an attractive alternative in some
cases. However, it is not unusual for certain groups (such as indigenous people or a union
group) to have been given diesel concession rights (storage, local sales, transportation to remote
areas). In such cases, it may be prudent to develop a substitution strategy that will in some way
compensate the diesel stakeholder for the economic loss resulting from a transfer to another
technology based electric system or otherwise mitigate those losses.
Incumbent utility companies may view the provision of universal electricity service and
rural electrification as a burden.
Awarding rural concessions for energy services
With the privatization and unbundling of the electricity industry in many countries, incumbent
utility companies may view the provision of universal electricity service and rural electrification as
a burden to be shed. But to others such services may provide a business opportunity. In some
countries, federal or state governments have established electric service criteria and then
request private sector companies (including affiliates of traditional utility providers) to bid to
provide the services (e.g., the state of Massachusetts in the United States). Such criteria may
include one or more requirements, for example:
• to use renewably generated electricity (or other environmentally preferable
technologies);
• to provide universal service (lifeline rates) for all citizens in the area; or
• to provide some types of electric appliances and/or services through either
leasepurchase options or other types of beneficial credit plansamount of service at the lowest level of subsidy. Other countries have adopted a rural
electrification structure which allows companies to compete to provide rural electric services on
the basis that the government, in the early years, shall pay either a fixed subsidy or the
difference between the company’s cost and some pre-determined customer rate.
What are the market barriers and ideas for overcoming these barriers when delivering
universal service?
Serving low-income people in grid-connected areas
Use of “lifeline rates”, though not a new idea, can be particularly effective in bringing universal
electric service to households easily connected to the grid. “Lifeline rates” are low tariffs for low
levels of electricity consumption. They may not include a financial need test and may simply be
offered to all residential customers to assure affordability of the minimum amount of electricity
determined to be necessary for basic quality of life. This subsidized rate is paid for by a very
small fee on all electricity purchased above the lifeline amounts. Lifeline rates can also be used
in combination with rural electrification strategies where, for example, rates for the first 35kWh
are designed to make service affordable for poor people who use small amounts of electricity
primarily for lighting.
Community organizations, familiar with local needs, are often willing to assume
responsibility for implementing policies and projects.
Alleviating high start-up costs and risks.
The problem of high start-up costs and risks is related to the perception of the lack of
creditworthiness of low-income and rural consumers. Though this perception has not always
proven to be true, both public and private financing institutions, acting on this perception,
continue to finance as though remote and rural customers were not creditworthy, thereby raising
the initial costs of rural electrification programs.
Fortunately, several innovative programs in credit delivery systems offer promising opportunities
to ease the credit situation in rural markets. One such solution may be to establish a local
member-supported bank to make small loans, such as the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh (a
member supported bank mainly comprised of poor families and women). Another is to enlist
companies that already lease basic equipment to consumers, communities, and local energy
suppliers (e.g., LPG distributors and small power companies). Laws that give incentives to local
banks to provide credit may enable universal electrification projects. The existence of a local
bank willing to extend credit is a positive signal to the larger. international lending community.
The ability to use local currency, even for only a portion of the project costs, reduces currency
exchange risk issues. Although not generally favored. the national government can provide
guarantees (security) or counter guarantees to local governmental guarantees on locally raised
debt. Partnerships with the multilateral development agencies may enable the creation of funds
that could serve just this purpose. Electricity companies can also provide credit includingremote areas where equipment must be imported and/or transported over long-distances can
make initial costs appear high even though long-term life-cycle costs may be quite low in
comparison to fossil fuel alternatives. Given the economic potential and environmental
advantages of these technologies, initial subsidies for rural electrification using renewables are
fully consistent with good public policy and can be handled in a variety of ways, including the
following:
• Participatory approaches: Cooperatives, nongovernmental organizations, and
local community organizations can be very effective vehicles for providing electric
services of all kinds. These organizations are familiar with and understand local
needs and are often willing to assume responsibility for implementing policies and
projects. The key is to identify the appropriate community social unit or subgroups
with common interests and with whom external economic activities can be combined.
In Bangladesh, for example, locally managed rural electric cooperative’s records of
billing, collection, losses and maintenance are significantly better than that of the
main power utility in charge of urban distribution.
• Decentralized power combined with other infrastructure needs: Combining the
development of decentralized power with other infrastructure or social needs (e.g.,
water or telecommunications, health and education services), can often be very
cost-effective, stimulate greater community support and leverage funds from a
variety of sources. The major barrier to overcome is traditional compartmentalized
thinking that says each of these things must be done by a separate entity.
• Credit Financing: Credit financing can greatly expand the number of households
able to afford electricity services. In rural Bolivia, the companies operating the rural
micro-grids decided to finance the connection charges allowing their customers to
pay back the costs in small installments over five years. This scheme enabled the
number of households able to purchase electricity service to more than double,
reducing both connection and electricity service rates for everyone.
• Lower service standards: The costs of electrification can be significantly reduced
by initially working with lower service standards, then, gradually increasing the level
of these service standards over time as improved local economic development
increases rural customers’ ability to pay. Simplifying wiring codes and using load
limiters (circuit breakers) for lower levels of consumption can reduce costs
significantly. Using cheaper poles and involving local people in works and
maintenance also will reduce service costs. Moreover, participation of the local
community not only reduces costs, it enhances consumer satisfaction and helps to
provide financially viable investments. Another approach is to focus on providing
electricity services (e.g., lighting, refrigeration, battery recharging) rather than kWh of
electricity. Though these services may be more limited than what is available in
urban areasthis demandside approach is often better at meeting customer’s needsoperation and maintenance can cause many financiers to see investments in
non-traditional technologies like renewables as high risk. Rural electrification
programs using renewables that include adequate support for training, operation and
maintenance can result in greater access to capital and lower interest rates.
Participation of the local community not only reduces costs, it enhances consumer
satisfaction and helps to provide financially viable investments.
To the extent that the expanded availability of electricity can be linked to local economic
development, the greater the likelihood of success of the electrification efforts.
b. GOVERNMENT ROLES IN UNIVERSAL
ELECTRIFICATION
Begin with establishing universal electrification as a national goal. A goal statement
provides concrete direction to all levels of decision makers involved with universal electrification
in a country. If such a goal statement is embodied in a comprehensive plan, the comprehensive
plan provides focus and direction, sets priorities, offers support, and helps attract investment
capital from both within and without the country. It also lays out the acceptable models for
development and identifies the geographical areas where concessions could be established. A
universal electrification goal is most useful if it is concrete and quantifiable (i.e., establishing
numeric goals for the percentage of households to be connected by a certain date).
If national policy goals do not identify universal electrification and if sector policy objectives do
not identify the role that renewable technologies can play in meeting that goal, both public-sector
and private-sector developers and investors will likely focus their attention on urban centers,
where electricity markets are more secure, easier to reach, and more financially appealing. Even
with national-level direction and encouragement, private-sector development will only take place
when the financial rewards outpace the relative expenses and risks.
Provide a factual basis so national objectives may be determined.
Once a country has established universal electrification as a national goal, strategic planners will
focus on the data collection that will provide a factual basis - the foundation on which sector
objectives may be established. A paramount element of the factual basis is market identification.
For example, collection of demographic data is essential to identifying the location and extent of
the markets.
How does the government determine how much electricity is needed in each target
market and how the populations in those areas will use and pay for that electricity when it
is delivered?
Determine needs and abilities of the rural and village communities.technically, an electrification program now or in the future. Concomitantly, the policy strategist
may identify isolated production centers whose self-generation resources may be extended to
surrounding communities.
Look at the resources available for providing electricity to remote areas.
An inventory and evaluation of the country’s indigenous resources involves identifying national
resources from all sources and then evaluating the quality of the resource (e.g., strength and
average daily amount of sunlight, strength and frequency of wind, etc.). This evaluation includes
an assessment of the applicability of any particular resource to the areas in need of
electrification. For example, a solar resource in an uninhabited portion of the country will not be
particularly useful in providing electricity to a rain forest area. Accordingly. assessment also
includes logistical issues associated with site selection. installation and operation. It should be
noted that replacement or augmentation of diesel generation (that may only have been operated
for four-to-six hours per day) with renewable generation (that provides 24-hour electricity service)
has implications that go far beyond mere electricity service. One can expect a qualitative shift in
the types of tasks for which electricity is being used as well as doing more of the same types of
tasks previously undertaken.
Integrate the renewable technologies into the energy mix.
Technologies such as solar, wind, biomass and small-scale hydropower and geothermal are
often well suited for rural areas and may justify more systematic attention by policy makers than
they have hitherto received. If a given renewable resource is available through a resource
assessment survey. utilization of that resource may be included as an objective of the universal
electrification plan.
The accuracy of the information used in the analyses of short-term costs determines the
usefulness and equitability of cost comparisons.
How does the government identify project costs in context of universal electrification?
Regardless of the model used to implement rural electrification, the totality of the costs
must be considered in the overall analysis.
Sustainable development is based on an accurate economic and environmental evaluation of the
relevant alternative systems and generation sources: usually called “least-cost planning”.
Least-cost planning means an evaluation of all costs involved with each option and a comparison
of those costs over a long-term basis (usually greater than ten years). An analysis which focuses
only on short-term costs will not provide the decision makers with all the information needed to
make a well informed decision and may inherently favor traditional generation sources. The
accuracy of the information used in the analysis determines the usefulness and equitability of
cost comparisons.
Leastcost planning is a complex and professionally exacting processGenerallyleastcostthese resource evaluation studies - often with the assistance or financial support of
multilateral or foreign development agencies. In the areas of hydro, biomass and
geothermal, many countries already have well documented studies that can provide
valuable information for the least-cost planning process. However, many countries
have not archived resource evaluation studies of either solar or wind resources.
• The consumer base also requires consideration.
What are the current and projected demographics of the area?
What is the expected load in the area, and how will the load vary from hour to hour?
What are the expressed needs of the community and how will it use its electricity?
What are the projected demand growth scenarios? What is the user
willingness/ability to pay?
• Detailed financial analyses will be required to demonstrate projected costs of
installation. Installation and start-up costs are the most expensive components of
both rural off-grid areas and in urban on-grid renewable energy project facilities. In
order to compare the costs of alternatives, all components of the initial start-up costs
must be included, from the building of the facility, to installation of equipment, to
internal and external wiring of individual households for electrification.
• The cost of support services for operation, maintenance and repair are essential
components of a least-cost comparison. The cost elements of support services
include the cost of inventorying spare parts and of operating a regular maintenance
programs as well as identification and quantification of on-going operational costs on
a life-cycle basis. For example, least-cost planning may recognize that a diesel-fired
plant lasts five to ten years and then needs replacement, whereas solar and wind
facilities may last 20 years and a geothermal or mini-hydro facility might last well
beyond its projected 50-year life.
• The costs of the administrative infrastructure are also a factor. Such costs include
education and training at both the professional and consumer level, as well as
support services for the technicians and managers.
• Also included are “soft costs” - transaction costs necessary to engage in any
commercial transaction, such as professional fees for bankers, lawyers, engineers
and developers.
• The cost of obtaining credit for rural electrification projects is among the most
troublesome factors, since the associated credit costs are generally quite high.
Many countries already have well documented studies that can provide valuabley g
The challenge for least-cost planners is to quantify the value of externalities and include
them in an objective least-cost planning process.
Since objective quantification of “benefits” in a cost:benefit equation is extremely difficult,
externalities are usually not considered in the least-cost planning process. However, policy and
decision makers generally recognize that there is extrinsic value in these aspects known as
“externalities” and that value needs to be considered in the overall evaluation of electrification
development. Rural or remote electrification projects that otherwise might be minimally feasible,
might be very feasible when externalities are factored into the evaluation.
The cost of getting fuel to remote locations is a major cost component in the decision to
install diesel-fired mini-grids.
“Externalities” broadly refer to the benefits or costs generated as a by-product of an economic
activity that do not accrue to the parties involved in the activity. In this specific context of an
electrification project, the term refers to the collateral effects a project may have on the overall
economic, social or environmental condition of a region or a country. These collateral effects
relate primarily to health and social factors, such as the health care costs observed in regions
where air and water quality are below average levels. The cost of mitigating adverse social
impacts, such as urban migration, and the social benefits of electrification, such as providing
rural populations with more control over their own lives, can also be considered to be collateral
benefits derived from electrification projects in isolated areas.
“Grid-extension costs” generally have the following components, all of which must be
considered in evaluating alternatives:
• capital and fuel costs of generation;
• capital costs of reinforcing the transmission and sub-transmission networks;
• extension of medium voltage transmission networks;
• establishment of a low voltage distribution network and household connections; and
• indirect costs, such as household wiring.
The cost of getting fuel to remote locations is a major cost component in the decision to
install diesel-fired mini-grids.
“True fuel costs” are an essential factor in evaluating nonrenewable energy development in
isolated areas. For example, the cost of getting fuel to remote locations is a major cost
component in the decision to install diesel-fired mini-grids. This determination entails projections
of world fuel prices, transportation costs, and transportation infrastructure improvements.
How does the government promote the commercial viability of projects in rural andg, pj
• a development agenda whereby electricity is more likely to be at least partly
subsidized and services are available to poorer people; or
• an economic agenda in which market factors play a more prominent role in project
development and electricity is purchased with few subsidies.
Ensure compatibility with government agenda. but rely on local support.
Both types of projects are important, but the differences should be noted because they affect
overall project development, including how the projects are financed and paid for and the level of
service available. Projects may be a mix of the two (development and economic agenda)
alternatives, and electricity metering can be a useful tool in these projects. Projects based on an
economic (cost recovery) agenda usually have an enhanced opportunity to be more sustainable
because they result in a higher ability to pay and hence generate revenue streams over the life
cycle of the project. Such revenue streams are important, and sometimes essential, to pay for
operations and maintenance (“O&M”) costs.
Development projects are often the result of the availability of short-term capital funds (e.g., over
a three-year period). Funding for O&M may not be available over the life cycle of the project,
thereby creating a less sustainable project environment. In addition, projects in which electricity
is made available at no charge are usually much less sustainable than projects where electricity
services are paid for, even if not at a full cost recovery level.
Rely on local support. It is important for projects to be compatible with the country’s agenda,
but projects that rely exclusively on government support may eventually fail because of the
changes inherent to government agendas and because, without local support, proper operation
and maintenance is difficult. Government support should be used to promote projects, and
government opposition should always be avoided.
Identify an organization for long-term management and oversight.
Long-term management and oversight.
Long-term management and oversight of a project may best be vested in organizations
associated with the villages that would transcend political volatility, such as NGOs with long term
commitments to villages.
c. PARTNERSHIPS IN UNIVERSAL
ELECTRIFICATION
During the upcoming decades, the greatest challenge to the national energy policy
strategists will be attracting private-sector investments into rural and remote• to decrease government expenditures in the electricity sector in response to
government goals for fiscal stability.
• to promote private-sector investment in the production of electricity in response
to government goals to reduce state involvement in the economy and achieve
long-term growth through increased productivity and competition.
In most countries, these three objectives cannot be reached simultaneously under conventional
models and practices for off-grid electrification. New models for sustainable, financially viable,
large-scale rural and remote electrification are needed if most of the unserved populations are to
have affordable access to electricity. It seems clear that most countries intend for universal
electrification to proceed with or without private-sector investment; nevertheless, if government
funds are insufficient or non existent, private funds are the only available alternative.
The question for the policy strategist is how to enlist private-sector investment in universal
electrification.
The challenge to the policy strategist is to forge a shared understanding of public- and
private-sector perspectives and fit them skillfully together to form a whole, thereby
enabling universal electrification.
The challenge is to make universal electrification projects both profitable and less risky - and as
soon as possible. Government strategists have an immediate need to partner government and
private-sector developers to develop new frameworks enabling joint ventures. These new
ventures will invest in commercial operations that can become profitable in a reasonable time
(three-to-six years) and that can yield sustainable long-term returns on investments while serving
the large need and demand for basic electricity services in isolated areas.
To enable and promote partnerships with private-sector renewable energy developers, policy
makers may develop a four-fold strategy:
• Facilitate the transfer of expertise and capital.
• Promote initiatives that provide remote and rural electrification projects with
commercial viability.
• Reduce risks to the potential investor.
• Formulate a universal electrification plan that allows the rational use of renewable
resources.
No private-sector investor will invest in a project until it appears profitable and no private-sector
banker will lend money to a project which has unacceptable risks. Rural and remote
electrification projects have the reputation of being both unprofitable and high riskcommercial sustainability, private-sector participation in universal electrification will be a reality.
Renewable energy is an integral part of this solution.
What economic measures are available to governments to encourage renewable
integration into the energy mix?
Researchers have found that people in rural communities have a greater willingness to
pay for electricity and a greater capacity for saving income than is commonly believed by
some energy policy strategists.
The goal of universal electrification (and the objective of promoting private-sector investment in
universal electrification) can be buttressed by establishing the long-term objectives: (i) of project
self-sustainability, and (ii) of pricing based on the cost of service. Project development that does
not emphasize long-term sustainability will be avoided by private-sector investors. To this end,
project development strategies should take several preliminary steps, including:
• Verify willingness and ability of end-users to pay. Directly related to long-term
sustainability is the willingness and ability of consumers to pay for service. Projects
should be developed whereby users can contribute to the capital cost of the project.
For extremely poor people, a significant component of the project costs may be
covered by grants or other external sources of funds, but individuals and
communities should be required to pay something, even if it is in the form of in-kind
labor rather than money.
• Seek local investors. Local investors should be sought out and brought into
projects. Profit will be a key motivator for private-sector participants.
• Organize a method of collecting money for O&M. An administrative procedure
for collecting revenue for operations and maintenance needs to be in place.
• Require that pricing be based on the costs of service. Although the costs per
household to provide electric service in a remote rural village may be more than in an
large urban center, it does not follow that the village customer must pay more for his
electricity.
Develop projects in which users can contribute to the capital cost of the project.
There are several financing options that have proven successful around the world.
• End-user credit. On a local level, financing household renewable energy systems
through end-user credit mechanisms is useful for overcoming the “first-cost” barrier,
and thereby reaching a broader spectrum of the rural market. Local revolving credit
funds are often used to supply credit and provide a self-perpetuating financial
mechanism for expanding system use.
• Environmental incentives. One of the major benefits of renewable technologies isrenewable-based projects.
• Leasing may prove a viable financing mechanism for supplying household
renewable energy systems such as photovoltaics and small wind turbines.
• Subsidies may be established that require grid-connected tariffs to include a
component defraying the start-up costs of off-grid projects. A typical approach
followed in most industrial countries has been for the government to mandate a
requirement (by law, regulation or contract) requiring that a utility expand services in
rural areas and towns. Such expansion requirements typically allow utilities to
recover their costs through an overall incease in average electricity tariffs. As the
costs of service are higher in rural areas, such policies lead to some
cross-subsidization from urban consumers. If such a measure is focused (e.g., based
on per family income and unavailable to those who can afford to pay), it will not
undermine the financial position of the grid-connected generators and distribution
companies. Theoretically, as incomes and demand grow, economies of scale will
reduce the high costs of start up, resulting in the eventual elimination of the need for
the subsidy. At the national level, financial support may come from public revenues,
often with multi lateral development bank support (i.e., World Bank, Inter-American
Development Bank, etc.). Financial support may also come from user charges or
surcharges on the use of fossil fuels. The latter has the advantage of making the
programs less dependent on public financing.
Organize administrative procedures for collecting revenue for operations and
maintenance needs.
• Tax incentives and investment grants may be appropriate, especially where
education and training is required to enable local residents to operate and maintain
isolated systems. NGOs are generally willing to participate in providing investment
grant programs which promote the use of new and innovative technologies Also, tax
incentives may be appropriate in cases where start up costs are high. Since start-up
costs include the capital cost of the equipment, tax incentives related to capital
investment in equipment used in remote and rural electrification projects (e.g.,
accelerated depreciation, tax credits, tax holidays and production tax incentives)
serve to lower the start-up costs and attract private equity and debt.
What partnership policy strategies may be designed to overcome the high initial costs of
renewable energy?
The investment costs of rural electrification systems can be daunting when the task is to electrify
an entire country. Access to long-term, low-interest capital is restricted normally to large, low risk
generation projects, and is generally unavailable to universal electrification projects designated
for remote and rural areas. However, with the advent of successful pilot projects and working
installations in renewable energy rural electrification projectsthe question of longer termThe common thread running through all of the outlined approaches is the willingness of
government, multilateral development agencies, NGO’s, and the private-sector to work
together to design mechanisms and opportunities for providing credit that responds to
the needs and abilities of the local community.
National commercial and development banks have an important potential role to play as
second-tier financial institutions.
To date, national commercial and development banks have been relatively minor players in the
area of rural electrification. These institutions have typically perceived the risks of investment in
this sector as being too high, and the rates of return as being too low, for their involvement.
Policy strategists can overcome such perceptions through a variety of mechanisms, including
pre-investment study support, loan guarantees, education and training efforts, the development
of infrastructures, and the use of least-cost technologies.
Commentators from the World Bank have observed that the primary obstacle that discourages
private-sector companies from providing supplies to rural areas is high start-up costs. Extending
an electricity grid to remote villages can be very expensive, especially if only a few households
are to be connected.
The problem here is not necessarily that people are unwilling to pay. Evidence suggests that
people will spend a significant proportion of their incomes on better energy, which improves their
quality of life or enables them to become more productive. In Bangladesh, for example, even the
poorest people are connecting to the grid when the service is available.
Require that pricing equal the costs of service.
The problem is the perceived lack of creditworthiness of low income consumers in remote and
rural areas, combined with the unavailability of long-term credit in nations with the greatest
numbers of unserved populations. Rural customers who cannot get affordable credit can seldom
pay the high startup costs of improving energy supplies. The government, through partnerships
with NGOs, cooperatives, extension services, equipment manufacturers and multilateral
development agencies, can address this problem in several ways:
• Link government capital investments for other rural services (e.g., schools,
hospitals, government buildings) with capitalization of electricity for the same region.
In this strategy, a government subsidy is being offered to ensure stable electricity
service for public benefit. The incremental cost of serving others in the immediate
region may then be less onerous.
• Bundle development of several rural infrastructure services (e.g., water,
telecommunications and electricity) together to reduce transactions costs of
financing, construction, training of local people to maintain the systems and general
operations and maintenance costsIf project costs cannot be recuperated, subsidies and financial incentives may be
required.
Countries may find that if costs associated with the least expensive universal electrification
option can not be fully recuperated in the form of a tariff paid by consumers, then subsidies and
financial incentives may be the only viable option. No country, so far, has succeeded in providing
universal electricity service without some form of public support or cross-subsidies in the tariff
structure.
There are two approaches to the commercial viability of universal electrification projects.
• First, remote and rural electrification projects should permit full recovery so
that the private sector will be motivated to provide the services; and
• Second, subsidies at the capital equipment level are justified as an
investment in the social benefit of the community, i.e., government subsidies at
the capital level constitute an investment in the people.
Target subsidies to remedy specific market failures and to stimulate new technologies.
These two approaches may be pursued in parallel. Compelling cases have been made
throughout the world that it is a legitimate function of government to promote social and
economic objectives through the use of subsidies and incentives in order to meet the goal of
universal electrification. However, it is critical that if subsidies or incentives are provided that they
be provided in a very focused and targeted way so as to address specific issues related to
market failures and for the purpose of stimulating an economy. Limited subsidies or financial
support can be justified for some programs in areas where education and training may be
needed or where the costs and risks of start-up are high.
Design projects to recover their costs.
Recognizing that, in most isolated electric systems, some form of subsidy may be required
initially to keep rates affordable and to promote development, it is especially important that each
project be designed, over the long term, to recover its costs. Although the majority of the
alternatives for encouraging rural electrification development are one form of subsidy or another,
in the long-term subsidies are not healthy for a country and are not sustainable. Subsidies often
represent a significant portion of a country’s gross national product, and work against
least-cost-planning decision making. Subsidies also discourage efficient use of energy and
generally go to higher income households. For example, in many countries where the price of
kerosene is subsidized, the families who are relatively wealthy, who can afford to buy more
kerosene get a disproportionate advantage. Subsidies are also traditionally provided to farms
and commercial enterprises that could afford to pay the true costs.
In a number of countries, such subsidies have recently been greatly modified and in many casesy y p, 
eventually be recovered.
The challenge to the policy strategist is to design a regime in which prices recover the present
value of costs over the long term.CHAPTER 6. PROGRAM
IMPLEMENTATION
a. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
b. SOCIAL FACTORS
c. INFORMATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
Institutional issues are at the center of sustainability, and sustainability is at the heart of
private-sector interest. The English word “sustainability” has two connotations: in one sense
it means “to support,” and in another “to be on-going”. As the term “sustainability” is used in the
literature on rural electrification, both connotations are present. Typically, a government or
another sponsor contributes start-up monies with the understanding that, once started, the
program will be on-going, but with the need for the government or sponsor to provide some
continuing, additional assistance.
From the perspective of a private-sector investor however, the concept of “sustainability” has a
more demanding meaning. If a private-sector investor installs generating capacity, it is requisite
for the customer community to pay for the electricity it consumes in an amount sufficient for
repayment of capital costs as well as operations, maintenance and fuel expenses, plus a
reasonable profit.
In an institutional sense, sustainability may be achieved through a series of steps:
• Educate customer communities on the merits of electrification and generation
options.
• Select the most appropriate technology.
• Institute effective collection processes.
• Provide for adequate maintenance.
• Develop in-country technical capacity.
Education, technology selection, collection, maintenance and the development of in-country
technical capacity are threads that are interwoven into the fabric of program implementation. The
following sections discuss the institutional issues which affect sustainability from three different,
but complementary, perspectives: program management, social factors and information
programs as they relate to program implementation.pq
processes. Historically, remote and rural electrification collection practices have proven
inadequate. This one factor can lead more quickly than any other to the failure of rural electric
utilities, whether they use conventional or renewable energy technologies.
Cost recovery through rate collection has been problematic for many rural electricity providers in
isolated areas. Some rural areas have no tradition of monthly payment for services. Services are
often paid at the instant the product or service is received. If electricity is being sold on a kWh
basis, this can introduce a number of problems related to collection procedures. Costs of
metering, billing, and collection are high, and, if not controlled vigorously, theft can become a
significant problem. Losses, largely administrative and not technical, can run as high as 40% in
some rural systems. Proper administrative, financial, and technical controls must be installed to
ensure that collection is efficient and effective and that losses are minimized.
What policy strategies facilitate self-sufficient electrification in rural and remote areas?
Establish collection cycles in consultation with the local community.
Frequency of payment is best established in conjunction with community and local experts.
Income in local communities is often tied to the land and harvests. Timely collection may be
achieved in agricultural communities by simply reducing the number of payments to meet the
availability of income. In some more successful projects a variable monthly fee tied to the
harvest-cycle has aligned payment with income (i.e., smaller payments during the time interval
between harvests and larger payments when the harvest comes in). Such real world
accommodations have helped consumers develop regular payment habits lessening the
possibility of default.
The objective of the disconnect policy is to collect delinquent payments, not to punish
consumers.
Establish procedures for nonpayment.
When consumers are unable to pay their bills, service may need to be disconnected. At such
times, clear standards and procedures for disconnection are essential to minimize or prevent
political interference. An individual’s status in the community can affect the collector’s willingness
to penalize that individual for not meeting his financial obligation. Such practices undermine the
integrity of the remote and rural electrification effort and shift the financial burden to consumers
in good standing.
The objective of the disconnect policy is to collect delinquent payments, not to punish
consumers. The swiftness and severity of the disconnection process should be determined by
national and local leadership. Delay in initiating collection enforcement may be misinterpreted as
a lack of seriousness of the payment requirement. Furthermore, delay allows past debt to build,
and may result in debt accumulation to such a degree that repayment is impossible. Prudent
management suggests that a disconnection process begin as soon as payment is more than onewarning may result in disconnection and imposition of a surcharge for re-connection. A third
warning, in the case of a distributed system, may result in removal of the generating source e.g.,
a PV panel or wind turbine. In addition, most successful disconnect policies also outline
procedures for handling consumers who are unable to pay because of temporary financial
distress. An alternative to a disconnect process is the installation of pre-payment meters or
availability of “life-line” amounts of power. See Chapter 5a (Renewable Technologies and
Universal Electrification Efforts).
Establish a tariff structure geared to the social and economic realities of local area. Many local
consumers have little experience with using credit or the obligation to pay a regular fee for
service. Many project sponsors are unfamiliar with the income patterns of local villages or
regions. While a kilowatt hour charge may be appropriate in a city, this pricing structure may be
inappropriate for a rural or village setting. The policy strategist will need to give careful
consideration to the most appropriate types of tariffs in any area that is a candidate for
electrification. Service tariffs (a fixed amount for a particular application or load) and
consumption tariffs (fees based on the number of kilowatt hours used), are the two prevailing
mechanisms.
Give careful consideration to the most appropriate types of tariffs in any area that is a
candidate for electrification.
In a distributed generation environment (in which a generating unit is placed in individual
homes), charging consumers by type of use (i.e., a set price for lighting, radio and televisions,
sewing machines, etc.) may be preferable to charging a straight fee per kilowatt hour. This
pricing structure removes the need to install and read meters and gives consumers a consistent
and predictable figure for which they can budget. If it is desired to utilize a service fee, such a fee
should be in the form of a single charge. Covering all the costs may prove less confusing both for
the collection agent and the customer. Such a service fee may include the following costs:
• rental or loan fee, depending upon whether the consumer owns or leases the
generation equipment, amortized over a minimum five-year period;
• administrative and technical support fees, including training, customer service,
collections and disconnections;
• preventative maintenance and replacement fees for batteries, PV panels, parts, etc;
• profits or returns to developers; and
• taxes levied by the national or local government.
Accountability is essential to a sustainable universal electrification program.
“Accountability” means that the managers of a project who have the day-to-day,
decision-making authority also have the responsibility to be answerable for their actions. Being
“bl” ithitt t lithf itttiCommercial businesses have learned that objectives established at the operating level are more
often achieved than objectives mandated from above. The same lesson is applicable in remote
and rural electrification projects.
Communicating on-going results is essential to effective monitoring.
Regularized reporting forces the operating level to collect and assimilate results on an on-going
basis and allows early course-correction by both operators and supervisors. Achieving such
on-going communication may require overcoming numerous hurdles. Many local groups and
villages have little experience with record keeping and little time or incentive to maintain
extensive records. In many isolated areas, literacy deficiencies and lack of writing skills are a fact
of life. Mail, telephone and telegraph may be slow or non-existent. An over-zealous bureaucracy
can impose unrealistic and burdensome demands on the resources of a manager in a remote
area. By limiting the number of reporting requirements, greater accuracy can be expected of the
reports delivered. For example, if managers require only an original of a report, rather than
duplicates or copies in even greater multiples, limited local resources will not be overtaxed.
Effective monitoring is equally essential. Communicating is a two-way exercise. Furthermore, an
unanswered or unacknowledged report is a lost opportunity to encourage success or provide
guidance.
The challenge to the policy strategist is to identify the minimum information required to ensure
accountability and to devise mechanisms for its accurate dissemination. Such minimum
information requirements may include:
• general financial and operating information;
• account delinquency rates;
• system performance measures; and
• customer satisfaction measures.
How may governments establish sound local administration?
Knowing who has paid and who has not paid their bills is the primary function of a rural electricity
record-keeping system. No organization can survive without an accurate picture of its finances,
yet this is often the case in remote and rural electrification installations. Local communities often
are not familiar with record keeping techniques. Since many have never been required to make
regular payments of any type, they have no knowledge of what is required to track those
payments. National, state or local governments usually must exercise primary responsibility to
provide the training, infrastructure and oversight of the records management process. This
process requires creating uniform procedures and forms and then mandating their use.
Sound practice suggests centralized record keeping, and institutionalizing the payment of
bills by individuals.
Without centralization, payment information can be easily lost or neglected. If payments are
made collectively (ieby a neighborhood or village in a cooperative) it may be administrativelyy 
Maintenance plans may be created with the assistance of the vendor and product
manufacturer and tailored to the specific circumstances and means of a project site.
Regular audits ensure adherence to policies and procedures.
Regular audits of the records ensure that the policies and procedures are being met. Without
oversight, there is little incentive on the part of local communities to comply with records
management requirements.
How may governments provide for adequate maintenance?
Although renewable technologies require less maintenance than conventional forms of electricity
generation, they are not immune to equipment or parts failure. Ensuring reliable electricity supply
is key to customer satisfaction and, ultimately, to the success of a rural electrification effort.
Preventative maintenance and tracking records minimize system failure.
A preventative maintenance and testing program is the best method for minimizing system
failures and maintaining a reliable supply. Maintenance plans may be created with the
assistance of the vendor and product manufacturer and tailored to the specific circumstances
and means of a project site. Preventative maintenance programs will reduce the number of
system failures, but they can not eliminate them entirely. A standardized record system for
tracking maintenance and repair records is also an essential part of such a maintenance plan,
thus a repair and replacement program will be required.
Maintenance plans begin with the consumer.
Consumers are closest to the individual units and can be trained to spot minor problems before
they become too severe. Additionally, consumers can be instructed in basic maintenance of their
systems - keeping them dean, lubricated, etc. As an incentive to follow a maintenance regime,
consumers may be offered a small discount for their efforts. Such programs can significantly
extend the life of installed systems and favorably impact both the financial and social bottom line.
Test prior to installation.
Test to identify equipment problems before installation. Testing programs can be as simple as a
visual check for obvious unit defects or component-based testing with appropriate testing
equipment.
Formal maintenance programs are essential to sustainable programs.
A formal maintenance program with supporting infrastructure is essential to a sustainable
program. Such a formal maintenance program includes:
• a job request system for initiating and tracking service orders;b. SOCIAL FACTORS
Development of rural and remote electrification projects requires a major level of
community involvement In the past, those projects with a high level of community involvement
- consensus, support, and participation - have been the ones which have proven the most
successful.
Community participation creates ownership, and ownership leads to success.
Even the best crafted energy plan and the best funded rural electrification project ultimately may
be frustrated if the local community is not brought fully into the process. Urban programs or
experiences can not be easily replicated in a remote and rural setting. The dynamics and
reference points are just too different. Local community members are in the best position to
assess their willingness to support electrification efforts and to choose the best options for
generation once those options have been explained to them. Participation creates ownership,
and ownership leads to success.
Local village structures and interpersonal relationships are complex and involved. Remote
villages are microcosms of a country, and like a country, are made up of many groups and
subgroups, often acting at odds with one another. But villages are more sensitive than large
population centers to small disruptive elements. Policy planners seeking electrification for remote
areas have found that by enlisting the involvement and support of groups and sub-groups within
villages, they can better ensure that such electrification programs are perceived as equitable and
are not resisted as favoring one group over another.
From the private-sector perspective, local ownership, a project champion, and affordability
are key issues:
Focus on projects with a high level of community involvement.
• Requirement of local ownership. Local ownership is important for project
sustainability; and provides a link between the project and the community. It
increases the communication between the villagers and project developers and
allows a project to be seen as more of a local response to local needs than a
government-imposed, top-down development.
• Need for a project champion. Related to the local ownership issue is the
identification of a project champion. A project champion is someone who lives in the
village (such as the acknowledged leader of the community) and who actively
supports the project. This person could also be the owner or the operator (or both) of
the system. They would be available on a day-to-day basis for the interface (social
and technical) that is required for village power projects.Local ownership, a project champion and affordability builds a high level of community
involvement. Community involvement entails consensus, support and participation - necessary
elements found in the great majority of successful electrification programs.
On what basis may governments select areas for electrification?
Define the criteria for participation in an electrification program.
Frequently, a nation cannot electrify its rural areas all at once, so some method of selection and
prioritization must be decided upon. Selection of villages or households for electrification can be
a highly politicized process. Choosing who receives access to electricity and who does not
confers a lot of power on the individual making that decision. Without a clearly defined plan and
criteria for participation, electrification can become a tool of political patronage, leading to
discontent and inefficient distribution of product. Criteria may properly reflect the ability to pay as
well as the need and appropriateness of the area for installation or connection.
Depoliticize the selection process.
Enlist the involvement and support of groups and sub-groups within villages to ensure
that electrification programs are perceived as equitable and are not resisted as favoring
one group over another.
Selecting communities to receive electricity has often been a highly politicized process. With
privatization of state-owned systems, central planning is becoming a thing of the past. Universal
electrification, however, may be one area in which integrated resource planning remains a valid
government tool. Otherwise, particularly if the State continues to be involved in co-financing
projects, the decision errors of the past could be repeated in the future. To safeguard against
these tendencies, either integrated resource planning or some alternative, pragmatic methods of
planning seem prerequisite to a national universal electrification program. At a minimum, such
planning should incorporate criteria such as the needs of communities, costs and benefits,
productive uses and the environment.
Establish an objective review board.
The selection process requires more than merely establishing standards; it requires the
establishment of an impartial review board to apply those standards. The most effective review
boards are ones that represent a cross-section of the community, not just one faction or class.
Diversity of representation however, should fit the cultural requirements of the local community
and seek to support (not supplant) the local governing structure. The board should be provided
with the necessary training and support to execute their responsibilities and should develop
models for resolving disputes. In cases where the demand for access outweighs supply, a lottery
system for qualified applicants may be an effective method for choosing recipients.g ppy
strategist formulates the objectives of such an educational and training program, the policy
implementer will establish an educational and training plan that enables these objectives to be
met.
In a universal electrification program, “education” implies imparting information sufficient to
allow rational decision making, and “training” implies instructing the recipient how to perform a
specific task. “Demand-side management” - the planning implementation and monitoring of
utility activities designed to influence customer use of electricity in ways that will produce desired
changes in a utility’s load shape - is related to training but is a little different and includes the
perception of the local communities about the project.
Electrification is an information and knowledge-driven process.
Electrification is an information and knowledge-driven process, from the establishment of policy
to the day-to-day operation of generation equipment. Policy strategists at the national level will
become familiar with the capabilities and operational requirements of different renewable
technologies, comprehend the vagaries and nuances of national energy law and policy, and
master basic financial analysis and administration techniques. This basic knowledge is equally
important to local governments, local developers, and consumers.
Decision makers in countries with large populations without electricity may not have access to
accurate information on the appropriateness of various generation options. Often they have no
information either regarding user willingness and ability to pay or the local availability of
renewable natural resources. In such an environment, policies and planning tend to be politically
based rather than prioritized on an economic or financial rationale.
Communicate realistic expectations of electricity availability and project performance to
users before project implementation. Education is a two-way communication.
At the national level, planners are often unaware of the potential for the utilization of the PV,
wind, biomass, mini-hydro and geothermal technologies. They may also be unaware of the
existence of these technologies as viable options to meet the basic electricity needs of isolated
communities and to assist in reducing CO2 emission. Such unawareness results in these
technologies being left out of the energy planning process. Consequently, policy strategists need
to act not only to promote awareness of the potential for utilizing such technologies, but to assist,
wherever possible, with their integration in the sectoral-planning process.
Education is a two-way communication.
The project developer must become aware of the needs of the community and the community
must learn about the project and take part in its development. It is important that realistic
expectations of electricity availability and project performance are communicated to users before
project implementation. For this knowledge to be properly communicated, training programs
t bifd itt f thy ppj
trainee group: administrators, technicians, and consumers.
• Administrators (system owners and operators) - Train to understand and apply
the rules for selecting participant households, for collecting and recording payments,
for dealing with delinquent accounts, and for communicating with consumers and
regulators.
• Technicians (maintenance people) - Train to install and maintain the generation
systems, to diagnose and repair problems and to respond to customer requests in a
courteous and timely manner.
• Consumers - Train to use electricity efficiently and train to operate and perform the
basic upkeep on their systems.
Infuse training programs into every aspect of the process.
Establish, test and recognize proficiency levels.
Regular skill and competency testing, especially of technicians, allows policy implementors both
to evaluate the general effectiveness of training programs and to provide a reasonable degree of
quality control. A certification program for technicians can be useful for ensuring a minimum
degree of competency and improving work quality. Certification confers status on the individual
and can improve productivity and encourage compliance.
A sound training program is both stable and dynamic.
Economies of scale as well as elementary management requirements usually dictate the
standardization of educational and training programs for electrification. Standardization does not,
however, mean that these programs are frozen or immutable. Since the training requirements
will be on-going, training programs will evolve to reflect changing circumstances. Consequently,
these on-going training programs should be flexible and adaptive to meet the changing needs
and patterns of the community.
Educate local communities on the benefits of electrification.
In an education program designed to explain the practical applications of electricity (how it can
be used efficiently) and the financial implications and obligations of each household, adult
students learn not only about electricity but also about what it means to be a consumer.
Consider gender issues, cultural practices and local customs.
Sensitivity to gender issues, cultural practices and local customs ensure that educational and
training efforts target the proper individuals. For example, in many countries, household tasks
ripe for electrification (including illumination) may be the responsibility of women. In this instance,
instruction targeted at male consumers may prove ineffective.Few communities or individuals will opt for a technology about which they know little. An
informed choice requires information. An education program which introduces local communities
to the different generation technologies and promotes a unbiased discussion of the advantages
and disadvantages of each technology: (i.e., costs, reliability, maintenance, output, resource
requirements) allows those local communities to make sound decisions. A community which is
knowledgeable about generation options can participate in choosing the most appropriate
technology for their location and situation.
Energy strategists should be alert to identify misconceptions that serve as a deterrent to
facilitating the utilization of renewable energy systems. For example, planners in many
developing countries still mention the high investment cost of PV compared to diesel generators,
instead of comparing these two technologies on a life-cycle costing basis. In this example, were
the planner to consider both life-cycle costing and undistorted (unsubsidized) conventional fuel
prices, PV systems would compete on an equal economic footing with diesel generators in view
of the minimal maintenance needed for upkeep; the lack of fuel requirements for electricity
generation and the positive impacts created on the environment.
In an education program designed to explain the practical applications of electricity (how it can
be used efficiently) and the financial implications and obligations of each household, adult
students learn not only about electricity but also about what it means to be a consumer.APPENDIXES
Appendix A. Description of Renewable Energy Technologies
Appendix B. List of Contacts and Resources
Appendix C. Example Basic Power Purchase Agreement
Appendix D. Renewables Portfolio Standard
Appendix A. Description of Renewable Energy
Technologies
The fact about...
Biomass Energy
Presented by US/ECRE in cooperation with the Bioenergy Industries Association U.S. Agency
for International Development
Biomass - any organic material such as wood and woodwastes, agricultural residues, municipal
waste, and animal waste-is the oldest source of energy known to mankind.
For thousands of years, people have burned wood to generate heat and to cook food. Until the
mid-1800s, 90% of the energy consumed in the U.S. was generated by burning biomass. Today,
biomass energy accounts for about 3.2% of total U.S. energy consumption, or some 2.9
quadrillion BTUs (quads) every year.
In 1994, biofuels generated 2.7 quads of energy in the U.S. That’s roughly the same amount of
energy generated by U.S. nuclear power plants and 45% of total U.S. renewable energy
consumption that year. The U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) reports that U.S.
consumption of biomass has grown more than 10% since 1990, and projects that biomass will
generate 3.4 quads by the year 2010, an increase of over 20% from 1995.
Wood burning accounts for the majority of bioenergy use in the U.S., with over 700 facilities
currently using wood or woodwaste to generate electricity. Two-thirds of this wood is consumed
by. industrial facilities - primarily pulp, paper, and sawmills and wood products manufacturers - to
produce electric power and process heat or steam for their industrial operations.
A number of independent power producers generate biomass-fueled electric power and sell it toU.S. utilities, municipalities, and economic planners have become increasingly interested in
using bioenergy to meet economic, environmental, and social goals. These groups see a number
of benefits related to the use of bioenergy:
• Bioenergy systems address local and global environmental concerns. When
used to offset fossil fuel use, bioenergy systems can significantly reduce or eliminate
sulfur dioxide emissions (which cause acid rain) and a variety of other harmful
emissions, including nitrogen oxides and particulates. Moreover, since growing
biomass absorbs an amount of carbon roughly equal to that emitted when it is
combusted, bioenergy systems produce energy with no net emissions of carbon
dioxide, the chief greenhouse gas. The U.S. is negotiating international agreements
to limit greenhouse gas emissions, and bioenergy is expected to play a prominent
role in helping the U.S. comply with these treaties.
• Biomaas offers short-and long-term economic advantages. The use of locally
produced fuels directly reduces the need to import oil or coal from other regions or
countries. Development of local infrastructure for fuel supply generates local
employment in the cultivation, harvesting, and processing of biomass fuels. In 1992,
the use of biomass resources to produce electricity generated more than $1.8 billion
in corporate and personal income and more than 66,000 jobs throughout the U.S.
economy.
• Biofuels can be burned with the same type of equipment used for
conventional power generation. Unlike other renewable energy sources, bioenergy
can be generated using combustion technology similar to that used in existing fossil
fuel-fired power plants. In fact, biomass can be used as a supplemental fuel in
existing power plants in a process called co-firing.
• Crop production can help revitalize many rural area According to the Electric
Power Research Institute (the research arm of the U.S. electric utility industry), the
U.S. could support 50,000 MW of biomass power generating capacity by dedicating
currently available cropland for fuel production. This capacity could create a $12
billion annual market for agricultural producers.
• Biomaas generates profitable co-products and ancillary benefits. In addition to
useful energy, bioenergy systems can create lucrative by-products such as animal
feed, pulp, and industrial chemicals.
In developing countries, biomass is still the dominant energy source, accounting for roughly 35%
of energy consumption overall, and contributing up to 70% of total energy consumption in some
countries. This energy, used primarily in the form of fuelwood for cooking, is produced and
consumed in a very inefficient manner. In some areas, fuelwood gathering is contributing to
deforestation and other environmental problems. However, many efforts are underwaygyp, yy p, p
on fossil fuels while boosting their local economies, increasing employment, and protecting the
environment As utilities, consumers, and policymakers become better educated about its
benefits, bioenergy will become an increasingly important part of the modern energy economy.
BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY: HOW DOES IT WORK?
Bioenergy is generated from biofuels - organic materials such as trees, grass, agricultural
residues, animal wastes, aquatic plants, and municipal waste. These fuels store energy captured
from the sun during photosynthesis.
Bioenergy technology extracts the energy stored in biofuels through direct combustion or by
converting the fuel into charcoal, liquid, or gas. There are four basic methods for converting
biofuels into energy:
• Direct Combustion: Biofuels can be burned to produce steam for generating
electricity, heating homes, or supporting industrial processes. This is the simplest
and most commonly used method of biomass conversion.
• Anaerobic Digestion: This biochemical process uses bacteria to accelerate
natural decay and converts biomass into methane. Methane gas can be burned like
natural gas for residential cooking and heating, industrial heat and steam, and/or
electricity generation.
• Gasification: Through direct combustion biofuels are heated, usually in the
absence of oxygen, and reduced to gaseous compounds. The resulting fuel is
treated and can be burned to produce heat or steam, injected into engines to
produce mechanical or electrical power, used as transportation fuels, or converted
into synthetic fuels.
• Fermentation: By using yeast to decompose carbohydrates (such as starches in
grain, sugar cane juice, or molasses), biomass can be converted into ethanol and
used as a transportation fuel Each year, U.S. ethanol production offsets
approximately 60 million barrels of imported oil and positively impacts the U.S. trade
balance by $2 billion.
Each of these bioenergy conversion methods is in use today. However, bioenergy will never
reach its full potential until its benefits are properly understood and accounted for by
policymakers.
Bioenergy has a particularly strong role to play in mitigating environmental concerns such as
waste disposal, acid rain, and global climate change. In addition, bioenergy systems can
stimulate economic development and job creation.
The cost-competitiveness of bioenergy systems is dependent upon several factors, most of them
site-specificFor examplesince biofuels have a relatively low energy content per tonbioenergyBIOFUEL: WHAT QUALIFIES?
Most biomass fuel is gathered in the form of waste or residue from forests, cities, towns,
agricultural interests, and industry. Fuel also can come from fast-growing plants that are
harvested specifically for energy production. Ideally, energy crops can grow on a marginal
amount of land, thrive without fertilizers or extensive maintenance, and protect the soil from
erosion.
Biomass Wastes -
• By-products from manufacturing processes (wood shavings or pulp waste)
• Agricultural and food processing wastes (fruit pits, rice hulls, corn cobs)
• Sewage and solid waste
Biomass Residues -
• Forest residue (diseased timber, forest thinnings, poor quality timber that cannot be
sold)
• Agricultural residue (sugar cane bagasse, corn stalks, straw from rice, wheat, or
other grains)
BIOMASS CASE STUDY
Dow Coming Corporation, Midland. Michigan, USA
Rising energy costs led Dow Corning Corp. to build a biomass-fueled 28-MW steam and electric
cogeneration facility at its Midland, Mich, manufacturing plant Using wood harvested from nearby
aspen forests, wood wastes from local industry, and commercial woodwastes from area
businesses, Dow produces steam (formerly produced by a fuel oil generator) and electric power
tt itidtil dNational BioEnergy Industries Association
122 C Street, N.W.
Fourth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
(202) 383-2540
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
1617 Cole Boulevard
Golden, Colorado 80401
(303) 275-3000
World Wide Web: www.nrel.gov
Center for Renewable Energy & Sustainable Technology (CREST)
1200 18th Street N.W.
Suite 900
Washington, D.C 20036
(202) 530-2208
World Wide Web: www.crest.org
U.S. Export Couicil for Renewable Energy
122 C Street N.W.
Fifth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
(202) 383-2550
World Wide Web: http://solstice.crest.org.renewable/usecre
The facts about...
Energy Efficiency
Presented by US/ECRE in cooperation with the U.S. Agency for International Development and
the National Association of Energy Service Companies
When people begin exploring energy efficiency measures as means of reducing their energy
costs, many start with a “turn-down-the-thermostat” approach reminiscent of the 1970s. Today,
however, the energy services industry provides a full range of high-technology approaches for
reducing energy consumption and improving end-use efficiencies without sacrificing comfort or
productivity.
These new technologies - ranging from high-efficiency lighting equipment to energy efficient
motors and energy management systems - are helping consumers rework the way they use
energy. Energy efficiency investments in residential buildings, commercial enterprises,
manufacturing, and industrial facilities can provide tremendous savings to consumers and a
strong boost to the economy as a wholeFor examplelower operating costs resulting fromAccording to the National Association of Energy Service Companies (NAESCO), investments in
the U.S. residential and commercial sectors alone could save the equivalent of 80,000 MW of
electric generating capacity while creating 345,000 new jobs and reducing carbon emissions by
72 metric tons every year.
In order to achieve this level of success, the energy service industry goes beyond simple
conservation. By using technologies and project designs that require less fuel, the industry helps
its customers actually improve indoor comfort levels and (in the industrial and manufacturing
sectors) increase production. This brings savings for everyone because reduced energy
consumption, energy costs, and increased production capacities translate into a more efficient
economy. In the hypothetical scenario outline below (see Figure 1), energy efficiency
investments enable U.S. consumers to increase their annual consumption of non-electricity
goods and services by $45 billion.
Long active in the U.S. domestic market, energy service providers are expanding their project
horizons internationally. The companies that develop energy efficiency projects are seeking to
provide international customers with the same benefits that U.S. consumers receive from
innovative projects.
Facility owners, utility officials, and government decision makers in a number of countries are
expressing a growing interest in American energy efficiency products and services. Opportunities
are increasingly abundant for American equipment manufacturers and investors working in the
international marketplace. This is good news for the U.S. economy, where the 82 billion invested
annually in installed projects around the world creates about $700 million in direct employment
benefits each year.
WHAT IS AN ENERGY SERVICE COMPANY?
An energy service company (ESCO) is involved in the development, installation, and financing
of comprehensive, “performance-based’ energy efficiency projects. ESCOs maintain project
equipment, monitor and verify a project’s energy savings, and assume the risk that a project will
save the amount of energy promised.
Energy efficiency projects are considered “performance-based” because the ESCO’s
compensation is generally based on the amount of energy actually saved. Projects generally
seek to achieve energy savings from the widest possible combination of cost-effective
measures in a facility. These characteristics set ESCOs apart from other market providers who
do not offer comprehensive project designs using multiple technologies.
While ESCOs may pursue various market strategies, all are characterized by their
comprehensive project development capabilities and their assumption of performance risk for
each project they develops
CORE TECHNOLOGIES - highefficiency heating and air conditioning;
• efficient motors;
• variable-speed drives; and
• centralized energy management systems.
In some cases, these technologies exhaust the possibilities for energy savings at a given
facility. Many times, however, they form a foundation from which additional savings can be
achieved through more innovative measures, such as the addition of cogeneration or
renewable energy systems.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY CASE STUDIES
For most projects, a baseline energy audit is conducted to gain a general understanding of a
facility’s energy consumption. The initial audit can help determine the potential scope of an
energy efficiency project and provides the building blocks from which an ESCO can perform a
more detailed and comprehensive investment-grade energy audit Results from the
comprehensive audit are used as the basis for project financing and energy savings projections
built into the contract Ancillary services are of ten provided within a project contract, such as
removal and disposal of hazardous materials from a customer’s facility. In addition, projects are
centered on educating customers about their energy consumption patterns and building an
energy efficiency partnership between the customer and the ESCO. Finally, ESCO contracts
include a maintenance component to ensure that new high-efficiency equipment achieves
optimal performance over its lifetime.
Libby-Owens-Ford Glass Manufacturing Plant
Laurinburg, North Carolina
PROJECT DEVELOPER: Honeywell
At Libby-Owens-Ford’s (LOF) plant in North Carolina, Honeywell Home & Building Control has
developed a comprehensive energy efficiency system which is saving $1.5 million annually in
energy and operating costs. Honeywell conducted a major modernization project at the
23-year-old plant, including environmental controls, lighting, and production-line improvements.
For example:
• Variable-speed drive retrofits on fan systems provide the largest single energy
savings ($250,000 each year).
• High-pressure sodium lamps and electronic ballast retrofits save $160,000
annually.
• Programmable controllers adjust critical temperatures in the manufacturing
processHyatt Regency Hotel
Buffalo, New York
PROJECT DEVELOPER: Power System Solutions
In the early 1990s, the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Bufalo received an energy audit from its utility,
Niagara Mohawk Power Corp., which identified a number of opportunities for saving energy.
Based on this initial audit. Power System Solutions (PSS) conducted an investment-grade audit
which revealed that the hotel could save at least 1.4 million kilowatt-hours and $ 100,861 in
energy expenditures each year by making specific equipment changes and installing an energy
management system. The hotel agreed to install:
• variable-speed drives on its ventilation fans, water pumps, and cooling tower;
• a run-around-loop heat recovery system;
• a direct digital energy management system which enables the hotel’s engineers to
match energy use to the use of the building’s facilities; and
• complete high-efficiency lighting.
PSS guaranteed annual energy savings of $100,000. Since the project’s completion in Spring
1994, the hotel has saved roughly $160,000 every year. The project has provided positive cash
flow from day one, and after four years, the hotel will retain 100% of its savings.
For more information, contact any of the following organizations:
Center for Renewable Energy & Sustainable Technology (CREST)
1200 18th Street, N.W.
Suite 900
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 530-2202
World Wide Web: www.crest.org
Export Council for Energy Efficiency
750 First Street, N.E.
Suite 940
Washington, D.C. 20002
(202) 371-2779
World Wide Web: www.ecee.org
National Association of Energy Service Companies
1615 M Street, N.W.
Suite 800
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 371-7816(202) 383-2550
World Wide Web: http//solstice.crest.org/renewable/usecre/
The facts about...
Geothermal Energy
Presented by US/ECRE in cooperation with the U.S. Agency for International Development and
the Geothermal Energy Association
Geothermal resources serve a substantial portion of the world’s energy demand, and use of this
renew able energy technology is growing.
More than 6,700 MW of geothermal electricity generating capacity is installed in 20 countries in
virtually every region of the world. In addition, the world has more than 11,300 thermal
megawatts operating in direct-heat geothermal applications. In the United States alone, the
geothermal industry provides 2,750 MW of electricity generating capacity and 700 MW of thermal
capacity. The world’s geothermal capacity saves the equivalent of 150 million barrels of oil each
year.
Despite this success, geothermal energy could provide significantly more electricity if its full
potential is tapped. Many view geothermal energy as a key resource for meeting growing power
demand in developing countries. Clean, efficient resources and energy efficiency measures are
essential to satisfying explosive demand in these markets. The Geothermal Energy Association
estimates that over the next 30 years, as much as 80,000 MW of electricity generating capacity
could be constructed in developing countries. This amount of power could bring significant
quality of life benefits to citizens in places like Mexico, Central America, the Caribbean, South
America, and the Pacific Rim.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY - THE BENEFITS
• Minimal Environmental Impact: Geothermal plants generate far fewer and more easily
controlled environmental impacts compared with conventional technologies. Air emissions are
virtually zero; water used in geothermal plants is returned to reservoirs at a depth well below
gronndwater levels; and geothermal plants re quire a very small amount of land.
• High Reliability: Existing geothermal systems have proven to be highly reliable. They are
available for power generation 95% of the time with excellent efficiency and production values.
• Modularity: Geothermal plants can be built over time to serve demand as it grows. A 10-MW
geothermal power plant can be built in as little as six months. Clusters of plants totalling 250
MW or more can be built in two years.
• Indigenous resource: By tapping its geothermal resources, a community or nation can avoid
costly energy importsAlsoplants generate local jobs and economic development As part of aIn order to generate electricity, geothermal developers drill deep into the Earth to tap naturally
occurring hot water or steam. Water temperatures found thousands of meters beneath the
Earth’s crust can reach 400° Centigrade. Heat is brought to the surface and harnessed to power
electricity-generating turbines.
Three geothermal regimes exist within the Earth’s crust hydrothermal, hot dry rock, and earth
energy. Hydrothermal energy and earth energy provide economically competitive power for
today’s consumers. Geopressured, hot dry rock, and magma energy all require additional
technology improvements in order to be cost-competitive.
• Hydrothermal energy, geopressured energy, and magma energy result when
heat is concentrated in specific regions of the Earth’s crust The most obvious
indicators of this type of energy are volcanos, geysers, and hot springs. In many
places, however, significant geothermal resources exist in locations where such
indicators are not present on the Earth’s surface.
• Hot dry rock energy is found eight to 16 kilometers (five to 10 miles) everywhere
beneath the Earth’s crust Hot dry rock energy is difficult and expensive to extract
since the rocks are either too dry or impermeable to transmit water in useful
amounts.
• Earth energy is used in geothermal heat pumps throughout the United States. This
thermal energy is found just beneath the surface and is the normal temperature of
shallow ground. Without enhancement, earth energy can be tapped by heat pumps
to help alleviate electricity demand.
For generating electricity, hot water (ranging in temperature from 177° to about 370° C, or 350°
to greater than 700° Farenheit) or steam is pumped from an underground reservoir to the
surface. The steam is transferred to a turbine which turns an electricity generator. The remaining
geothermal fluid is pumped back to peripheral parts of the reservoir to help maintain its pressure.Low-temperature resources (lower than 177° C or 350° F) can be harvested through binary
power plant technology. A binary plant taps geothermal fluid to heat a “working” fluid that
vaporizes at low temperatures. The working fluid vapor is fed to a turbine and is re-condensed
and then re-heated repeatedly in a closed-loop cycle.
In direct-heat applications, geothermal water is usually fed into a heat exchanger which transfers
heat to the household. The geothermal water cycles through the heat exchanger and then
returns to the reservoir. Direct-heat applications can be used for home heating, greenhouse
heating, vegetable drying, and other uses.
Geothermal heat pumps use yet another process. A heat exchange fluid runs through a
closed-loop system, absorbing heat from the earth and transferring it to the home.
KEY GEOTHERMAL RESOURCE AREAS
A large number of high-temperature geothermal systems are found along the edge of the Pacific
Ocean. This region is home to hundreds of active volcanos and stretches from the Aleutian
Islands of Alaska east to the Philippines and Indonesia and south to the Andes Mountains in
South America. Because of widespread volcanic and earthquake activity, this part of the world
has been called the “Ring of Fire.”
Geothermal projects are operating and being built throughout the Ring of lire, but the U.S.
geo-thermal industry is concentrating its efforts on six specific areas (see map below).1. The Philippines The Philippines ranks second in the world in installed geothermal-based
electricity generating capacity. Geothermal fields throughout the Philippines are large, but most
development is focused on the islands of Luzon and Leyte. The first Philippine geothermal plant
began operating in 1979. The country now hosts 1,051 MW in geothermal electricity generating
capacity, and plans for 927 MW of additional capacity are in the pipeline. In addition to electricity
generation, geothermal energy is used in the Philippines for fish processing, salt production, and
coconut and fruit drying.
2. Indonesia: Another world leader in geothermal energy development, Indonesia first began
harvesting the earth’s energy in the 1920s. The country has 114.5 MW of operating
geothermal-based electricity generating capacity and is planning to develop more than 1,300
MW in additional capacity by the year 2000. These new installations will bring power to the
central grid as well as to isolated villages. Indonesians also use natural steam and hot water for
cooking and bathing.
3. Mexico: Approximately 756 MW of geothermal electricity generating capacity is operating in
Mexico. The country also has 1,400 hot springs, and direct-use applications are used for
industrial laundries, refrigeration, district heating, greenhouse heating, concrete block production,
and timber drying.
4. Central America: Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Puerto
Rico have tremendous geothermal potential, but most of it is undeveloped. El Salvador is most
advanced, with 105 MW of capacity operating, followed by Costa Rica with 60 MW, Nicaragua
with 35 MW, and Guatemala with 24 MW.
5. Andes Volcanic Belt Several high-temperature geothermal systems exist in sparsely
populated areas of Venezuela, Colombia, Equador, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, and Argentina.
However, because of low population density, energy demand is low and most of these fields
remain undeveloped. A 670 MW power plant is operating in Argentina and hot waters throughout
South America are used for bathing and district heating.
6. The Caribbean: Several Caribbean islands are exploring and developing their geothermal
potential: Guadeloupe, Dominica, Monserrat, and St Lucia.1200 18th Street N.W.
Suite 900
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 530-2202
World Wide Web: www.crest.org
Geothermal Education Office
664 Hillary Drive
Tiburon, CA 94920
(800) 866-4GEO
World Wide Web: www.ensemble.com/geo
Geothermal Energy Association
122 C Street N.W.
Fourth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
(202) 383-2676
World Wide Web: gea@geotherm.org
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
1617 Cole Boulevard
Golden, Colorado 80401
(303) 275-3000
World Wide Web: www.nrel.gov
U.S. Export Council for Renewable Energy
122 C Street, N.W.
Fifth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
(202) 383-2550
World Wide Web: http//solistice.crest.org/renewable/usecre/
The facts about...
Hydropower
Presented by US/ECRE in cooperation with the U.S. Agency for International Development and
the U.S. Hydropower Council for International Development.
The last two decades have seen significant growth in hydropower development throughout the
world. While large projects were built in the 1970s to provide utility-scale, grid-connected power
and flood management, smaller scale hydropower projects are now helping to address one of
the developing world’s most pressing problems: the need to bring electricity to remote, rural
areas.ability for private development of hydropower projects, can bring electricity to these growing
communities.
Less than 10 percent of the world’s technically usable hydropower potential is being used today.
However, small-scale hydropower plants are proving to be very cost-effective for strengthening
grid-connected systems and for rural electrification. These plants provide a number of benefits to
the communities that they serve. For example -
• Thousands of existing facilities sited around the world have proven their reliability
and effectiveness.
• With sufficient water resource, these facilities can provide a 24-hour energy source.
• They have no fuel costs and cause minimal environmental impact.
• Operation and maintenance requirements are minimal and can be performed by
local staff.
• Properly maintained facilities can perform well for 50-100 years.
Existing hydropower projects invest in local resources and provide energy for local activities (like
grain grinding, milling, and drying) and electricity for lighting, communications, and small
industries. In addition, hydropower plants are used to fuel water purification efforts and
agricultural processes.
U.S. industry has been a critical player in the design, development, mitigation of environmental
impacts, financing, installation, and operation of hydropower facilities around the world. The
industry is continuing its leadership position by bringing competitively priced, state-of-the-art
technology to the global market New hydropower facilities cost between $800 and 81,200 per
kilowatt installed.
From the mountains of Nepal to the islands of Malaysia to the forests of Central and South
America, American-manufactured hydropower equipment and expertise are helping bring
improved quality of life to the world’s developing economies.
HYDROPOWER TECHNOLOGY: HARNESSING THE POWER OF RUNNING WATER
Hydropower systems capture the energy in falling water. This energy is converted into reliable
electricity to efficiently and cost-effectively meet market demand.
Hydropower plants are configured in one of two ways. “Run of river” operations use the natural
flow of a river by diverting it into canals that lead into a power plant. In the second configuration,
water is stored in a reservoir and sent to the power house as needed.
In general, hydropower systems include the following basic components:
• Power House, which contains turbines, generators, excitation, control systems,Usually, a grate or trash rack cover prevents debris (trees, branches, rocks, etc.)
from entering the turbine.
• Wicket gates or guide vanes meter water into the turbine from the scroll case.
• Water supply system canals made of either earth or concrete provide direct flow
into the plant’s forebay, and penstocks (pressurized pipes) direct water from the
reservoir to the scroll case.
• Tailrace, a draft tube by which the water exits the power house and passes
through a concrete or rock-lined outlet structure.
Three basic types of turbines are used to generate hydropower:
• Francis turbine: a fixed-blade turbine;
• Kaplan turbine: a variable-pitch blade turbine similar to a propeller; andObstacles challenge hydropower development in many countries around the world. However,
there are many efforts underway to minimize these barriers and encourage the use of
hydropower to electrify rural and developed areas. These efforts are being made by government,
industry, and other organizations. They range from programs offering tax incentives for
renewable energy development to policies that welcome private investment in power generation
projects. A few examples are listed below.
Standardization of EquipmentBy standardizing equipment design and manufacture processes, many governments in nations
with developing economies are reducing the costs associated with hydropower development
Standardized equipment and standardized project designs can be used to build a hydropower
plant that serves specific end-user needs. For example, if a plant is to be build in a remote area
with no major roadways, equipment can be made more modular than that used in an urban,
developed area.
International Strategic PartnershipsPartnerships between local companies and foreign hydropower firms can facilitate more
cost-effective and efficient project development By tapping the experience and lending power of
U.S. firms and combining it with their unique knowledge of local terrain and customs, local
businesses can successfully utilize indigenous hydro resources. The Don Pedro project in Costa
Rica is an excellent example of such a partnership (see box, right).
Renewable Energy IncentivesSome countries offer “renewables obligation” pro grams to encourage the development of small
hydropower, wind energy, and other clean energy sources. These programs provide set-asides
for least-cost renewable energy sources and guarantee the prices that renewable energy
developers will receive for selling clean power to electric utilities.
Poverty Alleviation/Rural Electrification ProgramsRural electrification efforts in many developing countries are bringing small renewable energy
systems to remote, off-grid areas of the world. When sufficient water resources are present,
hydropower is often the least-cost option for these rural communities.Size: 14 MW, highhead hydroelectric plant
Project construction cost: $25.6 million
Power sates: 15-year power purchase agreement
The Don Pedro project was built through an international partnership between Instituto
Costarricense de Electricidad (ICE) and Jose Cartellone Construcciones Civiles, S.A., and is
operated by Ogden Power Corp. The project provides power to ICE under a 15-year renewable
energy power purchase agreement and is financed wife $20.6 million in debt through GE
Capital Corp. and $5 million in equity provided by Energia Global and Energy Investors Funds.
For more information, contact any of the following organizations:
Center for Renewable Energy & Sustainable Technology (CREST)
1200 18th Street, N.W.
Suite 900
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 530-2208
World Wide Web: www.crest.org
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
1617 Cole Boulevard
Golden, Colorado 80401
(303) 275-3000
World Wide Web: www.nrel.gov
U.S. Hydropower Council for International Development
122 C Street, N.W.
Fourth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
(202) 383-2550
U.S. Export Council for Renewable Energy
122 C Street, N.W.
Fifth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
(202) 383-2550
World Wide Web: http://solstice.crest.org/renewable/usecre/
The facts about...
Photovolatics Technology
Presented by US/ECRE in cooperation with the U.S. Agency for International Development andcentralized-grid electricity production.
PV systems are operating in every region of the world. Because of its versatility, PV technology
is in demand, and worldwide PV markets will continue to grow as costs continue to decline.
Whether on a very small scale (such as in a telephone callbox) or in larger scale applications
(such as in homes and commercial buildings), PV can provide clean energy from an abundant
and free fuel source - the sun.
At the household level (or smaller) PV systems can either replace or supplement
utility-generated electricity. In stand-alone PV electric systems, the power generated is stored in
a battery and used as needed. In grid-connected systems, power from the utility grid can serve
as a back-up source on cloudy days or when electricity use is unusually high.
The following are some examples of existing PV operations and the functions that they support:
• Communications - In thousands of locations, PV systems are providing electricity
for remote telecommunications functions. Such installations range in size from a few
watts to several hundred kilowatts of capacity. They electrify microwave repeater
stations, remote control systems, radio communications, telephones, emergency call
boxes, and other remote equipment
• Lighting - More than 6,000 PV-powered lighting systems are currently operating in
the U.S. These systems power lighting for billboards, highway signs, rural buildings,
parking lots, and vacation cabins. Many PV-powered lamps include timers or, “photo
cells,” that sense darkness and activate the bulb when it is needed.
• Refrigeration - In many parts of the developing world, solar technologies like PV
are the sole source of electricity for refrigeration. PV systems make it possible to
refrigerate medical supplies and food items in remote areas, bringing improved
quality of life to remote communities.
• Water Pumping - PV systems are used in almost every climate to power irrigation,
livestock watering, drinking water pumps, and industrial water pumping operations.
Like refrigeration systems, these installations bring significant quality of life and
health benefits to the communities that they serve.
Nearly 90 MW of PV capacity was shipped in 1996, and that number is expected grow to 150
MW by the year 2000. U.S. industry is a leader in this dynamic market, bringing cost-competitive
($5/watt to $6/watt at the factory), high-end technology to individuals and communities around
the globe.
HOW DOES PHOTOVOLTAICS TECHNOLOGY WORK?
Photovoltaics technology converts sunlight into electricity by using semiconductor material.
Single PV CellMany PV cells are made of pure silicon, an excellent semiconductor and abundant material
When sunlight shines on a pure crystal of silicon, electrons are set loose from the atoms that
comprise the material The freed electrons move about the crystal somewhat randomly until each
finds an atom with which it can bond. Energy is produced when an electron returns to an atom
that has been missing an electron. Silicon used in PV cells is chemically treated to facilitate this
process and is usually about 1/50th of an inch thick.
Each four-inch-wide silicon solar cell can generate about one watt of electricity when exposed to
sunlight on a clear day. To increase the amount of power produced, several cells are typically
packaged together in a “module” that is encased in a transparent cover with a water-tight seal
Modules are often wired together in “arrays” to provide enough electricity to perform virtually any
task.
Single and polycrystalline silicon, thin-film amorphous silicon, and several advanced materials
can be used to make PV cells. Today’s conventional cells can convert between 5% and 17% of
the sun’s light into useful energy. Experimental cells have proven to be twice as efficient in
laboratory tests, a development that bodes well for the industry.
Materials improvement, technology advancements, and economies of scale all have contributed
to improved efficiency and cost-competitiveness for PV technology. When PV cell manufacturing
began in the early 1960s, the cost was about $1,000 for every watt of power installed - about 100
times the costs associated with conventional power sources. By 1970 (after growth in the space
industry helped bring costs down a bit), the cost of installing PV systems had dropped to roughly
$100 per watt Today, PV systems can cost as little as $7 for every watt installed.
These dramatic cost reductions, along with many non-price benefits, make PV a very competitive
renewable energy technology.
Simple PV System (utility intertie)This system would be used in a grid-connected home, with excess power sold to the local utility.
The inverter converts DC power from the PV array into low-distortion AC power, which can be
transmitted to the utility grid. Excess power is delivered through a kilowatt-hour meter to the
utility grid. A second meter measures power consumed by the household.
PHOTOVOLTAICS APPLICATIONS - CLEAN ENERGY CASE STUDY
The Bohoc School Haiti
In an effort to combat a recent power shortage, the Bohoc School in Haiti has begun a simple
photovoltaic program.
The school and its surrounding facilities required more power than its existing diesel generator
could provide. In addition, the school was spending $6,000 each month for diesel fuel and
generator maintenance and could not afford to add to those expenses.
After examining a variety of options, the Bohoc School decided to use PV to serve its
classrooms, water pumping operations, auto shop, and other electricity needs. For the cost of
one year’s worth of diesel fuel, a new PV system was installed. The system generates enough
power for the school’s lighting and refrigeration functions, ceiling fans, and appliances.
By savings in fuel expenses alone, the school’s PV system will pay for itself in about four years.
Benefits of Using PV Systems
• Free Fuel: Once equipment is purchased and installed, the bulk of PV costs are complete.
Fuel costs are zero for the lifetime of the project, so PV systems will be more economical in
many cases even though up-front capital costs are relatively high.moving parts, PV is a reliable energy source in all types of climates and weather conditions.
• Environmentally Benign: PV systems are silent and do not emit environmentally damaging
substances into the air or water.
• Modularity: Panels can be installed as needed and upgraded as the demand for power grows.
Furthermore, additions can be made while the original system continues to operate.
For more information, contact any of the following organizations:
Center for Renewable Energy & Sustainable Technology (CREST)
1200 18th Street N.W.
Suite 900
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 530-2202
World Wide Web: www.crest.org
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
1617 Cole Boulevard
Golden, Colorado 80401
(303) 275-3000
World Wide Web: www.nrel.gov
Sandia National Laboratories
P.O. Box 5800
Albuquerque, NM 87185-0753
(505) 844-4383
World Wide Web: www.sandia.gov
Solar Energy Industries Association
122 C Street, N.W.
Fourth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
(202) 383-2600
World Wide Web: www.seia.org
U.S. Export Council for Renewable Energy
122 C Street, N.W.
Fifth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
(202) 383-2550
World Wide Web: http://solistice.crest.org/renewables/usecre/
The facts abouty , 
technology to heat water for home use. Since then, the technology has evolved dramatically. In
the 1990s, solar thermal technology is used to serve a fall range of energy needs in the
industrial, commercial, utility, and residential sectors.
Solar thermal systems are used in homes, hospitals, and industrial plants around the world.
More than one million residences and 250,000 commercial buildings in the United States alone
employ solar thermal technology for water or space heating. In Tokyo, Japan, 1.5 million
buildings use solar hot water heaters. In Israel, 30 percent of buildings and all homes must use
solar water heating technology. Also, in many developing countries, solar energy is the only
source of power readily available for heating water.
Solar thermal facilities can operate effectively in virtually any climate, from hot deserts to the
earth’s coldest regions. The one million residential solar water heaters operating in the U.S. save
between 220,000 gigawatt-hours (GWh) and 280,000 GWh each year. From medical facilities in
Zimbabwe to swimming pool heaters in Miami to hot water heating in Japan, solar thermal
technology is bringing clean energy, energy conservation, and improved quality of life to people
around the world.
In addition to direct-use applications, solar thermal technology can be used to generate elec
tricity. Today’s solar thermal power plants produce about 0.005 Quads (480 million kWh) of
energy each year - that’s enough energy to power more than 45,000 American homes.* At their
current production rate, solar thermal power plants displace 325,000 tons of carbon dioxide
emissions every year.
*The average American home consumes approximately 10,000 kWh of electricity
each year.
Global markets for this technology are growing at a remarkable pace, and the U.S. solar thermal
industry is stepping up to the challenge of satisfying increased demand with state-of-the-art
technology. Improved technology, materials, and manufacturing processes will contribute to
continued cost reductions and steady market growth for the forseeable future.
SOLAR THERMAL ENERGY: A WEALTH OF BENEFITS FOR UTILITIES
Solar thermal provides a number of advantages for utilities
• electricity and hot water can be marketed simultaneonsly;
• utilities can match power production to daytime demand peaks;
• plants have minimal environmental impact and
• plants can be built in as little as 18 months and scaled to demand.
In almost any climate, solar collectors can harvest the sun’s energy to provide reliable, low-cost
power for small or large-scale direct-use applications (hot water for homes and industries) asSolar thermal systems can use flat plate collectors to capture the suns energy and transfer it
either directly or indirectly household, water or heating systems. Each collector contains an
absorbing surface (called an absorber plate) and an insulating container (generally a metal box)
that supports a transparent glazing material (usually glass). Heat from the sun is trapped by the
collectors and absorbed by the plate. The heat is transfered to a heat-transfer media, which can
be either liquid or gaseous, for immediate use or storage.
Direct solar systems transfer the sun’s heat to water, which flows through the faucet to the end
user. Indirect systems transfer heat to an intermediary heat-transfer fluid such as anti-freeze, a
refrigerant, or treated water. The heat transfer fluid passes heat on to the household water
through a heat exchanger (such as a coil wrapped around the water storage tank).
In typical installations, collectors are mounted on the roof of a building and oriented to achieve
maximum exposure to the sun. One or two collectors are used in a typical household system.
During cloudy weather or periods of excessive hot water use, backup heating can be used.
These systems can save homeowners up to 3,000 kWh annually.
Solar Thermal Power Plants
Utility power plants employ concentrating devices to focus sunlight and intensify the heat that is
collected. By doing this, these facilities achieve extremely high temperatures and generate
steam which powers electricity generators.
Three types of concentrating devices are used:
• Central Receivers - Mirrors focus sunlight on a single collector mounted on a
central tower. The mirrors are heliostats, that is, they track the sun while remaining
focused on the central receiver.
• Trough Systems - Long, curved mirrors focus sunlight on tubes filled with
circulating heat transfer liquid. The liquid can reach temperatures as high as 400°C
(750°F).
• Dish Systems - A parabolic dish reflector focuses solar radiation on a receiver
mounted at the focal point of a dish. Fluid circulating through the receiver transfers
heat to the power generator.SOLAR THERMAL ENERGY APPLICATIONS
Solar thermal technology can provide energy for a variety of purposes:
Residential Hot Water - Water heating can account for up to 40 percent of an American
household’s energy consumption. Solar thermal technology can help offset 60 to 80 percent of
this demand. With a back-up heating element, all of a home’s hot water needs can he satisfied
with a solar energy system. Over its lifetime, a solar system will pay for itself; and, in sunbelt
states, solar systems can generate a 10 to 20 percent rate of return on the initial investment
Swimming Pool Heating - Solar thermal technology can raise pool temperatures by 4° to 6°
Centigrade and can extend the swimming season in many locations by three to four months. An
average pool heating system would have eight to 10 collectors, an electronic controller, and a
pump.
Commercial/Industrial - Current solar thermal technologies can deliver water temperatures
between 40° and 93° Centigrade. These systems match well with conventional energy systems
and provide pro-heated water for industrial needs or fully-heated water for commercial use. They
are most commonly used in the laundry, food service and processing, metal plating, and textile
industries.
Utility-Scale Electricity Generation - Nearly 400 MW of solar thermal electric generating
capacity is operating in the U.S. These power plants provide reliable power for thousands of
American homes and businesses.Seoul, South Korea
More than 85 percent of daily hot water use at the 24-story Kook Jae office building is provided
by solar thermal technology.
A 9,400 square foot solar water heating system was designed by Korean Steel Products using
collectors manufactured by American Energy Technologies for U.S. Solar Corp. and was
installed in 1984 Since then, the system has been so efficient that it even satisfies 10 percent to
20 percent of the building’s annual space heating needs in addition to food service,
gymnasium, spa, and other hot water requirements.
CASE STUDY: PARABOLIC TROUGH TECHNOLOGY
Solar Electric Generating Systems Southern California
Solar thermal parabolic trough systems have been working in tandem with natural gas in a
Southern California steam cycle power plant since the late 1980s The commercial-grade solar
thermal system is installed in nine units with 30 MW to 80 MW of capacity each for a total
capacity of 354 MW.
The systems operate at peak efficiencies of up to 25 percent Until mid-1996, they have
provided six terawatt-hours of electricity to California’s power grid, resulting in sales of $800
million.
For more information, contact any of the following organizations:
Center for Renewable Energy & Sustainable Technology (CREST)
1200 18th Street, N.W.
Suite 900
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 530-2208
World Wide Web: www.crest.org
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
1617 Cole Boulevard
Golden, Colorado 80401
(303) 275-3000
World Wide Web: www.nrel.gov
Sandia National Laboratories
P.O. Box 5800
Albuquerque, NM 87185-0753Washington, D.C. 20001-2109
(202) 383-2600
World Wide Web: www.seia.org
U.S. Export Council for Renewable Energy
122 C Street, N.W.
Fifth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001-2109
(202) 383-2550
World Wide Web: http://solstice.crest.org/renewables/usecre/
The facts about...
Wind Energy Technology
Presented by US.ECRE in cooperation with the U.S. Agency for International Development & the
American Wind Energy Association
Between 1994 and 1996, nearly 3,200 MW were added to the world’s total installed wind energy
capacity, making wind power the world’s fastest growing energy source.1 Installed worldwide
wind power capacity has tripled, outpacing growth in conventional fuels like oil, coal, and even
natural gas over the same time period.
1WorldWatch Institute Vital Signs, 1995
The last two years were record-setters for the international wind energy industry, which racked
up $1.5 billion in sales during 1995 and 1996. In 1996, 1,271 MW of new wind energy capacity
were installed, bringing the world’s total capacity to 6,259 MW and total investment in wind
power projects to more than $6.5 billion.
Worldwide markets for wind energy technology are expected to continue this dynamic growth
trend. The U.S. Department of Energy estimates that the world’s winds could supply up to 580
trillion kWh of electricity each year. (The U.S. consumes about 2.8 trillion kWh annually.) In
addition, wind power plants are being built today with 30-year levelized costs between 4 cents
and 5 cents per kilowatt-hour (kWh), a price that is competitive with most conventional energy
sources. Incentives can reduce prices even more. As prices continue to drop, wind power will
serve an increasing portion of the world’s energy demand.
Wind power can be used to serve a full range of energy needs, from grid-connected, utility-scale
power plants, to small village power systems, to re mote water-pumping operations. Turbine
sizes vary accordingly, from small wind turbines with a few watts of generating capacity to huge
machines with power ratings of 1 MW or more.
Wind turbines can be installed singly for individual home or commercial use. They also can be
built in small clusters of three or four to serve several homes or farms, or in even larger groups toWind is an indigenous, renewable, and free energy source that generates no pollution and has
few environmental impacts. Wind technology is being recognized around the world as an
excellent means of serving growing energy supply needs.
Worldwide markets for wind power are expected to reach a cumulative value of $23 billion by
2005.
HOW DOES WIND TECHNOLOGY WORK?
A wind turbine generator converts the wind’s kinetic energy into electricity or mechanical energy
that can be harnessed for productive use. The mechanical energy generated by a wind turbine
can be used for water pumping, irrigation, or water heating in rural or remote locations. Wind
electric turbines provide electricity for direct residential or business use or for use by utilities.
Each turbine uses a rotor with one or more blades to turn a power shaft which either activates a
mechanical pumping system or an electric generator. When the wind passes the rotor,
aerodynamic lift is created causing the rotor to spin. Turbine components are described in the
diagram below.Turbines vary in size depending on the type of service they provide. A rural water pumping
operation would likely use a small machine with a few kilowatts of generating capacity. A 10-kW
turbine located in a moderate wind regime can generate an average of 30 kWh of power each
day. Remote villages might use a group of small turbines supplemented with power from a
bkMt llth thif hcost-competitive with conventional electricity generating technologies.
• Dispersed, grid-connected systems can be used to generate power for homes,
businesses, and farms. During low-wind periods, back-up power is purchased from
the local utility. When the wind system generates surplus electricity, power is fed
back into the utility grid.
• Off-grid, stand-alone systems provide cost-effective energy for consumers that
are not connected to the utility grid. Such facilities include rural residences, water
pumping, and telecommunications operations. Batteries can be used to store
electricity and diesel generators can be used for back-up power. Wind hybrid
systems, which use any combination of wind, photo voltaics, batteries, and diesel,
are a cost-effective way of providing reliable power to remote areas.
WIND ENERGY COSTS & BENEFITS: WHAT TO CONSIDER
Wind Resource
The amount of energy in the wind is proportional to the cube of the wind speed. Although wind
speed varies over time, it does follow general daily and seasonal patterns which are predictable
and which can be tracked through scientific assessment.
Thorough assessment of a site’s wind resource is crucial to determining whether a wind power
system will provide cost-effective and reliable energy. In general, small turbine systems require
annual average wind speeds of at least 9 mph (4 meters per second). Utility-scale wind power
plants require wind speeds of at least 13 mph (6 meters per second). Wind resource assessment
specialists recommend at least 12 months of consistent observation and recorded wind
measurement for large-scale projects. However, three months is often sufficient for small
systems.
Technology
Wind energy technology has come a long way. Due in large part to improvements in turbine
reliability, durability, and technology innovations, costs associated with wind energy production in
the 1990s are 80 percent less than the cost of generating wind power in the early 1980s.
Turbine reliability and productivity have improved substantially since the first wind plants were
installed in California 15 years ago State-of-the-art equipment operates with 98 percent
availability. In addition, turbine capacity factors (the number that reflects a turbine’s productivity)
have tripled since the early 1980s Today’s machines perform with capacity factors that exceed
30 percent
Financing
Financing is another critical factor when determining the costs of wind systems and other
bljtcompany, its power would cost only 3.5 cents/kWh.
Tax & Loan Incentives
Government efforts to help develop a stable, long-term market for renewable energy
technologies like wind power can help bring down costs even further. Through direct, low-cost
government loans and loan guarantee programs, interest rate buy-downs, tax incentives, and
other mechanisms, governments can foster the growth of renewable energy industries.
For example, in the U.S., a federal wind energy production tax credit has been adopted to
encourage wind energy development This incentive awards a 15 cent tax credit for every
kilowatt-hour of wind energy produced and sold to a utility. The credit was enacted in an effort to
level the playing field for wind power in a tax system that has traditionally favored the use of
conventional electricity generating technologies.
Government incentives such as this can promote investment and begin to reduce financing costs
for wind and other renewable technologies.
For more information, contact any of the following organizations:
American Wind Energy Association
122 C Street, N.W.
Fourth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
(202) 383-8500
World Wide Web: http//www.igc.apc.org/awea/
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
1617 Cole Boulevard
Golden, Colorado 80401
(303) 275-3000
World Wide Web: http//www.nrleg.gov
National Wind Technology Center
1617 Cole Boulevard
Golden, Colorado 80401
(303) 384-6900
World Wide Web: http//www.nwtc.gov
U.S. Export Council for Renewable Energy
122 C Street, N.W.
Fifth Floor
Washington, D.C. 20001
(202) 383-2550
World Wide Web: http://solsticecrestorg/renewables/usecre/U.S. EXPORT COUNCIL FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY (US/ECRE)
Fourth Floor
122 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: 202-383-2550
Fax: 202-383-2555
usecre@usecre.org
AMERICAN WIND ENERGY ASSOCIATION (AWEA)
Fourth Floor,
122 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: 202-383-2500
Fax: 202-383-2505
3304640@mcimail.com
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY ASSOCIATION (GEA)
Fourth Floor
122 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: 202-383-2676
Fax: 202-383-2678
gea@geotherm.org
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ENERGY SERVICE COMPANIES (NAESCO)
1440 New York Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: 202-371-7980
Fax: 202-393-5760
naesco@naesco.org
NATIONAL BlOENERGY INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION (NBIA)
Fourth Floor
122 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: 202-383-2540
Fax: 202-383-2670
71134.1162@compuserve.com
NATIONAL HYDROPOWER ASSOCIATION (NHA)
Fourth Floor
122 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001Suite 820
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: 202-289-3835
Fax: 202-289-7519
SOLAR ENERGY INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION (SEIA)
Fourth Floor
122 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: 202-383-2600
Fax: 202-383-2670
info@seia.org
CENTER FOR RESOURCE SOLUTIONS
Presidio Building 49
Post Office Box 29512
San Francisco, California 94129
Phone: 415-516-2100
Fax: 415-561-2105
jhamrin@igc.org
CENTER FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE TECHNOLOGIES
1100 11th Street
Suite 311
Sacramento, California 95814
Phone: 916-442-7785
Fax: 916-447-2940
NATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY LABORATORY (NREL)
1617 Cole Boulevard
Golden, Colorado 80401-3393
Phone: 303-275-3000
client_services@nrel.gov
NATIONAL WOOD ENERGY ASSOCIATION
777 N. Capitol Street, N.E.
Suite 805
Washington, DC 20002
Phone: 202-408-0664
Fax: 202-408-8530
ARTHUR JOHN ARMSTRONG, P.C.
1364 Beverly RoadAppendix C. Example Basic Power Purchase
Agreement
1. OVERVIEW
1.1 BASIC AGREEMENT. The basic document is a single contract between a
Company and a Utility where the Company contracts to design, build and operate for
[“w” hours a day, “x” days a year for “y” years, a facility producing “z” megawatts]
[firm] [as delivered] power.
COMMENT
• The foregoing applies only to base-load generators.
1.2 MAJOR DEFINITIONS. The following summarizes the key definitions:
“Agreement” means this Renewable Resources Power Purchase Agreement.
“Annual Period” means any one of a succession of consecutive 12-month periods.
“Buyers System” or “System” means the Buyer’s electrical system serving
[country], including Buyer’s Electrical Interconnection Facilities, beginning at the
Point(s) of Delivery.
“Date of Initial Commercial Service” means the day the Seller designates as the
initial date of production of electricity by Seller at its Facility.
“Electrical Interconnection Facilities” means those facilities required for the
receipt or delivery of Electricity or any Point(s) of Delivery required to connect
Buyer’s System to the Facility in order to effectuate the purposes of this Agreement.
“Electricity" means the total amount of electricity producible by the Facility and
available for sale.
“Force Majeure” a force such as (i) acts of God; (ii) war, insurrection, riot, civil
disorder or disturbance; (iii) impact of national emergency; (iv) defaults of
subcontractors and suppliers; (v) change of law; and (vi) strikes.
“Renewable Resources License” means the [Resources] License granted the____
day of 19___, by the [Minister] to Seller.
“Joint Venture Agreement” means the agreement entered between and among
__________________.
“KWh” means kilowatts of electricity per hour.jy pg p
COMMENT
• These definitions are illustrative only.
2. TERM. Thirty years (plus two extensions of five years each).
COMMENT
• The terms of sale to the grid must be incorporated into the contract. To the extent
that it is contemplated that the facility be transferred back to government or utility
ownership, a build, own, operate, transfer (or “BOOT” arrangement) formula may be
devised whereby, after the debt is paid and the company receives an agreed return
on investment, the facility may be transferred for an agreed sum. If the government
or utility wants to expedite transfer, it will offer incentives to allow high retention of
gross income (perhaps forfeiting royalty and thereby vesting itself with an increasing
share of the corporate ownership), and be prepared to buy out the company early. If
the government or utility wishes to minimize cash outlay, a long term contract can
usually allow transfer for a token sum of money.
3. SALE OF ELECTRICITY
3.1 Seller shall sell and Buyer shall buy all Electricity to be produced by Seller’s
facility.
3.2 MONTHLY ELECTRONIC CHARGE. Buyer shall pay Seller, in [designated hard
currency], a monthly electricity charge equal to (i) the capacity charge, calculated on
a kW basis, plus (ii) the product of the energy price for the applicable calendar year,
and the monthly quantity of Electricity on a kWh basis.
COMMENT
• This approach is illustrative. There are a number of formula which have proven
effective. The economics of the project and the goals of the parties should dictate a
result which can be expressed by formula.
• The kW basis and the energy price for the calendar year are at the heart of the
agreement and therefore the subject of negotiations and formula set forth in separate
appendixes.
All parties must agree upon an electricity pricing formula which guarantees prices to
the Seller. This formula should account for various factors such as system reliability,
production costs to the private sector producer, avoided costs to the Buyer for oil,
coal, natural gas, etc., and generation capability. If reliable power is supplied by the
Seller, the full avoided costs (energy plus capacity costs) are part of the criteria for
selling the electricity transfer price which is also moderated by system reliability and
capacity. From an economic perspective, avoided costs should reflect incremental or
lil tf ltiitdtiThthttthSllf• Hard currency payment is essential. Financial institutions will not loan the private
sector project funds without hard currency repayment.
Furthermore, since infrastructure projects such as power production facilities do not
generate hard currency, financial institutions may require government guarantees. In
some of the developing countries, the government guarantees only the
power-purchase payments; it does not necessarily guarantee the wan. Should a
government opt for this approach, it would only guarantee that payments will be
made for the electricity it receives, not for the debt of a facility whether it succeeds or
not.
4. DUTIES OF THE PARTIES
4.1 SELLER. Seller shall obtain all material government approvals. Seller shall own,
operate and maintain all Electrical Interconnection Facilities necessary for the
delivery of electricity from its Facility to the Points of Delivery. Seller shall endeavor
to provide uninterrupted delivery of Electricity to Buyer’s System.
4.2 BUYER. Buyer shall own, operate and maintain all Electrical Interconnection
facilities necessary for the receipt of electricity from Points of Delivery to its System.
Buyer shall purchase Electricity.
5. MEASUREMENT, METERING AND OPERATING SCHEDULE
5.1 UNITS OF MEASUREMENT. For the purposes of this Agreement Electricity shall
be measured in kW and kWh.
5.2 MEASUREMENT EQUIPMENT. Seller and Buying shall each maintain electrical
measuring, equipment. Seller’s meters shall be used for quantity measurements.
Testing, corrections of measuring equipment and maintenance shall be as mutually
agreed.
5.3 OPERATING SCHEDULE. Seller and Buyer shall keep each other informed as
to the operating schedule and condition of their respective facilities and equipment.
COMMENT
• Measurement provisions, with the requisite checks and balances must be carefully
honed. Confidence of Seller and Buyer in the measurements must be scrupulously
maintained if the Agreement is to be effective during the operating years. This issue,
if not set forth with specificity at the outset of the relationship, may prove to be a
major cause of friction in the relationship.
6. BILLINGS AND RECORDS
6.1 MONTHLY BILL TO BUYER. Seller shall bill Buyer for the amount of Electricity
actually delivered by Seller during the preceding month.notice.
COMMENT
• Certainty of payment underlies project financing. Interest penalties for late payment
are normally part of these provisions.
7. TAXES. Seller shall be solely responsible for any income taxes relating to the Facility. Buyer
shall be solely responsible for any sales, use, property, income or other taxes relating to the
Buyer’s System, as well as any taxes imposed on the sale to the Buyer of Electricity produced by
the Facility.
8. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
8.1 REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF BUYER. Buyer hereby
represents and warrants to Seller as follows:
A. Buyer is a corporation duly organized and existing in good standing
under the laws of [country] and is duly qualified to do business with
[country].
B. Buyer possesses all requisite power, authority, including regulatory
authorities and financial capability, to enter into and perform this
Agreement and to carry out the transactions contemplated hereunder.
8.2 REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF SELLER. Seller hereby
represents and warrants to Buyer as follows:
A. Seller is a joint venture duly organized and existing under the laws of
and is duly qualified to do business in [country].
B. Seller possesses all requisite power and authority to enter into and
perform this Agreement and carry out the transactions contemplated
hereunder.
COMMENT
• In most international transactions, particularly where there is a direct foreign
investment of the type contemplated here, an initial decision to be made concerns
the type and nationality of the entity which will actually engage in the activity.
Factors which are usually considered in making such selections include foreign and
domestic taxation, methods of financing the operation, credit risks and concerns,
trade incentives, risks concerning injury to person and property, local licensing and
permitting public relations, etc.
Whether there is a requirement under law that the Licenses be a domestic
corporation is a question which needs to be examined.
9. INDEMNIFICATION. Each Party agrees to protect, indemnify and hold harmless the other
Party and its directorsofficersshareholdersemployeesagents and representatives againstcomprehensive general liability insurance in agreed amounts.
11. ARBITRATION. Arbitration shall be under the Convention for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States.
COMMENT
• Most private-sector investors consider it of particular importance in contracts with
government entities to specify clearly what jurisdiction’s laws will be applied in the
interpretation and enforcement of the contract, to specify where disputes will be
resolved and how disputes will be resolved (arbitration is the generally preferred
method). Each party to the Agreement will normally want the laws of its own domicile
to apply and for the dispute to be settled by a tribunal located in its domicile.
• In electing an arbitral tribunal, special care should be taken to ensure that the
government has officially recognized that forum. The following list sets forth the
major arbitral tribunals.
a. ICSID. The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States (“ICSID”) establishes the
International Center for Investment Disputes. This convention has the
unique advantage of providing that each contracting state shall recognize
and enforce an ICSID award as though it were a final judgement of the
country’s courts. ICSID is limited to disputes arising between a state party
to the convention and a national of another state and must arise from an
investment dispute. [Country] is a member of ICSID, and contemplates
the use of ICSID in the Model License.
b. The New York Convention. The 1958 United Nations Convention on
the Recognition an Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (the “New
York Convention”), ratified by approximately 70 countries, provides that
an international award rendered in a country party to the Convention may
be enforced in another convention country.
c. UNCITRAL. This model set of rules was unanimously approved by the
U.N. They are of particular interest because arbitrations administered by
the London Court of Arbitration and The American Arbitration Association
can be carried out using these rules.
d. ICC The International Chamber of Commerce rules have the
advantage of being internationally recognized (unlike those of the
American Arbitration Association).
e. AAA. The American Arbitration Association rules are perhaps more
effective than others, provided that the contracting parties are citizens of
tihih htifid thNYk Ctiitd• Liabilities such as penalties for default on contracts are important to the utility
vis-á-vis future expansion plans.
• Of overriding importance are the breach of contracts envisioned under the domestic
regulatory scheme. Since a breach results in forfeiture of rights, the government will
have enormous leverage over the joint venture seller.
13. MISCELLANEOUS. These provisions address notice, service successors and assigns, third
party beneficiaries, confidentiality governing law, language, currency, effective date,
amendments and other such significant issues.
Appendix D. Renewables Portfolio Standard
One mechanism for using competitive markets to attain an appropriate reliance on
renewable resources in the fuel mix used to generate electricity is called the “Renewables
Portfolio Standard" (RPS). Electric industry restructuring is aimed at inducing more efficient
electric service- Energy policy strategists are seeking competitively-neutral, market-based
strategies to ensure that the objectives of integrated resource planning are not lost. The RPS
approach bridges the shift to competitive markets.
The RPS approach applies a resource diversity standard to all retail electric service suppliers. It
relies on flexible, market implementation of this standard to obtain compliance at least cost.
Specifically, all retail suppliers are required to possess a minimum percentage of renewable
energy resources within their overall resource portfolio. A government or a grid system
determines the percentage after considering its environmental and resource diversity goals and
the availability and cost of renewable resources. Suppliers could meet the standard by owning
renewable energy projects, purchasing renewable energy on the wholesale market, or
purchasing renewable generation “credits.”
A. General Description
As a condition of doing business in a country (or a governmental subdivision) every retail power
supplier (vertically-integrated utility, distribution-only utility, direct access supplier, or power
aggregator), and any self-generator, are required to:
a. Demonstrate that a minimum percentage of its total kilowatt-hour (kWh) sales (or,
in the case of a self-generator, its output) were generated from a defined set of
renewable resources; or
b. Own certificates for an equivalent amount of kWh generation from such resources.
The retail power supplier could satisfy this requirement by owning and generating
power from a renewables facility, purchasing renewable generation produced by a
ff supplier that owns a renewable power facility or has contract rights to production
from such a facility that is producing in excess of what the supplier needs to meet its
RPS obligation could sell the excess generation as “credits.” The purchaser of the
credits would have the right to count those credits toward its renewables obligation.
B. Application to a Power Pool
There are a number of ways in which voluntary power pools could be used to facilitate
compliance with the RPS.
(1) Crediting for renewables which are dispatched under normal economic
dispatch: Participants in a voluntary, single, or multi-jurisdiction power pool may
agree to distinguish renewable resources from other sales into the pool so that the
purchase of this power by a retail power supplier will count towards compliance with
the standard. Under this approach, renewable generation not otherwise obligated to
any retail supplier for purposes of complying with the RPS and that is successfully
bid into the pool or is economically dispatched would generate credits that would
temporarily be held by the pool manager. Periodic reports would indicate the fraction
of total sales into the pool (through bid or economic dispatch) that were generated
from renewable sources. The pool manager would then assign each buyer from the
pool a pro-rata share of credits commensurate to the total generation purchased from
the pool.
This system would be intended as a supplement to overall compliance with the
standard, not as the primary means of compliance, since there would be no
mechanism for assuring that sufficient renewable generation would be sold into the
pool. However, the periodic reports would be issued as frequently as necessary to
provide pool purchasers with enough information to gauge how much additional
generation or credits they would need to acquire to fully comply with the standard.
(2) Dispatch priority for renewables: As a means of meeting their RPS obligation,
some or all retail sellers participating in a pool could agree to establish a dispatch
priority for renewables within the regular pool. Under this arrangement, these retail
sellers would enter into an agreement with the pool manager to dispatch sufficient
renewable sources in the pool to meet a designated target over the course of a year.
Conversely, each retail supplier would commit to purchasing a specified amount of
renewables from the pool on an annual basis such that, combined with the supplier’s
own bilateral agreements and generation resources, the supplier would meet its total
requirement. Each participating retail supplier would pay its share of the incremental
costs associated with changing the dispatch priority to fulfill its renewables
commitment.
(3) Separate renewables pool: A group of retail sellers could establish a separate
renewables pool to facilitate them in meeting their RPS obligation at least cost. Thecredits would count toward the retail sellers renewables obligation.