File Name: LBR-CPD-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Liberia
Country Code: LBR
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 3-6 September 2019
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2024
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

ecuve od oe
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
1 July 2019
Original: English
1911138X (E) 030719
Second regular session 2019
3-6 September 2019, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Liberia (2020-2024)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Liberia (2020-2024) 9I. Programme rationale 
1. Liberia has embarked on a trajectory of pro-poor development through its new national 
development plan, the Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity and Development (PAPD), which was 
launched in 2018. The PAPD renewed the country’s commitment to peace and equitable growth, 
even as it continues to emerge from years of conflict, the Ebola crisis and the resultant economic 
downturn.
1 Liberia faces multiple challenges2
including high inflation, declining global commodity 
prices, growing foreign debt and import dependency,
3 which continue to slow economic growth4
and reduce fiscal space5for basic service delivery and achievement of the Sustainable Development 
Goals. Despite severe obstacles, Liberia has held open and democratic elections, successfully 
established key national institutions and achieved peacebuilding and legislative milestones.
2. Acute poverty and vulnerability in Liberia are a result of entrenched social and economic 
inequalities and exclusion. Liberia’s Human Development Index (HDI) has been declining,
6
standing at 0.435 for 2017, ranking Liberia 181 of 189 countries.
7 More than half of the country’s 
4.7 million people8live below the poverty line9and marginalization remain deeply entrenched.
10 In 
2018, 71.2 per cent of Liberians experienced multidimensional poverty,
11 with 33.2 per cent severely 
poor and 20.4 per cent vulnerable to slipping back into poverty.
12
3. Despite Liberia’s ratification of the Maputo Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa, its 
domestication remains inadequate. The Gender Inequality Index of 0.610 ranks Liberia 177 of 188
countries, a decline from earlier years.
13 The rate of women’s participation in politics and 
governance remain low; women occupy only 2 of 30 seats in the Senate and 9 of 73 seats in the 
House of Representatives.
14
 Gender gaps are evident in mean years of education (3.5 versus 6.1) 
and income ($577 versus $755). While patriarchal norms that maintain the low status of women 
and girls persist, the legacy of violence against women during the civil wars has been normalized.15
Almost 14 per cent16 of the population living with disabilities face stigma and lack income-earning 
opportunities. The adult HIV prevalence rate of 2.1 per cent17 (women: 2.4 per cent; men: 1.8 per
cent) results from health system deficiencies and unequal gender relations.
4. Centralization of political and economic power in the capital and inadequate provision of 
services and infrastructure at the local level have produced uneven development patterns across
Liberia.
18 The initial peace, security and humanitarian assistance provided by partners was not 
adequately followed by systematic rebuilding of core government functions, leading to suboptimal 
levels of integrity in decentralized delivery of public services, especially to marginalized groups.
 
1 World Bank, FY19-FY24 Country Partnership Framework, 2018.
2 Liberia Common Country Assessment, 2018.
3 World Bank, FY19-FY24 Country Partnership Framework, 2018.
4 International Monetary Fund 2019 Article IV Mission to Liberia: https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2019/03/08/pr1971-imf-staffcompletes-2019-article-iv-mission-to-liberia
5 Africa Economic Outlook (2017).
6 UNDP Human Development Indices and Indicators 2018 Statistical Update, tables 1, 2.
7 UNDP Human Development Report 2018; inequality-adjusted HDI for 2017 is 32 per cent lower. 
8 United Nations Population Division, 2017.
9 Liberia Institute for Statistics and Geo-Information Services, Liberia Household Income and Expenditure Survey, 2016.
10 Poverty stands at 71.6 per cent in rural areas and 31.5 per cent in urban areas.
11 UNDP multidimensional poverty data 2018.
12 UNDP Human Development Report, 2018.
13 Ibid.
14 National Elections Commission, Liberia.
15 Government of Liberia and United Nations Joint Programme Against Sexual and Gender Based Violence and Harmful Traditional Practices, 
Program brief (undated). 
16 Government of the Republic of Liberia, (2008) National Population and Housing Census.
17 J
it Uitd NtiPHIV/AIDS“Libi’thltkh”27 Mh 2019DP/DCP/LBR/3
Liberia’s score on the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index worsened from 37 
in 2016 to 32 in 2018,
19 although the decline began in 2012. 
5. Significant progress has been made in strengthening peace, security and the rule of law, but 
challenges persist. The constitutional review begun in 2012 remains incomplete. Recommendations 
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission meant to heal wounds inflicted by the conflict remain 
unimplemented. Weak administrative procedures and limited human and institutional capacities20
have led to delays in citizens’ access to justice, especially in cases of human rights violations and 
sexual and gender-based violence. Illicit proliferation of small arms remains a challenge.
6. Inadequate employment opportunities21 are preventing Liberia from benefiting from its 
demographic dividend.
22 Informal employment is at 67.9 per cent,23 with the worst rates in North 
Central (86.3 per cent) and Northwest (73.6 per cent) regions where access to education and 
livelihood opportunities is limited, leading to both rural-urban migration and outmigration. Women 
constitute 55.3 per cent of the workforce in the informal sector and provide 80 per cent of the 
agricultural labour force.
24 Access to credit is restricted and 72 per cent25 of adult Liberians are 
unbanked. Electricity is available to 18 per cent of the total population and 3 per cent of the rural 
population. Liberia is ranked 174 among 190 economies in the ease-of-doing-business26 ratings.
7. Even though agriculture employs over half the population27 and generates close to one third of 
gross domestic product, only 28 per cent of arable land is used for agriculture. Due to low technical 
and budgetary investments,
28 agriculture is limited to subsistence farming, with a predominance of 
female farmers. Returns on exports of cash crops have declined due to falling international prices. 
Recent estimates suggest that the national food poverty rate exceeds 40 per cent.29 
8. Liberia’s revenue base relies on taxes from natural resource extraction through mining, timber
and plantation concessions to foreign companies. The domestic private sector is small and suffers 
from low productivity, limited capacity for innovation and minimal access to formal finance. The 
challenge is to: (a) harness and maximize the development impact of revenue from concessionaires; 
(b) leverage revenue flows to develop a domestic private sector which can create jobs; and (c) ensure 
environmental sustainability of the extractive and forestry sectors. 
9. Land rights issues30 continue to be a driver of conflict and hamper investment. Most of the 
population has no formal rights to their land. Nearly 40 per cent of the land has been signed away 
in concessions, mainly affecting women in rural communities. Local communities are left out and 
do not benefit from their resources. Though the Land Rights Act 2018 is expected to address these 
challenges, inadequate funds and capacities to implement the law remain impediments. 
10. Liberia has rich and diverse natural resources and is a global biodiversity hotspot.
31 Linkages 
between socioeconomic and environmental issues in the context of sustainable development in 
Liberia and in the subregion, especially for women and marginalized groups, are critical. Climate 
change, deforestation and threats to protected areas are likely to adversely affect sectors including 
agriculture, fisheries, forestry, hydropower generation and health. Rising sea levels have accelerated 
coastal erosion, damaging infrastructures and impacting livelihoods of coastal communities. Low-
 
19 Transparency International, Liberia, 2018. 
20 Liberia Peacebuilding Plan, 2017.
21 Republic of Liberia, Poverty alleviation and wealth creation through small enterprise development 2011.
22 Liberia National Census, 2008; under 35 population at 70 per cent. 
23 Household Income and Expenditure Survey, 2014.
24 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Gender Assessment Series, Liberia, 2018.
25 Central Bank of Liberia, 2013.
26 World Bank, FY19-FY24 Country Partnership Framework, 2018. Washington, D. C.
27 FAO, Liberia, 2015. 
28 World Development Indicators, Liberia 2018.
29 Liberia Food Security Assessment 2015.
30 Mi
itf FiAffiLibiLd Plid Ld Riht2016lying areas are frequently flooded due to inadequate drainage systems and poor waste management. 
Early warning systems in Liberia remain nascent. Planning and resource allocation are not evidencebased due to limited data and knowledge of current climate risks and anticipated climate change 
impacts.
11. Liberia has made progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and the 
principles of the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States by incorporating them into the PAPD.
32
A framework for monitoring and reporting progress for the Goals and the PAPD, based on 
international and national indicators, is in place. However, the availability of reliable disaggregated 
data to ensure that no one is left behind remains critical. Also, progress towards the Sustainable 
Development Goals may be adversely affected by ongoing aid volatility and the Government’s 
policy objective to reduce aid dependency.
12. UNDP, a trusted partner of the Government, has deployed its comparative advantage to support 
national authorities: (a) through its convening power as an impartial, high-level mediator on 
sensitive reforms; (b) as a connector, and now an integrator, among diverse partners and interest 
groups; and (c) as a knowledge broker, drawing on its global network of technical expertise to 
provide institutional capacity-building and policy advisory services. UNDP support33 to national 
authorities from 2013 to 2019 impacted areas critical to the achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals. It facilitated Liberia’s ratification of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change34
and in 2016 supported the development of the National Policy and Response Strategy on Climate 
Change and the National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction. To enable decentralization, 
UNDP successfully advocated for the passage of the Local Government Act 2018, establishment of 
15 county service centres and roll-out of an innovative citizens’ feedback mechanism. UNDP 
provided technical support to the electoral law reforms in 2014 and successful conduct of the 2017 
elections and continues to build the legal capacities of personnel and infrastructures of the justice 
system. 
13. The theory of change incorporates the following lessons:
35 (a) regular feedback from target 
groups improves programme implementation and outcomes for achievement of multiple Sustainable 
Development Goals; (b) strengthening oversight systems coupled with innovation boosts last-mile 
delivery of interventions; and (c) mainstreaming resilience expands livelihood options, saves lives 
and reduces economic costs. Accordingly, UNDP will shift towards an issue-based approach,
balancing short-term pressures with transitions to medium- and long-terms development outcomes,
emphasizing sustainability and scalability of results.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
14. This country programme reflects and contributes to the priorities the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development, as articulated in the PAPD and United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework (UNDAF) 2020-2024. These are: (a) access to basic services; (b) inclusive growth; (c) 
peace and justice; and (d) governance. Based on consultations and a comparative advantage analysis, 
UNDP will contribute to outcomes areas (b), (c) and (d), each aligned to the UNDP Strategic Plan, 
2018-2021. Human rights-based programming principles, innovative approaches, integrated 
platforms and financing solutions will be used to build strategic new partnerships and to accelerate 
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
15. Target areas for this programme adhere to the principle of leaving no one behind and are 
consistent with the PAPD. The focus will be on 7 of the 15 counties: Nimba, Grand Gedeh, Lofa 
and Grand Cape Mount based on persistent poverty, low social development indices and high 
prevalence of recorded sexual and gender-based violence;36 and Montserrado, Sinoe and Grand 
 
32 Republic of Liberia, Road map for domesticating the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
33 UNDP, Liberia country programme midterm review (2016) and outcome evaluation (2017).
34 Republic of Liberia, Environmental Protection Agency, 2018.
35 UNDP
Libitidti(2016) d tlti(2017)UNDAF lti(2018)DP/DCP/LBR/3
Bassa mainly for vulnerability to climate change and coastal defence interventions. UNDP 
programme design and implementation will enable equal participation of and benefits to women, 
youth, people living with disabilities, sexual minorities and communities at increased risk of HIV 
infection and poor health.
16. Outcome 1, inclusive governance, contributes to Sustainable Development Goals 5,10,11 and
16 and will apply UNDP signature solutions 2, 3, 5 and 6. The theory of change underpinning the 
interventions is that the quality of core government functions to deliver quality essential goods and 
services to the population is the foundation of the social contract between the people and the State.
17. To advance the recovery process and reduce the risk of a relapse into societal disorder, UNDP 
will support mechanisms to improve the quality and effectiveness of core government functions. 
UNDP will provide upstream policy support across key areas on Liberia’s Sustainable Development 
Goal domestication agenda, development planning, implementation of the New Deal process, aid 
coordination, national statistical systems and public sector reform. Efforts will be increased to
mobilize domestic resources for decentralized service delivery.
18. UNDP will continue to provide expertise to the National Elections Commission to facilitate 
electoral law reforms, promote women’s political participation and prevent electoral violence. It 
will support renovation of the electoral infrastructure and establish an integrated online egovernance platform to enhance transparency and accountability in election procedures. Youth 
organizations will be engaged to boost voter registration and turnout and ensure peaceful polling. 
Renewed efforts will be made to improve women’s representation and participation in politics.
19. UNDP will support the national anti-corruption institutions to establish viable e-governance 
solutions to enhance transparency and improve the productivity and accountability of public 
institutions. UNDP will continue to provide resources and expertise to improve public procurement 
and assist civil society to contribute to higher levels of integrity, especially in the infrastructure 
sector, through real-time community monitoring. 
20. Effective decentralization and local governance are key strategies to promote sustainable peace 
and inclusive growth in Liberia. UNDP will strengthen the capacity of local government officials 
and institutions to implement the 2018 Local Government Act, scale up the successful county 
service centre model for service provision to 15 counties and ensure fiscal decentralization through 
county treasuries in select counties. These activities will directly support national efforts to establish
and enhance administrative systems at all levels of local government and create operational 
frameworks for financing local governments. Special measures will be taken to ensure that countylevel service delivery is beneficial to women and marginalized groups. 
21. To improve public services, particularly to the most vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, 
UNDP will support the implementation of the innovative, information technology-enabled citizens’ 
feedback mechanism launched in 2019. The data from this mechanism will enable the design and 
implementation of a performance management system for the civil service, and inform planning, 
implementation and monitoring of the Sustainable Development Goals.
22. South-South cooperation will be forged with post-conflict success-stories such as Rwanda and 
Sierra Leone and the Electoral Commission of Ghana. Through the UNDP Global Policy Network, 
collaborations will be sought for models for revenue mobilization and Sustainable Development 
Goal acceleration.
23. Outcome 2, peacebuilding and social cohesion, is aligned with Sustainable Development 
Goals 5, 10 and 16 and applies UNDP signature solutions 2, 3, 5 and 6. The underlying theory of 
change is that if peacebuilding, rule of law and justice, governance (UNDAF/PAPD outcome 3) 
and economic recovery (UNDAF/PAPD outcome 1) are addressed in an integrated way, then the 
transition to social cohesion at the local level can be accelerated and sustainable. The PAPD places 
high priority on these combined strategies in the aftermath of the March 2018 withdrawal of the 
United Nations Mission in Liberia. 24. Jointly with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), 
UNDP will scale up programmes to enhance the capacities of, and public confidence in, justice and 
security institutions; and to improve access to justice, security and protection services, especially 
for women and girls. This includes direct support across the entire justice “chain” (police,
prosecution, judiciary, prison) with a focus on strengthening community security, promoting and 
protecting human rights, sustainably improving the decentralized delivery of justice and security 
services, and enhancing legal literacy and offering tailored legal aid and assistance, especially to 
pretrial detainees and children in conflict with the law. UNDP efforts under the European UnionUnited Nations Spotlight Initiative will expand women’s access to decentralized services to prevent 
sexual and gender-based violence and to ensure speedy legal redress. Implementation of the 
Firearms and Ammunitions Control Act will be improved by addressing regulatory gaps. 
25. UNDP is uniquely positioned to help the Government establish a credible reconciliation process 
by: (a) supporting the national law reform agenda and reviewing discriminatory provisions in 
enacted laws, emerging bills and laws pending assent; and (b) by creating appropriate dialogue 
platforms for civic engagement around select development issues and governance processes. UNDP 
will support the establishment of a harmonized peacebuilding architecture and early warning 
systems for conflict prevention as per recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission, and will ensure women’s participation in peace processes.
26. South-South cooperation will be forged with Ghana to expand learning on peace architecture 
models, and with Kenya for specialized training of immigration and police on forensics.
27. Outcome 3, inclusive growth, is aligned with Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 13,
14 and 15 and UNDP signature solutions 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6. Interventions are informed by the theory 
of change that if programmes address the links between poverty reduction and environmental 
sustainability, this can reduce inequalities and protect the economic interests and well-being of the 
rural poor. UNDP will support the Government to meet its obligations under the Paris Agreement 
by strengthening policy and legislative capacities, building partnerships for climate action, 
particularly with the private sector, and mobilizing national and global finance. Mainstreaming
environmental considerations into national policy and planning to ensure climate justice for women 
and marginalized groups will remain a priority.
28. Capacities of ministries, agencies and commissions will be enhanced to build resilience and 
drive the response to climate change in coastal counties through adaptation planning, including the 
establishment of integrated coastal zone management units. Technology for monitoring coastal 
erosion and construction of infrastructure for protecting coastlines will be stepped up. UNDP will 
enhance opportunities for community dialogue on local implications of climate change through 
gender-responsive adaptative actions to meet the unique needs of communities in coastal regions, 
agricultural settings and urban areas. This will include assistance to diversify local businesses in 
coastal areas by promoting coastal-focused business networks in collaboration with regional 
stakeholders. In partnership with the Government and private sector, UNDP will support improved
access to credit, especially for women and youth, in rural areas. Early warning systems will be 
supported to help protect livelihoods in the agriculture, fishery, mining and forestry sectors. These 
efforts will also address both push and pull factors of migration. Support to disaster risk reduction 
activities and environmental awareness-raising in communities will continue in partnership with 
civil society.
29. UNDP will support improved policy frameworks for biodiversity conservation, management of 
protected areas and sustainable land and water management. This will include support to sustainable 
palm oil production; rehabilitation of mangrove ecosystems; sustainable livelihoods that benefit 
local communities, especially women; emerging areas of tourism (with a focus on ecotourism); the 
blue economy; and use of renewable energy for rural health clinics, eco-friendly fish drying and 
cooking technologies. 
30. UNDP views land concession reform as integral to a broader national dialogue rather than as a 
string of narrow technical interventionsUNDP will support the establishment of multistakeholder DP/DCP/LBR/3
platforms comprising local administrations, traditional elders, civil society, women’s and youth 
organizations, the business community and development partners to build consensus on land 
concession management and social cohesion. Government agencies responsible for concession 
management will be supported to improve technical capacity to manage concession-related disputes. 
To promote a vibrant private sector, UNDP will support improvements in the regulatory framework 
for ease of doing business. Women- and youth-led associations and small-scale businesses, often 
adversely impacted by the concessions model, will be supported to overcome their supply-side 
constraints and use market opportunities. 
31. South-South cooperation will be forged with private sector federations and enterprise 
development initiatives in Botswana, Kenya and Rwanda. 
III. Programme and risk management 
32. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional 
and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’s 
programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework.
33. UNDP is committed to implementing the common chapter of the strategic plans of UNDP, the 
United Nations Population Fund, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and United Nations 
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) through working jointly 
on sex and age-disaggregated data, gender-based violence, advancing the rights of people with 
disabilities and climate and disaster resilience.
34. In keeping with the Paris Declaration and the Accra Agenda Action on Aid Effectiveness, the 
country programme will be nationally executed and appropriate implementation modalities will be 
used at the project level. In accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/9, all direct costs 
associated with project implementation will be charged to concerned projects. To strengthen 
implementation, UNDP will use macro and micro assessment tools to assess the capacities of 
partners and will provide appropriate support. To manage financial risks, the programme will use 
the harmonized approach to cash transfers in coordination with other United Nations agencies. Cash 
transfer modalities, the size of disbursements and the scope and frequency of assurance activities 
may be revised during programme implementation based on the findings of programme and 
expenditure monitoring and audits. 
35. Experience shows that national capacities for the anticipation and prevention of risks, of both 
natural hazards and conflict, are an integral part of development rather than an ad hoc measure. In 
Liberia, the following components of the risk mitigation will be supported: (a) early detection and 
analysis; (b) preparedness to ensure that plans, funds, operational contingencies and high-levels of 
awareness are in place to address risks when they do materialize into crises; (c) response to manage 
and contain the immediate consequences; and (d) recovery, to transition back in the shortest possible 
time to a development trajectory and prevent or minimize the likelihood of recurrence.
36. UNDP will mitigate the risks related to sensitive governance issues by ensuring continued 
respect for ground rules that worked well in the past: adherence to United Nations values; national 
leadership and ownership; transparency in dealings with all concerned stakeholders; and openness 
to dialogue and emphasis on inclusion. UNDP will continuously support capacity-building of 
institutions in public procurement and internal audit to mitigate risks and enhance accountability 
and transparency in the management of resources.
37. Based on recommendations from an independent internal strategic review of the country 
programme and the availability of funding, three hubs outside Monrovia will be considered to scale
up programme delivery and deploy the area-based integrator role, platforms and labs at the local 
level to strengthen programme impact.38. UNDP will assist the Government to convene line ministries and development partners to 
coordinate development finance and support the establishment of integrated Sustainable 
Development Goal financing frameworks as recommended by the development finance assessment 
undertaken by UNDP in 2016. UNDP will utilize innovation including through accelerator labs and 
the Global Innovation Facility for solutions that deliver at scale on country-level Sustainable 
Development Goal implementation. Managing expectations, front-loading knowledge of risk factors 
at the design stage and developing oversight processes that engage stakeholders in an ongoing 
process of learning will be important elements of the mitigation approach.
39. The decline in official development assistance necessitates greater effort for financing 
development using domestic resources. While this provides opportunities to optimize resource 
management, it also risks leaving some vital capacity development needs unmet. To mitigate, UNDP 
will expand partnerships with the private sector, international financial institutions, foundations and 
non-traditional donors,
37 investing in innovative solutions while leveraging funding for scaling up 
programmes in rural areas. The country office will also review its business processes to improve 
efficiency and cost-effectiveness, including a staffing structure with adequate delivery capacities. 
40. Liberia does not face a significant risk of conflict in the short term. However, high public 
expectations coupled with persistent inequality, exclusion and previous unresolved human rights
issues may lead to instability. The Liberian political economy is unpredictable, necessitating
sustained dialogue with the Government and stakeholders. The likelihood of another epidemic such 
as the Ebola outbreak remains a reality. UNDP will develop a business continuity strategy and 
establish thresholds to trigger programme adjustments, including reallocation of resources.
III. Monitoring and evaluation
41. Global and/or nationally-owned data sources and traditional and innovative monitoring methods
including field visits will be used to track contributions of UNDP projects to national results and the 
Sustainable Development Goals. Corporate quality assurance standards will be used to strengthen
linkages to the Goals. The country office will build capacities of staff and national counterparts 
regarding the application of the UNDP social and environmental standards and accountability 
mechanism. 
42. Based on programme achievements and the policy and political environment, the theory of 
change and the results and resources framework will be adjusted, as needed. Third-party evaluations, 
conducted as per corporate guidelines, will inform programme design and implementation.
43. UNDP will implement its gender strategy, advance the gender seal initiative and invest at least 
15 per cent of the budget on gender-specific interventions. The gender marker will be used to 
monitor expenditures and improve planning. Three per cent of the overall programme budget will 
be earmarked for monitoring, quality assurance and communicating results.
44. A multi-year policy research and knowledge management agenda will be adopted for making 
results and learning available to diverse audiences. Collaboration with national and international 
academic institutions and development partners will be accelerated in mutual areas of interest. 
UNDP will invest in communicating results through stories and real-life narratives, using 
innovative, user-friendly tools, including social media. 
 
37 DP/DCP/LBR/3
Annex. Results and resources framework for Liberia (2020-2024)
Pillar 4 of National Plan – Inclusive, decentralized governance 
UNDAF Outcome 4/ UNDP OUTCOME 1: By 2024, people in Liberia, especially the vulnerable and disadvantaged, benefit from strengthened institutions that are more effective, accountable, 
transparent, inclusive, and gender responsive in the delivery of essential services at the national and subnational levels
STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome 2: STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATIONS 
UNDAF outcome, 
indicators baselines, 
targets
Data source, 
frequency of data 
collection, 
responsibilities
Indicative outputs Major partners / partnerships
frameworks
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome ($)
Indicator: Proportion of 
population who believe 
decision-making is inclusive 
and responsive,
disaggregated by sex 
Baseline: Male & Female: 
0% 
Target: 50%: 25% Males; 
25% Females
Indicator: Proportion of 
population satisfied with 
their last experience of public 
services, disaggregated by 
sex 
Baseline: 56%
Target: 76%
Indicator: Liberia 
Corruption Perceptions Index 
score
Baseline: 32 (2018)
Target: 50 
Indicator: Number of
ministries/agencies/commissi
ons with systems to track 
public allocations for gender 
equality 
Baseline: 0
Target: 20 
Cabinet Secretariat 
Annual
Social Cohesion and 
Reconciliation Study
Biennial
Transparency 
International
Annual
National Budget
Annual
National Identification 
Registry 
Annual
Output 1.1: Capacities developed across the whole of government to 
integrate development plans and budgets, and to analyse progress 
towards the Sustainable Development Goals, using innovative and datadriven solutions
Indicator 1.1.1: Existence of data collection mechanisms providing 
disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the Goals:(i) Conventional 
data collection methods (surveys); (ii) Administrative reporting systems; (iii) 
New data sources (citizen feedback mechanism) 
Baseline: (i) Yes; (ii) Yes; (iii) No;
Target:(i) Yes; (ii) Yes; (iii) Yes;
Data Source: ministries/agencies/commissions and Cabinet Secretariat
Indicator 1.1.2: Percentage of Goal-related policy proposals submitted to 
the Cabinet by ministries/agencies/commissions that comply with quality 
standards of the Cabinet Guide
Baseline: 50%
Target: 75%
Data Source: Cabinet Secretariat 
Indicator 1.1.3: Existence of development plans and budgets that integrate 
international agreements across the whole of Government: (i) 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development; (ii) Paris Agreement
Baseline: (i) Yes; (ii) No 
Target: (i) Yes; (ii) Yes
Data Source: PAPD evaluation report (2023)
Indicator 1.1.4: Number of plans and policy instruments /mechanisms 
developed for Sustainable Development Goal domestication 
Baseline: 4
Target: 7
Data Source: Ministry of Finance, Development and Planning
Office of the President
Ministries of Finance, Development 
and Planning, of Justice (MoJ), of 
Internal Affairs (MIA), of Gender, 
Children and Social Protection, of 
Mines and Energy (MME)
Liberia Lands Authority (LLA)
Governance Commission
Relevant 
ministries/agencies/commissions
Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission
UN-Women
UNAIDS
UNV
FAO
United Nations Economic Commission
for Africa
United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID)
Swedish International Development 
Cooperation Agency (Sida)
African Development Bank
Liberia Chamber of Commerce
University of Liberia
Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping 
Training Centre
Carter Center
Transparency International
Regular: 
$14,967,000
Other: $34,000,000Indicator: Electoral 
management bodies have 
institutional and legal 
capacities to deliver 
democratic elections
Baseline: 238
Target: 4
Indicator 1.1.5: Proportion of programmes/projects where South-South or 
triangular cooperation is used to achieve results 
Baseline: 20%
Target: 40%
Data Source: UNDP project reports
Output 1.2: Capacities of government at subnational levels strengthened 
to promote inclusive decentralized service delivery including to
marginalized and vulnerable groups.
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of decentralized services available in counties
Baseline: 28
Target: 36
Data Source: County superintendents’ office
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of county treasuries established.
Baseline: 4
Target: 9
Data Source: Ministry of Finance 
Indicator 1.2.3: Number of provisions in the Local Government Act 
implemented 
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Data Source: Governance Commission
Output 1.3: Electoral processes strengthened for inclusive, transparent 
and peaceful conduct of elections 
Indicator 1.3.1: Number of election magisterial areas equipped with 
logistical facilities for storage and supply of election materials.
Baseline: 1
Target: 19 
Data Source: National Election Commission
Indicator 1.3.2: Extent to which administrative procedures for dispute 
resolution are established and implemented
Baseline: 139
Target: 4 
Data Source: Complaints matrix of the National Election Commission 
Indicator 1.3.3: Number of amendments to the national election legislation 
endorsed
Centre for Transparency and 
Accountability in Liberia
Institute for Research and Democratic 
Development
 
38 1. Not adequately (25% - 50%) 2. Partially (50% - 75%) 3. Moderately (75% - 90%) 4. Largely/Mostly (90% and above)
39 Not adequately (25% - 50%) 2
Partially (50% - 75%) 3Moderately (75% - 90%) 4Largely/Mostly (90% and above)DP/DCP/LBR/3
Baseline: 41
Target: 76 
Data Source: National Elections Commission 
Output 1.4: Institutions and systems strengthened to reduce corruption 
at national and subnational levels to maximize resource availability for 
pro-poor development 
Indicator 1.4.1: Number of integrity diagnosis data available for national 
pillars 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 12 
Data Source: Transparency International 
Indicator 1.4.2: Number of ministries/agencies/commissions with functional 
e-governance platforms
Baseline: 3
Target: 10
Data Source: General Audit Commission
Indicator 1.4.3: Number of infrastructure projects undergoing real-time 
community monitoring
Baseline: 0 
Target: 3
Data Source: Community monitoring reports
Pillar 3 of National Plan – Peace, justice and social cohesion
UNDAF Outcome 3/ UNDP OUTCOME 2: By 2024, Liberia consolidates, sustains peace and enhances social cohesion, has strengthened formal and informal institutions capable of providing access 
to inclusive, effective, equitable justice and security services, capable of promoting and protecting the human rights of all.
STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome 3: RESILIENCE 
Indicator: Number of 
Human rights violations 
adjudicated disaggregated 
by sex
Baseline: 44 
Target: 750 
Indicator: Percentage of 
public satisfied with the 
performance of justice and 
security institutions, 
disaggregated by sex
Baseline: 31.3%: M:48.6%; 
F:51.4%
Target: 40%
Independent National 
High Commission on 
Human Rights 
Annual
Public perception 
survey 
Biennial
Output 2.1. National and local justice systems enabled to ensure 
increased access to justice and security 
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of sex-disaggregated legal aid beneficiaries
Baseline: 1,243 (2018)
Target: 7,500
Data source: National Civil Society Council 
Indicator 2.1.2 Number of sexual and gender-based violence cases 
adjudicated
Baseline: 80 (2018)
Target: 300
Data Source: Ministry of Justice
MoJ, MIA, Judiciary,
Independent National Commission on 
Human Rights
OHCHR
UN-Women
UNICEF
UNODC
Liberian National Bar Association 
Association of Female Lawyers in 
Liberia 
Prison Fellowship –Liberia
Rural Dwellers Empowerment Concept
Louis Arthur Grimes School of Law
Regular: 
$14,967,000
Other: $23,100,000Indicator: Proportion of 
citizen expressing 
satisfaction with Liberia’s 
social cohesion, 
reconciliation and 
sustainable peace. 
Baseline: 60%
Target: 80%
Social cohesion and 
reconciliation study
Biennial
Indicator 2.1.3: Proportion of complaints addressed by the newly established 
Civilian Complaints Review Board of the Liberia National Police 
Baseline: 0%
Target: 50%
Data Source: Liberia National Police
Indicator 2.1.4: Number of cases which receive legal aid 
Baseline: 2,800
Target: 5,000 
Data Source: Judiciary
Output 2.2. Reconciliation and peacebuilding mechanisms expanded and 
integrated into the governance structure at national and subnational 
levels, with equal participation of women
Indicator 2.2.1. Number of districts with early warning systems for conflict 
prevention and peacebuilding, that reflect a strong gender-sensitive analysis 
Baseline: 15 
Target: 70 
Data Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs 
Indicator 2.2.2. Number of operational harmonized peace 
architecture/platforms, with at least 30% women’s participation 
Baseline: 13 
Target: 15
Data Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs 
Indicator 2.2.3. Number of recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission implemented 
Baseline: 0
40
Target: 5 
Data Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs
Women and youth associations 
Community-based organizations Local 
Peace Committees
Traditional and religious leaders 
Sida
Irish Aid
USAID
Peacebuilding Fund
Pillar 2 of National Plan — Economy and jobs
UNDAF Outcome 2/ UNDP OUTCOME 3: By 2024, Liberia has diversified, and inclusive economic growth underpinned by investments in sustainable and environmentally friendly agriculture, food 
security, job creation and improved resilience to climate change and natural disasters
STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome 1: POVERTY ERADICATION 
Indicator: Percentage of 
Population below poverty 
line
Baseline: Males=52.3%; 
Females=46.3%
Urban=31.5%
Household Income and 
Expenditure Survey
Output 3.1: Systems strengthened to enable implementation of gendersensitive and risk-informed prevention and preparedness to limit the 
impact of natural hazards and climate change and promote peaceful, just 
and inclusive societies 
MIA, MME, Ministry of Agriculture
Environmental Protection Agency 
LLA
Forestry Development Authority
National Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Authority
Regular: 
$14,967,000
Other:
$63,000,000
 
40 Ongoing initiativesDP/DCP/LBR/3
Rural=71.6%
National=50.9%
Target: Males=33.2%
Females=27.2%
Urban=12.4% 
Rural=52.5%; 
National=31.8%
Indicator: Employment rate 
Baseline:
Informal employment rate: 
National (Males)= 69% 
(Females)=90.9%
Urban =72.5%
Rural=86.5%
Vulnerable employment, 
National (Males)=67.9% 
(Females)=91.1% 
Urban=69.1%
Rural =88.7%
Target: (Males)=41.7% 
(Females)=58.3% 
Indicator: Percentage of 
household with access to 
finance disaggregated by 
sex
Baseline: 36%
Target: 50%: Males:20%; 
Females:80
Indicator: Rate of (1) forest 
under protection, (2) 
deforestation per annum
Baseline: (1) 1.3%, (2) 0.7% 
(2015);
Target: (1) 30% (2) 0.9%
Indicator: CO2 emissions 
(Mt CO2 eq)
Baseline: 1.89 
Target: 1.79
Biennial
Household Income and 
Expenditure Survey
Biennial
Global Findex Database 
(World Bank)
Every three years
Global Forest Resource 
Assessment 
Annual
Biennial update report, 
Government of Liberia
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of systems for the implementation of nationally 
determined contribution strengthened
Baseline: 1
Target: 5
Data source: Environmental Protection Agency
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of gender responsive sectoral adaptation plans 
developed for improving climate resilience at national and county level
Baseline: 1
Target: 4
Data source: Environmental Protection Agency
Indicator 3.1.3: Length (metres) of coastal defence walls erected
Baseline: 1,600 
Target: 5,000 
Data Source: Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy
Indicator 3.1.4: Number of rural health facilities using alternative sources of 
energy
Baseline: 6
Target: 10 
Data Source: Ministry of Health
Output 3.2: Policies, institutions and programmes strengthened, and 
solutions adopted, to address conservation, sustainable use, ecotourism 
and equitable benefit-sharing of natural resources and conflict prevention 
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of counties benefiting from extractives revenues 
generated
Baseline: 4
Target: 6 
Data Source: Liberia Extractives Industry Transparency Initiative
Indicator 3.2.2: Extent to which institutional framework for tourism (with a 
focus on ecotourism) is functional
Baseline: 1
41
Target: 4
Data Source: Ministry of Information, Cultural Affairs and Tourism
Indicator 3.2.4: Number of operational multi-stakeholder platforms in 
concession areas
Baseline: 9
Target: 16 
Liberia Institute of Statistics and
Geo-Information Services 
Conservation International
Cuttington University
University of Liberia
FAO
UNEP
World Bank
UN-Women
Green Climate Fund
USAID
Sida
European Union
UK AID
Australian Aid
Economic Community of West 
African States
 
41 Criteria: 1 (Existence of National Investment Incentive Code 2010 for tourism) 2 (Existence of National tourism policy) 3 (Liberia Tourism Board established) 4 (National tourism strategy and action plan 
functional) Data Source: National Bureau of Concessions
Indicator 3.2.5: Number of targets of the Liberia National Biodiversity 
Strategy and Action Plan 2011-2022 met 
Baseline: 1 
Target: 4 
Data Source: Environmental Protection Agency
Output 3.3: Policies and programmes for promoting small and medium 
business strengthened 
Indicator 3.3.1: Number of policy frameworks revised to support 
Livelihoods and private sector development.
Baseline: 1
Target: 4
Data Source: Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of banks offering low-interest rates (4-6%) to rural 
livelihood start-ups
Baseline: 0
Target: 8
Data Source: Central Bank of Liberia 