File Name: LBY-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Libya
Country Code: LBY
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August to 1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
27 June 2022
Original: English
2210283X (E) 210722
Second regular session 2022
29 August to 1 September 2022, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda 
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Libya (2023-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework......... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Libya (2023-2025) .......................................................... 11I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework
1. Libya is a wealthy nation by many accounts, given its natural resources, strategic location,
ethnic diversity, cultural heritage and strong social fabric, all of which are solid foundations for 
development. Young people make up two thirds of the population and around 18 per cent of 
Libyans are aged 15 to 24 with high literacy rates.
1 While a decade of political crisis and recent 
violent conflict have had a devastating impact on the country’s development trajectory and 
population, particularly the most vulnerable, many of its current structural development 
challenges –including limited economic diversification and overreliance on oil revenues, 
foreign labour and public sector employment – date back to the pre-revolution era.
2. While recent developments resulted in a decline in armed conflict and humanitarian needs, 
these gains remain fragile and reversible, with multiple risks threatening to derail progress made 
to date towards peacebuilding and reconciliation. The impacts of the coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19) pandemic have constrained progress across all Sustainable Development Goals. 
National capacities to respond to the multitude of challenges facing Libya have been severely 
constrained by conflict, political and administrative divisions and instability, compounded by a 
bloated and inefficient civil service, corruption and weak transparency and accountability. The
poor enabling environment for business and lack of support and incentive structure to stimulate 
growth of the private sector further stifle the country’s economic potential. Unemployment rates 
remain persistently high, reaching, in 2020, 20.1 per cent overall, 51.53 per cent for youth, 
26.06 per cent for women and 16.73 per cent for men.
2
3. The interim Constitution recognizes all Libyans as equal before the law without distinction, 
including on the grounds of gender. Nonetheless, women and girls continue to face increasing 
risks of violence, marginalization and considerable obstacles in realizing their political, social
and economic rights due to a fundamentally patriarchal social structure and sociocultural norms. 
The county’s ranking in the global Gender Inequality Index dropped from 41 of 162 countries
in 2018 to 56 in 2019.
3 Men still dominate the political landscape. As of January 2021, women 
held only 16 per cent of parliamentary seats and 5 of 33 ministerial positions.4
4. UNDP has delivered $193.26 million in assistance under the 2019-2022 country programme, 
averaging programme delivery of $45.7 million annually. While leveraging its well-established 
network and relationships with key stakeholders and its capacity to provide advisory services 
and implement multifaceted programmes, UNDP has worked closely with and harnessed the 
expertise of other United Nations partners, including the United Nations Support Mission in 
Libya (UNSMIL), on peacebuilding, reconciliation, recovery, strengthening of democratic 
governance and rule of law and supporting national and local elections. 
5. UNDP has played a leading role in the Stabilization Facility for Libya, through which 
national and local government institutions and 14 partners work together to restore essential 
services and infrastructure shattered by conflict. UNDP strengthened the capacity of half the 
municipalities in the country (65 municipalities), home to 75 per cent of the population, to 
improve delivery of basic social services, completing 339 projects in 12 municipalities and 
building the capacities of over 400 municipal officials. UNDP and the Libyan company Tatweer 
Research launched the flagship national business incubator/accelerator, Tatweer 
Entrepreneurship Campus, which to date has benefited 3,581 participants (49 per cent women). 
UNDP improved access to health care for 3.5 million people through the rehabilitation of health 
1 Libya Common Country Analysis (2022), The Libyan Ministry of Youth expanded the youth age group up to 39 years.
2
International Labour Organization, ILOSTAT database.
3 UNDP, Gender Equality Index, 2020: http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2020_statistical_annex_table_5.pdf
4 UN-Women, Women in Politics 2021, January 2021: https://www.unwomen.org/-
/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2021/women-in-politics-2021-en.pdf?la=en&vs=353DP/DCP/LBY/4
facilities and the delivery of medical equipment; access to quality education for 750,000 
students through the renovation of 118 educational facilities; and access to water and sanitation 
for over 2 million people. Evidence and recommendations by stakeholders confirm the need to 
scale up support and capacity-building provided to municipalities and to improve service 
delivery while combining upstream and downstream interventions, as planned in the proposed 
programme.
6. UNDP collaborated with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to strengthen the justice system in line with the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child. UNDP, together with the International Organization for 
Migration, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the World Food Programme,
employed a human security approach to strengthen local engagement in addressing the impact 
of conflict and COVID-19. The approach aimed to build the resilience of communities, 
including host communities, internally displaced persons, returnees and migrants, strengthening 
their ability to cope with and recover from conflict and pandemic and laying the foundations 
for better post-crisis recovery and longer-term development.
7. Project evaluation and stakeholder consultations identified the need to scale up support to 
local governance. UNDP has designed a local governance strategy, complementing other 
investments by partners, centred around: (a) supporting the Ministry of Local Government in 
its decentralization efforts; (b) scaling up capacity-building at municipal council level; and (c) 
enhancing the democratic participation of citizens, particularly youth and women, in local 
governance. The strategy will guide UNDP interventions under this programme document.
8. The 2021 Common Country Analysis emphasized the need for continued support to the peace 
process while addressing the root causes of political fragility and conflict to create a stable and 
sustainable peacebuilding and State-building environment. Unification and reform of 
government and decentralization will enhance the legitimacy of government institutions from
citizens’ perspectives. Strengthening justice and human rights institutions can help tackle 
inequality, human rights violations and impunity in the short term, and foster sustainable peace 
and rights-based national reconciliation in the longer term. Support to economic diversification 
and the creation of an enabling environment for private sector growth will advance sustainable 
and inclusive economic development and create employment opportunities outside the public 
sector. Public sector reform and capacity development enable the efficient delivery of quality 
basic and social services and social protection to the population. Sustainable growth through 
improved natural resources management can help mitigate the impacts of climate change and 
environmental degradation.
9. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), 2023-
2025 identifies four strategic priorities: (a) peace and governance; (b) sustainable economic 
development; (c) social and human capital development; and (d) climate change, the 
environment and water.
10. UNDP will contribute to the UNSDCF through a set of strategic upstream and downstream 
investments. It will continue to leverage its role as convener and integrator and its global 
expertise and comparative advantage within the United Nations country team, in adopting a 
holistic approach to peacebuilding, governance, socioeconomic and environmental challenges.
Bringing global expertise, knowledge, innovations and lessons learned in development to the 
local context, the UNDP country programme will focus on three UNSDCF outcomes under 
priority areas (a) and (d), while contributing indirectly to the other priority areas.
11. To these ends, UNDP will leverage the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the 
3x6x3 framework of its Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, supporting Libya towards three directions 
of change – structural transformation, leaving no one behind and resilience – through six 
signature solutions (poverty and inequality, governance, resilience, environment, energy,gender equality), enhanced by three enablers (strategic innovation, digitalization and 
development financing). It will utilize its comparative advantage in applying integrated interagency, gender-transformative development approaches and innovative ways of problem
solving.
12. UNDP has been supporting national and local institutions towards resilience and 
peacebuilding across Libya by fostering inclusive and gender-responsive economic recovery 
models coupled with restoration and expansion of critical basic services at the municipal level. 
UNDP is a trusted partner with comparative advantages that complement United Nations 
development efforts. It has a strong value proposition in promoting and supporting inclusive 
and gender-responsive governance; strengthening the rule of law and access to justice;
supporting meaningful political dialogue; empowering and engaging agents of change,
particularly women and youth, towards social cohesion; and supporting political reform to 
create an environment conducive to long-term stability, peace and sustainable development.
13. UNDP will: (a) ensure a better fit-for-purpose organizational structure through a more 
effective programme unit and a new corps of national staff; (b) strengthen its presence through
closer engagement, co-location and embedding technical support in key institutions; (c) ensure 
a strong focus on inclusion of civil society, youth and women as agents of positive change; (d) 
enhance its proven track record to pool resources, combining donor, private sector and 
government resources, including increasing government cost-sharing in the next programme
period; (e) reinforce existing partnerships and build new ones, including through South-South
and triangular cooperation, with improved communication and knowledge dissemination to 
capture regional and global experiences and innovations, while integrating partners at all levels 
into networks for development; and (f) strengthen collaboration and joint programming with 
UNSMIL and other United Nations agencies, when relevant.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
14. UNDP seeks to contribute to the overarching aspiration that all people in Libya, including 
women, youth and vulnerable and marginalized groups, benefit equally from sustainable peace 
and enhanced rule of law, democratic governance, livelihoods and a climate-resilient future.
15. Based on the UNSDCF, the country programme and its theory of change were developed 
jointly with key authorities and civil society partners through a broad consultative and 
participatory process to ensure that key national priorities, identified by national stakeholders, 
are addressed. The process involved important national and local government institutions, 
including key ministries, municipalities, civil society organizations, including women’s and 
youth organizations, and the Chamber of Commerce.
16. The UNDP strategy is built on the following guiding principles: 
(a) Providing closer support and capacity-building to State and civil society actors though colocation, training of trainers and transformative “learning by doing”, which will localize 
knowledge and expertise and enhance their intergenerational transfer, ensuring sustainability of 
impacts;
(b) Creating networks of agents of change, enclaves of accountability and “islands of 
integrity” to promote a paradigm shift in development planning, principles of democratic 
governance, transparency and rule of law, and transform institutions and shape the social, 
political and economic spheres over time and beyond the life cycle of the programme;
(c) Utilizing a participatory approach that engages all stakeholders, to ensure local ownership 
and sustainability;DP/DCP/LBY/4
(d) Embracing innovations (including digital transformation, non-traditional financing 
mechanisms, flexible and agile delivery mechanisms, new partnership modalities and creation 
of a partner network) to address developmental and programme implementation challenges;
(e) Supporting the transition from conflict to post-conflict mode through building capacities 
of national and local government institutions for evidence-based planning, budgeting, 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation, while addressing the increasing risks of gender 
discrimination and the exclusion of women and youth from State-building, peacebuilding and 
development processes;
(f) Ensuring a human rights-based approach, promoting conflict-sensitive programming and 
compliance with the principle of do no harm; 
(g) Balancing upstream and downstream interventions to maximize impact and mitigate risks;
(h) Following an area-based approach to address context-specific vulnerabilities and promote 
integrated socioeconomic recovery and community resilience; 
(i) Integrating South-South and triangular cooperation into policies, programmes, strategies
and other planning instruments and leveraging the South-South Global Thinkers initiative to 
maximize the benefits of knowledge-sharing to local stakeholders.
17. The theory of change is built on a series of assumptions. First, if institutional and human 
capacities of national and local institutions to ensure democratic and gender-responsive 
governance, evidence-based planning, decentralization, the right to vote and fair national and 
local elections are enhanced; and if an enabling environment for political dialogues, 
reconciliation and citizen engagement is created; then by 2025, Libyan citizens, particularly 
youth and women, are better able to exercise their rights and obligations in an inclusive, stable, 
democratic and reconciled society, underpinned by responsive, transparent, accountable and 
unified public institutions (UNSDCF outcome 1.1).
18. Second, if institutional and human capacities of national and local authorities to reinforce
the rule of law are strengthened; if the capacities of local administrations to deliver improved
basic social services in a participatory, equitable, gender-responsive and conflict-sensitive 
manner are strengthened; if the capacity of the private sector to contribute to growth, livelihood 
generation and the participation of women, youth and marginalized groups in economic life is
boosted; and if the capacities of local stakeholders to enhance social cohesion and sustain peace 
are strengthened; then by 2025, all people in Libya participate in and benefit from a more 
peaceful, safe and secure society, free from armed conflict and underpinned by unified and 
strengthened security, justice, rule of law and human rights institutions that promote and protect 
human rights-based on the principles of inclusivity, non-discrimination and equality in 
accordance with international norms and standards (UNSDCF outcome 1.2). 
19. Third, if State, civil society and private sector capacities to mitigate climate change and 
foster green growth and renewable energy transition are enhanced; and if capacities to improve 
water security and the water/energy nexus are enhanced, then by 2025, all people in Libya, 
including the most vulnerable and marginalized, have increased resilience to the impacts of 
climate change, water scarcity and environmental degradation (UNSDCF outcome 4.1). 
20. To these ends, UNDP will work on three main pillars.
Pillar 1. Combating political and administrative fragility through enhancing the 
accountability, effectiveness and gender-responsiveness of governance mechanisms
21. Following a portfolio systems approach and aligned with UNSDCF outcome 1.1 and its 
Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, UNDP will support political reforms and transformational change 
favouring democratic, gender-responsive governance, evidence-based planning and inclusive 
political processes through strengthening capacities of State and non-State actors, supporting the transition to constitutional democracy, ensuring a coherent functioning of government 
institutions and women’s political empowerment. UNDP will scale up its effort to address the 
root causes of the increasing risks of excluding women and youth from State-building 
processes, through sustainable solutions. Capacity development will include institutions 
monitoring the Sustainable Development Goals and institutions entrusted to conduct free, fair
and transparent national and local elections, enhancing the participation of women and youth 
in national and local elections and strengthening oversight while reducing hate speech and 
disinformation. To this end, UNDP will harness resources and technical expertise of key 
development partners, including the European Union, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and SouthSouth cooperation providers.
22. A key driver for progress is bringing the State closer to its citizens by promoting 
decentralization, strengthening local governance and supporting localization of the Sustainable 
Development Goals. This will also feed into better capacities to devise national, local and 
sectoral gender-responsive, evidence-based policies and plans geared towards more inclusive 
economic recovery. Building on current and previous successful partnerships, this will be done 
in close collaboration with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights (OHCHR), UN-Women, UNODC, UNSMIL and the European Union.
23. Working with UNSMIL, UN-Women and key development partners, UNDP will: (a)
support the creation of an enabling environment for inclusive political dialogues, reconciliation 
and citizen engagement; (b) promote dynamic participation of the entire society in its 
governance and ensure that collaborative solutions are developed; (c) empower and 
interconnect change agents, particularly women and youth, within institutions and society at 
large, which will support the sustainability of impact beyond UNDP interventions; (d) develop 
mechanisms addressing misinformation and hate speech; and (e) scale up support to 
reconciliation efforts at the local and grass-roots levels.
Pillar 2. Building peace and resilience through strengthened local institutions delivering 
meaningful improvement of living conditions at the community level 
24. Recognizing the threats to peace posed by the lack of security, basic social services and 
economic opportunities, particularly for youth, women and marginalized groups, in line with
UNSDCF outcome 1.2 and its Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, UNDP will support peacebuilding 
through enhanced local governance and participation; improved and more equitable access to 
basic social services, justice and economic opportunities; and strengthened capacities of civil 
society organizations to promote local development and peacebuilding processes.
25. This will be done through a host of investments including:
(a) Localizing knowledge and expertise and building the capacities of national and local 
governmental institutions to sustainably deliver equitable access to basic services for all, 
particularly women and marginalized communities; 
(b) Establishing partnerships with national and local authorities to strengthen institutional 
and human capacities to provide enhanced access to justice for all citizens, in partnership with 
UN-Women and UNSMIL, and continue to collaborate with UNICEF to enhance justice for 
children;
(c) Strengthening the rule of law at the local level, facilitating community members’ 
engagement and capacity-building;
(d) Contributing to the creation of sustainable livelihood opportunities, particularly for 
women, youth and vulnerable and marginalized groups and communities (e.g., southern Libya 
and internally displaced populations);
(e) Designing vocational training programmes and creating decent work while supporting 
women in business;DP/DCP/LBY/4
(f) Supporting the creation of a vibrant entrepreneurship ecosystem, through mentoring, 
incubation and regional and South-South and triangular cooperation, including enhanced
private sector cooperation with regional and global counterparts and creating networks of 
regional and global mentors in collaboration with international financial institutions and Arab 
and African private sector associations;
(g) Scaling up support to civil society actors to participate in local development and 
peacebuilding processes through strengthening their organizational capacities, accountability 
mechanisms and relationship with local authorities and stakeholders.
26. The aforementioned interventions will enhance the availability of sustainable and legal 
economic opportunities offering alternatives to bearing arms, joining militias and other illicit 
activities; and contribute to the reduction of poverty, inequalities and socioeconomic exclusion, 
particularly those affecting women, youth, internally displaced persons, persons with 
disabilities and marginalized communities (e.g., southern Libya).This will be done through 
strengthening the capacities and boosting the inclusion of these groups in political dialogue, 
economic life and development processes to support reconciliation, social cohesion and 
sustaining peace. Improved access to justice and basic social services, a significant reduction 
in local violence/conflict and creation of sustainable opportunities for socioeconomic 
development will contribute to building citizens’ trust in government and create conditions for 
peaceful coexistence.
Pillar 3. Promoting sustainable green growth and enhancing resilience to climate change
27. Aligned with UNSDCF outcome 4 and the Strategic Plan 2022-2025, UNDP will: (a) 
harness the expertise of the United Nations Environment Programme combined with its own
global experience in climate change mitigation and adaptation to support State institutions in
devising greener and more risk-informed growth strategies; (b) support stakeholders in
accelerating energy transition through renewable energy investments for vulnerable 
communities, and devising needed policy, institutional and legal frameworks; (c) support 
institutions in improving water security; (d) promote efficient use of water resources at the 
grass-roots level through advocacy and awareness-raising, in collaboration with UNICEF; and
(e) support cross-sectoral, risk-informed and gender-responsive planning to enhance the nexus 
between energy, water and food security. This will be done through building capacities, 
promoting behavioural change and supporting integrated sustainable local development. These 
interventions form part of a package to accelerate implementation of the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and will be integrated 
as cross-cutting components of UNDP support to local development and enhancing the delivery 
of basic social services. Greener growth, fuelled by clean renewable energy, will contribute to 
environmental sustainability and enhance resilience to the effects of climate change, while 
providing greener jobs.
III. Programme and risk management 
28. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in 
the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control 
framework.
29. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
30. UNDP will ensure adequate human resources, management and oversight systems to 
implement its programme successfully in partnership with regional, subregional and 
international organizations. Different implementing partners will be selected on the basis of 
comparative and collaborative advantage and capacities, with a view to building sustainable 
impact. The multi-stakeholder (governmental, donor and community/civil society) project 
review boards and project steering committees will continue as oversight mechanisms. UNDP 
will increasingly deliver on-demand services to the Government to enhance development 
effectiveness in addressing development challenges, aligning budgets to the Sustainable 
Development Goals and unlocking related financing.
31. UNDP continued partially to operate remotely through its Operational Support Facility in 
Tunis given logistical and security constraints. Continued improvement in the security
conditions and the opening of a new compound in Tripoli have allowed for a gradual relocation 
to and enhanced presence in Libya. Five major areas of risk have been identified: (a) political 
and socioeconomic fragility and instability leading to frequent changes in government,
increased impunity and human rights violations; (b) the continuing high-risk/high cost of 
implementation due to security threats; (c) declining funding due to shifting priorities of 
development partners and adverse global economic conditions (d) further rapid environmental 
degradation adversely impacting fragile energy and water security; and (e) the need to operate 
remotely and maintain two offices due to security challenges.
32. UNDP will mitigate those risks by: 
(a) Ensuring balance between upstream and downstream interventions, between support to 
national and local government institutions and between short-term responsiveness to 
government requests and long-term development objectives; 
(b) Adopting conflict-sensitive programming and analysis; 
(c) Anchoring selected interventions at the local government level;
(d) Diversifying partnerships to include, locally, the private sector, non-governmental 
organizations, academia, civil society and community-based organizations, and internationally, 
regional and international organizations; 
(e) In support of the UNSMIL mandate, promoting inter- and intra-party dialogue and 
advancing government reform agendas for political stabilization and peace consolidation; 
(f) Continuing to expand the capacities of State and non-State actors to play a larger role in 
programme implementation; 
(g) Diversifying the programme’s resource base through increasing government cofinancing, regularly updating and enhancing the adaptability of the UNDP partnership, resource 
mobilization and communication strategies and adopting an integrated approach with United 
Nations and regional organizations; 
(h) Enhancing programme flexibility and adaptability and designing contingency plans and 
modalities, including scaling down activities, if needed;
(i) Strengthening vertical and horizontal coordination between national authorities to support 
stability and long-term vision across interventions; 
(j) Applying the UNDP Social and Environmental Standards and Accountability Mechanism
as tools to help manage environmental and socioeconomic risks; 
(k) Relocating UNDP international staff to Libya to increase presence and capacity, while 
maintaining some supporting and backstopping capacity in Tunisia;DP/DCP/LBY/4
(l) Building on the UNDP Global Staff Survey recommendations, continuing to develop staff 
capacity through continuing learning and career development in accordance with the localized 
UNDP People for 2030 strategy. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
33. The country programme indicators, as well as interventions, are aligned with the UNSDCF
and the Sustainable Development Goals. UNDP will contribute to the development and 
monitoring work of the United Nations Programme Monitoring and Evaluation Group to 
facilitate coordination, joint programming and harmonized results-based management 
approaches. The monitoring and evaluation plan tracks a range of quantitative and qualitative 
“SMART”
5
indicators, disaggregated by relevant criteria (such as gender and age) and reports
on relevant outcomes in the UNSDCF. International sources will be used to complement
national ones, and where direct indicators are unavailable, proxy indicators will be used to 
gauge impact. 
34. UNDP will strengthen monitoring and evaluation practices through: 
(a) Periodic reviews and midterm and final evaluations, while emphasizing gender-sensitive 
evaluation; 
(b) Earmarking each project budget to data collection, monitoring and evaluations; 
(c) Emphasizing the review of results at strategy and portfolio levels; 
(d) Expanding the use of third-party monitoring and impact evaluations by engaging with 
local development partners;
(e) Conducting its own surveys when possible and using independent evaluations, field visits 
semi-structured interviews and focus groups; 
(f) Leveraging evidence labs to improve data collection and results-based monitoring and 
evaluation on the ground;
(g) Undertaking periodic evaluations, in collaboration with national and international 
partners, to identify best practices, capture lessons learned and generate knowledge to guide 
scaling-up of interventions across the UNDP portfolio; 
(h) Employing community-based monitoring and partnering with grass-roots civil society 
organizations to gather data on the ground in support of results-based monitoring and evaluation
while emphasizing the emergence of patterns of desired transformative change, or lack thereof; 
(i) Exploring partnership with academic institutions to administer innovative techniques of 
monitoring and evaluation;
(j) Expanding to include participatory statistics and visual data representation (such as maps 
and interactive sites) and social and environmental screening procedures;
(k) Utilizing randomized and/or purposefully selected control groups to periodically assess
the contributions of targeted community-based interventions and identify opportunities for 
expansion, replication and scale-up.
35. At least 15 per cent of the budget will be invested in gender-specific interventions, based 
on the UNDP gender equality strategy, and in advancing the Gender Seal initiative. UNDP will 
invest in addressing the heightened vulnerability and risks faced by women due to the conflictclimate change nexus, unique to the Libyan context, throughout its programming, monitoring
and evaluation, and consider earmarking additional resources for this purpose as deemed 
5 Specific
measurableachievablerelevant and time-boundnecessary and feasible. The gender marker will be used to monitor expenditures and improve 
planning.
6
36. The monitoring and evaluation plan includes lessons learned from project implementation. 
It emphasizes the tracking, assessment and interpretation of results and changes, including in 
government policies or lack thereof, and links them to interventions. The plan will assess the 
role played by UNDP and by others and the gaps to guide follow-up, scale-up and adaptive 
programming.
6 UNDP gender equality strategy
2018-2021DP/DCP/LBY/4
Annex. Results and resources framework for Libya (2023-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: NA
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 5, 16
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1.1 By 2025, Libyan citizens, particularly youth and women, are better able to exercise their rights and 
obligations in an inclusive, stable, democratic, and reconciled society, underpinned by responsive, transparent, accountable and unified public institutions
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions
Cooperation Framework 
outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source and frequency 
of data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, 
baselines, targets)
Major 
partners/partnerships/
frameworks
Estimated cost 
by outcome 
(in $ thousands)
Indicator 1.1. Head of State,
parliament and government 
elected through credible 
elections, based on agreed 
legislative and institutional 
framework. 
Baseline (2014): 1 national 
parliamentary election and 0 
Head of State elected. 
Unstable institutional 
framework and no agreed 
legislative framework. 
Target: 1 national 
parliamentary election and 1 
presidential election based on 
credible elections. Stable 
institutional framework and 
agreed legislative framework 
in place.
Indicator 1.2. Proportion of 
seats held by women in 
national parliaments, local 
governments.
(SDG indicator 5.5.1)
Baseline (2021): 15.96% of 
parliament (30/188 seats); 
Data Source: HNEC
Frequency: electoral cycles
Data Source: InterParliamentary Union
Frequency: annual
Output 1.1 Institutional and human capacities of national and 
local state institutions to ensure democratic and genderresponsive governance, evidence-based planning, 
decentralization, right to vote and fair national and local 
elections are enhanced
Indicator 1.1.1 Extent to which national and local authorities 
have the capacities in conducting credible and transparent 
election
Scale: 0= poor, 1= needs improvement, 2=satisfactory, 
3=high, 4=excellent
Baseline (2021): 1 
Target (2025): 3
Data source/frequency: UNDP/Annual 
Indicator 1.1.2 Number of (a) women, (b) youth and (c) 
Persons with Disabilities with enhanced capacities
participating in national and local elections.
Baseline (2021): (a) 30, (b) 10, (c) 0
Target (2025): (a) 200, (b) 100 (c) 50
Data source / frequency: UNDP, HNEC, CCLE/annual
Indicator 1.1.3 Electoral legal framework for presidential 
and parliamentary elections adopted in accordance with 
international standards
Baseline (2021): 2 electoral laws
Target (2025): All necessary electoral laws for parliamentary 
and presidential elections are amended as necessary and
passed
Data source / frequency: UNDP/annual
UNSMIL
European Union
Governments of Germany,
Italy, France, United States
Japan, Canada and 
United Kingdom’
Department of Political 
and Peacebuilding Affairs
Accelerator Lab
High National Elections 
Commission (HNEC)
Central Committee for 
Local Elections (CCLE)
CSOs
Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Local 
Governance
Local municipalities
UN-Women
UNICEF
Regular: $480
Other: $30,000
Subtotal: $30,4805.6% of ministerial positions 
(1/18 ministers). 
Target: 30%
Indicator 1.3. Completed and 
endorsed constitutional 
framework in effect
Baseline: No endorsed 
constitution.
Target: Constitution approved 
by referendum.
Data Source: United Nations
reports, official 
correspondence and
government notifications. 
Output 1.2. An enabling environment for political dialogues, 
reconciliation, and citizen engagement is created
Indicator 1.2.1 Percentage representation of (a) women and 
(b) youth (c) members of minority ethnic groups in political 
negotiations and decision-making processes.
Baseline (2020): (a) 21% (16/75) delegates in Libyan Political 
Dialogue Forum, (b) 0 (c) 66% (2/3 minority ethnic groups in 
the 2014 Constitutional Drafting Assembly).
Target: (a) Women>30%, (b) youth >20% (c) 100%
represented in all political and decision-making processes,
including the parliament.
Data Source: Ministry of Women’s Affairs, UNDP/ annual
Indicator 1.2.2 Percentage of parliamentarians (by sex) with 
increased capacity to contribute to law-making, 
representation, dialogue, and oversight, including state budget 
oversight
Baseline (2020): 0% of MPs, 0% of women
Target (2025): 75% of MPs, 100% of women
Data source / frequency: UNDP/annual
Indicator 1.2.3 Mechanisms to increase women 
representation in parliament (a) developed and (b) adopted.
Baseline (2021): (a) yes, (b) no
Target (2025): (a) yes, (b) yes
Data source/frequency: UN-Women, UNDP, UNSMIL, 
HNEC, parliament / annual
Indicator 1.2.4 Number of (a) Civil Society-Government 
dialogue mechanisms created; and (b) municipalities with 
operational social, democratic and political dialogue 
mechanisms.
Baseline (2021): (a) 0; (b) 0 
Target (2025): (a) 10; (b) 30
Data source/frequency: UNDP, Official correspondence and
government notifications/annualDP/DCP/LBY/4
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: NA
SDGs 1, 2, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1.2 By 2025, all people in Libya participate in and benefit from a more peaceful, safe, and secure society, 
free from armed conflict and underpinned by unified and strengthened security, justice, rule of law, and human rights institutions that promote and protect human rightsbased on the principles of inclusivity, non-discrimination, and equality in accordance with international norms and standards
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2 No one left behind centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development
Indicator 2.1. Existence of 
independent national human 
rights institutions in 
compliance with the Paris 
Principles.
Baseline (2020): No
Target (2025): Yes -
National Council for Civil 
Liberties and Human Rights 
operational.
Indicator 2.2. Proportion of 
people, by sex, with access 
to law and justice services
Baseline (2020): TBD
(through assessment in 2023)
Target (2025): 20% (10% 
women)
Indicator 2.3. Proportion of 
employees working in the 
private sector among total 
employment.
Baseline (2020): 22%
Target (2025): 25%
Data source: UNICEF, 
OHCHR, official 
notification
Frequency: annual
Data source: United 
Nations Reports
Frequency: annual
Data source: UNDP, World 
Bank
Frequency: annual
Output 2.1 Institutional, and human capacities of national and 
local authorities to strengthen security and rule of law and 
improve access to equitable and gender-responsive justice are 
strengthened
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of members of the judicial authority 
capacitated to deal with arbitrary detention.
Baseline (2021): 30
Target (2025): 70
Data source/frequency: Ministry of Justice, UNSMIL, HRS, 
UNDP, OHCHR/annual
Indicator 2.1.2 Existence of a national plan and associated 
delivery mechanisms for the unification of security sector 
institutions.
Baseline (2021): No 
Target (2025): yes
Data source/frequency: Ministry of Justice, Ministry of 
Internal Affairs, UNDP, UNSMIL/Annual
Indicator 2.1.3 Existence of policy/legal frameworks for 
gender equality, women empowerment, and violence against 
women.
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 1 National Policy for Gender Equality and Women’s 
Empowerment; 1 law on violence against women.
Data source / frequency: UN-Women, UNSMIL, UNDP/ 
annual 
Output 2.2 Local administrations capacities to deliver better 
basic social services in a participatory, equitable, genderresponsive and conflict-sensitive manner are strengthened
UNSMIL
UNICEF
UN-Women
European Union
Governments of 
Germany, Italy, France
United States, Japan
United Kingdom
African Development 
Bank 
Ministry of Justice
Ministry of local 
Governance
Ministry of Economy 
and Trade 
Ministry of Planning
Government 
Construction Fund, 
notably for Benghazi 
and Derna
Local Municipalities
CSOs
Libya Chamber of 
Commerce
Regular: $480
Other: $50,000
Subtotal: $50,480Indicator 2.2.1 Existence of multisectoral local 
development/peacebuilding plans covering basic services and 
economic recovery activities 
Baseline (2022): None
Target (2025): Established
Data source/frequency: UNDP, Ministry of Local 
Governance, Municipalities/annual
Indicator 2.2.2Proportion of population with improved 
access to basic services:(a) Water, (b) Managed Sanitation 
Services, (c) Electricity (D) Basic Sanitation
Baseline (2020): (a) 65%, (b) 21.6%, (c) 68.5%, (d) 92.1%
Target: (a) 68%, (b) 23%, (c) 90%, (d) 94%
Data Source/Frequency: UNDP, World Bank, national 
WASH authorities/ annual 
Output 2.3 Private sector capacity to contribute to growth, and 
livelihoods generation and participation of women, youth and 
marginalized groups in economic life are boosted
Indicator 2.3.1 Number of new jobs created through UNDP-
supported programmes (disaggregated by sex and age)
Baseline (2020): Total 259, 10 youth, 104 women
Target (2025): Total 500, 100 youth, 300 women
Data source/frequency: UNDP/annual
Indicator 2.3.2 Number of new financing products and/or 
microloans created.
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 10
Data source/frequency: UNDP, ILO/annual
Output 2.4 Capacities of local stakeholders to enhance social 
cohesion and sustain peace are strengthened
Indicator 2.4.1 Number of local tension monitoring 
mechanisms developed and implemented at the municipality 
level 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 5 
Data source/frequency: UNDP/Annual
Indicator 2.4.2 Number of civil society members and civil 
servants at the municipality level trained (disaggregated by 
sex)DP/DCP/LBY/4
Baseline: Total 90, women 12
Target: Total 150, women 50
Data Source/ frequency: UNDP/annual
Indicator 2.4.3 Number of pilot “community centres” jointly 
run by the municipality and civil society organizations 
Baseline: 0
Target: 5 
Data source/frequency: UNDP/annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: NA
SDGs 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4.1 By 2025, all people in Libya, including the most vulnerable and marginalized, have increased 
resilience to the impacts of climate change, water scarcity, and environmental degradation.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive, and digital transitions
Indicator 3.1. Renewable 
energy share in the total 
final energy consumption.
Baseline (2021): 0.03%
Target: 0.5%
Indicator 3.2. Level of 
water stress: freshwater 
withdrawal as a proportion 
of available freshwater 
resources.
Baseline (2018): 81.7% 
Target: TBD with 
Government
Indicator 3.3. CO2
emission per unit of value 
added.
(SDG indicator 9.4.1)
Baseline (2018): 5.89%
Target (2025): 2%
Indicator 3.4. Percentage
of population with access 
to electricity
Baseline (2019): 68.5%
Data source: 
IRENA
Frequency: annual
Data Source: FAO 
AQUASTAT
Frequency: annual
Data source: UNIDO
Frequency: annual
Data source: World Bank
Frequency: annual 
Output 3.1 State, civil society and private sector capacities to 
mitigate climate change and foster green growth and 
renewable energy transition are enhanced
Indicator 3.1.1 Existence of national plan for renewable 
energy
Baseline (2021): No
Target (2025): Yes
Data source/frequency: UNDP/annual
Indicator 3.1.2 Number of households benefiting from 
alternative technologies and renewable energies
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 200
Data source/frequency: National/UNDP reports/annual
Indicator 3.1.3 Number of sectoral climate change and 
disaster risk management policies, plans, and strategies 
developed.
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2025): 2 
Data source/frequency: UNDP/annual
Output 3.2 Capacities to improve water security and water
energy nexus are enhanced
UNEP
European Union
Government of 
Germany
World Bank
GEF
Green Climate Fund
World Bank
Repsol 
Local Municipalities
Renewable Energy 
Authority of Libya
Ministry of 
Environment
General Electricity 
Company of Libya
CSOs
The National Oil 
Corporation 
The National 
Meteorological Centre
Regular: $480
Other: $55,000
Subtotal: $55,480Target (2025): 90% Indicator 3.2.1 Number of innovative incentive mechanisms 
promoting rational use of scarce natural resources, including 
fresh water, put in place 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 3
Data source/frequency: United Nations/national 
reports/annual
Indicator 3.2.2 Number of new funded partnership 
mechanisms for gender-responsive sustainable management 
solutions of natural resources and waste, at national and local
level. 
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 5
Data source/frequency: United Nations/national
reports/annual