File Name: LSO-CPD-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Lesotho
Country Code: LSO
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 4-7 September 2018
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2023
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
29 June 2018
Original: English
1810791X (E) 100718
Second regular session 2018
4-7 September 2018, New York
Item 4 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Lesotho (2019-2023)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Lesotho (2019-2023) 9DP/DCP/ LSO/3
I. Programme rationale 
1. Lesotho is landlocked and classified as a lower middle-income country. Between 2011 and 2015,
1
it achieved average economic growth of 4.5 per cent and its gross national income per capita 
increased from $630 to $1,270, owing to the Government’s commitment to fiscal consolidation, 
economic growth diversification, infrastructure and human development. By 2015 Lesotho had 
significantly improved literacy rates (98.6 per cent for girls and 90.6 per cent for boys) and the 
percentage of women in Parliament increased from 17 per cent in 2003 to 25 per cent in 2015.
2
Lesotho improved its ranking in the World Bank Ease of Doing Business Index from 153 in 2012 to 
104 in 2018.
2. Despite this progress, poverty, unemployment and inequalities have persisted. Lesotho is ranked 
among the least development countries with a Human Development Index of 0.497, ranking 160 of 
188 countries.
3 About 57.1 per cent of Lesotho’s estimated 2 million people4
live below the national 
poverty line and 34 per cent below the food poverty line of 138 maloti ($10.30) per adult per month.
5
Inequality has increased from a Gini coefficient of 0.51 (2003) to 0.549 (2016)6 when adjusted for 
gender inequalities, placing it among the 10 most unequal countries in the world. Unemployment is 
estimated at 32.8 per cent and is higher among females (39.7 per cent) and youth (32.3 per cent)
compared to males (26.2 per cent).7 HIV prevalence is estimated at 25 per cent and is highest among 
women aged 15–49 years at 29.7 per cent.
8 Politically, Lesotho’s 51 years of independence have
been marked by cyclic instability, insecurity and fractious politics. While the Ibrahim Index of 
African Governance ranked Lesotho 15 of 54 countries in 2017 with a score of 58.2, the collapse of 
two successive coalition Governments and three national elections between 2012 and 2017 
demonstrate the extent of Lesotho’s political volatility. From 2014 to 2017, Lesotho’s ranking on 
the Corruption Perceptions Index slipped from 55 to 74 out of 180 countries. The political crisis in 
Lesotho has placed the country on the agenda of the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) over the years. The current Government came to power in June 2017, with a commitment 
to implementing various SADC recommendations including reforming the Constitution, Parliament,
the security and justice sectors and the public service, which are key for Lesotho’s long-term stability 
and economic transformation.
3. On gender equality, Lesotho is ranked among the top 10 best performing countries in Africa.
9
However, its ranking on the Global Gender Gap Index dropped from 16 in 2013 to 73 in 2017, due 
to widening gaps in women’s political, economic and labour participation. The greatest 
representation of women in governance is in local government (49 per cent in 2017). Social exclusion 
is highest among people with disabilities, of whom only 3 per cent are employed and who have no 
political representation.
10
4. Lesotho is vulnerable to effects of extreme climatic conditions characterized by droughts, floods, 
frosts, hail and snowstorms. Climatic changes are evidenced by increasingly warmer conditions and
lower rainfall, with significant implications for agriculture, food security, poverty and vulnerability, 
as the sector accounts for the livelihoods of 70 per cent of the of population.
11
5. Increased use of natural resources for farming, grazing and fuel has resulted in a high degree of 
environmental degradation and economic and governance challenges. Lesotho has 18.9 per cent 
arable land and one of the lowest forest coverage rates in Africa. Land classified as degraded 
 
1 World Bank, Lesotho Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2016.
2 Lesotho Millennium Development Goal Report, 2015.
3 UNDP, Human Development Report 2016.
4 Lesotho Population Census 2016.
5 United Nations Lesotho, Common Country Analysis 2017 
6 UNDP, Human Development Report 2016
7 Lesotho Bureau of Statistics, 2014.
8 Ministry of Health/Lesotho and ICF International. 2016. Lesotho Demographic and Health Survey 2014.
9Africa Gender Equality Index, 2015.
10 Lesotho National Federation of Organisations of the Disabled, 2010.
11 Government of Lesotho, Country Diagnosis Report, 2017 DP/DCP/LSO/3
accounts for 14.9 per cent of total area.12 Annual depletion of natural resources is estimated at 4.6 
per cent of gross national income and the country loses at least 2 per cent of its topsoil annually due
to erosion.
6. Lesotho’s energy balance reflects heavy reliance on biomass fuels for basic energy needs,
especially in rural areas, and on imported fossil fuels for other household, transportation and 
industrial purposes.
13 The overall household electrification rate is 34 per cent, with 36 per cent in 
urban and peri-urban areas and 8.65 per cent in rural areas. The potential for renewable energy 
resources such as wind, hydropower and solar remains largely untapped. 
7. Lesotho has undertaken a systematic mapping to align the Sustainable Development Goals to the 
thematic pillars of the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDPII) 2018/19–-2022/23, to advance
sectoral linkages and integration of the Goals into the national agenda. However, due to weak 
sectoral coordination, limited evidential analysis and data, national prioritization and mainstreaming 
of the targets and indicators for the Goals have not been concluded. 
8. UNDP is acknowledged as a partner of choice for programme and resource management.
14 The 
midterm evaluations of the 2013-2018 country programme components15 found that UNDP made 
significant contributions towards: (a) the acceleration of inclusive growth; (b) sustainable and sound 
environmental management; and (c) governance and accountable institutions.
9. The evaluation found that UNDP support to accelerated inclusive growth, through enhancing
business registration processes, access to finance and development of key sectoral policies,
contributed to an improved business environment and competitiveness. In collaboration with the 
Government and private sector, UNDP piloted projects on inclusive finance and entrepreneurship 
development which contributed to heightened awareness of the need for inclusive private sector 
development, particularly targeting women and youth. Facilitation of grants for start-up loans for 
entrepreneurs and women-led community groups enabled employment and income generation.
10.UNDP assistance to sustainable and sound environmental management emphasized strategies and 
interventions promoting adaptation to climate change and increased resilience; conservation of 
natural resources to secure livelihoods; and better management of risks associated with natural 
disasters. A National Strategic Resilience Framework has been developed in partnership with United 
Nations agencies and the Government to enable Lesotho to address the multifaceted challenges posed 
by climate-induced shocks. Additional funding mobilized through the Global Environment Facility 
(GEF) enabled Lesotho to scale up community interventions towards climate change adaptation and
improve environmental and natural resource management. Investments in renewable energy and 
range and environmental management contributed to improved livelihoods, productivity and food 
security. 
11.The evaluation of the governance and accountable institutions component noted that significant 
milestones were attained through support to governance institutions and legislative and policy 
environment. Capacity-building of the Independent Electoral Commission enabled Lesotho to hold 
two snap national elections in 2015 and 2017, both hailed by observers as transparent, free and fair. 
A joint programme with the United Nations Capital Development Fund on strengthening the capacity 
of local governments enabled the transfer of functions from central to local governments and the 
provision of basic social services to communities. The country also improved mechanisms for 
preventing and combatting corruption through the development and implementation of the National 
Anti-Corruption Strategy and Action Plan. The legal environment assessment for HIV and AIDS 
strengthened the national response to HIV/AIDS. With UNDP support, the Government developed 
a comprehensive National Reforms Framework and Roadmap to guide restructuring aimed at 
 
12 UNDP, Lesotho National Human Development Report, 2015. 
13 Lesotho Energy Policy, 2015-2025.
14 UNDP Partnership Survey 2017
15 https://erc.undp.org/evaluation/units/122DP/DCP/ LSO/3
transforming Lesotho into a peaceful, stable and prosperous country.
12.With nearly 20,000 responses to the My World Survey and a country-wide civil society-led 
consultation, Lesotho had one of the most participatory consultations for the post-2015 agenda.
These processes enabled generation of evidence for policy decisions, reprioritization of unachieved 
Millennium Development Goals and promoted awareness of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Support to studies such as the Lesotho National Human Development Report16 facilitated knowledge 
creation and development of strategic options for inclusive and gender-sensitive economic
development. The ongoing capacity-building support to the national statistics system aims to
improve the availability and use of data for effective policymaking, planning and reporting.
13.The midterm evaluations attributed challenges in the effective delivery of the country programme
to political instability and uncertainty and the politicization of the public service. In response, UNDP 
is supporting comprehensive national reforms in partnership with national stakeholders, United 
Nations agencies and regional and international partners. This is in line with the Common Country 
Assessment’s finding that UNDP has a comparative advantage in the areas of poverty reduction, 
conflict resolution, understanding development frameworks and mobilizing partners and 
stakeholders around issues of inclusive economic growth, security and environmental protection.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
14.The proposed country programme 2019-2023 is informed by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, anchored on the draft NSDP II and the United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework (UNDAF) 2019–2023 and guided by the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018–2021. The draft 
NSDP II prioritizes promotion of inclusive and sustainable economic growth and private sector-led 
job creation to address challenges of political instability, persistent poverty, non-inclusive economic 
growth and inequality. The UNDP programme is structured around three pillars: (a) governance, 
accountability, social cohesion and stability; (b) sustainable and inclusive economic growth; and (c) 
environmental sustainability, climate change and resilience. The programme will leverage synergies 
with other United Nations agencies and contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals.
15.Political stability, strong and accountable institutions and effective legislative and governance 
systems are prerequisites for inclusive socioeconomic and political transformation, sustainable
livelihoods and resilience. The programme therefore proposes an issue-based approach, focusing on
solutions with substantive multiplier effects, and emphasizes engagement at local and national levels
to maximize impact. The programme further advocates the development of a human rights-based
policy and legal environment and strategies relevant to the national context and capacities. To 
strengthen its position as a thought leader on development, UNDP will establish a multi-year 
research agenda and utilize corporate Sustainable Development Goal tools to expand knowledge and 
evidence for policy formulation, planning and implementation. 
16.The programme builds on past lessons and pilots and balances policy-level initiatives with 
concrete interventions to create solutions to national development challenges. In line with the 
principle of leaving no one behind, the programme will enhance the inclusion of women, youth and 
persons with disabilities in Lesotho’s socioeconomic and political processes by catalysing 
innovations, South–South and triangular cooperation and sharing corporate best practices. UNDP 
will leverage its partnerships with the Government and cultivate new partnerships with donors, civil 
society, the private sector, media and academia for programme sustainability. 
Governance, accountability, social cohesion and stability
17.This programme pillar is aligned to signature solution 2 of the UNDP Strategic Plan, strengthen 
effective, inclusive and accountable governance, and is expected to enhance good governance, social 
accountability and cohesion. 
 
16 UNDP
Lesotho Human Development Report 2015DP/DCP/LSO/3
18.The first component focuses on supporting the implementation of inclusive national reforms of 
the political and constitutional systems including Parliament and the security, justice and public
sectors. With funding from the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office, UNDP will support 
the organization of dialogues on the reforms and national reconciliation. In collaboration with 
SADC, the European Union, the Commonwealth Secretariat, other United Nations agencies and 
international partners, UNDP will draw on its global expertise and South-South partnerships to 
provide technical support and promote innovation, public participation and inclusion of women, 
youth and persons with disabilities. UNDP will continue to support capacity-strengthening for
religious leaders, civil society, media and academia for improved facilitation, advocacy and 
engagement in national processes.
19.Secondly, working with government and faith-based organizations, UNDP will support the 
consolidation of national and local capacities for dialogue, peacebuilding and conflict prevention. 
|Complementary to ongoing support to district peace committees, efforts will target districts with a 
history of violent conflict to strengthen preventive and response capacities with deliberate focus on 
the inclusion and capacity of women and youth in mediation and community reconciliation 
processes.
20.Thirdly, working with the Ministry of Gender and Youth, Sports and Recreation, the United 
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and women-led 
civil society organizations, UNDP will support organized women’s groups on issues such as national 
reforms, peacebuilding, conflict management, leadership, governance, gender and human rights. It
will support the Lesotho Parliamentary Women’s Caucus and advocacy for domestication of the 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women and other protocols 
to bridge the gender gap. UNDP will develop a youth-focused coordination and planning mechanism 
to support implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 16 and related development 
programmes to enhance the voice and participation of youth in socioeconomic and political 
processes.
21.Finally, UNDP will support key human rights and governance institutions to promote inclusion, 
transparency, accountability and access to justice. In partnership with the Office of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, UNDP will provide technical support and capacitybuilding towards the establishment of a National Human Rights Commission that is compliant with 
the Paris Principles and support Lesotho’s reporting on international conventions on human rights.
UNDP will support the implementation of the recommendations of the assessment of the legal 
environment on HIV/AIDS and the National Action Plan on Women, Girls and HIV and AIDS. In 
collaboration with the German Agency for International Cooperation, UNDP will promote social 
accountability and civic participation through voter and civic education and, with other United 
Nations agencies, the European Union and the Commonwealth Secretariat, support capacity-building 
of the public service. Ongoing support to anti-corruption initiatives will be scaled up.
Sustainable and inclusive economic growth
22.In line with signature solution 1 of the UNDP Strategic Plan, keeping people out of poverty and 
inclusive economic growth, this pillar addresses poverty, inequality and limited opportunities for 
employment and livelihoods, especially among women, youth and persons with disabilities. Lesotho 
recognizes agriculture, manufacturing, technology, tourism and creative industries as key drivers for 
growth and employment. UNDP will promote economic participation, for women, persons with 
disabilities and youth in these sectors to foster social inclusion and equity and reduce dependence on 
the national Social Protection Scheme. UNDP best practices, South-South cooperation and business
models will be adopted to promote collaborative platforms towards inclusive growth.
23.Priority will be to support government capacities for evidence-based policymaking, analysis, 
planning, monitoring and reporting by facilitating the availability of disability-disaggregated data 
and statistics utilizing the Washington Group on Disability Statistics short set of disability questions.
The UNDP multi-year research agenda will contribute to policymaking through policy and issue 
briefs, national Sustainable Development Goal and human development reports and analysis of the 
national multidimensional poverty index. Complementary to the ongoing partnership with the World DP/DCP/ LSO/3
Bank, European Union, United Nations Population Fund and United Nations Children’s Fund on 
capacity-building for data literacy and use, UNDP will promote innovations and coordination for 
generation, access to and use of data. 
24.As an integrator, UNDP will create platforms that draw on the capacities of United Nations
agencies in areas beyond its comparative advantage, facilitate coordinated technical assistance and 
strengthen mechanisms for Sustainable Development Goal implementation, monitoring and 
reporting, to deliver impact and utilize resources efficiently. UNDP will support the Government to
leverage existing and potential financial resources for the implementation of the Sustainable 
Development Goals and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda based on the recommendations of the 
financial resources mapping and development finance assessment exercises.
25.UNDP will complement ongoing efforts of the World Bank and African Development Bank to 
support a competitive business environment and employment creation through enhanced institutional 
coordination for private sector development. UNDP will advocate and facilitate the institution of the 
United Nations Global Compact and the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights for a 
responsible business environment and private sector contribution to the Sustainable Development 
Goals. Working with the Ministry of Gender and Youth, Sports and Recreation and the public and 
private sectors, UNDP will promote the reduction of gaps in women’s participation and 
empowerment through the UNDP Gender Seal certification. UNDP will scale up initiatives on
inclusive business by promoting access to financial services and inclusive markets for micro, small 
and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and facilitate their participation in public-private dialogues.
26.Lastly, through skills development, the programme will support the generation of demand for 
inclusion, especially among women, youth and persons with disabilities, and promote behaviour 
change for economic transformation. In partnership with the International Labour Organization, 
UNDP will support research on market-readiness skills among youth to understand the extent and 
impact of skills-market mismatch and establish a database on available skills and gaps, to facilitate 
the introduction of new market-relevant training programmes. UNDP will also pursue South-South 
cooperation for youth empowerment through the YouthConnekt Initiative and with UNDP Lebanon
to foster opportunity-seeking behaviour through innovation, technology and information spaces, 
promoting entrepreneurship and networking. Support to the Ministry of Small Business 
Development, Cooperatives and Marketing will also be scaled up to introduce systems for profiling 
MSMEs to facilitate partnerships and mentorship for emerging entrepreneurs.
Environmental sustainability and resilience to climate change 
27.This pillar is aligned to signature solutions 3, 4 and 5 of the UNDP Strategic Plan: enhance 
national prevention and recovery capacities for resilient societies; promote nature-based solutions 
for a sustainable planet; and close the energy gap. UNDP will work with the Government to 
implement the National Strategic Resilience Framework in a gender-responsive and risk-informed 
manner. The programme will focus on scaling up and replicating piloted sustainable land 
management models and best practices to support community groups, women, persons with 
disabilities and youth in regions that are highly susceptible to climate change impacts, environmental 
hazards and land degradation. 
28.Based on the findings of the study on the socioeconomic impacts of climate change, the 
programme will adopt the integration of rangeland management and rehabilitation, sustainable use 
of biomass and promotion of hydro, wind and solar for energy generation. UNDP will maintain 
ongoing partnerships with GEF and other United Nations agencies to scale up and strengthen 
capacities for implementation of integrated water catchment management programmes, focusing on 
ecological zones most affected by land and environmental degradation. UNDP will partner with the 
Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil Conservation, Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Culture, 
and community-based organizations to mainstream climate change in national and local strategies 
and policies and build synergies with the work of the European Union on climate change.
29.The midterm evaluation of the programme component on environmental sustainability 
recommended the utilization of decentralization structures to promote stewardship and strengthen DP/DCP/LSO/3
capacities for range management and enforcement of related laws. Building on ongoing initiatives, 
the programme will be delivered through empowering local farmer and grazing associations to 
implement sustainable natural resource management practices and reduce their vulnerability to 
disasters and climate change. Eco-friendly and climate-smart technologies and capacities will be 
introduced to stimulate diversification of livelihoods and enhance household food security and 
incomes.
30.As a key player in the renewable energy sector, UNDP has supported collection and analysis of 
energy consumption data needed for effective planning and programming. In alignment with 
signature solution 5 of the UNDP Strategic Plan, close the energy gap, UNDP will support 
implementation of the Sustainable Energy for All initiative for the development and promotion of 
market-driven and affordable solutions and private sector participation in the delivery of renewable 
energy technologies. The programme will support the Ministry of Energy to develop relevant legal 
and policy frameworks to promote private sector investments in renewable energy. UNDP will 
collaborate with academic and private sector institutions to promote research, innovations and 
knowledge on renewable energy and energy-efficient technologies. 
III. Programme and risk management
31.This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional 
and headquarters levels with respect to the country programme are prescribed in the programme and 
operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework. 
32.National implementation will be the default modality for the programme. However, in 
exceptional circumstances and in consultation with the Government and UNDP headquarters, direct 
implementation will be used to safeguard and ensure UNDP accountability. The harmonized 
approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other agencies to manage risks. 
As per Executive Board decision 2013/9, cost definitions and classification for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. Regular project and 
management audits and spot checks will be carried out to ensure efficiency of internal controls and 
accountability. 
33.UNDP will work closely with the Ministry of Development Planning as the interlocutor for 
development programmes in the country, other United Nations agencies and development partners
in delivering the programme in line with the Lesotho Partnership Policy to ensure sustainability and 
continuity of UNDP interventions. UNDP will further leverage its internal business processes and 
capacities to deepen and establish broad-based partnerships, including engagement of potential and 
non-traditional donors and expansion of South–South and triangular cooperation.
34.In tandem with the planned national reforms, the programme will build capacities of middle 
managers in key partner institutions to facilitate smooth transitioning between governments to 
safeguard continuity of programmes and reduce risks associated with political instability and 
frequent changes in government. UNDP will continuously scan the horizon, update the programme 
risk profile and utilize internal programme management structures and independent reviews for 
programme and operational stability and adjustments.
35.As a partner of choice in programme and resources management UNDP will strengthen capacities 
for joint development planning, monitoring and partnerships required for national development. 
UNDP will explore with the Government the possibility of supporting the delivery of underperforming loans from international financial institutions. UNDP will develop new partnership 
strategies aligned to the Lesotho Partnership Policy and broaden its partnerships with civil society, 
the private sector, academia, United Nations agencies, other development partners and communitybased groups for maximum impact. 
36.Lesotho’s lower middle-income status, limited donor presence and donors’ continued 
conditioning of assistance on good governance could undermine resource mobilization efforts. While DP/DCP/ LSO/3
supporting national reforms as a remedy to the country’s governance challenges, UNDP will also 
seek to mobilize funding from bilateral and thematic trust funds with a focus on multi-year funding 
to ensure predictability and flexibility of resources. UNDP will continue engagement with the 
Government to mobilize resources from GEF and other sources to address the country’s 
environmental and climate change challenges. 
37.To enhance national ownership of the programme, stakeholder who were engaged in the UNDAF 
and country programme development processes will be maintained to enhance stakeholder inputs 
into the programme and alignment to national priorities.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
38.In line with the UNDP evaluation policy, 5 per cent17 of programme resources will be allocated 
for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and will ensure systematic collection of disaggregated data to 
enrich the evidence and analysis underpinning programmes, and to fill the data gaps that impede
effective targeting. The UNDP gender marker will be consistently used to monitor expenditures and
improve gender-based planning and decision-making. Stakeholder participation will be promoted 
through joint field visits, programme reviews and participation in project board and technical 
working groups.
39.In alignment with the UNDAF, UNDP will use national data sources for reporting while 
strengthening internal M&E capacities to enhance evidence-based management, programme 
effectiveness and sustainability. UNDP will further strengthen internal processes for M&E to 
improve attributability of results, learning and inform programme adjustments. The UNDP M&E 
plan will be used to strengthen communication for results and facilitate advocacy for programme 
support, policy dialogues and thought leadership. Programme outputs will be monitored on a 
quarterly basis and outcomes on an annual basis and validated through a joint annual review with 
stakeholders. The programme will undertake thematic and project evaluations throughout the 
programme cycle, and a midterm programme evaluation will be conducted after three years of 
implementation.
40.UNDP will contribute to United Nations efforts to improve accountability, effectiveness and 
efficiency in “Delivering as One” through leading and participation in UNDAF pillars and 
collaborating with other United Nations agencies.
 
17 The costed evaluation plan accounts for 2 per cent of the resources and 3 per cent will be utilized for monitoring and programme assurance 
activitiesDP/DCP/LSO/3
Annex. Results and resources framework for Lesotho (2019–2023)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strengthening governance and accountability systems
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: By 2023, government and non-governmental institutions deliver their mandates and uphold good governance, rule 
of law, and human rights, with all people having improved access to justice and participating in social and political decision-making processes in a peaceful 
environment.’ 
Sustainable 
Development 
Goals:
5,10,16,17 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
UNDAF outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines 
targets) 
Major partners / 
partnerships
frameworks
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome ($)
1.1: Proportion of seats held by 
women in the (a) National Assembly 
and (b) local government
Baseline: (a) 24 (2017); (b) 47
Target: (a) 30; (b) 50 
National Assembly 
Every 5 years 
1.1 Capacities of government and national stakeholders 
strengthened to undertake and sustain gender-responsive, inclusive 
and participatory institutional and governance reforms processes
1.1.1 Proportion of reform recommendations addressing persons with 
disabilities, women’s empowerment and gender equality (a) adopted and 
(b) implemented
Baseline: (a) 0; (b) 0
Target: (a) 30%; (b) 5%
Data source: Parliament
Frequency: Annual 
1.1.2. Proportion of women participating in sessions of dialogue on 
reforms at (a) national and (b) community levels.
Baseline: (a) 0; (b) 0
Target: (a) 30%; (b) 30%
Data source: National Dialogue project reports,
Frequency: Annual
Office of the Prime 
Minister;
SADC;
Peacebuilding 
Support Office;
National Assembly;
Ministry of Law and 
Constitutional 
Affairs;
Ministry of Justice, 
Human Rights and 
Constitutional 
Affairs, 
Ministry of Public 
Service;
Lesotho Council of 
NGOs;
Christian Council of 
Lesotho;
Directorate on 
Corruption and 
Economic Offences;
European Union;
UN-Women;
Commonwealth 
Secretariat;
Regular: 
$1, 859,000
Other:
$3,935,000
1.2. Constitution-making, electoral and parliamentary processes 
and institutions strengthened to promote inclusion, transparency 
and accountability 
1.2.1: Women's participation in elections:
(a) Proportion of women in the voter registry
(b) Proportion of women on the governing mechanism of the electoral 
management body
(c) Benefiting from Temporary Special Measures to ensure women’s 
participation and representationBaseline: (a) 56%; (b) 56%; (c) 21
Target: (a) 56%; (b) 56%; (c) 25
Data source: Independent Electoral Commission (IEC)
Frequency: Every five years
1.2.2. Number of (a) national and (b) local elections judged free and fair 
by independent observer 
Baseline: (a) 3; (b) 2
Target: (a) 1; (b) 1
Data source: IEC 
Frequency: Every five years
1.2. Lesotho’s ranking on the 
Economist Intelligence Unit 
Democracy Index 
Baseline: 56 (2017)
Target: 40
Economist 
Intelligence Unit, 
Annual 
Ministry of Law and 
Constitutional Affairs 
1.3. Civil society and citizen have strengthened technical capacities 
for advocacy, public participation, oversight and social 
accountability 
1.3.1. Number of (a) citizen forums and (b) proposals on reforms and 
good governance facilitated by non-State actors 
Baseline: (a) 0; (b) 0; 
Target: (a) 10; (b) 5
Data source: CSOs, media
Frequency: Annual
1.3.2. Number of parliamentary hearings and committee meetings 
triggered by the Private Members Bill through public participation 
processes.
Baseline: 0;
Target: 2
Data source: Parliamentary Committee Reports
Frequency: Annual 
1.4. Capacities of CSOs, communities and institutions at national 
and local level strengthened for conflict prevention, peacebuilding 
and social cohesion 
1.4.1. Extent18 to which there are data-informed mechanisms19 in place 
to strengthen social cohesion and prevent risk of conflict
Baseline: 1 (2016); 
 
18 Scale: 0 – None, 1 – Minimal, 2 – Moderate, 3 – Largely; 4 – Fully 
19 Development policies
plansstrategies and institutions DP/DCP/LSO/3
Target: 3 
Data source: Ministry of Development Planning
Frequency: Annual 
1.4.2. Percentage of peace committees that integrate gender 
consideration in their negotiations
Baseline: 0; Target: 25%
Data source: Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace; 
Frequency: Annual 
1.3. Existence of an independent 
national human rights institution 
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
Ministry of Justice, 
Human Rights and 
Correctional 
Services; universal 
periodic review;
Annual 
1.5. Rule of law and national human rights institutions and systems 
have strengthened technical capacities to promote inclusion, 
transparency and accountability 
1.5.1. Percentage of human rights treaty bodies State Party reports 
completed and submitted 
Baseline: 22%
Target: 56%
Data source: OHCHR, Government of Lesotho
Frequency: Annual 
1.5.2. Existence of effective measures adopted to mitigate and remedy 
corruption risks at: (a) national level, (b) subnational level, (c) sector 
levels 
Baseline: (a) 3 (2017); (b) 0; (c) 0; 
Target: (a) 4; (b) 4; (c) 3
Data source: Directorate on Corruption and Economic Offence
Frequency: Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Enhancing inclusive and sustainable economic growth and private sector-led job creation
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3.1: Outcome 3.1: By 2023, government and private sector increase opportunities for inclusive and sustainable 
economic growth, improved food security, and decent work, especially for women, youth and persons with disabilities
Sustainable 
Development 
Goals:
1,2,5,8,9,10,17
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1: Advance poverty reduction in all its forms and dimensions
2.1: Average annual earnings of 
female and male employees 
Bureau of Statistics 
Annual 
2.1. National and local level institutions have enhanced technical 
capacities to coordinate and facilitate effective planning, 
implementation, analysis and national reporting on the Sustainable 
Development Goals using innovative and data driven-solutions
Ministry of Finance;
Ministry of 
Development 
Planning;
Bureau of Statistics;
Regular: 
$1,490,000
Other: 
$5,464,000Baseline: Men $288 Women $208 
(2008) 
Target: Men $288; Women $224
2.1.1. Extent to which development plans and budgets integrate 
international agreements across the whole-of-government1:
(a) 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(b) Paris Agreement
(c) African Union Agenda 2063 
Baseline: (a) 1; (b) 0; (c) 1
Target: (a) 3; (b) 3; (c) 3
Data source: Ministry of Development Planning; 
Frequency: Annual 
2.1.2. Extent to which there are data collection/analysis mechanisms in 
place providing disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals:
(a) Conventional data collection methods (e.g., surveys)
(b) Administrative reporting systems
(c) New data sources (e.g., big data)
Baseline: (a) 1; (b) 0 (c)0; 
Targets: (a) 3; (b) 3; (c) 3
Data Source: Bureau of Statistics; Frequency: Annual 
Ministry of Gender 
and Youth, Sports and 
Recreation;
Academia 
Ministry of Small 
Business 
Development, 
Cooperatives and 
Marketing;
Lesotho Chamber of 
Commerce and 
Industry;
Private Sector 
Foundation of 
Lesotho;
Ministry of Trade and 
Industry;
World Bank 
African Development 
Bank 
European Union
ILO 
2.2. Proportion of working-age 
population that have employment in 
formal and informal sectors (access 
to decent work), by sex and age
Baseline: Total 44.1% (2008)
Age: 15-24: M:4.9%, W:2.2%
Age: 25-34: M:9.5%, W:6.1%
Age: 35-64: M:12.1%, W:9.3%
Target: Total 50.6%
Age: 15-24: M:5.9%, W:5.2%
Age: 25-34: M:10%, W:7.6%
Age: 35-64: M:12.1%, W:9.8%
Labor Force Survey 
Every 5 years 
Bureau of Statistics 
2.2. Capacities of government institutions and private sector 
improved to create competitive and gender-sensitive business 
environment and enable effective economic participation of MSMEs
2.2.1. Number of gender-sensitive policies/legal frameworks promoting 
employment creation adopted and implemented 
Baseline: 2;
Target: 5
Data source: Ministry of Development Planning; Frequency: Annual
2.2.2. Number of MSMEs participating in policy dialogues for private 
sector development 
Baseline: 0;
Target: 100
Data source: Ministry of Small Business Development, Cooperatives 
and Marketing, Basotho Enterprises Development Corporation; 
Frequency: Annual
2.2.3. Proportion of Gender Seal certification areas for private sector 
adopted and implementedDP/DCP/LSO/3
Baseline: 0; Target: 20%
Data source: Ministry of Gender and Youth, Sports and Recreation;
Frequency: Annual
2.4. Proportion of men, women and 
children of all ages living in poverty 
in all its dimensions according to 
national definitions
Baseline: 45.9%
Target: 40%
National Household 
Budget Survey
Every five years 
Bureau of Statistics 
2.3. Capacities of national public and private sector institutions 
strengthened to promote enterprises development 
2.3.1. Number of start-up enterprises in priority sectors20 (a) registered 
annually (disaggregated by age, sex of owner and sector); and (b) still in 
business two years after registration
Baseline: (a) TBD; (b) 0; 
Target: (a) 50; (b)10
Data source: One-stop Business Facilitation Centre 
Frequency: Annual 
2.3.3. Percentage of MSMEs with access to formal financial services: 
(a) bank; (b) mobile money
Baseline: (a) 48%; (b)TBD
Target: (a) 55%; (b) TBD
Data source: FinScope MSME, Central Bank of Lesotho 
Frequency: Annual 
2.3.4. Number of new jobs created through MSMEs disaggregated by 
(a) gender; and (b) age 
Baseline: (a) 2,526 (Women: 1,647, Men: 879) (2017); (b) youth: 37
Target: (a) 1,000 (Men: 100), Women: 400); (b) youth: 500
Data source: Project reports; Frequency: Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Enhancing inclusive and sustainable economic growth and private sector-led job creation
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP#3.2: By 2023, the people of Lesotho use natural resources in a more sustainable manner and the marginalized and 
most vulnerable are increasingly resilient
Sustainable 
Development 
Goals:
1,2,5,7,12,13,15,
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3: Strengthening resilience and shocks to crises
3.1.: Proportion of degraded land
Baseline: 14.88%
Target: 11.88%
FAO
Annual
3.1. Capacities of key institutions and sectors at national and local 
levels enabled to scale-up and enforce rangeland management 
initiatives for sustainable natural resources management
Ministry of Forestry, 
Range and Soil 
Conservation, 
Regular: 
$1,200,000
Other: 
 
20 manufacturing
technologytourismagricultureMinistry of Forestry, 
Range and Soil 
Conservation 
3.1.1. Natural resources that are managed under a sustainable use, 
conservation, access and benefit-sharing regime: 
(a) Area of land under protection (hectares)
(b) Number of plant species managed and used under access and 
benefit-sharing regime
Baseline: (a) 3,637; (b) 0; 
Target: (a) 50,000; (b) 2
Data source: Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil Conservation 
Frequency: Annually
3.1.2. Number of community groups implementing sustainable land 
management programmes
Baseline: 110; Target: 200
Data source: Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil Conservation; 
Frequency: Annually
3.1.3. Number of people benefiting from improved livelihoods 
interventions supported by UNDP, disaggregated by sex
Baseline: 2,586 (Women: 1,628, Men: 958)
Target: 7,000 (Women: 4,407, Men: 2,593)
Data source: Ministry of Forestry, Range and Soil Conservation, 
Ministry of Energy 
Frequency: Annually
3.1.4. Number of plans and strategies for sustainable rangeland 
management implemented. 
Baseline: 0; Target: 4
Data source: Ministry of Tourism, Environment and Culture; 
Frequency: Annually 
Ministry of Energy 
Ministry of Tourism, 
Environment and 
Culture,
Ministry of Water
Affairs
GEF 
Green Climate Fund
European Union 
Watershed 
management 
framework 
National Resilience 
Framework
$11,456,000
3.2: Proportion of land under 
improved range management
Baseline:
Improved: 52.79% (16,129 km2), 
Degraded: 15.94% (4,870.17 km2)
Target: Improved: 55.79% (19,611.74 
km2), Poorly managed: 12.94% 
(27,052.54 km2)
Lesotho Land Cover 
Atlas 
FAO 
3.2. Low-emission and climate-resilient objectives addressed in 
national, subnational and sectoral development plans and policies to 
promote economic diversification and green growth
3.2.1 Number of national and local plans and strategies that integrate 
climate resilient objectives
Baseline: 4; Target: 7
Data source: Ministry of Energy; Frequency: AnnuallyDP/DCP/LSO/3
3.2.2: Existence of targets for low emission and/or climate-resilient 
development in: (a) development plans and strategies; (b) budgets;
(c) private sector business plans and strategies
Baseline: (a) No; (b) No; (c) No; 
Target: (a) Yes; (b) Yes; (c)Yes
Data source: Ministry of Energy 
Frequency: Annual 
3.3: Proportion of population living 
in households with access to basic 
services: (a) energy; and (b) financial 
services
Baseline: 
(a) Total: 27.8%; 
Urban: 61.5%; Rural: 11.8%
(b) Total: 22%, 
Target:
(a) Total: 37.8%; 
Urban: 76.5%; Rural: 16.8%
(b) Total: 61%; women: 61% 
National Energy 
Surveys
Annual 
Ministry of Energy
3.3. Capacities of national government and private sector 
strengthened to enable universal access to clean, affordable and 
sustainable energy
3.3.1: (i) Number and (ii) Proportion of households using clean and 
sustainable energy:
(a) Women-headed, 
(b) Persons with disabilities, 
(c) In rural areas
Baseline: 
(a) (i) TBD; (ii) TBD;
(b) (i) TBD (ii) TBD;
(c) (i) 56,246; (ii) 10.47%
Target: 
(a) (i) 2,500; (ii) 0.4% 
(b) (i) TBD; (ii) TBD;
(c) (i) 57,246; (ii) 10.65%
Data source: Energy Survey Report 
Frequency: Annually
3.3.2. Number of off-grid systems promoting and providing access to 
clean energy.
Baseline: 6;
Target: 20 
Data source: Energy Survey Report; 
Frequency: Annually