File Name: MAR-CPD-2023-EN
Year: 2023
Country Name: Morocco
Country Code: MAR
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 January to 3 February 2023
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for Project 
Services
Distr.: General
30 November 2022
Original: English
2227331X (E) 201222 
First regular session 2023
30 January to 3 February 2023, New York
Item 7 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Kingdom of Morocco 
(2023-2027)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Morocco (2023-2027) ................................................................ 11I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. The Kingdom of Morocco is a lower middle-income country of 36.91 million people.
1
Since the mid-1990s, the country has achieved substantial progress in human development
and maintained economic growth thanks to timely public investments and institutional 
reforms to reduce poverty. Progress toward the Sustainable Development Goals (hereafter, 
the Goals) continues: Morocco has strengthened its physical and human capital, accelerated
its transition to clean development and improved the trajectory of its economic growth 
regarding employment, poverty reduction, social and territorial inequalities, and a reduction 
in fossil fuel dependence.2 However, in recent years Morocco has experienced slower and 
unevenly distributed growth. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic – including rising 
inequalities and a gross domestic product contraction – further highlights the urgency for 
adopting a new, more sustainable development model. 
2. The common country analysis outlines three key development challenges the United 
Nations development system in Morocco is well-positioned to address.3 The first is the need 
for an inclusive and sustainable economic transformation as Morocco moves from an 
agricultural to a service economy, requiring increases in productivity and competitiveness, 
while sustainably managing the country’s natural resources. The changing climate is driving 
a shift to higher-value agricultural sectors, while demographic dynamics currently outpace 
the economy’s ability to absorb new labour market entrants, especially youth and women. 
The second is the need to reduce inequality and enhance social inclusion, especially in the 
wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, which worsened gender inequalities and urban/rural 
disparities. While poverty is considered low at 2.5 per cent,4 men are more likely to be 
employed compared to women; in 2021, the unemployment rate reached 12.3 per cent at the 
national level: 16.8 per cent for women and 10.9 per cent for men.
5 The third is the need to 
support opportunities created by the Constitution of 2011 to strengthen governance capacities 
and effectiveness to advance national development objectives. Progress has been made through 
institutional reforms and relevant new national strategies/laws, but the process could be 
accelerated further6 by improving the policy coherence and evidence base for new policies.
3. The New Development Model, published in June 2021, sets the country’s fifteen-year 
socioeconomic vision that prioritizes: (a) implementing structural reforms to boost private 
sector competitiveness; (b) improving the quality of education and health services;
(c) broadening the decentralization process; and (d) preserving natural resources. The 
Government has aligned its coalition programme to the New Development Model, setting 
four key objectives: (a) transforming the economy; (b) strengthening human capital;
(c) promoting inclusion; and (d) fostering the emergence of resilient and sustainable 
territories. 
4. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF),
2023-2027, presents the strategic priorities of United Nations organizations, agreed jointly 
with the Government, in support of national policies and initiatives. Consequently, the four 
outcomes of the UNSDCF reflect the following key strategic priorities: (a) inclusive 
economic transformation and sustainability; (b) human capital development; (c) inclusion 
and social protection; and (d) governance, resilience, and local development.
5. UNDP contributes to national efforts relating to public policy harmonization and 
1 World Bank development indicators, 2020.
2 Second voluntary national review of the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, 2020 national report.
3 Common country analysis, Morocco. United Nations in Morocco, 2022.
4 High Commission for Planning, 2020.
5 High Commission for Planning, 2020.
6 Universal periodic reviewdemocratic governance, environmental protection and climate action, Goals-related 
monitoring and reporting, human rights, and the reduction of inequalities in partnership with 
UNFPA, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Entity for 
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the World Health 
Organization (WHO) and others. UNDP will increase its contribution to UNSDCF 
implementation by focusing on Goals integration and by collaborating with other United 
Nations organizations’ programmatic, operational and communications efforts. UNDP will 
contribute to the United Nations efforts to advance national objectives and the New
Development Model through direct substantive contributions to three of the UNSDCF four 
priority areas via three the following strategic enablers:
(a) Digitalization of public services to facilitate access across different sectors;
(b) Strengthening the enabling environment/ecosystem for innovation to underpin 
the modernization of the civil service, social assistance, and micro, small and 
medium enterprises (MSME) sectors; and 
(c) Inclusive development finance to help leverage and orient international and 
domestic sources of funding toward national objectives for the Goals and 
increasing access to productive resources for underserved population groups.
6. As an integrator within the United Nations country team, UNDP will continue providing 
integrated solutions related to the promotion of the Goals and strengthen operational support 
to resident and non-resident agencies. UNDP will also strengthen United Nations
communication capabilities to raise awareness of sustainable development via innovative 
digital platforms such as AKID20307and development dialogues.
7. The UNDP comparative advantage8resides in its programmatic and operational 
capacities, strategic position as a trusted development partner to the Government and others
and as a convener within the United Nations country team for people-centred development 
and transformative change, its field presence and access to target groups. UNDP has used this 
advantage to promote multi-stakeholder and issue-based dialogue/coordination; facilitate the 
participation of youth, women and persons with disabilities in rural areas in eastern, northern 
and southern Morocco; test innovative approaches, including through its accelerator lab; and 
build value-added partnerships, including with the private sector, civil society and academia.
These efforts have resulted in: (a) economic empowerment support to 350,000 beneficiaries 
(40 per cent women), including 15,000 jobs created and 400 small and medium enterprises 
supported; (b) a series of innovative virtual dialogues on key social, economic and 
environmental challenges, together with the World Bank and the Policy Center for the New 
South; and (c) over $150,000 raised by civil society organizations through capacity-building 
support in response to new crowdfunding legislation.
8. Lessons,
9
incorporated into the country programme, include the need to: (a) strengthen
programme scaling and sustainability strategies; (b) deepen the robust collaboration with 
national/international partners in developing new programmes; (c) expand its integrated and 
adaptive approach to programming by ensuring the territorial and thematic convergence of 
interventions and strengthening synergies between different portfolios; and (d) explore
innovative financing, in particular with the private sector and the international financial 
institutions.
7 AKID2030 is a community engagement initiative to support the efforts of Morocco to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic (www.akid2030.com).
8 Final independent evaluation of the UNDP country programme, 2017-2021.
9
IbidII. Programme priorities and partnerships 
9. The country programme is fully aligned with the New Development Model, the 
Government Programme,
10 UNSDCF, the UNDP strategic plan, 2022-2025, and the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and emphasizes a human-rights-based approach, 
gender equity and the principle of leaving no one behind. It builds on previous development 
results and will fully utilize UNDP country, regional and global institutional capacities,
including South-South and triangular cooperation. Programme design was informed by 
consultations with national and international stakeholders (Government, private sector, civil 
society and academia) within the context of UNSDCF development and via UNDP-specific 
discussions. The vision for the programme is to work in partnership with the Government and 
the international community to facilitate the New Development Model’s objectives of 
structural transformation to a more inclusive, empowered, sustainable and resilient economy 
and society contributing to broader African prosperity.
10. The programme proposes to contribute, through targeted activities and development 
projects, to national efforts to achieve inclusive and sustainable development and the 
objectives of the New Development Model, which lie along three main pathways: First, the 
economy must become more competitive and create decent jobs, especially for women and 
youth, through a structural transformation based on green transition and a sustainable and 
inclusive development model. This will strengthen the resilience of the ecosystem, help 
diversify and decarbonize the economy, promote entrepreneurship, and create more (green) 
jobs. Second, continued effort to reduce social, spatial and gender inequalities should 
continue. This will require equal access to services and skills-training to improve job 
opportunities, particularly for vulnerable populations, and improved living conditions in rural 
and urban areas. Third, policies and reforms must continue to build coherence and be more 
evidence-based, inclusive and context-sensitive.
11. Based on the UNDP comparative advantage and lessons learned, including from the 
2017-2022 independent country programme evaluation, the new programme will capitalize 
on the UNDP integrator role, within the United Nations country team, through thoughtleadership and knowledge generation, including supporting a stronger focus on providing 
strategic policy and technical support. Emphasizing innovation, digitalization and 
development finance will allow UNDP to deliver NextGen solutions both in traditional areas 
of programmatic support as well as expand into new areas. These new approaches will require 
new strategic partnerships, including with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO), the International Labour Organization (ILO), UNICEF, the United 
Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) and UN-Women to support the 
Government in building effective coalitions for transformative change. Underpinning all
these efforts will be a stronger operational service offer to national and United Nations
partners. South-South and triangular cooperation will continue to be an integral part of the 
UNDP partnership with Morocco, offering its experience in areas such as climate action, 
energy transition and prevention of violent extremism, while also seeking insights from other 
countries on innovative solutions to development challenges.
12. The principle of leaving no one behind will guide programme and project 
design/implementation. In line with the New Development Model, UNDP interventions will
support the Government in expanding the participation of youth, women and others in 
economic, political and social spheres via increased integration, equitable access to 
opportunities, and the promotion of their rights. There will be greater focus on women’s 
socioeconomic empowerment by providing support to improve their employability, resilience 
and representation. At least 15 per cent of the budget will be invested in gender-specific 
10 Government of the Kingdom of Morocco
Government ProgrammeJanuary 2012 (https://wwwmengovma/Documents/programmegouvFRpdf)interventions, based on the UNDP gender strategy, and in advancing the gender seal initiative. 
The gender marker will be used to monitor expenditures and improve planning. 
13. The country programme will focus on three UNSDCF priority outcome areas: 
(a) inclusive economic transformation and sustainability (UNSDCF outcome 1);
(b) inclusion and social protection (UNSDCF outcome 3); and (c) governance, resilience and 
local development (UNSDCF outcome 4). Using a portfolio approach, wherever possible, 
UNDP interventions and its financing framework for economic transformation and 
sustainability will be informed by the engagement with vulnerable groups under the 
inclusion/social protection outcome area to design appropriate responses. Similarly, 
interventions under both inclusion/social protection and economic transformation, as well as 
Goals-related data monitoring, will inform the design of policies and processes to be 
supported under the governance, resilience and local development outcome area – to improve 
the quality of policy coherence and services under the other outcome areas.
Priority 1. Inclusive economic transformation and sustainability
14. The UNDP offer under this priority area will contribute to national objectives 
under Goals 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 17 and UNDP signature solutions 3, 4, 5 and 6.
15. The UNDP contribution to the UNSDCF in this area will focus on strengthening 
entrepreneurship and the emergence of a circular, low-carbon, climate-resilient economy, 
emphasizing job creation for women and youth. UNDP will support the Ministry of Energy 
Transition and Sustainable Development and relevant sectoral ministries and institutions to
strengthen national capacities to transition to clean energies and environmentally friendly 
practices. UNDP will initiate a flagship ‘sustainable cities’ programme for innovative 
planning, intelligent and energy-efficient urban infrastructure, sustainable mobility, and 
green/circular economy initiatives, starting with Marrakech as a pilot. This programme will 
encourage low-carbon, green, sustainable and inclusive practices in key economic sectors, 
and promote business integrity, in synergy with interventions under priority 3. South-South 
and triangular cooperation will be key tools for knowledge-sharing on good practices and 
new approaches.
16. UNDP interventions that support biodiversity and ecosystems conservation/valorization
and sustainable management of natural resources will provide new job opportunities in the 
green and blue economy, including green entrepreneurship and job creation in the tourism
sector, including for youth and women, where UNDP will support sustainable policies and 
strategies that promote ecological transition and the country’s rich culture and heritage (in 
synergy with priority 2). 
17. Consistent with the New Development Model’s call to make the social economy a pillar 
of development, UNDP will capitalize on its experience supporting women-led cooperatives 
to facilitate the transfer of knowledge, scale up pilot initiatives and promote the 
transformative potential of the solidarity economy for employment generation and the 
economic empowerment of vulnerable groups. Digital and energy-efficient technologies will 
inform knowledge and programming to apprise national policy dialogue and decision-making 
using new and gender-sensitive data collection technologies. Methods to measure the 
contribution of the social and solidarity economy to inclusive economic development will be 
proposed.
18. UNDP will support Government initiatives and joint programmes, such as the 
Partnership for Action on Green Economy (PAGE), with ILO, the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP), UNIDO and the United Nations Institute for Training and 
Research (UNITAR), which aim to strengthen synergies and complementarities between the 
different United Nations partners.Priority 2. Inclusion and social protection
19. The UNDP offer under this priority area will contribute to national objectives 
under Goals 5, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 17 and to UNDP signature solutions 1, 3 and 6.
20. The UNDP contribution to this UNSDCF outcome area will largely focus on inclusion 
as a complement to the work of other partners (World Bank, UNICEF) on social protection 
issues. UNDP will continue to support the work of the High Commission for Planning whose
national and regional reports on the follow-up to the implementation of the Goals will inform 
the design of integrated programming approaches and inclusive development solutions that 
build forward from the COVID-19 pandemic and target those left behind or at risk of being 
left behind. This will contribute to the work of the interministerial commission in charge of 
coordinating the Goals with evidence-based data.
21. UNDP will also continue to support the mission of the National Human Development 
Observatory to evaluate public policies for human development (including territorialized 
evaluations) and promote the use of evaluation to strengthen those policies, for more effective 
management of related programmes.
22. UNDP will build in on its youth portfolio to support the Government by working on 
identifying future-oriented skills and competencies that will improve (self-)employability and 
entrepreneurship, including for youth, women and others. With the support of the Danish 
Partnership for Arab States and others, UNDP will support the Government’s efforts to 
provide an enabling environment for job creation and a “Sustainable Development Goals 
accelerator for small and medium enterprises” that will enhance youth employment 
opportunities. UNDP will also work with ILO and UN-Women to support the Government’s
efforts to eliminate barriers to participation and socioeconomic inclusion in conjunction with 
interventions under priority 1 linked to an inclusive, green economy. Existing programming 
to address civic education in schools will be scaled up to foster social cohesion and build 
young people’s resilience to radicalization.
23. Partnerships with regional development agencies/authorities will support local 
entrepreneurship ecosystems and the social and solidarity economy, in synergy with the work 
under priority 1. Key local value chains (such as local and craft products) will be 
strengthened, and ongoing pilot projects will be scaled up to favour higher incomes for local 
producers and a more balanced appropriation of value-added. An integrated approach will 
help to simultaneously address weaknesses in structural capacities, productivity and 
competitiveness to foster stronger integration of MSMEs, including women-led cooperatives,
into regional and global supply chains. UNDP will support the Government’s efforts to 
facilitate inter-organizational cooperation among the enterprises, public institutions and local 
authorities involved in the provision of support services to MSMEs. Building on its 
partnerships with the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank of Morocco and other relevant 
stakeholders, UNDP will support financial inclusion and promote digital solutions to expand 
economic opportunities. It will help strengthen the entrepreneurial ecosystem by supporting 
MSMEs and social enterprises in adopting new/innovative business models that create green 
jobs, particularly for women, youth and marginalized groups, including migrants (in synergy 
with priorities 1 and 3).
24. As part of its leaving-no-one-behind strategy, UNDP will strengthen povertyenvironment linkages by continuing to support the Ministry of Habitat to provide decent 
housing and living conditions to the rural inhabitants of the ksours and kasbahs (the country’s 
traditional earth constructions) in the south of the country. With the support of UNDP and 
based on the lessons of a pilot of 16 ksours and kasbahs, Morocco has recently launched the 
2026 integrated strategy for the sustainable rehabilitation and development of the ksours and 
kasbahs. UNDP, together with other United Nations organizations, will implement the 
strategy through the rehabilitation of buildings that are energy efficient and climate resilient(in alignment with efforts under priority 1), while increasing access to basic services, building 
capacity, and preserving an ancestral habitat of cultural and patrimonial value.
25. With the General Delegation to the Prison Administration, UNDP will scale up 
detainees’ acquisition of professional/life skills and support partnerships with the private 
sector to create productive activities in prisons to strengthen the chances of socioeconomic 
reintegration after prison, while continuing to support the reform of the prison administration 
and the humanization of detention conditions (see priority 3). With the support of the 
Mohammedia League of Scholars, interventions will emphasize inclusive rehabilitation and 
the deconstruction of the extremist discourse to counter violent extremism. 
Priority 3. Governance, resilience and local development
26. The UNDP offer under this priority area will contribute to national objectives 
under Goals 4, 5, 9, 10, 16 and 17 and to UNDP signature solutions 1, 2 and 6.
27. UNDP will support the Government with ongoing reforms processes, in line with the 
New Development Model, notably to strengthen the coherence of public policies at the 
national and subnational levels and to improve the performance of the public administration. 
UNDP will focus on supporting justice sector reform and implementing the national action 
plan for democracy and human rights. The emphasis will be to accelerate the shift towards
people-centred justice and protection of human rights, particularly for women. UNDP will 
help to strengthen access to justice and improve relevant legislation (in coordination with the 
World Bank and the European Union). In close collaboration with UNICEF, the United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and UN-Women, UNDP will support the 
digital transformation of judicial institutions at all levels, working in partnership with the 
Ministry of Justice and the Mediator to ensure that institutions are better equipped to identify 
and respond to the needs of individuals, especially women and vulnerable people. Similarly, 
engagement with the Supreme Judicial Council, the Court of Auditors and other partners will 
strengthen their institutional capacity to enhance institutional integrity and accountability 
mechanisms. 
28. UNDP will focus on integrating human rights approaches and indicators in regional 
development plans, strengthening capacities for institutional communication and supporting
civil society advocacy. The socioeconomic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has also 
underscored the importance of responsible economic practices. In line with the United 
Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, UNDP will identify opportunities 
to promote responsible business conduct in synergy with initiatives under priority 1. A pilot 
will be developed in one value chain or economic sector to promote corporate responsibility 
and an inclusive and equitable growth model that respects international human rights 
commitments.
29. Building on the two previous phases of the joint programme on harmonization and 
evaluation of public policies, UNDP will continue to work with other United Nations
organizations to accompany different ministries in implementing their reforms for greater 
horizontal and vertical coherence, effectiveness, and efficiency of public policies, and their 
convergence with the New Development Model. Technical solutions for the harmonization 
of national and regional information systems and data-driven innovations will be promoted 
to strengthen the national statistical system, as a basis for evidence-based policymaking.
30. UNDP will work with national partners and other United Nations organizations, under 
the leadership of the Ministry of Economy and Finance, to develop and implement an 
integrated national financing framework tailored to the country’s context and priorities, 
providing the Government with a tool to enhance the alignment of financing strategies and 
policies with the priorities of the New Development Model and the Goals, relying on the full 
range of public and private development financing sources. UNDP will bring stakeholders 
together to assess financing needs and gaps and identify opportunities where public spending could be optimized and/or innovative finance solutions (thematic bonds, public-private 
partnerships, impact investment, etc.) could be leveraged. This work will be informed by 
UNDP efforts in all three priority areas to identify financing gaps to help direct additional 
resources toward national development objectives. Partnerships with the international 
financial institutions and the private sector will be sought to support the Government’s efforts 
to overcome impediments to financing sustainable development and attract investments, 
including by supporting the establishment of effective and efficient governance structures for 
large-scale national initiatives (notably with the Ministry of Employment and the Ministry of 
National Education).
31. In line with the Public Services Charter, technical assistance will support the 
Government's efforts to modernize administrative procedures and formalities, and improve 
the delivery of services to the population, using accelerated digitalization as a lever, building 
on the ongoing partnership with the new Ministry of Digital Transition and Administrative 
Reform. The public services will also be supported by strengthening the capacities of 
administrations, especially in the use of Amazigh for communication with users speaking 
only this language. This work will be informed by UNDP activities in other priority areas 
which will help identify user demand and bottlenecks to design inclusive service delivery 
solutions (under priority 2) and entrepreneurship development (under priority 1) and will 
benefit from South-South and triangular cooperation for good practices. Transparency, 
integrity and accountability will be promoted through capacity-building and advocacy to 
implement the national anti-corruption strategy and the national action plan of the Open 
Government Partnership.
32. To support inclusive local governance and the development of sustainable and resilient 
territories, UNDP will provide capacity-building and tools to the central administration,
decentralized services, regional councils, civil society, the private sector and academia to 
implement the country’s administrative devolution charter. Elected officials and executives 
of the territorial administration will improve their capacities to design, plan, implement, 
monitor and evaluate public policies and development projects.
33. With the Ministry of Interior, UNDP will support local authorities in fostering a local 
approach to the national strategy for sustainable development and the Goals, including their 
integration in regional and local development plans and the design of exemplarity pacts for 
administration at both the national and subnational levels. Collaboration with the United 
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) and other United Nations
organizations will be sought to advance joint methodologies and approaches for the 
localization of the Goals.
34. Under the leadership of the Ministry of Housing, and in complementarity with the 
‘sustainable cities’ flagship initiative under priority 1, UNDP will support initiating a crossportfolio reflection on ‘smart territories’ with the aid of its accelerator lab and will enhance 
the capacity-building efforts for local actors to develop inclusive and sustainable solutions to 
major urban challenges.
III. Programme and risk management
35. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes is 
prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and 
internal control framework.
36. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all the programme to enable response to force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be used in a coordinated 
fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions 
and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
37. UNDP and the Directorate for Multilateral Cooperation and International Economic 
Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, African Cooperation and Moroccan Expatriates –
as the national coordinator – will set up in early 2023 a coordination committee to meet at 
least once a year to review and provide guidance on planned activities in the programme.
Partnerships with national/subnational authorities will be further strengthened given the 
Government’s considerable co-financing of the country programme. Partnerships with other 
United Nations organizations, civil society, the private sector and financial institutions will 
be pursued to maximize complementarity and expand the funding base. 
38. Exit, scaling and sustainability strategies for the programmes and projects will be codesigned with national partners to foster long-term impact by: (a) supporting national 
priorities/programmes to maximize sustainability; and (b) developing scaling/exit strategy 
action plans to identify necessary staff/resources for sustaining and/or scaling initiatives. 
Innovative programming instruments, such as the engagement facility, and joint 
programming instruments will be deployed and a portfolio-based approach will be applied, 
wherever feasible, to facilitate agility and adaptation to uncertainties. 
39. The current international context poses additional risks to food security, energy supply 
and access to financing, thereby increasing the risks to realizing national development 
progress. Considering that it will benefit from stakeholder participation and support, the 
country programme will seek to enhance resilience, including a just and green transition, and 
align financing with development priorities. Around 70 per cent of the programme is funded 
by domestic resources, which could decrease owing to the Government’s austerity policies 
and the potential redirecting of resources away from development priorities in response to 
shocks. In such case, a ‘plan B’ programme criticality exercise, guided by the leave-no-onebehind principle, will be implemented with partners to identify and agree on priority 
initiatives that should be sustained and their management/funding arrangements. 
40. The country programme will respond to any new changes in the development context or 
in funding resources by adjusting the theory of change, maximizing synergies, fine-tuning 
development interventions, and selecting implementing modalities for rapid response. The 
country office will review its business processes to improve staffing structure with 
appropriate capacities, which will be complemented by United Nations Volunteers, as 
needed.
41. UNDP will apply its revised social and environmental standards and accountability 
mechanism and its enterprise risk management policy to enhance programme quality, and it 
will conduct regular quality assurance and risk assessments throughout the programme cycle.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
42. The country programme monitoring and evaluation framework is aligned with the 
UNSDCF, the UNDP strategic plan, 2022-2025, and the Sustainable Development Goals. 
UNDP will contribute to the work of the United Nations country team programme monitoring 
and evaluation group to facilitate coordination and harmonized results-based management. 
International sources will be used to complement national ones, and where direct indicators 
are unavailable, indirect indicators will be used to gauge impact.
43. UNDP will strengthen monitoring and evaluation practices by: (a) earmarking each 
project budget for data collection, monitoring and evaluations; (b) reviewing results at 
strategy and portfolio levels; (c) conducting its own surveys, field visits, semi-structured 
interviews and focus groups; (d) leveraging evidence labs to improve disaggregation in local data collection and results-based monitoring; (e) undertaking periodic evaluations, including 
thematic evaluations, in collaboration with national and other partners, to generate knowledge
and inform programming; and (f) exploring partnerships with academic institutions on
innovative techniques for monitoring and evaluation.
44. A multi-year research plan to advance UNDP thought-leadership will be implemented
with partners to co-produce policy briefs and discussion papers. At least 3 per cent of the 
programme budget will be dedicated to monitoring, evaluation and communication of results. 
45. In partnership with other United Nations organizations and data-generating entities, 
including the High Commission for Planning and National Human Development 
Observatory, UNDP will support improving national capacity for Goals-related monitoring 
and reporting through nationally owned data systems and improving the horizontal and 
vertical harmonization of these systems.
46. The monitoring and evaluation plan emphasizes the tracking, assessment and 
interpretation of results and changes, including in government policies, and links them to 
interventions to guide follow-up, scale-up and adaptive programming.DP/DCP/MAR/4
Annex. Results and resources framework for Morocco (2023-2027)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Transforming the economy (Goals 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17).
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME: Morocco's economy is competitive, inclusive and creates decent jobs, especially for women and youth, through a structural transformation 
based on sustainable development and resilience, including climate resilience.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions.
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), BASELINES, 
TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF 
DATA COLLECTION, 
AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
MAJOR 
PARTNERS/PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOMES
(in United States 
dollars)
Output 1.1. Strengthened national capacities and innovative 
solutions to support, inclusive, gender responsive, green, circular 
and low-carbon economic and energy transition.
1.1.1. Number of measures supported by UNDP to enable the 
enhancement and/or implementation of nationally determined 
contributions (NDCs)
Baseline (2022): 3
Target: 8
Source/frequency: Projects reports/monitoring, reporting and 
verification (MRV)/NDC reports/yearly
1.1.2. Number of people benefitting from services from clean, 
affordable and sustainable energy (integrated results and resources 
framework (IRRF) 5.1.2) 
Baseline (2022): 0
Target: 928,850 (50% female; 50% male)
Source/frequency: Project reports/yearly
1.1.3. Amount of energy saved (MWh) (IRRF 5.2.2)
Baseline (2022): 0
Target: 116,493 direct energy saving (in MWh)
Source/frequency: Energy audit/yearly
1.1.4. Greenhouse gas emissions (CO2equivalent) avoided (in ton)
Baseline (2022): 0
Target: 900,000 tCO2e direct
Source/frequency: Energy audit/yearly
1.1.5. Number of action plans integrating urban sustainability 
informed by evidence
Baseline (2022): 0
Target: 3
Source/frequency: Action plans; project reports/yearly
Ministry of Energy Transition and 
Sustainable Development, Ministry 
of Industry and Commerce, Ministry 
of Tourism
Sustainable development department
Central Bank
Digital Development Agency 
Private sector
United Nations organizations
International Finance Cooperation 
European Investment Bank 
Islamic Development Bank 
African Development Bank 
Academia, CSOs
Regular: $300,000
Other: $12,000,000 
Subtotal:
$12,300,000Output 1.2. Enabling environment and inclusive solutions and 
practices promoted for biodiversity and ecosystem conservation, 
and sustainable management of natural resources, taking into 
account the effects of climate change. 
1.2.1. Number of new strategies, plans and regulatory frameworks 
that promote the preservation and conservation of biodiversity and 
ecosystems 
Baseline (2022): 0
Target: 3
Source/frequency: Official bulletin/yearly
1.2.2. Number of hectares/species conserved and maintained under a 
sustainable use, conservation, access and benefit-sharing regime
Baseline (2022): 0 hectare; 0 species
Target: 46,000 hectares; 2 species
Source/frequency: Project reports/yearly 
1.2.3. Number of people directly benefiting from initiatives to protect 
nature and promote sustainable use of resources (IRRF 4.1.1)
Baseline: 0
Target: 3,000 (50% women)
Source/frequency: Project reports/yearly 
1.2.4. Number of CSOs supported to implement community 
interventions for sustainable initiatives
Baseline (2022): 0
Target: 25 (8 women-led)
Source/frequency: Project reports/yearly 
Regular: $250,000
Other: $5,000,000
Subtotal: $5,250,000
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Promoting inclusion (Goals 5, 8, 10, 17).
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME: Social protection is universal and sustainable, and social, local, regional and gender inequalities are reduced in order to leave no one 
behind.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human 
development.
Output 2.1. Vulnerable populations in disadvantage areas, 
particularly women and youth, benefit from increased livelihood 
opportunities, equitable access to basic services and a sustainable 
natural environment.
2.1.1. Number of disaggregated and gender-sensitive information 
systems at regional and/or local level to:
(a) measure progress towards the Goals
Baseline (2022): 3 regions
Target: 6 regions
Source/frequency: HCP; Regional delegations / yearly
Regional development agencies, 
Ministry of Habitat, Ministry of 
Finance
General Delegation to the Prison 
Administration
High Commission for Planning 
(HCP)
National Human Development 
Observatory (ONDH)
Regular: $350,000
Other: $20,000,000
Subtotal:
$20,350,000DP/DCP/MAR/4
(b) measure progress towards social public policies 
Baseline (2022):0
Target:10 communes
Source/frequency: ONDH information system / Yearly
2.1.2. Number of innovative solutions adopted by programme 
partners, which expanded policy and development options (IRRF 
E2.2)
Baseline (2022):0
Target: 10
Source/frequency: Accelerator lab reports/yearly
2.1.3. Number of MSMEs and cooperatives supported to enhance 
their competitiveness and productivity 
Baseline (2022):0
Target:100 (50 women-led)
Source/frequency: Project reports/yearly 
2.1.4. Number of new jobs created by sex
Baseline (2022):0
Target: 600 (30% women)
Source/frequency: Project reports/yearly 
2.1.5. Number of people accessing basic services and improved 
livelihoods
Baseline (2022):0
Target: 30,000 (50% women)
Source/frequency: Project reports/yearly 
2.1.6. Number of CSOs supported to implement community 
interventions benefitting vulnerable populations
Baseline (2022):0
Target: 50 (15 women-led)
Source/frequency: Project reports/yearly 
2.1.7. Number of new actions undertaken to prevent violent 
extremism
Baseline (2022):0
Target: 20
Source/frequency: Activity reports/yearly 
2.1.8. Number of people in vulnerable situations supported to 
strengthen their resilience(persons in situation of handicap, 
prisoners)
Baseline (2022):0
Target: 2,000 (20% women)
Source/frequency: Activity reports/yearly 
2.1.9. Number of green direct jobs created
Mohammed VI Foundation for the 
Reinsertion of Detainees, 
Mohammedia League of Scholars 
Danish Partnership for Arab States
Central Bank
World Bank
United Nations organizations
Academia, CSOsBaseline (2022): 0
Target: 100 (70% youth, 40% women)
Source/frequency: Activity reports/yearly 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Fostering the emergence of resilient and sustainable territories (Goals 4, 5, 9, 10, 16, 17).
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME: Public policies are efficient, inclusive, territorialized and evidence based integrating sustainable development.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions
Output 3.1. National institutions and legal framework 
consolidated for democracy, human rights and justice, in 
alignment with the Moroccan Constitution and international 
standards and commitments.
3.1.1. Number of stakeholders with capacities to support the 
fulfilment of nationally and internationally ratified human rights 
obligations (rule of law and justice; human rights)
Baseline (2022): 0
Target: 10
Source/frequency: Projects reports /yearly 
3.1.2. Number of initiatives/mechanisms promoting national system 
information to monitor human development and progress towards the 
Goals
Baseline (2022): 6
Target: 15
Source/frequency: Reports/information systems/websites (ONDH; 
HCP; Ministry of Investment, Convergence and Evaluation of Public 
Policies)/yearly
3.1.3. Number of beneficiaries of capacity-building on the principles 
of human rights, justice and democracy 
Baseline (2022): 0
Target: 2000 (30% national, 70% territorial, 50% women)
Source/frequency: Activity reports/yearly 
Ministry of Justice; Ministry of the 
Interior; Ministry of Economy and 
Finance; Ministry of Digital 
Transition and Administrative 
Reform, Ministry of Employment;
Ministry of Investment, Convergence 
and Evaluation of Public Policies 
(MICEPP); Ministry of Education,
Mediator
HCP
ONDH
Interministerial Department for 
Human Rights
United Nations organizations
World Bank
European Union
Academia, CSOs, private sector
Regular: $350,000
Other: $12,500,000
Subtotal:
$12,850,000
Output 3.2. Institutions at national and local levels strengthened 
to deliver quality, sustainable, responsive, efficient, transparent, 
inclusive and accessible public services for the population, taking 
into account the specific needs of vulnerable groups, including
youth, women, migrants and people with disabilities.
3.2.1. Number of new measures to strengthen accountability, prevent 
and mitigate corruption risks, and integrate anti-corruption in the 
management of public funds, service delivery and other sectors at: 
(a) the national level, and (b) the sectoral level (IRRF 2.1.1)
National level:
Baseline (2022): 6
Regular:
$300,000
Other: $23,000,000
Subtotal:
$23,300,000DP/DCP/MAR/4
Target: 10
Sectoral level:
Baseline (2022):4
Target :9
Source/frequency: Project reports/yearly 
3.2.2. Number of dematerialized administrative procedures 
Baseline (2022): 92
Target: 200
Source/frequency: Annual reviews/yearly 
3.2.3. Number of innovative Goals-related financing strategies 
adopted by national partners
Baseline (2022): 1
Target (2027): 3
Source/frequency: Integrated national financing framework (INFF)
reports/yearly 
Output 3.3. National and local authorities and actors are 
equipped with capacities and tools to implement the advanced 
regionalization and de-concentration charter and strengthen 
inclusive local governance and the development of sustainable 
and resilient territories.
3.3.1. Number of administrations at a regional level that designed an 
exemplarity pact
Baseline (2022):0
Target:3
Source/frequency: Pact document/Ministry of the Interior 
website/yearly
3.3.2. Number of beneficiaries of capacity-building activities 
(training and awareness-raising) in favour of accelerating the 
advanced regionalization process and de-concentration by type of 
stakeholder
Baseline (2022):0
Target: 200
Source/frequency: Annual reviews/yearly 
Regular: $555,000
Other: $7,500,000
Subtotal:
$8,055,000
TOTAL:
$82,105,000
Regular: $2,105,000
Other: $80,000,000
____________