File Name: MDA-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Moldova Republic
Country Code: MDA
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August to 1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
27 June 2022
Original: English
2210288X (E) 210722
Second regular session 2022
29 August to 1 September 2022, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Republic of Moldova 
(2023-2027)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework.….….….… 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
Annex
Results and resources framework for the Republic of Moldova (2023-2027)………….….….….… 8I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. The Republic of Moldova is an upper middle-income country with a population of 
2.6 million.1 The country’s human development index (HDI) was 0.7502in 2019, placing it in 
the high human development category. Despite an HDI increase of more than 8.7 per cent since 
1991, 26.8 per cent of the population was still below the poverty line in 2020.
3 A severe decline 
in gross domestic product (GDP)4and deepening socioeconomic vulnerabilities due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic made Moldova the most affected country in Europe. 
2. Since late 2021, the country has been struggling with a complex energy crisis because of 
significant gas price increases. With 80 per cent of national electric power needs gas-fuelled,
the rise in gas tariffs is reducing the affordability of energy services for citizens. In February 
2022, Moldova became a recipient and transit country for refugees because of the ongoing war
in neighbouring Ukraine. As of the end of April 2022, over 440,000 people had already entered 
the country, either headed to other destination countries or to stay,
5 making Moldova the largest 
recipient of refugees in per capita terms of all countries receiving refugees.
6 A recent national 
income simulation exercise projected that the current crises could result in a GDP contraction 
of 7 per cent and an increase of those in income poverty by approximately 120,000 people.
7
The Government is seeking to diversify its energy supply, bolster its energy security by 
enabling a transparent, well-functioning energy market, and strengthen the ability of its social 
protection system to respond to increased energy tariffs, while ensuring that the refugee 
response is anchored in holistic government actions to address the impacts of multiple crises.
3. The situation has been evolving fast since the end of February 2022, with new waves of 
refugees expected to arrive daily causing growing pressures on national authorities and 
communities to accommodate and offer temporary support to an increasing number of people 
in an acute state of vulnerability. At the forefront of assistance to refugees are the local public 
authorities, which are challenged by significant planning and budgeting constraints that may 
lessen the effectiveness of current capacities to respond to the crisis. In the event of a protracted 
war in Ukraine, socioeconomic achievements in Moldova could be jeopardized.
8
It is therefore 
imperative that Moldova design and implement policies and support mechanisms to address the 
medium to long-term needs of refugees and host communities and foster social and economic 
inclusion, social cohesion, access to justice and human security. Building on its partnerships 
with central and local authorities, development partners and United Nations organizations, 
UNDP will support government-led efforts to provide a coherent and coordinated response 
addressing the immediate impacts and longer-term challenges of the crisis for the economy and 
society.
4. Despite improvements in recent years, gender continues to be a determinant of 
inequalities.
9
In addition, women and men from the most marginalized populations still face 
forms of exclusion in different areas of development. The pandemic resulted in women often 
losing their jobs or incomes, as they had to manage remote working while performing increased 
domestic and caring responsibilities. The share of women who continued to go to work is 15 per
cent lower than men.
10 Gender equality has not been mainstreamed into central and local level 
strategic planning, policy development and budgeting processes. 
1 https://statistica.gov.md/public/files/publicatii_electronice/Anuar_Statistic/2021/2_AS.pdf.
2 https://hdr.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/MDA#.
3 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.NAHC?locations=MD&most_recent_value_desc=false.
4 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=MD.
5 http://data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/ukraine?fbclid=IwAR2Y0fq9FLTC3i8emSuNLlq_AhUsxjIJD8xFhPkxrGWHUI_mODSdIa5jHQU.
6 https://ec.europa.eu/neighbourhood-enlargement/european-neighbourhood-policy/countries-region/moldova_hu.
7 Projections of changes in poverty and vulnerability in Belarus, Moldova, and Ukraine, UNDP Bureau for Policy and Programme Support, 2022.
8 The Development Impact of the War in Ukraine: Initial projections: https://www.undp.org/library/development-impact-war-ukraine-initial-projections.
9
“Gender barometer: How do women and men participate in the decision-making?”, UN Women, 2018.
10 The Moldova Comprehensive Gender Assessment 2022
UN Moldova5. In both the 2020 presidential election and the 2021 parliamentary elections,11 citizens 
supported the national vision of European Union integration. On 3 March 2022, the President 
signed the country’s application for European Union membership, in response to which 
Moldova is expected to be granted the status of ‘candidate state’ following a thorough 
assessment. The vision of the Government is to fulfil its commitments under the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development and the European Union-Moldova Association Agreement, in line 
with the Moldova 2030 Strategy.
12
6. Another development challenge affecting the country is the unsettled status of the 
Transnistrian region of the Republic of Moldova, with a steady decline in living standards. This 
further challenges the country’s multi-faceted national security and its capacity to fully utilize 
its socioeconomic potential. UNDP interventions have already brought benefits to vulnerable 
groups across the post-conflict divide and contributed to rebuilding channels for 
communication and interaction between Chisinau and Tiraspol, supporting international 
settlement efforts at the political level by contributing to an environment of trust across the 
Nistru river. This enables UNDP to build on technical interventions that deliver tangible 
benefits to the population on both banks of Nistru river and establish a positive cooperative 
dynamic between the communities, contributing to settlement of the conflict in accordance with 
internationally agreed parameters.
7. During the preceding programme cycle, UNDP activities in Moldova were relevant to the 
country context, as evidenced by the 2021 independent country programme evaluation.
13 UNDP 
is well-positioned as a reliable, responsive and trusted provider of development services, 
supporting the Government's efforts to pursue its priorities. UNDP has made notable 
contributions to promoting and scaling up gender equality and women's empowerment, 
supporting to confidence-building measures as well as diaspora engagement for socioeconomic 
development with the potential for transformative change. In the new programme cycle, a more 
integrated and systems approach will be adopted to better leverage the UNDP value for system 
change to overcome institutional weaknesses.
8. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), 2023-
2027, was prepared jointly with the Government grounded in the vision that “Moldova is a 
country where people want to live and where all people fully exercise their human rights and 
enjoy a better quality of life in a more inclusive and resilient society by 2027”. It targets four 
outcomes: (a) just and inclusive institutions and equal opportunities for human development;
(b) participatory governance and social cohesion; (c) enhanced shared prosperity in a 
sustainable economy; and (d) green development, sustainable communities and disaster and 
climate resilience. UNDP will utilize its comparative advantages and unique value proposition 
based on its expertise and efficiency, including operational flexibility and innovation in all four 
outcomes. Addressing the development-humanitarian-peace nexus will be important parts of 
the UNDP contribution to the national priorities and the UNSDCF and will be mainstreamed 
across outcomes.
9. In the spirit of building a #FutureSmartUNDP in line with the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-
2025, corporate tools such as deep demonstrations, the portfolio approach and strategic 
innovation will be used to help the Government unpack and tackle complex development 
challenges that affect progress towards sustainable human development. Based on its longstanding support for governance and digitalization in Moldova,
14 digital and technological 
innovation and business process reengineering will be mainstreamed into key crosscutting 
strategies, such as the country’s digitalization strategy. On strategic innovation, the country 
11 https://unpaspentru.md/2021/08/03/program-de-activitate-al-guvernului-moldova-vremurilorbune/?__cf_chl_jschl_tk__=pmd_ecb3a1e943e7e8d2d7c7c8d26026a9372f6bde3d-1628064717-0-gqNtZGzNAuKjcnBszQjO
12The National Development Strategy "Moldova 2030" was approved by the Government and is currently under revision 
https://cancelaria.gov.md/en/content/national-development-strategy-moldova-2030-parliament
13 http://web.undp.org/evaluation/evaluations/adr/moldova.shtml
14 https://www
mdundporg/content/moldova/en/home/library/effectivegovernance/digital-readiness-assessment-htmloffice will implement a systems approach, including by strengthening data collection and 
enhancing data systems for evidence-based planning. Partnership with the Government for 
Sustainable Development Goals financing and an integrated national finance framework will 
be pursued to fully leverage development financing. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
10. The vision for the country programme – on which UNDP extensively consulted with the 
Government and which is anchored in the UNSDCF – is for Moldova to become a more 
cohesive, inclusive, just and resilient society, supported by a better quality of life for everyone. 
The theory of change is based on the logic that achieving a better quality of life for all people 
in Moldova, as envisioned in the Moldova 2030 Strategy, is only possible if the country’s 
prosperity is shared among all people, while the most vulnerable and marginalized are 
empowered to exercise their human rights and participate meaningfully in all fields of life. 
Enhanced inclusion and resilience, peace and security are important preconditions for 
empowering all people to contribute to the country’s social and economic transformation and 
to accelerate achievement of the Goals. 
11. UNDP believes that achieving these long-term changes outlined above requires a more 
systemic approach to addressing pending structural challenges and the root causes of poverty, 
low economic competitiveness and environmental sustainability. The application of the six 
UNDP signature solutions will be key to helping the country accelerate structural 
transformations and better prepare for future shocks. In particular, UNDP will assist the country 
in the four main outcome areas (described below). 
Just and inclusive institutions and equal opportunities for human development 
12. Achieving just and inclusive institutions that have sufficient capacities to ensure effective 
delivery of quality human rights-based and gender-responsive services is a critical precondition 
for equal, sustainable and participatory human development, which is necessary to build the 
human capital that will drive the country’s social and economic transformation. This should 
address the need for stronger investments in human development in Moldova through more 
effective and inclusive access to quality basic services to empower those who persistently 
remain excluded so they can contribute to, and equally benefit from, a more sustainable 
development of the country.
13. UNDP will continue to work in communities, including the Autonomous Territorial Unit 
of Gagauzia, the Transnistrian region, and the Security Zone, to achieve improvements in local 
development, employment and economic opportunities by modelling innovative services and 
interventions. UNDP support will be provided on institutional strengthening and capacity 
building of public authorities to ensure rights holders’ access to quality, gender-responsive and 
inclusive services in partnership with Congress of Local Authorities from Moldova (CALM)
and relevant United Nations organizations. 
14. Work will continue to help people in all regions to have better services and upgraded
resilient infrastructure. Mechanisms such as inter-municipal cooperation, smart urban 
management approaches and public-private partnerships, which bring economies of scale, will 
be expanded. To accelerate inclusive digital transformation and ensure no one is left behind, 
partnership with United Nations organizations – the International Telecommunications Union 
(ITU), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the World Health Organization (WHO)
and others – and cooperation with the European Space Agency on the use of data and digital 
technologies for evidence-based solutions will continue.
Participatory governance and social cohesion
15. Sustained participatory and accountable governance is regarded as the key driver for 
promoting changes under all areas of strategic priorities for equal opportunities for human development, shared prosperity and building people’s and communities’ wellbeing and 
resilience to socioeconomic and environmental shocks. UNDP will support the strengthening 
of governance and rule of law to contribute to respect, protection and fulfilment of human 
rights, provide access to justice and security, and sustain peace so as to ensure that structural 
barriers preventing equal and meaningful participation of people in building a more cohesive 
society are effectively addressed and removed. In connection with this, social responsibility 
will be enhanced – through pro-activeness, co-creation, self-development in order to assist
Moldova in helping its population and accelerate achievement of the Goals.
16. UNDP will support institutional strengthening of priority sectors for effective, inclusive, 
accountable and gender-responsive governance and delivery of efficient public policies and 
services. Work will continue to digitalize the public sector for a more efficient and transparent 
public service. UNDP plans to co-design interventions to improve the capacities of rule-of-law 
institutions and protect human rights and provide effective remedies for all (including refugees
and victims of human rights violations, with a particular focus on the rights of survivors of 
gender-based violence), with the goal of ensuring personal safety and security. The programme 
will continue to contribute to democratic processes, especially elections, including by targeting 
diaspora engagement in local elections.
17. UNDP plans to support the relaunching of the Women’s Caucus in the Parliament and raise 
the capacities of women parliamentarians to promote gender-responsive policies. UNDP
cooperation with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of 
Women (UN-Women), UNFPA, UNICEF and the Parliament will continue to play a catalytic 
role in developing gender-sensitive policies and promoting gender equality. Programmatic 
interventions will be conducted in partnership with women-led civil society groups, especially 
to address stigma and discrimination against women belonging to underrepresented groups (for 
example, women with disabilities, Roma women, refugees, etc).
Enhanced shared prosperity in a sustainable economy
18. Enhanced and shared prosperity underpinned by more sustainable inclusive economic 
development is regarded as another powerful accelerator for equitable human development. In 
this connection, building human capital that can diversify and innovate economic activities and 
increase the proportion of high value and circular industries, connected to global value chains, 
is a critical precondition for boosting economic growth. Addressing skills mismatch, gender 
segregation in the labour market, persistent discrimination of some marginalized groups, and 
enhanced engagement with the private sector in a comprehensive manner should facilitate 
development of human capital in a way that drives transformation of the economy. 
19. The programme will further assist national and local public authorities in implementing 
employment policies to bring tangible results to the people. UNDP assistance will concentrate 
on supporting human capital development through innovative approaches. The focus will 
include, but will not be limited to, youth, women, older people, people with disabilities and 
refugees (to ensure benefits from better access to finance), enhanced skills (including digital 
skills), inclusive and green employment, and improved links between social protection schemes
and employment measures and services.
20. To leverage decent employment opportunities, the programme will focus on enhancing the 
competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) by contributing to an 
enabling environment for their development. Access to financial and non-financial assets and 
digital tools – including quality business development services – will be facilitated, along with
measures to support their productive capacities and strengthen value chains. Aiming at 
expanding MSME access to trade opportunities offered by the Deep and Comprehensive Free 
Trade Area (DCFTA) with the European Union, MSME understanding of DCFTA and its 
opportunities and requirements will be improved, along with MSME capacity to comply with 
the European Union standards.Green development, sustainable communities, and disaster and climate resilience
21. Green development, climate change mitigation and adaptation are expected to have a 
catalytic effect on the social and economic dimensions contributing to the reduction of poverty 
and inequalities. Community resilience is highly interwoven with the country’s natural 
ecosystems, and with local capacity to plan and implement climate-sensitive and environmentfriendly practices. 
22. The programme will continue to strengthen environmental governance through the 
development of more ambitious policies, while facilitating enforcement of existing laws and 
regulations. UNDP will support transformational change at a national and systemic scale, 
beyond sectoral changes, promoting innovative approaches and nature-based solutions in line 
with the systems changes required by green transformation. Work on empowering women and 
youth and civil society, as agents of change, to address the climate crisis and engage in 
environmental dialogue for an inclusive, just and resilient future will continue.
23. The programme will continue to strengthen the country's resilience to future energy shocks 
by advancing energy efficiency measures and renewable energy use and by strengthening its 
social protection system to address energy poverty. Opportunities and partnerships will be 
enhanced with the international financial institutions, think tanks, academia and the private 
sector to create new solutions and scale up successfully tested ones to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions in the most energy-intensive sectors, transboundary water management and 
biodiversity protection. 
24. Further strengthening partnerships with bilateral donors, international organizations and 
emerging partners will continue. Partnerships with the international financial institutions, 
foundations and the private sector to scale up innovative solutions while catalysing 
development financing will be essential. Work will also continue on expanding partnerships 
with academia and research institutions, and diaspora’s engagement in the development of 
Moldova. The Adaptation Fund, the Global Environmental Facility, the Green Climate Fund 
and other vertical funds will remain critical partners in support to government priorities. The 
programme will expand its portfolio of inter-agency partnerships, especially around issue-based 
coalitions on women’s empowerment, confidence building and refugees’ issues, with a focus 
on supporting cohesive United Nations action. UNDP plans to champion South-South and 
triangular exchange, facilitating sharing of knowledge on green transformation, innovation and 
private sector engagement.
III. Programme and risk management
25. This country programme outlines UNDP contributions to national results. It serves as the 
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, 
regional and headquarters levels with respect to the country programme are prescribed in the 
UNDP programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework.
26. The country programme will be nationally executed, with UNDP continuing to provide
implementation support services at the request of the Government or, if necessary, undertake 
direct execution for parts of the programme to enable response to force majeure. The 
harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be used in a coordinated fashion with other 
United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
27. UNDP will participate in the Government–United Nations coordination mechanisms. 
Programme and project boards will be established in accordance with the UNDP social and 
environmental standards and accountability mechanism. The assumption for implementing the 
programme is continued commitment to the European Union accession process and the political 
reform agenda. The main risks to the programme cooperation are associated with: (a) the prolonged crisis in Ukraine and its effects on the socioeconomic development of Moldova;
(b) an unpredictable political, economic and security environment, especially in the 
Transnistrian region; and (c) the persistent impacts of disasters – including COVID-19 – as well 
as the energy crisis on livelihoods. 
28. To mitigate and manage these risks, UNDP will: (a) continue to focus on major integrated 
and transformational projects for more significant impact and efficiency; (b) utilize its 
leadership role in resilience and reliance on its local partnerships – especially with 
municipalities, civil society and development agencies – to develop integrated solutions 
adapted to local needs; and (c) strengthen the resource mobilization strategy to diversify 
resources and the funding base by leveraging the support of multilateral and bilateral partners, 
the private sector and international financial institutions. 
29. The country office will continue monitoring political, security, programmatic and 
operational risks and strengthening anticipatory capacities of both the UNDP country office and 
the Government to facilitate adaptive management of projects and ascertain the continued 
relevance of the country programme. It will apply the principles of the UNDP enterprise risk 
management policy to ensure foresight and risk-informed decisions.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
30. The country office will monitor progress towards the agreed development goals and 
outcomes, gather knowledge, and inform its work based on regular data collection, monitoring 
and continuous investment in national capacities and UNDP internal capacities. Data will be 
disaggregated by sex, geography and income and increasingly identify those most left behind 
and at risk of exclusion, whenever possible. 
31. At the same time, the programme will continue its drive towards making UNDP a digitally 
native organization, as part of its digital strategy, 2022-2025, with fit-for-purpose digital 
systems and data and a digitally competent workforce. The programme will reinforce its 
capacity, innovative tools for data collection, and analysis at the country programme outcome 
and output levels. Existing monitoring tools will be modernized to enable measurable tracking 
of performance through collection of data and lessons to facilitate continuous organizational 
learning. 
32. Work will continue on employing national monitoring systems, official statistical data, and 
reports from ministries, development partners and research institutions to measure the UNDP 
contribution to national results. Other data information, perception surveys and innovative tools 
of United Nations country team members will be used to assess effects and behavioural change 
whenever possible and available. The evaluations contained in the plan provide sufficient and 
balanced coverage of all programme areas. New project results will either be captured in the 
mid-term review or be evaluated in project evaluations to be added in yearly reviews of the 
evaluation plan. Socioeconomic, political and environmental risks have been considered when 
outlining the evaluation plan and calendar. UNDP plans also contribute to UNSDCF 
evaluations.Annex. Results and resources framework for the Republic of Moldova (2023-2027)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Improvement in public infrastructure, utilities and housing.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: Outcome 1: By 2027, institutions deliver human rights-based, evidence-informed and gender-responsive services for all with the focus 
on those who are left behind.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2. No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S),
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS
(including indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST 
BY OUTCOME
(United States dollars)
1. Absolute poverty rate by sex of 
household 
Baseline (2020): men: 25.6%, women: 
29.3%, children: 26.0% 
Target: to be set by the Government in 
the 2030 national development strategy
2. Share of households with access to 
basic services, including safe water, 
sanitation, Internet connection
(national Sustainable Development 
Goal (SDG) indicator 1.4.1) 
Baseline (2020):
Safe water: 71,2%
Urban/rural: 95.9%/54,4%
Sanitation: 33,7%
Urban/rural: 79,4%/2,8%
Internet connection: 64,6%
Urban/rural: 76,9%/56,3%
Target: Safe water: 75%
urban/rural: 97%/56%
Sanitation: 35%
Urban/rural: 81 /3.5
Internet connection: 75%
Urban/rural: 85%/65%
National Bureau of Statistics 
Barometer of Public Opinion 
(biannually)
Output 1.1. National and subnational institutional capacities and policy 
frameworks for quality, resilient and inclusive service delivery are 
enhanced
Indicator 1.1.1. Level of capacity of targeted public institutions for inclusive 
and participatory planning, budgeting and monitoring on service delivery.
Baseline: 3: Central Government – partial capacity, Local Government - partial 
capacity 
Target: 4: Central Government – partial capacity, LG - capacity largely in place
Source: CALM, UNDP reports
Indicator 1.1.2. Number of inclusive public services with improved quality, 
secured by sustainable financing.
Baseline: 0
Target: 60
Source: State Chancellery, UNDP reports
Indicator 1.1.3. Number of people with improved living standards due to 
enhanced local public services and upgraded infrastructure, including in special 
status regions.
Baseline: 558,000 (IG)
- Women: 277,000
- Youth: 150,000
- Disability: 44,000
- Refugees: 0
- People from regions with special status: 125,000
Target: 778,000
- Women: 397,000
- Youth: 202,000
- Disability: 54,000
- Refugees: 5,000
- People from regions with special status: 171,000
Source: Local governments, UNDP reports
State Chancellery
E-Governance Agency
Ministry of Regional 
Development
Ministry of Economy
Regional and local authorities
CSOs
CALM
WHO
UNICEF
UNFPA
European Union
Switzerland 
Sweden
Romania
United Kingdom
Estonia
Slovakia 
Regular: $751,000
Other: $24,800,000Output 1.2. Digital transformation is supported through applying
technological solutions and reducing the digital divide for quality, resilient
and inclusive public services delivery to all, especially vulnerable groups 
Indicator 1.2.1. Number of co-designed policies and programs that promote 
affordable, resilient and secure digital services.
Baseline: 0
Target: 6
Source: E-Governance Agency reports
Indicator 1.2.2. Number of new digital solutions co-implemented to accelerate 
enhanced service provision.
Baseline: 0 
Target: 10
Source: UNDP, E-Governance Agency reports
Indicator 1.2.3. Level of satisfaction of service users with the co-implemented 
digital services.
Baseline: 60% 
Target: 80%
Source: E-Governance Agency reports, UNDP assessments 
Indicator 1.2.4. Number of people using digital technologies and services in 
ways that improve their lives.
Baseline: 37.7% (2020)
Target: at least 50% (2027)
Source: E-Governance Agency reports, UNDP assessments
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Efficient and inclusive governance and rule of law.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: Outcome 2: By 2027, more accountable, and transparent, human rights based and gender responsive governance empowers all people 
of Moldova to participate in and to contribute to development processes.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions.
1. Percentage of people who trust 
governance institutions (Parliament, 
Government, Justice) by sex and 
urban/rural status
Baseline (2021)
Parliament: Total: 15% 
Men/Women: 14%/16%; Urban/Rural: 
15%/15%; Migrants (2020): 6.6%
Government: Total: 19%; Men/Women: 
16%;/21%; Urban/Rural: 18%/19%; 
Migrants (2020): 8.4%
Barometer of Public Opinion 
(biannually)
Reports, assessments, surveys, 
United Nations/UNDP data
(annually)
Output 2.1. Capacity of policy makers to design and implement evidencebased, gender responsive, resilient and resourced policies is strengthened
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of public entities at national and subnational levels 
subject to institutional strengthening and evidence-based policy-making.
Baseline: 4
Target: 9 
Source: UNDP reports
Indicator 2.1.2. Number of new evidence-based policies, systems and/or 
institutional measures that integrate statistical tools to enable data driven policy 
making 
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
State Chancellery 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
European Integration
Ministry of Environment
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Labour and Social 
Protection 
Parliament 
Central Electoral Commission
CSOs
Justice institutions
Regular: $400,000
Other: $24,080,000Justice: Total 19% 
Men/Women:18%/19%; Urban/Rural: 
20%/18%; Migrants (2020): 7.8%
Target 
Parliament: Total: 30% Men/Women: 
30%/30%; Urban/Rural: 30%/30%; 
Migrants: 10%
Government: Total: 30% Men/Women: 
30%/30%; Urban/Rural: 30%/30%, 
Migrants: 12%
Justice: Total: 30% Men/Women: 
30%/30%; Urban/Rural: 30%/30%; 
Migrants: 11%
2. World Justice Project rule of law 
index15 (selected factors)
Baseline (2021):
Overall score: 0.51
Absence of corruption: 0.36
Open government: 0.57 
Order and security: 0.81
Target 
Overall score: 0.53
Absence of corruption: 0.40
Open government: 0.60
Order and security: 0.83
Source: National Bureau of Statistics and government reports
Indicator 2.1.3. Multi-stakeholder development financing mechanism based on 
the three integrated national financing framework (INFF) building blocks (SDG 
financing framework; SDG financing monitoring and reporting framework; and 
INFF governance and coordination platform) in place to strengthen public sector 
agility and efficient allocation of resources to achieve the SDGs.
Baseline: no
Target: yes
Source: UNDP reports 
Ombudsman and Ombudsman for 
the Rights of the Child
Output 2.2. Rule of law institutions have strengthened capacities to protect 
human rights, expand access to justice and legal remedies to ensure social 
cohesion and security for all 
Indicator 2.2.1. Number of measures implemented to expand access to justice 
and legal remedies.
Baseline: 3 
Target: 6
Source: Legal Aid Council, UNDP reports
Indicator 2.2.2. Number of initiatives that promote inclusion of vulnerable 
groups in all spheres of life.
Baseline: persons with disabilities: 1 
Roma persons: 0
Refugees: 0
Women survivors of gender-based violence: 1
Target: Persons with disabilities: 3
Roma persons: 3
Refugees: 2
Women survivors of gender-based violence: 3
Source: Ombudsman, UNDP reports
Indicator 2.2.3. Percentage of people feeling safe in Moldova
Baseline: 
Total: 30%
Men/Women: 30%/30%
Urban/Rural: 33%/28%
Target: 
Total: 35%
Men/Women: 35%/35%
Urban/Rural: 35%/35%
Source: Public Opinion Barometer (BOP) 
Output 2.3. Rights holders, in particular the most vulnerable and women, 
are empowered to participate in transparent and accountable governance 
15 https://worldjusticeproject
org/rule-of-law-index/country/2021/Moldova/Indicator 2.3.1. Percentage of people reached by elections awareness raising 
campaigns who voted during (local / national) elections.
Baseline: 84% 
Men/Women: 30%/30%;
Target: 90 % 
Men/Women: 50%/50%;
Source: Central Electoral Commission (CEC) reports
Indicator 2.3.2. Number of national and local measures to enhance 
accountability, integrity and transparency into the decision-making.
Baseline: 4
Target:9
Source: UNDP reports
Indicator 2.3.3. Number of innovative solutions on enhancing participation in 
decision-making at the national and local levels.
Baseline: 37
Target: 62
Source: UNDP reports 
Output 2.4. Women’s participation in decision making is advanced and 
structural barriers to gender equality are addressed through partnership 
with state institutions and civil society
Indicator 2.4.1. Number of inclusive and gender responsive legislative and 
Government-led initiatives.
Baseline: 2 
Target: 5
Source: Parliament,government reports
Indicator 2.4.2. Number of partnerships with women-led CSOs to advance 
women’s participation and gender equality.
Baseline: 0 
Target: 4 
Source: UNDP reports 
Indicator 2.4.3. Number of measures to address stigma and discrimination of 
women with disabilities.
Baseline:0
Target: 3
Source: Government, UNDP reports NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Reduction of economic inequalities.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: Outcome 3. By 2027, all people of Moldova, especially the most vulnerable, benefit from inclusive, competitive and 
sustainable economic development and equal access to decent work and productive employment.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development.
1. Employment rate (15+) 
Baseline (2021):
All: 39,8% 
Female: 35,4% 
Male: 44,7% 
Youth (15‐29): 28,9% 
Urban: 45,6% 
Rural: 36,0% 
Disability status: 13,5% 
Former prisoners: 1%
Target: to be added in 2023
All: ibidem 
Female: ibidem 
Male: ibidem 
Youth (15-29): ibidem 
Rural: ibidem 
Urban: ibidem 
Disability status: ibidem 
Former prisoners: ibidem 
2. Gender pay gap
Baseline (2020): 13.7
Target: 13.0
3. Remittances as share of GDP
Baseline (2020): 15.7%
Target: 13%
4. Share of remittances in household 
budgets of poorest 20%
Baseline (2020): 15.4%
Target: 21%
National Bureau of Statistics 
Barometer of Public Opinion 
(biannually)
Reports, assessments, 
surveys, UN/UNDP data,
(annually)
Output 3.1 Right holders, in particular vulnerable groups, including from 
regions with special status have improved livelihoods and access to decent 
jobs
Indicator 3.1.1. Number of people benefitting from improved livelihoods 
Baseline: 39,000.
- Women: 17,000
- Youth: 10,000
- Disability: 2,700
- Refugees: 0
- People from regions with special status: 15,000
Target: 49,000
- Women: 21,000
- Youth: 13,000
- Disability: 3,400
- Refugees: 500
- People from regions with special status: 19,000
Source: National Employment Agency, UNDP reports
Indicator 3.1.2. Innovative learning model developed to bridge skills gap and 
labour market demand.
Baseline: model not in place
Target: model in place 
Source: Ministry of Education, UNDP reports
Indicator 3.1.3. Number of new jobs created, with a focus on youth and women, 
including in special status regions.
Baseline: 1,910
- Women: 1,176
- Youth: 406
- Urban/rural: 0
- Green jobs: 262
- Migrants and returnees: 103
- Refugees: 0
- People from special status regions: 783
Target: 4,800
- Women: 2,900
- Youth: 1,000
- Urban/rural: 2,000/2,800
- Green jobs: 300
State Chancellery 
Ministry of Economy 
Ministry of Regional 
Development and Infrastructure
Ministry of Finance 
Congress of Local Authorities
Local public authorities
European Union
SDC
United Kingdom
Sweden International 
Development Cooperation 
Agency (SIDA)
International Organization for 
Migration (IOM), United Nations 
Office of the High Commissioner 
for Refugees (UNOHCR), Joint 
United Nations Programme on 
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), UNFPA, 
UNICEF, United Nations Office 
for Drugs and Crime (UNODC), 
European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development 
(EBRD)
CSOs, the private sector
Regular: $400,000
Other: $24,150,000- Migrants and returnees: 240
- Refugees: 200 - People from regions with special status
: 2,000
Source: Ministry of Economy, UNDP reports
Output 3.2. Economic actors, including from regions with special status, have 
access to financial and non-financial assets and services to recover and build 
competitive and future proof productive capacities 
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of improved business development services.
Baseline: 97 - Services in regions with special status: 73
Target: 127 - Services in regions with special status: 93
Source: Chamber of Commerce, business associations, UNDP reports
Indicator 3.2.2. Number of digital solutions enabling MSME development.
Baseline: 3 - Locally generated solutions for MSMEs:
3
- International solutions for MSMEs: 0
Target: 8 - Locally generated solutions for MSMEs: 6 - International solutions for MSMEs: 2
Source: UNDP reports
Indicator 3.2.3. Number of economic actors, including from regions with special 
status, benefiting from improved productive capacities and strengthened value 
chains.
Baseline: 1,000 - Women
-led: 353
- Youth-led: 146
- Green businesses: 30 - Businesses from special status regions: 395 - Urban/rural business: 0/0
Target: 1,600 - Women
-led: 560
- Youth-led: 225
- Green businesses: 50 - Businesses from special status regions: 625 - Urban/rural business: 640/960
Source: Chamber of Commerce, UNDP reports
Output 3.3. Public, civil society and private sector actors are enabled to build 
solid partnerships leveraging innovation, knowledge and finance to tap into 
collective socioeconomic development potential 
Indicator 3.3.1.Number of policies facilitating inclusive and sustainable 
economic development.Baseline: 27
Target: 40 
Source: Government reports 
Indicator 3.3.2. Number of partnerships enabling a conducive environment for 
socio-economic development, fostering public-private and/or civic engagement
Baseline: 377
- Public-public: 10
- Public-private: 42
- Public-civic-private: 325
- Women-led organizations/companies: 0
Target: 577
- Public-public: 16
- Public-private: 64
- Public-civic-private: 497
- Women-led organizations/companies: 50
Source: UNDP reports
Indicator 3.3.3. Number of new partnerships between businesses, including 
across the post-conflict divide, which enable new jobs creation and/or income 
generation
Baseline: 195
Target: 200
Source: Chamber of Commerce, UNDP reports
NATIONAL priority: Healthy and safe environment.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: Outcome 4. By 2027, institutions and all people of Moldova benefit from and contribute to green and resilient development, sustainable 
use of natural resources and effective gender-responsive climate change action and disaster risk management.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk; Outcome 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and 
digital transitions.
1. Greenhouse gas emissions at 
national level 
Baseline (1990): 43.3891 Mt CO2
equivalent 
Target: 12.448 Mt CO2 equivalent
2. Energy intensity 
Baseline (2019): 0.38 ktoe/mil EUR 
Target: 0,285 ktoe/mil EUR 
3. Share of land area covered by 
forest and forest vegetation 
Baseline (2019): 13,4%
Target: 15% 
National Bureau of Statistics 
Biannual Report to the United 
Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC), Low 
Emission Development 
Programme Report
Annual country report to the 
Energy Community Treaty 
(EUROSTAT) 
Annual Moldsilva agency 
reports
Output 4.1. National and local public authorities have enhanced environment 
governance capacity to ensure inclusive, effective transition to climate and 
disaster resilient, low emission and green development in line with the 2030 
Agenda, Paris Agreement and other inter-governmentally agreed
frameworks
Indicator 4.1.1. National climate change coordination mechanism is operational. 
Baseline: Climate Change Coordination Committee not operational 
Target: Climate Change Coordination Committee operational 
Source: Reports of the Ministry of Environment 
Indicator 4.1.2. Number of co-designed risk-informed regulatory and policy 
frameworks on climate change, disaster risk reduction, environment and energy.
Baseline: 4 
Target: 7 
Source: Ministries’ reports
Ministry of Environment 
Ministry of Regional 
Development and Infrastructure
Ministry of Finance 
Local public authorities
Ministry of Interior 
General Inspectorate for 
Emergency Situations 
Apele Moldovei agency
Moldsilva agency
CSOs
United Nations Economic 
Commission for Europe 
(UNECE), Food and Agriculture 
Regular: $510,000
Other: $27,185,000 
Indicator 4.1.3. Number of early warning and preparedness measures codesigned and implemented with women’s participation at the national and local 
level.
Baseline: 53 
Targets: 56 
Source: UNDP reports, State Hydrometeorological Service reports, General 
Inspectorate for Emergency S reports
Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO), IOM, United 
Nations Office for Disaster Risk 
Reduction (UNDRR), WHO 
European Union
Sweden
Austrian Development Agency 
EBRD
European Investment Bank 
Green Climate Fund
Global Environment Facility
Output 4.2. Public and private actors are enabled to implement efficient and 
innovative practices for sustainable natural resource use, climate resilience, 
low-emission, and green development 
Indicator 4.2.1 Number of people with access to clean, affordable and sustainable
energy. 
Baseline: total 199,030 
Women: 53,738 (27%)
Men: 145,291
Target: 215,000 
Women: 64,500
Men: 150,500
Source: Energy Efficiency Agency reports
Indicator 4.2.2. Number of people benefiting from initiatives that protect nature 
and sustainable use of resources, by sex 
Baseline: 24,000 
Women: 12,480
Men: 11,520
Target: 40,000 
Women: 20,000
Men: 20,000
Source: UNDP reports
Indicator 4.2.3. Number of Local Public Authorities with climate and disaster 
resilience practices implemented. 
Baseline: 17 
Target: 23 
Source: UNDP reports 
Indicator 4.2.4. Number of partnerships with private sector to promote and codesign innovative solutions on renewable energy, low emission, climate resilient 
and green development.
Baseline: 29 
Target: 34Source: UNDP reports, memoranda of understanding
Output 4.3. CSOs, community-based organizations (CBOs) and young people 
are empowered to actively engage in climate resilience, low emission and 
green development
Indicator 4.3.1. Number of people reached by environment, climate change and 
green development awareness and advocacy activities disaggregated by age.
Baseline: 259,897
Youth: 59,687 
Target: 300,000
Youth: 80,000
Source: UNDP reports
Indicator 4.3.2..Number of national platforms to facilitate CSO and youth 
participation in decision-making process on environment- and climate-related 
issues.
Baseline: 2 
Target: 4 
Source: UNDP reports; Small Grants Programme reports
Indicator 4.3.3. Number of non-governmental organizations (NGOs)/CBOs with 
capacities to engage in the areas of climate resilience, low emission and green 
development.
Baseline: 116
Target: 130
Source: UNDP reports, SGP reports