File Name: MDA-NREP-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Moldova Republic
Country Code: MDA
Category: NREP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2019
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2050
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Copyright © IRENA 2019
Unless otherwise stated, material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or 
stored, provided that appropriate acknowledgement is given of IRENA as the source and copyright holder. Material 
in this publication that is attributed to third parties may be subject to separate terms of use and restrictions, and 
appropriate permissions from these third parties may need to be secured before any use of such material.
ISBN: 978-92-9260-109-6
Citation: IRENA (2019), Renewables Readiness Assessment: Republic of Moldova, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.
About IRENA
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that supports countries 
in their transition to a sustainable energy future and serves as the principal platform for international co-operation, 
a centre of excellence and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge on renewable 
energy. IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy, including 
bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, 
energy access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity.
www.irena.org
Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by IRENA in close collaboration with the Government of the Republic of Moldova, as represented 
by the Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure (MoEI). Special thanks are due to numerous other officials, especially from 
the Energy Efficiency Agency, National Energy Regulatory Agency and Moldelectrica. This report benefited from the inputs 
of various experts, notably including Alexandru Cosovan (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development), Gabriela 
Cretu (Energy Community Secretariat), Giuseppe Grimaldi (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development), Adil 
Hanif (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development), Marcela Lefter (Electra Norte), Tiago Oliveira (European 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development), Denis Tumuruc (MoEI), and Nicolae Zaharia (Sinergetika). IRENA colleagues 
including Abdulmalik Oricha Ali, Serkan Ata, Emanuele Bianco, Diala Hawila, Vanessa Interiano, Luis Janeiro, Sandra Lozo, 
Hameed Safiullah, Jeffrey Skeer, Costanza Strinati, and Naida Taso also provided valuable guidance and input.
Contributing authors: Marcin Scigan (IRENA), Gürbüz Gönül (IRENA) and Igor Zanoaga (consultant)
Disclaimer
This publication and the material herein are provided “as is”. All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the 
reliability of the material in this publication. However, neither IRENA nor any of its officials, agents, data or other third-party 
content providers provides a warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied, and they accept no responsibility or liability for 
any consequence of use of the publication or material herein. 
The information contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA. The mention of specific 
companies or certain projects or products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by IRENA in preference to 
others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. The designations employed and the presentation of material herein do not 
imply the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region, country, territory, city or area 
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.Republic of
Moldova
RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENTGiven its high dependence on imported energy resources, the Republic of Moldova is crying out for a more 
intensive use of renewable energy sources. Indeed, in a country where three quarters of energy needs 
are covered by imports, the consistent and feasible implementation of a renewable energy strategy has a 
tremendous importance for the Republic of Moldova’s energy security. 
Therefore, the main pillars and vectors of the country’s energy policies are now orienting towards the 
enhancement of energy security and security of supply, the reduction of CO2 emissions, and the sustainable 
development of the economy. In the context of this fundamental role for renewable energy in the transition 
towards a more competitive economy and towards ensuring a more secure and sustainable energy system 
– the Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure is working hard to scale-up the importance of renewable 
energy in the country’s energy mix, with the support of the Energy Community Secretariat, development 
partners and the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). 
The development of this Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) report perfectly coincides with the 
Government of Moldova’s efforts to align its national legislation with the commitments it has made under 
the Energy Community Treaty and Association Agreement, signed with the EU. 
Indeed, despite recent developments in the renewable energy sector, the need for a systematic assessment 
of the sector’s potential – and its bottlenecks – was still necessary. As a result of fruitful collaboration 
between the Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure and IRENA, this assessment has now been conducted. 
Its conclusions include the opinions of all major stakeholders, bilateral and multilateral co-operation 
agencies, financial institutions and private sector representatives. This study also sets the priority areas 
that the Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure would like to continue working on, while also defining 
perspectives for collaboration with all the relevant stakeholders. This is of paramount importance for the 
country and serves in achieving a common goal – improved energy security.
FOREWORD
from the Minister of 
Economy and InfrastructureThis RRA exercise will help a great deal and add to the major achievements reached by the national 
authorities during the last decade. One of the most important of these was the adoption of the Law on the 
Promotion of the Use of Energy from Renewable Sources, transposing European Directive 2009/28/EC. 
This provides a set of mechanisms for raising and supporting the interests of the national and international 
business community regarding renewable energy investments. The law lays down a set of rules to promote 
the use of renewable energy sources in the most transparent and competitive way. A support scheme, 
which is meant to increase the share of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption, will build the 
path to a sustainable development of the energy sector and of the country’s economy, all to the benefit of 
final consumer.
Moreover, in addition to helping the government reduce consumption, optimise costs and secure the 
country’s hope for a brighter and a more energy secure future, energy efficiency and renewable sources of 
energy represent some of the most promising ways in which almost half of the target set and agreed by 
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change can be achieved.
Last but not least, on behalf of the Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure, I would like to express our 
appreciation to IRENA, our development partners, the business community and other stakeholders for their 
commitment to develop the use of renewable sources of energy in the Republic of Moldova. Their support 
and technical assistance are of great importance for the benefit of our country and we look forward to a 
long and fruitful future relationship.
Chiril Gaburici
Minister of Economy and Infrastructure
Republic of MoldovaThe Republic of Moldova faces growing energy challenges, including dependence on energy imports and 
increasing demand for electricity to power economic growth. Imported fossil fuels already account for 
more than two-thirds of primary energy supply, making the country vulnerable to rising fuel costs and 
supply disruption. 
On the other hand, the country has vast renewable energy potential, which remains still largely untapped. 
With renewables becoming increasingly cost-competitive, policy makers have recognised them as an 
important means to address the Republic of Moldova’s energy challenges and achieve a sustainable future. 
Notably, the country has already met several major targets set out in its National Renewable Energy Action 
Plan for 2013-2020, including the objective to cover at least 17% of gross final energy consumption with 
renewables. 
This Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) – undertaken by the International Renewable Energy 
Agency (IRENA) in close co-operation with the Government of the Republic of Moldova – examines the 
energy sector holistically, identifying key actions to accelerate renewable energy deployment. It underlines 
short- to medium-term regulatory, financing and public-awareness issues, as well as the need for longterm planning. Specifically, the report suggests the adoption of an ambitious renewable energy target for 
2030 and ways to strengthen the government’s on-going efforts to develop the bioenergy sector. It also 
proposes measures to improve the bankability of renewable energy projects and enhance the capacity of 
local banks to facilitate the financing of such projects.
FOREWORD
from the IRENA
Director-General Over 30 countries, spanning Africa, the Caribbean, Latin America, the Middle East and the Asia-Pacific 
region, have undertaken the RRA process since 2011, exchanging knowledge and supporting international 
co-operation to promote clean, indigenous renewable energy technologies.
I would like to thank Minister Gaburici and the staff of the Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure for their 
support in preparing this study. The report was also enriched by insights from other government agencies 
and a wide range of other stakeholders. IRENA looks forward to working with all partners to translate these 
recommendations into practical action. 
I sincerely hope these RRA findings will strengthen the Republic of Moldova’s pursuit of renewable energy 
solutions as a source of economic growth, job creation and energy security. IRENA stands ready to assist in 
accelerating the country’s transition to a sustainable energy future.
Adnan Z. Amin
Director-General 
International Renewable Energy AgencyFigures VIII
Tables VIII
Boxes VIII
Executive Summary XI
1. Introduction 1
1.1 Country background 1
1.2 Renewables Readiness Assessment 2
2. Energy context 5
2.1 Energy supply and demand 5
2.2 Legal and regulatory framework 6
2.3 Energy development plans 8
2.4 Power system 9
• Power generation 10
• Grid infrastructure 12
2.5 Organisational structure of the energy sector 14
3. Renewable energy development 17
3.1 Renewable energy resources and applications 17
• Wind 20
• Bioenergy 21
• Solar 23
• Hydropower 24
• Geothermal 24
3.2 Renewable energy support mechanisms in the power sector 24
3.3 Financing of renewable energy 28
Contents4. Challenges and recommendations 31
4.1 Long-term planning 31
• Adopt a renewable energy target for 2030 32
• Conduct a production cost modelling study 32
4.2 Regulatory environment for renewable power investments 33
• Strengthen the enabling regulatory framework 33
• Streamline administrative procedures and facilitate their enforcement 34
4.3 Bioenergy 35
• Develop a strategy for the bioenergy sector 35
• Encourage the use of and further develop the online platform for biomass trade 36
• Identify an optimal pathway to increase the role of biofuels 36
4.4 Financing of renewables 37
• Improve the bankability of renewable energy projects 37
• Enhance the capacity of local banks to facilitate the financing of renewable energy 
projects 37
4.5 Public awareness 38
• Develop a national communication strategy on renewable energy sources 38
References 39
Annex. Key development steps for renewable energy 
projects in the Republic of Moldova 42Figure 1 Evolution of GDP and the MDL/USD exchange rate 2
Figure 2 High-Level Meeting on Renewable Energy in South East Europe, 2017 3
Figure 3 Total primary energy supply over the 2010-2017 period (ktoe) 5
Figure 4 Final energy consumption in 2017, by sector 6
Figure 5 Electricity generation in 2017, by source 6
Figure 6 Objectives of the Energy Strategy until 2030 8
Figure 7 Wholesale import electricity prices and electricity tariffs for end users 10
Figure 8 Domestic generation capacity in 2017, by fuel 11
Figure 9 Electricity network and power generation facilities in the Republic of Moldova 12
Figure 10 Potential power interconnections of the Republic of Moldova with ENTSO-E 13
Figure 11 Global levelised cost of electricity from utility-scale renewable power generation 
technologies, 2010-2018 18
Figure 12 Installed renewable energy capacity, by source (as of March 2018) 19
Figure 13 Dynamics of renewable energy growth 19
Figure 14 Wind potential in the Republic of Moldova 20
Figure 15 The Solid Biofuel Laboratory at the State Agrarian University of the Republic of 
Moldova 22
Figure 16 Global horizontal irradiation in the Republic of Moldova 23
Figure 17 Graphic representation of the support mechanisms in the Republic of Moldova 24
Figure 18 Key steps in a tenders’ development 26
Figure 19 Pre-qualification criteria 27
Figures
Table 1 Overview of the domestic power generation infrastructure in the Republic of Moldova 11
Table 2 Share of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption, by sector (%) 19
Table 3 RE capacity quotas under the new supporting scheme 25
Tables
Box 1 IRENA’s South East Europe Initiative 3
Box 2 Asynchronous interconnection with Romania 13
Box 3 The business case for renewables 18
Box 4 Cost-competitive solar PV and wind potential in South East Europe 21
Box 5 Republic of Moldova Energy and Biomass Project 22
Box 6 Policy Guidelines on Competitive Selection and Support for Renewable Energy 26
BoxesANRE National Energy Regulatory Agency
CHP Combined heat and power
DFI Development finance institution
EBRD European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ENTSO-E European Network of Transmission System Operators
EU European Union
EUR Euro
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GW Gigawatt
IPS Integrated Power System
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency
ktoe Kilotonnes of oil equivalent
kV Kilovolt
kW Kilowatt
kWh Kilowatt-hour
MDL Moldovan lei
MW Megawatt
MWh Megawatt-hour
PPA Power Purchase Agreement
PV Photovoltaic
RRA Renewables Readiness Assessment
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
USD United States dollar
AbbreviationsChisinau at night
Photograph: ShutterstockThe Republic of Moldova has a vast renewable energy potential, now 
poised to play an important role in addressing the country’s key 
energy challenges. 
The 2017 report from the International Renewable Energy Agency 
(IRENA), Cost-competitive renewable power generation: Potential 
across South East Europe, found that wind could provide up to
21 gigawatts (GW) of power capacity, much of which could be deployed 
with the levelised cost of electricity (LCOE) below 90 EUR/ MWh – the 
maximum level at which the report considers the potential to be costcompetitive. Furthermore, solar PV could provide up to 4.5 GW of 
capacity, more than 20% of which (1 GW) was considered already costcompetitive in 2016, if attractive financial conditions were provided.
At the same time, the Republic of Moldova heavily depends on 
imported natural gas, petroleum products and electricity. Almost 
70% of the primary energy supply – around 2 012 ktoe of the total 
2 939 ktoe – comes from imports. This is not only a huge economic 
burden, but also affects the country’s energy security, making it 
vulnerable to risks related to fuel supply disruption. Indeed, domestic 
power production typically covers less than 20% of demand, with this 
mostly provided by local, gas-fuelled CHP stations (330 MW) and 
renewables-based capacity (53 MW).
Despite abundant resources, deployment of renewables has been 
limited, so far, except for the use of biomass in the heating sector. 
There, a decade-long effort to develop the solid biofuel sector led to 
a widely taken up programme of replacing coal- and gas-fired boilers, 
as well as basic stoves, with biomass heating units. These burn straw, 
pellets, briquettes and firewood. 
The deployment of biomass continues to provide employment 
opportunities, as well. Existing government efforts are oriented 
towards strengthening the newly-created solid biofuel production 
industry (briquettes and pellets), which has already created about 
400 new jobs in rural areas and had an assessed turnover of
USD 6 million to USD 8 million in 2017.
In recent years, the Republic of Moldova has stepped up efforts 
towards developing non-biomass renewable energy sources, too. 
Executive SummaryIn 2012, it pledged to achieve a 17% share of 
renewables in gross final energy consumption 
by 2020 and developed the National Renewable 
Energy Action Plan for the 2013-2020 period. 
This envisages development of solar PV and wind 
technologies, amongst others. It also builds on 
the first steps to advance the use of renewables 
in the power sector, which date back to 2007. The 
Renewable Energy Law (No. 160-XVI of 12.07.2007) 
introduced tariffs for 15 years, under the “cost-plus” 
principle, with these based on the actual eligible 
costs incurred. 
Yet, as this framework was not considered sufficient 
to attract investments in the sector, the Law on the 
promotion of the use of energy from renewable 
sources (Law no. 10 of 26.02.2016) came into force 
in March 2018. 
This provides necessary guarantees for 
investments, including: non-discriminatory grid 
connection; priority dispatch; and an obligation 
by the central electricity supplier to purchase allrenewable-generated electricity for 15 years. In 
addition, the new law is expected to lead to the 
construction of up to 168 MW of new capacity, 
mainly wind and solar PV, to be supported through 
administratively set feed-in tariffs and an auctionsbased mechanism. Scheduled initially for 2019, 
these auctions are expected to result in a capacity 
of 80 MW of wind and 25 MW of solar PV.
The recent adoption of these new support schemes 
for renewable electricity has contributed greatly 
to the rising interest of the business community – 
but additional efforts are necessary to cement the 
foundations of the sector. 
In this context, in 2018, the RRA elaboration 
process was launched at the request of the 
Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure of the 
Republic of Moldova. This provided a venue for 
multi-stakeholder dialogue to identify challenges 
in renewable energy deployment and to suggest 
the solutions required to further exploit indigenous 
renewable energy resources, while integrating 
growing shares of solar and wind energy in the 
Republic of Moldova’s power system.
Challenges and recommended actions
Adopt a renewable energy target for 2030
The current share of renewables, 27.8%, was 
reached mainly through the revision of biomass 
consumption data for the years 2010-2016. Thus, 
it neither provides long-term predictability, 
nor reflects the country’s vision of energy 
sector development. Although the announced 
development of 168 MW of renewables capacity 
in the coming years has captured the interest of 
several investors, this could be considered a oneoff boost for the market, rather than an element of 
a solid strategy. 
The Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure has 
now begun various initiatives, including discussions 
within the Energy Community, with a view to 
agreeing on a new renewable energy target for 
2030. IRENA’s recently-initiated regional REmap 
analysis for the countries of Central and Southeast 
Europe, including the Republic of Moldova, can 
contribute to these efforts and help identify costeffective technology options for the deployment of 
renewables in the power and end-use sectors. 
Conduct a production cost modelling study
As renewables are becoming an increasingly costcompetitive source of energy, they are poised 
to play a greater role in the power system of the 
Republic of Moldova. The increased use of solar PV 
and wind, however, would present a new challenge, 
as the country does not have sufficient capacity 
to balance its generation. Thus, a production cost 
modelling study would allow the determination of 
any potential operational constraints that could 
result in the unavailability of sufficient power to 
meet demand. Furthermore, it could investigate 
multiple scenarios for the generation mix, including 
those with higher shares of renewables.
The results could help build confidence among 
policy makers, system operators and investors, as 
well as identify the most cost-effective option for 
balancing the system. To support countries in the 
assessment of power systems’ flexibility, IRENA and the VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland 
Ltd. developed the cost-free FlexTool. This analyses 
not only the traditional concept of flexibility 
(concerning, for example, flexible thermal and 
hydro-generation with high ramping capability and 
very low start-up time), but also other innovative 
technologies, such as flexible demand, energy 
storage and sector coupling.
Strengthen the enabling regulatory framework
Even though the new Law on the promotion of the 
use of energy from renewable sources (Law no. 
10 of 26.02.2016) came into effect in March 2018, 
additional pieces of legislation are required to 
ensure smooth implementation of the new support 
mechanisms. 
In particular, clarity on all requirements and 
procedures to be followed needs to be ensured 
well in advance for both project developers and 
financial institutions. For auctions-based support 
scheme, essential secondary legislation needs to 
be adopted, including: standard documentation 
for the tendering procedure; eligible producer 
status confirmation for small renewable electricity 
producers; and grid connection, including 
provisions referring to renewables integration. 
In addition, the regulatory framework could be 
strengthened by implementing a transparent 
methodology to calculate feed-in-tariffs and 
ceiling prices for tenders, as well as by facilitating 
introduction of the net metering scheme for 
distributed renewable energy generation. While 
legislative framework is in place, the mechanism is 
not widely used, due to lack of administrative clarity. 
Streamline administrative procedures and 
facilitate their enforcement
Co-ordination between relevant stakeholders, 
including the Ministry of Economy and 
Infrastructure, the Ministry of Agriculture, Regional 
Development and Environment, the Ministry of 
Finance and the transmission system operator is 
required to clarify and simplify some procedures 
that are perceived by the private sector as an 
administrative burden and hinder the deployment 
of renewable energy. 
While revising the National Renewable Energy 
Action Plan and developing an integrated National 
Energy and Climate Plan, key aspects raised 
during the RRA process could be addressed. These 
include: use of agriculture land for RE power plants; 
conduct of environmental impact assessments; 
taxation of RE-related equipment; and issuance of 
grid connection permits.
Develop a strategy for the bioenergy sector
With limited availability of wooden biomass, the 
government is advised to develop a country-wide 
programme for the use of solid biofuels. 
This strategy should not only provide a 
comprehensive assessment of resource 
potential, but also provide clarity on the most 
suitable technology options for a wide group of 
beneficiaries in the Republic of Moldova. Some 
failures to match beneficiary and technology have 
turned out to be costly in the past. In this context, 
the government could analyse the opportunity to 
revise the relevant legislation with the objective 
of increasing the role of local public authorities 
in promoting the bioenergy sector. As the owners 
of a vast amount of land, those authorities could 
strengthen their commitment to developing the 
local industry and would benefit from locally 
harvested, cost-competitive heating resources.
The strategy should also address the potential 
for cultivation and wide use of energy crops that 
can be grown on marginal and/or depleted lands. 
Currently, despite promising resources, the energy 
crop sector faces several challenges, including 
land conversion issues, land suitability and the 
availability of financial support.
Encourage the use of and further develop the 
online platform for biomass trade
Lack of proper communication and exchange 
among actors in the biomass market is perceived 
as a major challenge of the sector, even though a 
dedicated online platform was recently launched. 
The increased use of the tool would facilitate market 
operations and the entry of new fuel suppliers, 
including producers of agricultural residues and 
local public authorities. It would also enhance fuel price competition and supply liquidity. The 
platform should be actively promoted and further 
developed to provide a bridge between biomass 
producers and potential customers. It should also 
include information on the benefits stemming 
from the use of bioenergy and be a repository 
of available opportunities for local consumers to 
switch to this source of energy.
Identify an optimal pathway to increase the role 
of biofuels
The country has committed to a 10% share by 2020 
for renewables in the transport sector, but limited 
actions have been taken, so far, to promote the use 
of liquid biofuels. 
While there is a clear understanding among 
stakeholders of the need to ensure more 
sustainable use of energy sources in this sector, 
several concerns have been identified. These 
include the availability of land and infrastructure to 
cultivate crops for biofuels. Therefore, the country 
needs to identify an optimal pathway towards the 
use of biofuels in transport, either by focusing on 
domestic production, imports or combining these 
two options. 
Improve the bankability of renewable energy 
projects
The high-risk perception of renewable energy 
projects in the Republic of Moldova affects 
substantially the cost of capital that is critical for 
the financial viability of those projects. Therefore, 
more confidence in the market by financial 
institutions needs to be ensured to improve the 
bankability of those projects. Despite recent 
efforts by the government, the current framework 
is not perceived as sufficient, as it seems to expose 
potential investors to several risks. In this context, 
the following additional actions are required:
• Enhancement of the templates of the key 
project documentation, including power 
purchase agreements (PPAs) to provide 
necessary guarantees and predictability to the
stakeholders involved.
• Procedure for transparent assignment of the 
central electricity supplier.
• Design of a procedure for the transfer of 
all existing renewable energy producers to 
the support system, based on a contract 
for difference, which is envisaged to be 
implemented when the electricity market (dayahead and intra-day markets) is declared liquid 
by the regulator.
Enhance the capacity of local banks to facilitate 
the financing of renewable energy projects
Securing funding from the financial sector for the 
investments needed to achieve a total capacity 
addition of 168 MW may be a challenge, under 
the new policy support environment. While 
large-scale renewable power plants can access 
the necessary financial resources from abroad – 
through the contributions of either foreign investors 
or international financial institutions – small-scale 
projects are limited to funding opportunities from 
the local financial market. Limited knowledge 
of the renewable energy sector, among local 
lenders appraising projects, along with insufficient 
understanding of the sector’s support mechanisms, 
may obstruct the availability of financing. 
In addition, the Republic of Moldova’s financial and 
banking sector is comparatively small, with limited 
resources. Frequent problems in this sector, evidenced 
by the collapse of three large banks in 2014, have also 
affected the banking sector’s activities, in general.
Thus, for example, technical support in developing 
bankable project proposals and in structured finance 
principles, including project finance, can increase the 
capacities of local commercial banks and could be 
facilitated by international financial institutions that 
are well placed to provide such technical assistance. 
At the same time, public capital, including that 
provided by development finance institutions, 
could be used to help de-risk, or lower the risk 
of renewable energy projects. This would, in turn, 
lower the cost of capital for renewables, via the 
provision of risk mitigation instruments. Develop a national communication strategy on 
renewable energy sources
The deployment of renewables is an effective tool 
to fuel economic growth, create new employment 
opportunities, enhance human welfare and 
contribute to a climate-safe future. IRENA’s analysis 
suggests that renewable energy jobs worldwide 
could rise from 10.3 million in 2017 to 23.6 million 
by 2030 and 28.8 million by 2050. 
As the sector is still at an early stage of development, 
a national strategy is needed to raise awareness 
and boost understanding of renewable energy 
sources and their benefits across the Republic of 
Moldova.
This strategy should address several stakeholders, 
including state authorities, civil society, the banking 
community and donors. It could envisage necessary 
actions to: ensure proper ways to disseminate the 
most up-to-date information on renewables and 
the ongoing energy transition (e.g., a dedicated 
website, translation of authoritative publications 
into local language); and improve the curriculum 
of schools and universities to reflect the growing 
role of renewables. At the same time, intensified 
government communication efforts on the 
ongoing legislative changes would be beneficial for 
stakeholders. This is especially true regarding local 
financial institutions, as the relevant mechanism to 
finance renewable energy projects is prepared.
A national strategy is needed to raise awareness 
of renewable energy sources and their benefits 
across the Republic of MoldovaWind turbine in Busauca, Rezina
Photograph: Shutterstock1.1 Country background
The Republic of Moldova, with its capital city of Chisinau, is a landlocked country situated in South-Eastern Europe and wedged between 
Romania and Ukraine. The population is 3 550 852 inhabitants, 
approximately 57% of whom live in rural areas, and its territory covers 
an area of 33 800 square kilometres (km) (NBS, 2017). 
After gaining independence on 27 August 1991, following the collapse 
of the Soviet Union, the country introduced a parliamentary system 
and experienced a long transition period. This was characterised by 
political instability and numerous changes of government. Socioeconomic and political stability has been recently ensured, however, 
and has been marked by economic growth and fruitful collaboration 
with neighbouring states. Common roots and cultural similarities 
between the Republic of Moldova and Romania are reflected in strong 
linkages in business and commerce.
Several reforms carried out in recent years have positively impacted 
the economy, including the energy sector. These reforms have 
contributed to a process of gradual integration with European Union 
(EU) structures, with this process remaining a priority for the country. 
In 2010, the Republic of Moldova joined the Energy Community, an 
international organisation that includes the EU and its neighbours. 
The Energy Community aims to create an integrated pan-European 
energy market. The Association Agreement signed in 2014 between 
the EU and the Republic of Moldova also established a framework for 
political and economic collaboration. 
The country has recently been experiencing economic recovery, 
following a crisis in 2014-2015 that was related largely to challenges 
in the banking sector. As a consequence of this crisis, the Republic 
of Moldova faced a severe devaluation of its currency, the Moldovan 
lei (MDL), while the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) shrank 
0.5% in 2015 (Lupusor et al., 2016). Figure 1 shows the impact of the 
crisis on GDP (in current USD) and the MDL/USD exchange rate. With 
GDP growth of 4.5% in 2017, however, the country became the third 
fastest growing economy in Europe that year, with its GDP totalling 
USD 8.13 billion. This gave a per capita GDP of USD 2 290, which was 
equal to 21% of the world average (WB, 2018b).
Introduction1
1 If not stated otherwise, data in this report is based on information relating to the right bank of the Dniester River 
only. The territory of the Republic of Moldova also includes the region of Transnistria, located on the left bank of 
the Dniester River, which declared independence in 1990. However, no United Nations member state recognises 
its sovereignty. The report refers to electricity produced by entities located in Transnistria as “purchased from 
MGRES”.Economic activity is shifting progressively towards 
services, a sector that in 2017, accounted for nearly 
65% of GDP and provided employment for more 
than half of the workforce. The sector is driven by 
insurance, legal consultancy and telecommunications, 
with foreign investment playing a substantial role. 
As the country has a moderate climate, along with 
favourable climatic and soil conditions, agriculture 
is also an important sector, accounting for 16% of 
GDP and employing nearly 30% of the workforce, 
in 2017. The main areas of agricultural production 
include vegetables, fruits, grapes, grain, sugar beets, 
sunflower seeds, tobacco, beef and milk. 
In 2017, the national employment rate was 40.5% and 
the unemployment rate was 4.1%, although the labour 
market varies greatly across the country (NBS, 2017). 
The Republic of Moldova is also the 129th largest 
export economy in the world. In 2016, the 
country exported USD 2.43 billion and imported
USD 3.95 billion, resulting in a negative trade 
balance of USD 1.52 billion. Petroleum products are 
listed high among the imported commodities, at 
USD 370 million (OEC, 2016).
1.2 Renewables Readiness Assessment
The International Renewable Energy Agency
(IRENA) developed the Renewables Readiness 
Assessment (RRA) as a tool for carrying out a 
comprehensive evaluation of the conditions for 
renewable energy deployment in a particular country. 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
25
15
10
20
GDP - Billions USD 
MDL to USD exchange rate
MDL/USD GDP
Figure 1. Evolution of GDP and the MDL/USD 
exchange rate
Source: Based on WB (2018b), NBM (2018)
The RRA is a country-led and consultative 
process. It provides a venue for multi-stakeholder 
dialogue to identify challenges to renewable 
energy deployment and to come up with solutions 
to existing barriers. Short- and medium-term 
recommendations are presented to governments to 
guide the formation of new policies, or the reform 
of existing ones, opening up a more enabling 
environment for renewable energy. The RRA 
also consolidates existing efforts and mobilises 
resources for priority actions.
The RRA elaboration process was launched at 
the request of the Ministry of Economy and 
Infrastructure of the Republic of Moldova, in the 
context of IRENA’s recently initiated South East 
Europe Initiative (see Box 1). This coincided with 
the government’s ongoing efforts to develop and 
finalise renewable energy-related legislation. These 
efforts have boosted the dialogue between policy 
makers and other interested parties, including 
potential investors, relevant state authorities, 
international financial institutions and civil society.
During the first stage of the process, a background 
paper was prepared outlining a general overview 
of the Moldovan energy sector, with a special focus 
on renewable energy. In addition, an issues paper 
was elaborated to identify potential barriers and 
bottlenecks that need to be addressed to ensure 
successful deployment of renewables. The paper 
includes the suggestions of interviewed experts.
With the aim of validating these findings and 
providing an open dialogue among a wide range of 
stakeholders, IRENA and the Ministry of Economy 
and Infrastructure organised an expert workshop 
on 4 June 2018. The main objectives were to discuss 
challenges for renewable energy development and 
to provide preliminary recommendations on the 
required actions to ensure favourable conditions 
for the sector. The event provided the opportunity 
to review global renewable energy developments, 
highlight the country’s international energy 
commitments and present an overview of the 
national energy sector.
Subsequently, a set of recommended actions to 
further advance the renewable energy sector 
was validated by local stakeholders within the Box 1. IRENA’s South East Europe Initiative
As part of IRENA’s increasing engagement with 
South East Europe, the High-Level Meeting on 
Renewable Energy in South East Europe took 
place in Abu Dhabi, in January 2017. 
The meeting served as a platform to discuss the 
opportunities and challenges in expanding the 
share of renewable energy in the region’s energy 
mix. It built on the region-wide consultation 
process undertaken in 2016, including a regional 
consultation workshop organised in collaboration 
with the Ministry of Energy of Romania, and 
gathered representatives from the governments 
of the region, as well as other, key regional 
stakeholders. 
The meeting resulted in the issuance of the Abu 
Dhabi Communique on Accelerating the Uptake 
of Renewables in South East Europe by the 
Heads of Delegation in attendance, which lays 
out the foundations for IRENA’s engagement 
in the region. This has the goal of supporting 
the creation of more conducive frameworks for 
renewable energy investment. As agreed at the 
meeting, the priority areas for collaboration with 
IRENA shall include, amongst others: mapping 
renewable energy resources; renewable energy 
planning; strengthened enabling frameworks; 
the socio-economic benefits of renewables; 
integration of variable renewable energy sources; 
and renewable energy financing. 
Figure 2. High-Level Meeting on Renewable 
Energy in South East Europe, 2017
From left to right: H.E. Mirko Šarović, Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic 
Relations, Bosnia and Herzegovina; Mr. Adnan Z. Amin, Director-General of IRENA; 
Mr. Dominique Ristori, Director General for Energy, European Commission.
framework of the second RRA workshop that took 
place on 15 October 2018 and was endorsed by 
the national owner of the process, the Ministry of 
Economy and Infrastructure. 
This report is structured in four chapters. The 
first provides introductory information on the 
country background and the RRA process. The 
second chapter highlights the main features of 
the energy sector from both a technical and legal 
perspective. In particular, it indicates the role that 
energy efficiency and renewable energy play in 
the government’s agenda and in the national 
strategy to ensure sustainable development. 
The third chapter is dedicated to the renewable 
energy sector, with a focus on potential, current 
applications, legal framework and financing. The 
final chapter provides a set of recommendations 
– identified by stakeholders involved in the 
RRA process – that address the most important 
challenges of the renewable energy market in the 
Republic of Moldova.Solar PV application in Chisinau 
Photograph: Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure2.1 Energy supply and demand
The total primary energy supply of the Republic of Moldova 
increased by an average of 1-2% annually during 2010-2017, reaching 
2 939 kilotonnes of oil equivalent (ktoe) (see Figure 3) by the end 
of the period. The consumption of fossil fuels (coal and natural gas) 
decreased gradually during this time, while the shares of electricity 
and biomass continued to grow. The country also experienced rising 
use of petroleum products, increasing 17.2%, from 776 ktoe in 2010 to 
937 ktoe in 2017 (NBS, 2018).
Final energy consumption in 2017 was 2 671 ktoe, equivalent to 
roughly 90% of the primary energy supply2 (see Figure 4). The 
residential sector consumes the largest share of final energy, at 50%, 
while the industrial sector consumes just 8%, as industry does not 
play a significant role in the country.
Energy context
2 This high ratio is a result of the lack of industry that would use energy for further purposes. In countries that have 
such a sector in place, those losses reach up to 20-25% of primary energy.
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
2633 2676 2624 2643 2669 2686
2796
2939
Coal
Natural gas
Petroleum products
Solid biofuels and waste
Electricity
TOTAL
267 277 285 290 292 289
290
297
512 537 574 584 629 650
698
764
776 812
764 785 803 829 896 937
962 930 885 834 850 816 837 836
116 120 116 150 95 102 75 105
Figure 3. Total primary energy supply over the 2010-2017 period (ktoe)
Source: NBS (2018)Residential
Public / Services
Agriculture
Industry
Transport
107
267
217
734
1346
MGRES
Ukraine
Local CHPs
Local RE power plants
55%
27%
Local
Production
18%
17%
1%
Figure 4. Final energy consumption in 2017,
by sector
Figure 5. Electricity generation in 2017, by source
Source: NBS (2018) Source: ANRE (2018)
The Republic of Moldova is poorly endowed with 
fossil fuel energy resources and is highly dependent 
on imported energy, in the form of natural gas, 
petroleum products and electricity. Almost 70% 
of the primary energy supply – 2 012 ktoe of the 
total 2 939 ktoe – is imported from neighbouring 
countries. Thus, the country is vulnerable to risks 
related to energy supply disruption. 
Nearly the entire volume of natural gas is imported 
from the Russian Federation (from Gazprom). 
About 44% of this fuel is used to generate electricity 
and heat, while 28% is used in the residential sector. 
Natural gas consumption has decreased over the 
last decade: by 2017, it had declined by 13% of 2010 
levels, or 30% of 2005 levels (NBS, 2012 and NBS, 
2018). Meanwhile, imports of petroleum products 
increased in 2017 to 809 272 tonnes, of which 70% 
was diesel, 21% was gasoline, and 9% was liquefied 
petroleum gas. The supply of petroleum products 
is more diversified, however, with imports coming 
mainly from Romania, the Russian Federation and 
Belarus (ANRE, 2018). 
Of the 3.7 billion kilowatt-hours (kWh) of electricity 
used in 2017, only 18% was generated domestically, 
mainly by local combined heat and power (CHP) 
plants, a non-pumped hydropower plant, and other 
small-scale renewable energy installations (see 
Figure 5). The rest of the electricity was imported 
from Ukraine (27.2%) and purchased from MGRES 
(54.8%), a power plant located in Cuciurgan (see 
footnote 1).
2.2 Legal and regulatory framework
In 2010, the Republic of Moldova became a fullfledged member of the Energy Community, which 
implies a commitment to transpose core EU energy 
legislation, the acquis communautaire. Since then 
all governmental efforts have been focused on 
aligning the national legal framework for energy 
with that of the EU. As a result, competition and 
market principles have been introduced, especially 
in the natural gas and electricity fields, with the 
objective of unbundling vertically integrated 
entities and introducing liberalised market 
principles.
The above-mentioned reforms have had a positive 
impact on the quality of services provided to 
final consumers and businesses and are expected 
to enhance the investment environment and 
attractiveness of the country as a whole. Between 2016 and 2019, the Republic of Moldova improved 
its ranking on the World Bank’s Getting Electricity 
Indicator from 97th to 81st and its ranking on the 
Doing Business Indicator from 52nd to 47th (WB, 
2018a).
The energy legal framework includes the following 
laws:
• The Law on Electricity (Law No. 107 of 
27.05.2016) ensures liberalisation of the 
electricity market and transposes all principles 
and rules of the EU’s Third Energy Package. 
In particular, the law clearly sets the rules 
for businesses in the power field, especially 
regarding mandatory requirements in 
unbundling. In addition, this law ensures that 
all final customers are eligible to buy electricity 
from any generator or supplier – although as 
yet no one has exercised the right to switch 
providers. 
• The Law on Natural Gas (Law No. 108 of 
27.05.2016) introduces similar rules for 
liberalisation of the natural gas market. 
In particular, it sets out the unbundling 
requirements and envisaged derogation for the 
Moldovagaz JSC and its subsidiary companies, 
owned by Gazprom. 
• The Law on Energy (Law No. 174 of 21.09.2017) 
provides a set of rules for all operators in 
the energy field, as well as for end-users of 
energy resources. It also consolidates the 
independence, authority and transparency 
of the National Energy Regulatory Agency 
(ANRE). The law establishes all the mechanisms 
and principles regarding the functioning of the 
ANRE, including: appointment and mandate 
of a director; budget formation and related 
financial management principles; and other 
provisions aimed at creating a healthy and 
favourable environment within the energy 
sector, focused both on attracting investment 
and on the supply of reliable, qualitative and 
affordable services to end-users.
• The Law on Energy Efficiency3
 (Law No. 139 of 
19.07.2018) consolidates the national institutional 
framework capacities for implementing energy 
efficiency policies and developing relevant financing 
mechanisms. The law also enables active participation 
by third parties, as it provides a necessary 
framework for energy performance contracts (via 
energy services companies, or ESCOs) and allows 
private investment in the public sector. The law 
contains the following pillars: implementation of the 
concept of energy efficiency obligation schemes; 
strengthening the exemplary role of public buildings; 
introduction of the obligation for large companies to 
perform obligatory energy audits; popularisation 
of sustainable public procurement; and promotion 
of energy performance contracts as market-driven 
funding instruments for energy efficiency measures. 
• The Law on the Promotion of the Use of 
Energy from Renewable Sources (Law No. 
10 of 26.02.2016), in force since March 2018, 
comes with new support mechanisms for 
renewable energy investments. These include: 
feed-in tariffs; net metering; and tenders (see 
Section 3.2). At the same time, to ensure local 
energy autonomy and achieve the goal of 
distributed energy generation, the law supports 
the development of small-scale, communitypromoted renewable energy projects. Moreover, 
it provides: an obligation by the central 
electricity supplier to purchase renewable 
electricity; guaranteed and non-discriminatory 
access to the grid; and priority dispatch.
While the government’s efforts have focused 
mostly on the use of renewables in the power 
sector, the law also introduces the possibility of 
importing mixed petroleum products. This would 
be as a first step in enabling the use of liquid 
biofuels, while working towards achieving the 
target of 10% renewable energy use in transport 
by 2020. In 2018, the government launched a 
comprehensive exercise to assess the costs and 
efforts related to reaching the target, in parallel 
with developing the required legislation on 
sustainability criteria for biofuels.
3 In addition, the Law on Labelling of Energy-related Products (Law No. 44 of 27.03.2014) and the Law on Eco-design for Energy-related Products (Law No. 151 of 17.07.2014)
aim to create an environment to enable lower energy consumption.2.3 Energy development plans
Approved in December 2018, the Moldova 2030 
National Development Strategy establishes the 
country’s long-term sectoral priorities and is aimed 
at enhancing the quality of citizens’ lives. The 
strategy’s goal is to bring the focus of public policy 
onto people’s problems, interests and aspirations. 
The document includes four pillars of sustainable 
development: a sustainable and inclusive economy; 
human and social capital; honest and efficient 
institutions; and a sound environment. In this 
context, ten sustainable development goals have 
been established at the national level, including: the 
guaranteeing of a quality education; the ensuring of 
efficient governance; the enhancement of people’s 
access to infrastructure; and the improvement of 
labour conditions.
The Energy Strategy of the Republic of Moldova 
until 2030 (“The Energy Strategy”), adopted in 
2012, indicates three main strategic objectives (see 
Figure 6).
The first objective relates to enhancing the 
security of energy supply, mainly by strengthening 
interconnections with Romania and, implicitly, with 
other EU countries. The most important infrastructure 
development projects are outlined in Section 2.4.
The second objective refers mainly to
approximation of the legal framework with the 
EU acquis, which includes transposition and 
implementation of the Third Energy Package. The 
most important pillars of the package – ensuring the 
prerequisites for market liberalisation – have already 
been introduced to the national legal system.
The third objective aims to ensure sustainable 
development of the Republic of Moldova by, among 
Figure 6. Objectives of the Energy Strategy until 2030
Ensuring the security
of energy supply
Developing competitive 
markets and their regional 
and European integration
Ensuring sustainability of the 
energy sector and climate 
change mitigation
other methods, promoting energy efficiency and 
renewable energy. In this context, as a Contracting 
Party of the Energy Community, the country has 
transposed EU Directive 2009/28/EC on the 
promotion of the use of energy from renewable 
sources, which establishes a conducive framework 
for the production and promotion of energy from 
these sources. In particular, it introduces:
• A requirement for the whole EU to reach a share 
of at least 20% for renewable energy in its gross 
final energy consumption by 2020. 
• An obligation for all EU members (and 
subsequently Contracting Parties of the Energy 
Community) to fulfil their national targets for 
renewables and to develop National Renewable 
Energy Action Plans that set out ways to achieve 
their respective commitments. 
• A mandatory sub-target of a 10% share for 
renewables in transport, for all countries in 
question, by 2020.
• Sustainability criteria for biofuels to ensure 
that they are produced in a sustainable and 
environmentally friendly manner.
In 2012, within the framework of the Energy 
Community, the Republic of Moldova pledged to 
achieve a 17% share for renewables in gross final energy 
consumption by 2020. It also developed the National 
Renewable Energy Action Plan (NREAP) for the 2013-
2020 period that envisages a set of legal, technical 
and analytical measures to ensure achievement of the 
target.4
 In addition, in the energy efficiency field, the 
National Energy Efficiency Program 2011-2020 and 
two National Energy Efficiency Action Plans (NEEAP 
2013-2015 and 2016-2018) were elaborated, with the 
objective of achieving a total of 167 ktoe of energy 
savings by 2020.
4 The document is under revision – as of December 2018.At the same time, the country remains committed 
to the objectives of the Paris Agreement and 
submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution 
in June 2017 (UNFCCC, 2017). The country has an 
economy-wide, unconditional target of reducing 
national greenhouse gas emissions to 64-67% 
below the 1990 level by 2030. The reduction 
commitment could be increased up to 78% below 
the 1990 level, conditional on a global agreement 
addressing some important issues. These include 
low-cost financial resources, technology transfer 
and technical co-operation, accessible to all at 
a scale commensurate to the challenge of global 
climate change.
In addition, the Ministry of Agriculture, Regional 
Development and Environment has developed 
two instruments of strategic planning, with 
associated action plans, aimed at implementing 
the above-mentioned commitments: The Climate 
Change Adaptation Strategy by 2020; and the Low 
Emission Development Strategy of the Republic of 
Moldova until 2030. Both documents emphasise 
the crucial role of energy efficiency and renewable 
energy in reaching the climate-related goal at the 
national level. 
2.4 Power system5
Domestic power production in the Republic 
of Moldova typically covers less than 20% of 
demand and is provided by local CHP stations, 
a non-pumped hydropower plant, and other 
small-scale renewable energy installations. In this 
context, a central electricity supplier6 was recently 
established to purchase electricity generated by 
the above-mentioned producers and to sell it to 
eligible customers and suppliers. 
At present, two actors dominate the market and 
supply electricity, with tariffs approved by ANRE. 
5 Two electricity market participants from the Transnistrian region requested and obtained licences from ANRE: MGRES for electricity production and Energokapital JSC for 
supply of electricity. This allowed them to generate electricity and to supply it to Moldovan final customers.
6 Energocom has been mandated for three years, until 1 January 2021. 
7 MGRES, built during 1964-1982, is the biggest generation capacity located in Transnistria. It has an installed capacity of 2 520 MW, with coal accounting for 1 600 MW, natural
gas for 500 MW and heavy fuel oil for 420 MW. It can be switched to natural gas with an available capacity of approximately 1 700 MW. It is currently owned and operated by 
Inter RAO EES Corporation. 
These are: FCC Gas Natural Fenosa Furnizare 
Energie LLC (GNFFE), created as a result of the 
unbundling of the distribution of supply activities 
by FCC RED Union Fenosa JSC; and JSC Furnizarea 
Energiei Electrice Nord, created as a result of the 
unbundling of the distribution of supply activities 
by JSC RED Nord and JSC RED Nord-Vest.
Both companies also act as suppliers of last resort 
in their respective supply areas. In addition, 20 
other registered independent electricity suppliers, 
licensed by ANRE, are entitled to provide 
electricity at non-regulated tariffs. As of November 
2018, however, no contracts with these suppliers 
had been recorded. This was due to their lack 
of credibility and financial strength, along with 
favourable conditions for electricity importation 
from Ukraine.
In 2017, the Republic of Moldova purchased 55% of 
its electricity from MGRES7 and imported 27% from 
Ukraine (via JSC Energocom). These two entities 
were selected in a tender for annual procurement 
of electricity organised by the Ministry of Economy 
and Infrastructure. 
The trading of electricity in the Republic of 
Moldova is based on bilateral contracts, since 
a power exchange expected to be established 
only after several years. The regulator is notified 
of contracts concluded by the above-mentioned 
suppliers, at regulated tariffs, to ensure that all final 
customer demand is met at the lowest possible 
cost. Furthermore, agreements involving electricity 
imports are subject to examination by ANRE and 
Moldelectrica, the transmission system operator, to 
ensure their technical feasibility. Figure 7 provides 
an overview of wholesale import electricity prices 
and electricity tariffs for end users (low voltage).Power generation
Domestic power generation capacity amounts to 
383 megawatts8 (MW) and is produced mainly by 
gas-burning CHP plants, which account for 86% of 
total installed capacity (see Figure 8 and Table 1) 
(MoEI, 2017). 
In the winter season, the typical load variation of 
the Moldovan power system (the right bank of the 
Dniester River only) ranges between a minimal 
base load of 330-370 MW and a maximum peak 
load of 700-760 MW, while in the summer season it 
ranges from a minimum of 260 MW to a maximum 
8 Seven additional sugar mill-owned CHP plants with a total installed capacity of 98 MW are available for a limited period of time during the year. In addition, two power plants
are based in Transnistria: MGRES, with total installed capacity of 2 520 MW and HPP Dubasari, with an installed capacity of 48 MW.
of 610 MW (MoEI, 2017). The maximum load for 
both banks of the Dniester River can reach up to
1 100 MW (Moldelectrica, 2018).
Because of its deficient generation capacity and 
peculiar power system (heat-demand driven CHP 
plants and small-scale hydropower plants with 
vulnerable hydrology) the Republic of Moldova 
has no plants that can provide primary, secondary 
and tertiary reserves. As a consequence, it must 
rely on Ukraine, for frequency control as well.
Although MGRES could provide some additional 
reserves, such an agreement has not been 
concluded so far. 
Figure 7. Wholesale import electricity prices and electricity tariffs for end users
Source: Based on ANRE (2018) and ANRE (2016)
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
140
120
100 108.2
121.6 126.0 124.5
111.7
89.2
98.0
104.8
56.7 59.9
67.3 68 68 67.95
49.5
47
80
60
40
20
0
USD/MWh
Wholesale import electricity prices, USD/MWh Electricity taris for end users (low voltage) USD/MWh
Solar water heaters, “Povestea” kindergarten in Nisporeni
Photograph: UNDP MoldovaFigure 8. Domestic generation capacity in 2017, by fuel
Table 1. Overview of the domestic power generation infrastructure in the Republic of Moldova
Source: Based on MoEI (2017) and MoEI (2018a)
Note: *An additional capacity of 13.4 MW of internal combustion engines powered by natural gas is to be installed and commissioned at the beginning of 2019.
Source: Based on MoEI (2017) and MoEI (2018a)
Natural Gas
Hydro (non-pumping)
Renewables (non-hydro)
330
16
37
Power plant name Date of 
construction
Installed 
capacity
Available 
capacity Fuel used
1. Termoelectrica JSC 
CET - 2 (CHP) in Chisinau 1976-1980 240 MWe 210 MWe natural gas
CET - 1 (CHP) in Chisinau 1951-1961 66 MWe 40 MWe natural gas
2. JSC CET-Nord (CHP), Balti* 1956-1970 24 MWe 24 MWe natural gas
3. Costești hydropower plant 1978 16 MW 16 MW hydro
4. Non-hydro renewable 
energy power plants 2009-2018 37 MW 37 MW
Total 383 MW 327 MWGrid infrastructure
The existing Moldovan power grid infrastructure 
was mainly built during Soviet times, as part of a 
jointly optimised system with the Soviet Union and 
the neighbouring countries of Bulgaria, Hungary 
and Romania. After the dissolution of the Soviet 
Union, all countries in the region redesigned their 
electricity systems. While Bulgaria, Hungary and 
Romania decided to synchronise their networks 
with the Western system (former UCTE, currently 
ENTSO-E), the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine 
joined the Eastern system (IPS). 
Despite strong links between ex-Soviet republics 
and their western neighbours, electricity exchange 
between the two systems is only feasible in “island 
mode”, or via expensive back-to-back converter 
stations. As the smallest country in the region, the 
Republic of Moldova was affected significantly by 
the dismantling of the region’s electricity system 
and consequently has inherited a poorly maintained 
and unsustainable power network. 
In particular, because the country suffers from 
insufficient power generation capacity, it uses 
its interconnections with Ukraine to ensure the 
necessary system reserves and balancing energy. 
This includes seven 330 kilovolt (kV) lines and
11 110 kV lines (see Figure 9). 
The high-voltage interconnection between the 
Republic of Moldova and Romania consists of 
the 400 kV Vulcanesti-Isaccea overhead line 
and four 110 kV lines; however, due to a lack of 
synchronisation, these are used only in exceptional 
cases. Because the local system is isolated from 
ENTSO-E, it demonstrates major operational 
limitations that affect the energy security of the 
Republic of Moldova and hinder the operational 
stability of the system and the possibilities for 
power exchange. Thus, a feasibility study has 
been conducted on interconnecting the energy 
systems of the Republic of Moldova and Romania 
by installing back-to-back stations (asynchronous 
interconnection) (see Box 2). This scenario makes 
it possible to maintain both the interconnection 
with Ukraine, as well as energy exchanges with 
Romania. 
At the same time, the Energy Strategy 2030 
envisages plans to strengthen bidirectional 
transmission connections between the IPS/UPS 
and ENTSO-E systems, enabling the Republic 
of Moldova to become a power transit country. 
Interconnection projects with the EU internal 
power market through new power lines, as well 
as the enhancement of internal networks, are 
considered essential both for supply security and 
for social welfare. In addition, interconnection 
with the ENTSO-E system is expected to enable 
increased competitiveness that will lead to more 
affordable energy prices. 
In this context, the Moldovan and Ukrainian 
governments are synchronising their energy 
agendas, especially those related to the 
interconnection of their national power systems 
with the ENTSO-E grid. In this regard, in June 
2017, the transmission system operators of both 
countries signed a Memorandum of Understanding 
with ENTSO-E confirming their intention. 
Figure 9. Electricity network and power 
generation facilities in the 
Republic of Moldova
Source: WB (2015)
Disclaimer: Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any official 
endorsement or acceptance by IRENA.Box 2. Asynchronous interconnection with Romania
A feasibility study was performed on 
interconnecting the energy systems of 
the Republic of Moldova and Romania by 
installing back-to-back stations (asynchronous 
interconnection). This approach makes it possible 
to maintain both interconnection with Ukraine as 
well as energy exchanges with Romania.
In this context, the following scenarios were 
analysed (see Figure 10):
1. A back-to-back station with up to 600 MW 
of capacity at Vulcăneşti and construction 
of the Isaccea-Vulcăneşti-Chisinau overhead 
line, estimated at EUR 270 million (No. 1 in 
the figure).
2. A back-to-back station with 300 MW capacity 
at Balti station and construction of the 400 kV 
Balti-Suceava overhead line, estimated at 
EUR 130 million (No. 2 in the figure).
3. A back-to-back station with 300 MW capacity 
and construction of the 400 kV StraseniUngheni-Iasi overhead line. An investment 
budget is not elaborated, as a connection 
point with Romania has not been determined 
yet (No. 3 in the figure).
The feasibility study concluded that the most 
feasible and suitable is option 1, the IsacceaVulcănești-Chisinau overhead line. 
Once finalised, the project is expected to 
increase diversification of the electricity market 
in the country, enable future integration with the 
ENTSO-E system and positively influence the 
increased uptake of renewable energy capacities.
Figure 10. Potential power interconnections of the Republic of Moldova with ENTSO-E
Source: MoEI (2018b)
Disclaimer: Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any official 
endorsement or acceptance by IRENA.
ENTSO-E
IPS/UPS
2
3
12.5 Organisational structure of the 
energy sector
Below is a list of the most important actors involved 
in governing the energy sector.
The Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure is 
responsible for administration of the energy sector, 
as well as for elaboration and implementation of the 
necessary measures to ensure the energy security 
of the country. In particular, the ministry develops 
energy-related policies, strategies, normative acts 
and sector programmes and project concepts.9 
In addition, the ministry leads international 
collaboration in the energy field, including, but not 
limited to, the supply of strategic energy resources, 
attraction of foreign investment, and facilitation of 
power interconnections.
The Energy Efficiency Agency provides support 
to the Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure in 
implementing energy efficiency and renewable 
energy policies. Its mission is to: manage all 
activities in the energy efficiency and renewable 
energy sectors; ensure the continuation of countrywide efforts to reach the objectives stemming from 
national strategies and programmes; and guarantee 
timely and proper implementation of legislation 
related to energy efficiency and renewable energy. 
Moreover, following institutional reform in 2018, 
the agency has absorbed the Energy Efficiency 
Fund. As a result, it also is responsible for providing 
financial support to the sector – in part through 
funds allocated from the state budget, but also 
through additional resources to be fundraised on 
local, regional and international financial markets. 
The National Energy Regulatory Agency (ANRE) 
is an independent regulatory authority, directly 
subordinated to parliament. It is responsible 
primarily for the introduction of market regulatory 
mechanisms that protect the interests of both 
consumers and investors. In particular, the agency:
• Supervises compliance with laws and 
regulations in the energy field.
• Promotes and ensures fair competition 
and efficient operation of energy markets, 
monitoring the level and effectiveness of 
market opening, as well as competition, in the 
wholesale and retail energy markets.
• Issues licences for activities in the energy 
market and monitors compliance with licensing 
conditions.
• Monitors the investment plans of system 
operators.
• Sets and approves standards and requirements 
for distribution, transmission and supply 
activities.
• Approves tariffs with the objective of 
considering the interests of both producers 
and customers.
• Supervises customers’ rights and protections.
The Competition Council aims to ensure the 
supremacy of competitiveness principles in the 
energy market, in line with the provisions of the 
Law on Competition (Law no. 183 of 11.07.2012), as 
well as the relevant legislation on electricity and 
natural gas.
Moldelectrica, a state-owned enterprise, performs 
the functions of a transmission system operator 
and manages the internal electricity transmission 
network, including the operation of 4 699 km of 
400 kV, 330 kV, 110 kV and 35 kV transmission lines. 
In August 2018, the government strengthened 
ownership independence through the adoption 
of Decision no. 806/2018, with the objective of 
advancing the unbundling process. In a next step, 
transmission system operators will be further 
certified by the regulator to prove compliance with 
unbundling-related requirements. 
The state-owned RED Nord10 and privately owned 
RED Union Fenosa perform the functions of 
distribution system operators (MoEI, 2017).
9 For example, project concepts for development of the power sector, refurbishment of domestic CHP plants, implementation of energy efficiency measures in the
residential sector, etc.
10 JSC RED Nord absorbed another state-owned distribution system operator, JSC RED Nord-Vest, in 2017.Biogas plant in Drochia
Photograph: Energy Efficiency Agency 3.1 Renewable energy resources and applications
The Republic of Moldova has vast technical potential for renewable 
energy. Yet, deployment has been limited so far, with the exception of 
the use of biomass in the heating sector. Indeed, although renewable 
energy has developed rapidly worldwide over the past decade and is the 
most cost-competitive solution in an increasing number of countries (see 
Box 3), this trend has not yet been observed in the Republic of Moldova. 
In 2017, the share of renewables in the Republic of Moldova’s gross final 
energy consumption was 27.8%. Biomass provides 98% of this share and 
is used mainly in the heating sector (NBS, 2018). This high contribution to 
the energy mix was identified only recently, however, by the retroactive 
revision of biomass household consumption data for 2010-2016. Efforts 
by the National Bureau of Statistics, the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) and the Energy Community Secretariat to improve 
the statistical record led to an apparent 10-fold increase in consumption 
figures, from 67 ktoe in 2009 to 678 ktoe in 2016 (UNDP and ECS, 2016). 
This revised share of renewables is well above the national target of 17% 
by 2020, which was established in 2012, based on the energy situation in 
2009. At that time, the share of renewables was 11.9%.11
Table 2 presents the evolution of renewable energy use in three sectors 
– electricity, transport, and heating and cooling – taking into account the 
revised data for 2010 - 2016.
Renewable energy 
development 
11 Based on an analysis of the Energy Community Secretariat. The national sources, e.g. the Moldovan Energy 
Efficiency Agency, indicated significantly lower share.Box 3. The business case for renewables
Renewables have grown at unprecedented 
rates over the past decade, with new records 
being set each year. An increasing number 
of countries have committed to those 
developments, too. In 2016, at least 176 countries 
had renewable energy targets (IRENA, IEA and
 REN21, 2018). 
The most spectacular changes have occurred in 
the power sector, where, since 2012, renewables 
have outpaced conventional fuels in annual new 
global capacity additions in electricity production 
(IRENA, 2018a).
By the end of 2017, the global installed capacity 
of renewables amounted to 2 179 gigawatts 
(GW), representing more than 29% of the world’s 
total power generating capacity. The bulk of this 
renewable capacity was from hydropower (53%), 
followed by wind power (23%) and solar power 
– mostly solar photovoltaics (PV), at almost 18%. 
Between 2010 and 2017, the global installed 
capacity of solar PV increased almost ten-fold 
and onshore wind almost three-fold (IRENA, 
2018a). 
Thus, the business case for renewables today 
is stronger than ever, with many technologies 
achieving spectacular cost reductions. Indeed, the 
average costs of utility-scale solar PV and onshore 
wind declined by 73% and 22%, respectively, 
between 2010 and 2017 (IRENA, 2018b).
Figure 11. Global levelised cost of electricity from utility-scale renewable power generation 
 technologies, 2010-2018
Source: IRENA (2019)
Bioenergy CSP Geothermal Hydro Oshore
wind
Onshore
wind Solar PV
2010 2018 2010 2018 2010 2018 2010 2018 2010 2018 2010 2018 2010 2018
2017 USD/kWh
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
Fossil fuel power range cost
0.070 0.069
0.330
0.202
0.050
0.071
0.055
0.082
0.132
0.166
0.050
0.040
0.355
0.088Table 2. Share of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption, by sector (%)
Source: MoEI (2018c)
Year 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Target
Electricity 6.9 4.4 4.0 1.7 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.2 10
Heating and cooling 34.4 36.1 39.0 39.9 43.6 44.5 45.5 46.1 27
Transport 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 10
Total renewable energy 21.3 22.0 24.3 24.4 26.1 26.2 26.9 27.8 17
Wind installations
Hydro installations
PV installations
CHPs on biogas
16.3 MW
31%
3.9 MW
7%
27.1 MW
51%
5.7 MW
11%
PV installations Wind installations
CHPs on biogas
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
40
30
20
10
0
Installed capacity, MW
Figure 12. Installed renewable energy capacity, 
 by source (as of March 2018)
Figure 13. Dynamics of renewable 
 energy growth
Source: MoEI (2018d) Source: MoEI (2018d)
In the power sector, the most-used renewable 
energy technology is wind, with an installed 
capacity of 27 MW, followed by CHP using biogas 
and almost 4 MW of solar PV (see Figure 12). 
The Republic of Moldova also has one, 16 MW 
hydropower plant, constructed in the late 1970s. 
The deployment of non hydro renewables had 
been growing slowly since 2012, but it accelerated 
greatly in 2016 (see Figure 13). This was due to 
investors seeking to obtain support before the new 
law on the promotion of the use of energy from 
renewable sources came into force in March 2018.Photograph: ShutterstockWind
Wind is the most abundant renewable energy 
source in the Republic of Moldova, with almost 
the entire country offering technically suitable 
locations for wind power investments (see 
Figure 14). Moreover, as identified in the 2017 
IRENA report, Cost-competitive renewable power 
generation: Potential across South East Europe, 
wind can provide up to 21 GW of power capacity, 
much of which could be deployed with the levelised 
cost of electricity (LCOE) below 90 EUR/MWh. This 
is the level up to which the potential is considered 
by the report to be cost-competitive (see Box 4)
(IRENA et al., 2017).
With 27 MW currently installed, wind is the most 
widely used renewable energy technology in the 
Moldovan power sector. This is based exclusively 
on second-hand turbines imported from European 
countries. With a new support regime (see Section 
3.2), up to 100 MW of new wind capacity is expected 
in the coming years. Further developments are also 
considered for industry self-consumption purposes.
Figure 14. Wind potential in the Republic of Moldova
Source: IRENA, Global Atlas; map data: Risø DTU (2018); base map: OpenStreetMap (2018). Available at: http://irena.masdar.ac.ae/?map=103
Disclaimer: Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any official endorsement or acceptance by IRENA.
Wind Speed at 100m - [m/s]
5.0
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6.0
6.2
6.4
6.6
6.8
7.0
Photograph: ShutterstockNote: The study covers: Contracting Parties of the Energy Community (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo*, Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia, the former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Ukraine); and member states of the European Union (Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and Slovenia). 
Note that this designation of Kosovo* is without prejudice to positions on status and in line with the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 (1999). 
Box 4. Cost-competitive solar PV and wind potential in South East Europe
IRENA’s Global Atlas is 
the largest initiative to 
assess renewable energy 
potential on a global 
scale. The platform hosts 
over 2 000 renewable 
energy maps, covering 
solar, wind, bioenergy, 
geothermal and marine 
energy, including several 
high resolution maps. 
In 2016, the tool was used 
to conduct a suitability 
analysis and to map 
investment opportunities for wind and solar PV 
in South East Europe. Six dimensions were taken 
into account to identify these areas: resource 
intensity, distance to power grids, population 
density, land cover, topography and altitude, and 
protected areas. 
The results of the assessment were presented in 
the IRENA report, Cost-competitive renewable 
power generation: Potential across South East 
Europe, launched in 2017. The report found the 
following:
• Vast technical renewable energy potential 
exists in the region, amounting to 739 GW. 
Wind energy is the most abundant resource in 
the region, with an overall technical potential 
of over 532 GW, more than four times that for 
solar PV. 
• 126.9 GW of the region’s overall renewable 
energy potential could be implemented in a 
cost-competitive way today. This is almost 
17% of the identified technical potential and 
is also 15 times higher than the 8.2 GW of 
planned total capacity additions required by 
National Renewable Energy Action Plans from 
2016 until 2020. 
• The additional cost-competitive potential 
could be even higher (above 290 GW), if lowcost capital was available. In total, by 2030, 
the additional cost-competitive potential of 
solar PV and wind will equal 620 GW. 
Bioenergy
The Republic of Moldova is known as an agricultural 
country with a significant biomass potential. Thus, 
bioenergy is the most popular renewable energy 
source in the country and remains a priority for 
the government. Almost all biomass is used in 
a traditional manner, though – as firewood and 
agricultural waste, typically consumed for heating 
purposes, especially in rural communities.
In 2010, the annual potential of solid biomass was 
assessed at 21042 terajoules, or 503 ktoe (UNDP, 
2010). This figure, sufficient to cover 18% of national 
energy needs, no longer seems to be accurate. In 
2017, the consumption of biomass totalled 733 ktoe 
(NBS, 2018). 
Pellets and briquettes – burned in highly efficient 
boilers or stoves – represent just 3% to 5% of 
biomass use, according to the Energy Efficiency 
Agency. At the same time, limited developments 
have occurred in the power sector, with less than 6 
MW of bioenergy capacity installed so far. Actions 
towards promoting the use of liquid biofuels in 
transport were also only initiated recently. Box 5. Republic of Moldova Energy and Biomass Project
Over the last decade many development 
partners supported the Moldovan authorities 
in replacing coal- and gas fired boilers, as well 
as basic stoves, with biomass heating units that 
burn straw, pellets, briquettes and firewood. 
One of the most important projects in this regard 
was the Energy and Biomass Project, financed 
by the European Commission and implemented 
by UNDP. This aimed to increase the use of 
energy from biomass sources and laid the basis 
for establishing functional markets for biomass 
technologies. Furthermore, it envisaged the 
creation of jobs and value-added chains at the 
local and regional levels through the supply of 
biomass fuel and technologies (UNDP 2018a, 
UNDP 2018b). 
With a total budget exceeding USD 28 million, 
within its first phase (2011-2014) and second phase 
(2015-2018), the project provided support for the 
installation of biomass-based heating systems 
in more than 250 buildings – mostly schools, 
kindergartens and medical facilities. Moreover, 
almost 1000 small residential boilers were installed 
thanks to subsidies for renewable energy heating. 
Overall, the installed capacity of equipment during 
this period was 41.2 megawatts-thermal.
In addition, the project resulted in: 
• Promotion of the use of bioenergy and 
increased awareness and social acceptance. 
• Vocational training for biomass boilers 
operators and foresters.
• Launch of the Biomass Energy Cluster and the 
Bioenergy Association.
• Creation of a web platform to connect biomass 
energy producers and consumers.
• Several companies assembling and 
manufacturing biomass boilers.
• Inauguration of public-private partnerships 
for the provision of bioenergy services.
• Accreditation of the first testing laboratory 
for the physical and chemical parameters of 
biofuels (see Figure 15).
Figure 15. The Solid Biofuel Laboratory at the State Agrarian University of the Republic of Moldova
Source: UNDP (2017)The deployment of biomass continues to provide 
employment opportunities as well. Existing efforts 
are oriented towards strengthening the newly 
created industry of producing solid biofuels 
(briquettes and pellets), which already ensures 
about 400 new jobs in rural areas and had an 
assessed turnover of USD 6 million to USD 8 million 
in 2017. According to the Energy Efficiency Agency, 
this market is driven by 155 MW of heat-only 
boilers that run on biomass, with 67 MW installed 
in the public sector and approximately 88 MW in 
the residential sector.
The Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure also 
aims to promote the energy crop production 
industry. This priority stems from the fact that 
consumers prefer to use wood biofuels for energy, 
instead of less efficient straw and other residues, 
even though the country’s level of forest cover is 
only about 12%. 
Solar
The Republic of Moldova has experienced 
limited development of solar PV in recent years.
Only 50-plus small projects, mostly rooftop solar, have 
been implemented during the last five years, with a 
cumulative capacity of almost 4 MW. Solar PV could 
provide up to 4.5 GW of capacity, however, more than 
20% of which (1 GW) was considered already costcompetitive in 2016. This meant that it had an LCOE 
below 90 EUR/MWh, if attractive financial conditions 
were provided.12 The other 80% would become costcompetitive by 2030 (IRENA et al., 2017).
The public sector remains the leader in using solar 
energy for hot water production. Through the 
Energy and Biomass Project (see Box 5), 30 public 
institutions benefited from the installation of solar 
water heaters, with these complementing existing 
biomass boilers. Another 15 projects in the public 
sector were financially supported by the Energy 
Efficiency Fund. 
Installing solar water heaters, especially in public 
institutions with high hot water demand, such as 
hospitals and kindergartens, proved to provide 
cost savings; thus, the public sector plays an 
exemplary role in promoting wider exploitation of 
solar heating potential.
12 Weighted average cost of capital (WACC) = 8%
Figure 16. Global horizontal irradiation in the Republic of Moldova
Source: IRENA, Global Atlas; map data: World Bank S map (2018); base map: OpenStreetMap (2018). Available at: http://irena.masdar.ac.ae/?map=3103.
Disclaimer: Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any official endorsement or acceptance by IRENA.
Long-term average
GHI kWh/m2
1225
1250
1275
1300
1325
1350
1375
1400Hydropower
Despite its large number of rivers, the Republic of 
Moldova has only one reservoir hydropower facility, 
a 16 MW plant located in Costesti on the Prut River, 
the second most important river in the country. In 
addition, 254 kilowatts (kW) of small hydropower 
installations are in operation (ANRE, 2017). 
The best areas for development are located in the 
Dniester, Prut and Danube river basins, with the 
country’s total potential estimated at 3.36 terawatthours per year (Ceban, 2015). As envisaged by the 
Energy Strategy 2020, some mini-hydro stations, 
totalling 1.2 MW in capacity, were planned for the 
Raut River, close to the village of Tribujeni in the 
Orhei district (UNECE, 2009).
Geothermal
The geothermal energy resource potential of the 
Republic of Moldova has been poorly investigated, 
with no comprehensive quantified estimate existing. 
Nevertheless, the country has significant availability 
of low enthalpy geothermal potential, especially 
in the southern part of the country, which could 
be widely used by heat pumps. The government’s 
focus on this technology is limited, with no actions 
envisaged in the National Action Plan for Renewable 
Energy. The Energy Efficiency Agency, however, has 
identified four operational geothermal installations, 
with a total installed capacity of 142 kW (EEA, 2016).
3.2. Renewable energy support 
mechanisms in the power sector
Until March 2018, power generation from renewable 
sources was supported by the Renewable Energy 
Law of 2007 (No. 160-XVI of 12.07.2007). The law 
envisaged the cost-plus principle.13 Under this, ANRE 
issued a tariff for 15 years – based on the actual eligible 
costs incurred – only after the investments had been 
made. In addition, the regulator had the right to adjust 
the tariff to regional benchmarks, if they were lower. 
This approach was not sufficient to attract investments 
in the sector and was therefore revised. 
The Law on the Promotion of the use of Energy from 
Renewable Sources (Law No. 10 of 26.02.2016), 
came into effect in March 2018 in the form of a 
tariff-based scheme and net metering. The law also 
provided the necessary guarantees for investments, 
including: non-discriminatory grid connection; 
priority dispatch; and an obligation for the central 
electricity supplier to purchase all-renewablegenerated electricity for 15 years. In addition, the 
new market-based scheme promotes competition 
among investors, as it envisages auctions for projects 
above 4 MW in the case of wind and 1 MW for other 
technologies. At the same time, the law supports the 
development of small-scale, community-promoted 
renewable energy projects. 
Figure 17 represents the support mechanisms 
under the 2016 law.
13 Tariffs are calculated based on project costs plus a relevant return. 
Figure 17. Graphic representation of the support mechanisms in the Republic of Moldova
Source: MoEI (2018a)
200 kW
Installed Capacity
NET metering
0 kW
10 kW
1 MW / 4 MW (wind)
Capacity limit
Feed-in tari Auctions14 It also sets out a methodology for determining ceiling prices for auctions.
Net metering and community-based projects
Net metering has been introduced to encourage 
project owners who cover their own electricity 
consumption with small, renewable-based 
generation units of up to 200 kW capacity. Any 
excess, calculated in a one-year accounting period, 
can be sold on at the average wholesale market 
price.
In addition, the Ministry of Economy and 
Infrastructure and the Energy Efficiency Agency are 
extensively promoting the concept of renewable 
energy projects driven by local communities, in 
order to increase the use of distributed generation. 
Despite ongoing efforts to promote the concept 
of community self-sufficiency, mainly by sharing 
European best practices, the country has not yet 
experienced any such developments. 
Feed-in tariffs
Administratively set feed-in tariffs for small 
installations (those with capacities below 4 MW in 
the case of wind and 1 MW for other technologies) 
will be issued by ANRE using a first come first 
served principle. In 2017, ANRE approved a 
methodology (Decision No. 375 of 28.09.2017) for 
determining those tariffs but some of its elements 
are subject to revision.14 The total capacity of those 
projects benefitting from feed-in tariffs is assumed 
to be 55 MW. 
Auctions (competitively set tariffs) 
The introduction of capacity auctions, tentatively 
scheduled for 2019, is considered the most important 
change in the renewable energy sector. 
As presented in Table 3, the government aims to 
organise technology-specific tenders for a total 
capacity of 113 MW, which will guarantee fixed tariffs 
for 15 years. The scheme has been designed in line 
with the EU Guidelines on state aid for environmental 
protection and energy for 2014-2020, which are 
mandatory for the Contracting Parties of the 
Energy Community. In addition, IRENA, the Energy 
Community Secretariat and the European Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) have 
jointly developed Guidelines for Contracting Parties 
of the Energy Community, which provide insights in 
this regard (see Box 6).
Table 3. RE capacity quotas under the new supporting scheme
# Type of technology
Quotas (MW) Threshold 
for small 
Classic installations
feed-in tariff Auctions
1 Wind 20 80 4
2 Solar PV 15 25 1
3 Biogas installations 12 8 1
4 CHP installations (on solid biomass) 5 – 1
5 Small hydro 3 – 1
TOTAL 55 113 –
Source: Based on Government Decision no. 689 of 11.07.2018Box 6. Policy Guidelines on Competitive Selection and Support for Renewable Energy 
In March 2018, the Policy 
Guidelines on Competitive 
Selection and Support 
for Renewable Energy 
were prepared jointly by 
the EBRD and the Energy 
Community Secretariat, in 
collaboration with IRENA 
(ERBD et al., 2018). 
Intended for countries of 
the Energy Community 
Treaty that are also EBRD 
countries of operation, these Guidelines build 
on IRENA’s Renewable Energy Auctions: A Guide 
to Design (IRENA and CEM, 2015). They provide 
recommendations for governments in four 
areas of auction design: the competitive process 
framework; procurement choices; selection 
process choices; and the delivery mechanism for 
renewable energy support. 
Guidelines are already being used in the policy 
work of the EBRD and the Energy Community 
Secretariat. In Albania and the former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia, EBRD is using the 
guidelines to assist local authorities. In Ukraine, 
the guidelines are informing discussions on the 
policy framework for supporting renewables. 
In the Republic of Moldova, EBRD has recently 
initiated its efforts to support the country in 
designing renewable energy auctions for onshore 
wind and solar PV, including preparation of the 
required tender documentation. 
Figure 18. Key steps in a tenders’ development
Source: Based on Government Decision no. 690 of 11.07.2018
Establishing of 
the capacity 
limits and 
maximum 
capacity quotas 
/Status - DONE, 
Responsible 
entity - MoEI, 
Government/
Elaboration of 
tendering 
documentation
/Status - IN 
PROCESS, 
Responsible 
entity - MoEI/
Launching of the 
tendering 
procedure
/Status - IN 
PREPARATION, 
Expected 
timeframe - 
mid. 2019 /
Submission of 
the oers and 
their 
qualification
Oers
evaluation
and awarding 
Signing of the 
contract 
15 As of December 2018.
The recently approved regulation on tendering 
(Government Decision No. 690 of 11.07.2018) 
provides an initial framework for organising auctions 
that grant “eligible producer” status on large 
investors. This is done through the establishment 
of unequivocal, objective, transparent and nondiscriminatory procedures, conditions and criteria. 
Under the new regulation, development of 
the renewable energy auctions will be carried 
out in compliance with the steps presented in
Figure 18. Additional tendering documentation and 
an auctions calendar are yet to be prepared by the 
national authorities.15
Auctions will be carried out by the Tendering 
Commission, which comprises representatives of: 
the Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure, the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Regional Development and 
Environment, the Agency of Land Relations and 
Cadastre, the Energy Efficiency Agency, and the 
Public Property Agency. Any bid that meets the pre16 Manufactured no more than 48 months before the start-up of the power plant.
qualification criteria presented in Figure 19, including 
bids put forward by foreign developers, is eligible 
to participate in the auctions. The criteria include 
issues related to land, financial credibility, technical 
credibility and connection to the grid. They have 
been established to ensure that only those with a 
genuine intention to implement the project are 
admitted to the procedure. 
The selection procedure is to be held based on the 
lowest price criterion, provided that:
• This is below the ceiling price to be determined 
by ANRE.
• The proposed capacity is within the quota for 
each technology set out by the government (see 
Table 3).
• New equipment is to be used.16
Moreover, potential investors are obliged to submit 
the proposal’s guarantee together with the offer. 
This is specified in the tender documentation as a 
fixed amount per 1 kW of specific technology, equal 
to 0.2% of the capital investment cost used by ANRE 
in the methodology used to set the ceiling price. The 
proposal’s guarantee shall be provided in the form of 
a guarantee letter provided by a financial institution. 
An additional guarantee needs to be submitted 
to the Tendering Commission within 30 days by 
the winner of a tender to ensure delivery of the 
commissioned electricity. Such a guarantee, at a 
fixed amount per kW, is not to exceed 2% of the 
value of the capital investment cost used by ANRE 
in the methodology used to set the ceiling price. 
Once selected and granted with the status of eligible 
producer, an investor will have 36 months to finalise 
its power plant. 
The key development steps for renewable energy 
projects/business in the Republic of Moldova are 
specified in Annex. Key development steps for 
renewable energy projects 
In addition to the pre-qualification criteria, renewable 
energy investors must be aware that the total 
capacity of all the projects developed by an investor 
using the same technology will also be taken into 
account while issuing feed-in tariffs. If the total 
capacity exceeds the capacity threshold provided in 
Table 3, participation in a tender will be required in 
order to benefit from the support scheme. Similarly, 
in the case of increasing the capacity of an existing 
power plant, its cumulative capacity will be taken 
into account. Those rules also refer to an investor’s 
spouse, relatives and affiliated persons (up to the 
second degree).
Figure 19. Pre-qualification criteria
Source: Based on Government Decision no. 690 of 11.07.2018
Pre-qualification
criteria
Financial credibility
• Proved financial viability (equity, credits, guarantees)
• Business plan
• Project financing plan
Connection to grid
• Connection notice from the relevant TSO
Technical credibility
• Compliance with technical requirements
• Feasibility study
• Proof of purchase/purchase intention of the equipment
Eligibility of location
• Ownership/right to use the land
• Proof of land designation change, if necessary3.3. Financing of renewable energy
Most of the renewable energy projects in the 
Republic of Moldova were financed by multilateral 
development banks or bilateral development 
agencies, or were self-financed by the private 
sector. Examples of the first source of funding 
include the EBRD, the European Investment Bank 
(EIB), and the World Bank Group, while examples 
of the second include the Swedish International 
Development Cooperation Agency and the 
Japanese International Cooperation Agency 
(JICA). Private sector funding was used mainly in 
the case of biogas and solar.
While some of these partners provided grants for 
the financial products developed in collaboration 
with local commercial banks, others set up credit 
lines to support both renewables and energy 
efficiency. For example, the EBRD’s financing tools, 
implemented together with BCR Chisinau, Moldova 
Agroindbank, Moldindconbank, ProCredit Bank 
and MobiasBanca, include: 
• MoSEEFF – the Moldova Sustainable Energy 
Efficiency Financing Facility. With a total 
budget of EUR 42 million, this aimed to support 
the use of renewables by local enterprises. 
Solar was one of the focus areas, and a diverse 
range of projects was implemented through 
the programme, from a 100 kW rooftop power 
plant installed on an agriculture warehouse, to a 
500 kW solar PV farm installed on the grounds 
of a carpet manufacturer.
• MoREEFF – the Moldova Residential Energy 
Efficiency Financing Facility. This had a total 
budget of EUR 35 million and targeted the 
residential sector during the period 2012-2017.
In addition, the Republic of Moldova is one of the 
beneficiaries of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) 
EBRD Sustainable Energy Financing Facilities 
programme. This is set to direct USD 1.4 billion to 
financing facilities with local financial institutions 
in Armenia, Egypt, Georgia, Jordan, the Republic 
of Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Serbia, Tajikistan 
Planting the energy willow, Orhei Professional School, Orhei
Photograph: UNDP Moldovaand Tunisia, in order to support renewable energy, 
energy efficiency projects and climate adaption 
measures (GCF, 2017).
Meanwhile, the local financial sector still does not 
offer adequate financing options for renewables, 
with the exception of a few banks with foreign 
capital that have dedicated financial products for 
renewable energy projects.17 The limited number 
of financial institutions open to this field results 
from the unavailability of low-cost capital and the 
high-risk perception of such projects. The lack of 
understanding of renewable energy technologies 
leads to the broad perception of renewables as 
being very innovative and prone to failure, which 
has led to high interest rates from capital providers.
The continuous involvement of international 
players, however, is expected to advance the 
uptake of renewable energy sources and to ensure 
that all investors, including small ones, that are 
interested in the new support mechanisms will 
be in a position to prove their financial credibility. 
Already, Moldelectrica has issued more than 30 
connection permits with a cumulative capacity 
of about 1 000 MW for new renewable energy 
projects.
Yet, the preparatory costs related to the prefeasibility stage and permitting, amongst other 
factors, are considered to be at a level that can 
limit the appetite of investors for the Republic 
of Moldova. Thus, given the condition of the 
local financial sector, only larger companies have 
sufficient financial resources to initiate project 
development. Small and medium sized enterprises 
with scarce finances are exposed to a high risk 
of failure in the completion of a project. Some 
support is provided by the Energy Efficiency Fund 
and international financial institutions, but this is 
often insufficient to increase the participation of 
those entities in the renewable energy market.
17 Procredit, Mobiasbanca.Wind turbine and transmission lines
Photograph: ShutterstockOver the past few years, the Republic of Moldova has stepped up 
efforts towards developing renewable energy sources. The decadelong activities to develop the solid biofuel sector, as well as the recent 
adoption of the new support schemes for renewable electricity, have 
contributed greatly to the rising interest of the business community. 
Additional efforts are necessary, however, to cement the foundations 
of the sector. The sections below outline the main challenges 
hindering more accelerated deployment of renewable energy and the 
corresponding recommended actions to address them. These have 
been identified via a multi-stakeholder consultative process along 
with the RRA implementation, described in detail in Chapter 1.
4.1 Long-term planning
The Republic of Moldova is poorly endowed with conventional 
energy resources and thus highly dependent on imported energy. 
Only around 25% of primary energy consumption is supplied through 
indigenous resources, with more than 98% of this biomass, used 
mostly for heating in rural areas. 
As identified in the IRENA report, Cost-competitive Renewable Power 
Generation: Potential across South East Europe (IRENA et al., 2017), 
the country has abundant renewable energy sources. With more than 
27 GW of technically suitable potential, those resources could be 
widely deployed to help achieve two key objectives of the Energy 
Strategy by 2030: to ensure the security of energy supply; and the 
sustainability of the energy sector.
With the costs of renewables falling rapidly over the past decade, 
these technologies offer cost-competitive energy supply solutions 
in an increasing number of countries, worldwide. The trend is set to 
grow, too, as technological innovation continues to drive the next 
generation of cost declines. 
Current efforts to raise renewable power capacity beyond the 2020 
target also confirm the government’s recognition of the importance of 
the ongoing energy transition, in enabling the country to improve its 
energy security. Additional policy and regulatory actions are required 
to solidify the role that renewable energy could play in addressing the 
key energy challenges in the country. In this context, the following 
recommended actions can be considered:
Challenges and 
recommendations• Adopt a renewable energy target for 2030
Since the renewable energy target of 17% by 
2020 has already been overachieved, it neither 
provides long-term predictability, nor reflects the 
country’s vision of energy sector development. 
The fact that the current share of renewables 
(27.8%) was reached mainly through the revision 
of biomass consumption data adds another 
level of uncertainty. Although the announced 
development of 168 MW of renewables capacity 
in the coming years has captured the interest of 
several investors, this could be considered a oneoff boost to the market, rather than an element 
of a solid strategy. 
Therefore, the ongoing activities undertaken 
by the Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure, 
as well as the discussions within the Energy 
Community, are undertaken with a view towards 
agreeing on a new renewable energy target 
for 2030. IRENA’s recently initiated regional 
REmap analysis for the countries of Central and 
Southeast Europe, including the Republic of 
Moldova, would contribute to these efforts and 
help identify cost-effective technology options 
for the deployment of renewables in the power 
and end-use sectors. The future long-term 
framework for renewables could also emphasise 
the important role that distributed generation 
across the country can play in consolidating the 
national power system. 
• Conduct a production cost modelling study
Renewables are becoming an increasingly costcompetitive source of energy in the Republic of 
Moldova and are poised to play a greater role in 
the national power system. 
From a technical perspective, some research 
studies indicate that the system could absorb 
around 1 GW of renewables – a level almost 
equal to the maximum load, which reaches 
1 100 MW (Gropa, 2017). The increased use 
of solar PV and wind technologies, however, 
would present a new challenge, as the country 
completely relies on Ukraine for balancing its 
generation. Thus, the country should carry out 
a production cost modelling study to determine 
any potential operational constraints that could 
result in the unavailability of sufficient power to 
meet demand. 
This study, including economic dispatch, 
would allow investigation of multiple scenarios 
for the generation mix, including those with 
higher shares of renewables, as well as any 
other policies and sensitivities. The modelling 
normally covers one year – with a higher 
time resolution to provide more insights on 
operational cost impacts – and aims to ensure 
that the system load is supplied entirely and 
most economically. The analysis would also 
address the issue of ancillary services and 
balancing, which are becoming increasingly 
important with the deployment of intermittent 
renewables and the increasing availability of 
distributed generation. 
The results could help build confidence among 
policy makers, system operators and investors, 
as well as identify the most cost-effective 
option for balancing the system. The study 
should consider the ongoing efforts to ensure 
interconnection and asynchronous operation 
with Romania, expected within the next 
four to five years, as well as the plans of the 
governments of the Republic of Moldova and 
Ukraine to ensure synchronous operation with 
ENTSO-E, in the long run.
To support countries in assessments of power 
system flexibility, IRENA and the VTT Technical 
Research Centre of Finland Ltd. have developed 
the FlexTool. This analyses not only the 
traditional concept of flexibility (concerning, 
for example, flexible thermal and hydropower 
generation with high ramping capability 
and very low start-up time), but also other 
innovative technologies that enrich the concept 
of flexibility. These include flexible demand, 
energy storage and sector coupling. The 
FlexTool is capable both of analysing system 
operations using a time step that represents 
real-world challenges (an hour or less in the 
case of VRE variability) and of carrying out longterm analyses and proposing possible flexibility 
solutions in a hypothetical future system with 
high VRE penetration (IRENA, 2018c).4.2 Regulatory environment for 
renewable power investments
Until March 2018, the development of renewable 
energy capacity in the power sector was supported 
by tariffs issued by ANRE. These were calculated 
for each individual project, after the investment was 
done, based on the actual eligible costs incurred. This 
lack of revenue predictability before the completion 
of a project, combined with the administrative and 
bureaucratic challenges reported by stakeholders, 
failed to ensure an attractive environment for 
significant uptake of renewables, over the last decade. 
Only 52 MW of renewable capacity had been installed 
by March 2018.
While the methodology developed by ANRE intended 
to ensure that investment costs are recovered 
through a tariff provided for 15 years, investors have 
questioned some of its assumptions. For instance, 
while the regulator assumed a capacity factor of 
0.25 for wind, which is relevant for new turbines, 
almost all units imported by local owners could reach 
capacity factors of only 0.17—0.18. In consequence, 
discrepancies in cash flow projections between 
investors and ANRE led to dissatisfaction with the 
issued tariffs. Moreover, as raised by the business 
community, exclusion of some expenditures was not 
clearly justified. 
With the recent introduction of the new support 
regime, ANRE will be responsible for setting feed-in 
tariffs for small-sized projects, up to 4 MW for wind 
and 1 MW for other renewable energy sources. In this 
context, the authorities can consider the following 
recommendations: 
• Strengthen the enabling regulatory framework
The Law on the Promotion of the use of Energy from 
Renewable Sources (Law No. 10 of 26.02.2016) has 
been in force since March 2018, although additional 
pieces of legislation are still under preparation to 
ensure smooth implementation of the support 
schemes. Clarity on all requirements and 
procedures to be followed needs to be ensured 
well in advance for both project developers and 
financial institutions. Successful efforts in this regard 
will guarantee confidence in the government as a 
reliable partner in the development of renewable 
energy projects and will maintain the interest 
of the investor community. In this context, the 
government is expected to:
1. Adopt essential secondary legislation,18 
including: on standard documentation 
for the tendering procedure; on eligible 
producer status confirmation (for small 
renewable electricity producers); and on grid 
connection, including provisions referring to 
the integration of renewables.
2. Implement the methodology used to calculate 
feed-in-tariffs and ceiling prices for tenders in 
a transparent manner. All key elements of the 
methodology should be made public, including 
investment cost per MW/technology, capacity 
factors, and operation and maintenance costs. 
3. Ensure that all the elements of auction design, 
including standard documentation, are in line 
with the EU’s 2014 Guidelines on State Aid for 
Environmental Protection and Energy and with 
international practices. A joint Policy Guidelines 
on Competitive Selection and Support for 
Renewable Energy, prepared by the Energy 
Community Secretariat and the EBRD, in 
collaboration with IRENA, provides insights in 
this regard (EBRD et al., 2018). Among other 
aspects, issues need to be addressed in relation 
to: the technical and human capacity of a 
committee responsible for the administration of 
auctions; and the establishment of an effective 
dispute resolutions centre.
4. Facilitate the introduction of the net 
metering scheme for distributed renewable 
energy generation. Despite the legislative 
framework in place, the mechanism is not 
widely used, due to the lack of clear rules for 
distribution system operators, insufficient 
understanding of the mechanism among 
local commercial banks, and the structure of 
subsidised electricity prices.
18 As of December 2018. In addition, the recently approved regulation on tendering (Government Decision no. 690 of 11.07.2018) provides an initial framework for organising
auctions that grants an “eligible producer” status to large investors through the establishment of unequivocal, objective, transparent and non-discriminatory procedures, 
conditions and criteria.• Streamline administrative procedures and 
facilitate their enforcement
The lack of effective co-ordination among 
different actors hinders the deployment of 
renewable energy in the country. As a result, the 
private sector highlights some procedures as 
too costly and lengthy, or even catalogues them 
as an administrative burden. To ensure better 
harmonisation, the Ministry of Economy and 
Infrastructure is advised to initiate a dialogue 
with the Ministry of Agriculture, Regional 
Development and Environment, the Ministry of 
Finance, and Moldelectrica to clarify and simplify 
such procedures. This effort could be part of the 
forthcoming revision of the National Renewable 
Energy Action Plan and the development of an 
integrated National Energy and Climate Plan, 
and may include the following aspects:
1. Land use designation
The national Land Code (Law No. 828-XII of 
25.12.1991) envisages the use for agriculture 
purposes only of sites/land parcels with a Soil 
Potential Index exceeding 60 points.19 As a 
consequence, most of the areas with abundant 
wind resources might not be available for the 
construction of renewable energy power plants, 
due to their status as agricultural land, despite 
the vast economic feasibility associated with the 
renewable energy business in such areas. Even 
with the presence of wind farms, however, land 
can fulfil other functions, such as agriculture: 
only some 10% of such land is occupied by wind 
power equipment, while the remaining 90% is 
available for grazing or cultivation. Moreover, 
a power plant could generate additional 
income for land owners and taxes for local 
municipalities.
2. Environmental impact assessment
The perception of stakeholders in the sector 
is that current procedures, in particular 
assessments of the social and environmental 
impacts of a new power plant, are too lengthy. 
The relevant national authorities are not seen 
as having sufficient capacity to issue permits 
in a timely manner. Therefore, strengthening 
capacity and optimising internal procedures, 
with the support of external technical 
assistance, if necessary, could ensure that the 
legally set time frame and other requirements 
are respected. In particular, efforts should be 
focused on the practical implementation of the 
provisions of the EU’s Directive 2014/52/ EU 
on the Assessment of the Effects of Certain 
Public and Private Projects on the Environment, 
adopted by the Republic of Moldova in October 
2017, including the arrangements for early and 
effective opportunities for public participation 
(EnC, 2018). 
3. Taxation
Incentives of a customs and fiscal nature 
are envisaged in the legislation,20 to ensure 
additional support to wind and solar PV 
investments. These incentives include reduced 
customs fees at import, exemption from valueadded tax on installation work and other inputs 
for renewable energy projects. Yet, some of the 
relevant provisions are considered unclear by 
both the investor community and the authorities 
responsible for implementation. In particular, 
specific technologies and sizes of projects are 
not treated in a coherent way. For example, 
a project with only one wind turbine does 
not correspond to the “wind park” definition, 
according to the interpretation of the Moldovan 
Fiscal Service. Thus, a univocal understanding 
of those provisions has to be ensured, either 
by amendment of the legislation, or by 
elaboration of a fiscal practice to be followed 
by the national fiscal authorities. Furthermore, 
any future changes in tax legislation should be 
introduced with a sufficient vacatio legis21 to 
enable adaptation of the business models used 
by investments already under development.
19 The Soil Potential Index, or SPI, is a calculation which rates soil on a scale of 0-100 points based on its capability to produce crops. For example, a rating of 10 would indicate 
a soil poorly suited to growing crops, while a rating of 95 would mean top quality soil with virtually no impediment to crop production.
20 Law No 172 of 25.07.2014 on the Approval of the Combined Nomenclature of Goods and The Fiscal Code of the Republic of Moldova, No. 1163 of 24.04.1997.
21 Latin, meaning “absence of law”. Refers to the period of time between a law’s promulgation and it taking effect.4. Grid connection permits
Approximately 1 GW of renewable energy projects, 
mostly wind, have received grid connection 
permits in the last few years, with the transmission 
system operator now refusing to issue such 
permits to additional investors, due to concerns 
about grid stability. In fact, however, only projects 
awarded in the upcoming auctions are likely to be 
implemented. As a result, an increased volume of 
issued permits, even exceeding 1 GW, would not 
necessarily affect stability of the grid. As a permit 
is required to take part in forthcoming renewable 
energy auctions, the approach of Moldelectrica 
appears to be to limit future competition to 
the investors already present in the Republic of 
Moldova. The credibility and the outcome of the 
auctions could therefore be severely undermined 
and, thus, a solution should be found to enable 
the issuance of grid connection permits to new 
potential renewables investors. 
4.3 Bioenergy
The Republic of Moldova is an agricultural country 
with significant biomass potential, with bioenergy 
contributing greatly to the achievement of the 
current 27.8% share of renewables in gross final 
energy consumption. Almost all biomass is firewood 
and agricultural waste, used in a traditional 
manner. When combined with the widespread use 
of inefficient technologies and the illegal cutting 
of firewood, this constitutes a challenge for policy 
makers, as the level of forest cover is very low, at 
only about 12%. 
At the same time, national stakeholders increasingly 
recognise that marginal and depleted lands 
represent a potential for energy crop plantations. 
A comprehensive assessment of total bioenergy 
potential, including that related to energy crops, 
has not been developed. The only estimation 
provided so far has identified limited energy 
potential from agricultural residues.
Over the last decade, the country has intensified 
its efforts to develop a bioenergy sector and 
market, with a focus on solid biofuels. With the 
assistance of development partners, many coaland gas fired boilers, as well as inefficient stoves, 
have been replaced by biomass heating units 
burning straw, pellets, briquettes and firewood. 
Nevertheless, the sector requires further effort to 
ensure co-ordination and allocation of resources, 
in order to develop a proper market that would 
facilitate communication between suppliers of 
raw material and producers of fuels. The currently 
existing trade and information portals created 
within the framework of the UNDP Energy and 
Biomass project have not been sufficient to 
establish an effective market with stable demand 
and supply sources. A comprehensive approach to 
the bioenergy sector, including biofuels, has never 
been developed. In this context, several key steps 
are recommended: 
• Develop a strategy for the bioenergy sector
With limited availability of wooden biomass, 
the country needs to manage the sector in a 
sustainable manner. A deep and comprehensive 
inventory of all forest areas, as well as marginal 
and depleted lands, could be established to 
ensure an accurate estimation of the biomass 
potential that could constitute a basis for a 
country-wide programme for the use of solid 
biofuels. 
In particular, the potential for the cultivation of 
energy crops can be further considered. With 
an estimated 38 000 hectares available for 
growing both woody and herbaceous biomass, 
the Republic of Moldova could develop the 
local raw material industry in a short period of 
time. The strategy, however, would need to be 
based on a detailed analysis, determining the 
most promising energy crops, the most feasible 
locations within the country, and the types of 
soil where the crops have the highest yields. 
In addition, the strategy could address many 
of the challenges that the energy crop sector 
currently faces, including land conversion 
issues, land suitability and the availability 
of financial support. In this context, the 
government could analyse the opportunity to 
revise the relevant legislation with the objective 
of increasing the role of local public authorities 
in promoting the bioenergy sector, including 
energy crops. As the owners of a vast amount of land, those authorities could strengthen their 
commitment to developing the local industry 
and would benefit from locally harvested, 
cost-competitive heating resources; public 
institutions in more than 250 communities in 
the country use biomass boilers for heating 
purposes. More common use of public-private 
partnerships and inter-municipal co-operation 
would also facilitate development of this sector.
Finally, the programme should build on a 
comprehensive assessment, providing clarity on 
the most suitable technology for each potential 
group of beneficiaries. As raised by stakeholders, 
due to a large diversity of raw material, as well 
as different consumption profiles, there is a lack 
of understanding of the available options. Some 
failures to match beneficiary and technology 
have turned out to be costly in the past. Thus, the 
analysis should consider: all types of properties; 
different groups of beneficiaries; several 
technologies, such as organic Rankine cycle 
(ORC), pyrolysis, Stirling, and steam mini turbines; 
and different consumer profiles. This exercise 
will help determine different business models 
for using biomass as a sustainable alternative – 
including in district heating – and provide clear 
recommendations for implementation, based if 
possible, on successful pilots. 
• Encourage the use of and further develop the 
online platform for biomass trade
A major challenge for the sector is the lack of 
proper communication and exchange among 
actors in the biomass market, even though a 
dedicated online platform was recently launched. 
The limited use of this tool causes considerable 
disruption to the value chain, as suppliers of 
raw material and producers of fuel struggle to 
find effective communication channels – and as 
final beneficiaries face problems in identifying 
reliable sources of biomass fuel. The country is 
advised to actively promote the platform and 
to encourage potential users to increase trade 
in all types of biomass, taking into account 
factors such as price, quality, region of origin 
and transport. With the expected development 
of the energy crop industry, widespread use of 
such a tool is even more necessary. 
The online platform could also facilitate 
the market operation and entry of new fuel 
suppliers, including producers of agriculture 
residues and local public authorities, as 
well as enhance fuel price competition and 
supply liquidity. In addition, this platform can 
offer a source of information on the benefits 
stemming from the use of bioenergy and be 
a repository of available opportunities for 
local consumers to switch to this source of 
energy. This type of bridge between biomass 
producers and potential customers would 
contribute to more stable and increasing 
demand. Furthermore, the platform could be 
further developed based on best practices in 
biomass exchange platforms, including the 
experience of Lithuania in the development of 
the Baltpool biomass exchange (Energypost, 
2017).
• Identify an optimal pathway to increase the 
role of biofuels
The country has committed to reach a 10% 
share of renewables in the transport sector by 
2020, but no actions have been taken so far to 
promote the use of liquid biofuels. At present, 
the widespread perception that the country 
lacks suitable areas to grow sugar cane and 
rapeseed continues to hinder development in 
this area. In addition, with no infrastructure in 
place to cultivate such crops, adaptation costs 
for the existing infrastructure would decrease 
the competitiveness of locally produced liquid 
biofuels against imports, opponents say. 
There is, however, a clear understanding of 
the need to find an adequate approach to 
ensure more sustainable use of energy sources 
in this sector. An assessment is therefore 
recommended, in order to identify an optimal 
pathway towards the use of biofuels in transport. 
The options currently under discussion include: 
full reliance on domestic production; import of 
bioethanol and biodiesel; or a combination of 
the two options, in light of the local production 
potential and price affordability. The results 
of the assessment could provide a clearer 
indication of the potential way forward for the 
biofuels sector. 4.4 Financing of renewables 
Most of the existing renewable energy power plants in 
the Republic of Moldova were supported by financing 
lines and programmes launched by development 
partners. This is because local commercial banks are 
cautious about investing in this sector, due to their 
high-risk perception of renewable energy projects, 
partly owing to their limited understanding of the 
technology. 
In addition, the country’s financial and banking 
sector is comparatively small, with limited resources. 
Frequent problems in the financing sector, evidenced 
by the collapse of three large banks, have affected 
the banking sector’s activities in general. Hence, 
scaling up renewable energy investment under the 
new policy support environment may be challenging, 
as the financial sector may have difficulty in providing 
funding for the investments needed to achieve a total 
capacity addition of 168 MW. 
Cost of capital is critical for the financial viability 
of projects, yet, local commercial banks’ products 
may not match the specific requirements of capitalintensive renewables projects, even though these 
banks are becoming highly interested in this sector. 
The loans offered tend to be short term and at a high 
interest rate. Further strengthening of the related 
regulatory framework, particularly in those areas 
that strongly affect the bankability of renewable 
energy projects, would increase financial institutions’ 
confidence in the market. 
• Improve the bankability of renewable energy 
projects
Under the project financing scheme, renewable 
energy projects are considered bankable only 
when lenders are confident that the expected 
revenue stream of the project can ensure the 
repayment of the loan, as per the terms of the 
lending agreement. Despite recent efforts by 
the government, the current framework is not 
perceived as sufficient, as it seems to expose 
potential investors to several risks. Therefore, 
additional actions are required to improve 
the bankability of renewable energy projects, 
including: 
1. Enhancement of the templates of the key 
project documentation, including the power 
purchase agreement (PPA), to provide the 
guarantees and predictability necessary to 
the stakeholders involved. This would include, 
among others, the following essential elements: 
an obligation to offtake renewable electricity; 
balancing obligations and costs; liability for noncompliance; payment security instruments; the 
transfer of obligations to a new central supplier; 
liability for unplanned disconnection from the 
grid; arbitration clauses; and a stated duration 
for the agreement.
2. Procedure for transparent assignment of the 
central electricity supplier, as the mandate of 
the current one is due to expire on 1 January 
2021. In case of a change of the central supplier, 
a smooth transition needs to be ensured 
allowing the transfer of all obligations to the 
new entity without impeding existing PPAs. A 
change of the off-taker increases the actual and 
perceived risks faced by potential investors.
3. Design a procedure for the transfer of all 
existing renewable energy producers to 
the support system, with this based on a 
contract for difference, which is envisaged to 
be implemented when the electricity market 
(day-ahead and intra-day markets) is declared 
liquid by the regulator.
• Enhance the capacity of local banks to facilitate 
the financing of renewable energy projects
While large-scale renewable power plants can 
access the necessary financial resources from 
abroad – through the contributions of either 
foreign investors or international financial 
institutions – small-scale projects are limited to 
funding opportunities from the local financial 
market. The total cost of planned small-scale 
renewable energy projects to be supported 
through the feed-in tariff (for a total of 55 MW) 
has been assessed to amount to approximately 
EUR 50 million. Additional capacity could also 
be introduced through net metering projects 
of up to 200 kW. The availability of financing 
for such projects, however, may be obstructed by the limited knowledge of the renewable 
energy sector and poor understanding of the 
support mechanisms among local lenders who 
appraise projects. Thus, technical support in, for 
example, developing bankable project proposals 
and in structured finance principles, including 
project finance, can increase the capacities of 
local commercial banks. This support could be 
facilitated by international financial institutions 
that are well placed to provide such technical 
assistance. In addition, aside from long-tenor 
concessional loans provided at below commercial 
rates to local financiers, international financial 
institutions, such as development finance 
institutions (DFIs), can utilise hybrid, on-lending 
and syndication structures to facilitate a more 
active involvement from local investors. Such 
structures include:
1. Mezzanine finance, whereby a DFI’s claim is 
subordinated to senior debt (provided by the 
local financier), but still senior to equity claims 
on project cashflows.
2. On-lending structures, whereby DFIs can use 
their high credit rating to borrow internationally 
at low rates and then on-lend the funds to 
local financiers via credit lines, at lower rates 
than such financiers would otherwise face.
3. Syndications (or co-financing) with local 
financiers to help spread the risks and 
returns. This would also spread knowledge of 
renewable energy financial structuring among 
a wider group of capital providers. DFIs should 
be careful not to displace (i.e., crowd out) the 
local private sector, or distort the market, but 
to instead act to crowd-in local investors and 
hence kick-start the local market. 
Finally, public capital, including that provided 
by the DFIs, could be used to help de-risk or 
lower the risk of renewable energy projects. This 
would lower the cost of capital for renewables, 
via the provision of risk mitigation instruments. 
Such instruments could include: partial risk 
guarantees for uncertain grid access; credit 
guarantees to lower the power off-taker nonpayment risk; liquidity facilities to bridge shortterm cash flow problems; and currency hedging 
instruments, to name but a few.
4.5 Public awareness 
Due to technological developments and rapidly falling 
costs, renewables are a viable energy choice for a 
growing number of countries, cities, companies and 
households. The deployment of renewable energy is also 
an effective tool to fuel economic growth, create new 
employment opportunities, enhance human welfare 
and contribute to a climate-safe future. Renewables are 
already a significant source of new employment, with 
renewable energy jobs standing today at 10.3 million, 
worldwide. Only a limited number of stakeholders in the 
Republic of Moldova, however, are aware of the socioeconomic benefits that renewable energy can offer. 
As the use of biomass for heating is perceived positively 
in the country and has allowed the development of a 
significant number of local businesses around this 
sector, the most advanced efforts to increase public 
awareness have occurred in the field of bioenergy. 
Nevertheless, more needs to be done to increase the 
public acceptance and use of renewable energy to 
facilitate its long-run development. 
• Develop a national communication strategy on 
renewable energy sources
Public awareness is necessary to influence political 
decisions on strategies for the country’s future 
development. A national strategy is needed to raise 
awareness and boost understanding of renewable 
energy sources and their benefits across the Republic 
of Moldova. This would also help consumers make 
more informed decisions regarding energy supplies and 
benefit from the opportunities offered by the sector. 
The strategy should address several stakeholders, 
including state authorities, civil society, the banking 
community and donors. It could envisage necessary 
actions to ensure proper ways to disseminate the 
most up-to-date information on renewables and the 
ongoing energy transition (e.g., a dedicated website, 
with translations of authoritative publications 
into local language). It could also improve the 
curriculum of schools and universities to reflect 
the growing role of renewables. At the same time, 
intensified government communication efforts on 
ongoing legislative changes would be beneficial for 
stakeholders. This is especially so for local financial 
institutions, as they prepare the relevant mechanism 
to finance renewable energy projects.References
ANRE (2018), Report on the activity of the National Energy Regulatory Agency in 2017, National Energy 
Regulatory Agency, Chişinău, www.anre.md/files/raport/Raport anual de activitate a ANRE in anul 2017.pdf 
(accessed 31 December 2018).
ANRE (2017), Decision No. 342 from 4 September 2017, National Energy Regulatory Agency, Chişinău, 
http://lex.justice.md/index.php?action=view&view=doc&lang=1&id=371365 (accessed 31 December 2018).
ANRE (2016), Annual electricity reports 2011-2016, National Energy Regulatory Agency, Chişinău. 
www.anre.md/
Ceban, V. (2015), Development of renewable energy in the Republic of Moldova: realities, capacities, 
options, perspectives, [Dezvoltarea energiei regenerabile în Republica Moldova: realităţi, capacităţi, opţiuni, 
perspective], Association for External Politics, Foreign Policy Association, Chişinău.
EBRD (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development) et al. (2018), Competitive Selection and 
Support for Renewable Energy: Policy Guidelines, EBRD and Development and Energy Community 
Secretariat, in collaboration with IRENA, Vienna, 2018. 
https://irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Regional-Group/Europe/EBRD-EnCS-IRENA-RE-AuctionGuidelines-2018---FINAL.pdf?la=en&hash=D38AE032CE412F784A687A113648E6488C22B81F.
EEA (2017), Report on the activity of the Energy Efficiency Agency in 2017, Energy Efficiency Agency, 
Chişinău, https://mei.gov.md/sites/default/files/document/attachments/raportul_agentiei_pentru_
eficienta_energetica_pentru_anul_2017.pdf (accessed September 2018).
EEA (2016), Letter to National Bureau of Statistics No. 29-445 of August 17, 2016, Energy Efficiency Agency, 
Chişinău, unpublished.
EnC (2018), Annual Implementation Report 2017/2018, Energy Community Secretariat, Vienna.
www.energy-community.org/dam/jcr:05c644e0-3909-4c26-84f5-e1cdb63e1af4/ECS_IR2018.pdf.
Energypost (2017), “Trading biomass like oil: Lithuania shows how it can be done”, Energypost.eu,
https://energypost.eu/trading-biomass-like-oil-lithuania-shows-how-it-can-be-done/
(accessed 31 December 2018).
GCF (2017), “GCF gives green light to largest climate project to date in EBRD partnership”, Green 
Climate Fund, www.greenclimate.fund/-/gcf-gives-green-light-to-largest-climate-project-to-date-in-ebrdpartnership (accessed 31 December 2018).
Gropa (2017), Victor Gropa, Estimation of the impact of wind power on the system power of the Republic 
of Moldova, Technical University of Moldova, Chişinău, www.cnaa.md/en/thesis/52069/ 
(accessed 31 December 2018).
IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2019), Global levelised cost of electricity from utilityscale renewable power generation technologies, preliminary results for 2018, IRENA Renewable Cost 
Database, unpublished.
IRENA (2018a), Renewable capacity statistics 2018, Abu Dhabi,
www.irena.org/publications/2018/Mar/Renewable-Capacity-Statistics-2018.
IRENA (2018b), Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2017, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,
www.irena.org/publications/2018/Jan/Renewable-power-generation-costs-in-2017.
IRENA (2018c), Power System Flexibility for the Energy Transition, Part 1: Overview for policy makers, IRENA, 
Abu Dhabi, www.irena.org/publications/2018/Nov/Power-system-flexibility-for-the-energy-transition.
IRENA, IEA and REN21 (2018), Renewable Energy Policies in a Time of Transition, IRENA, OECD/IEA and REN21,
www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2018/Apr/IRENA_IEA_REN21_Policies_2018.pdf.IRENA et al. (2017), Cost-competitive renewable power generation: Potential across South East Europe, 
International Renewable Energy Agency, Joanneum Research and University of Ljubljana, Abu Dhabi,
www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2017/IRENA_Cost-competitive_power_
potential_SEE_2017.pdf.
IRENA and CEM (2015), Renewable Energy Auctions – A Guide to Design, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,
www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2015/Jun/IRENA_Renewable_Energy_
Auctions_A_Guide_to_Design_2015.pdf.
Lupusor, A. et al. (2016), Moldova Economic Growth Analysis, Expert-Grup, Chişinău,
www.expert-grup.org/media/k2/attachments/MEGA_XIV_-_April_2016_EN.pdf. 
MoEI (2018a), Overview of the energy sector and renewable energy developments in the Republic of 
Moldova, presented by Mr Denis Tumuruc, Deputy head of Energy Policies Department, Ministry of Economy 
and Infrastructure, at the Expert Consultation Workshop, 4 June 2018, MoEI, Chişinău, unpublished. 
MoEI (2018b), General overview of the sector and its competitive advantages, presented by Mr. Vitalie 
Iurcu, State Secretary, Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure, at the Moldova Business Week, 28 November 
2018, MoEI, Chişinău, www.mbw.md/en/presentations/ (accessed 31 December 2018).
MoEI (2018c), Renewable energy share for 2017, MoEI, Chişinău, unpublished.
MoEI (2018d), Information provided by Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure, December 2018, 
unpublished.
MoEI (2017), Security of Supply Statement of the Republic of Moldova, MoEI, Chişinău.
www.energy-community.org/dam/jcr:038ab4ac-868f-4103-92c3-006fd19a9f0b/2017_SoS_ML.pdf
(accessed 31 December 2018).
Moldelectrica (2018), Indicatorii tehnico-economici, www.moldelectrica.md/ro/network/annual_report 
(accessed 31 December 2018). 
NBM (National Bank of Moldova) (2018), Official exchange rates for years 2013-2017, NBM, Chişinău,
www.bnm.md/en/content/official-exchange-rates (accessed 31 December 2018).
NBS (National Bureau of Statistics) (2018), Energy balance of the Republic of Moldova for 2017 year, 
NBS, Chişinău, www.statistica.md/public/files/publicatii_electronice/balanta_energetica/BE_2018_eng.pdf
(accessed 31 December 2018).
NBS (2017), Population and demographic processes, NBS, Chişinău, http://statbank.statistica.md/
pxweb/pxweb/en/20 Populatia si procesele demografice/20 Populatia si procesele demografice__
POP010/?rxid=b2ff27d7-0b96-43c9-934b-42e1a2a9a774 (accessed 31 December 2018).
NBS (2012), Energy balance of the Republic of Moldova for 2011, NBS, Chişinău,
www.statistica.md/public/files/publicatii_electronice/balanta_energetica/BE_2012_eng.pdf.
OEC (2016), Observatory of Economic Complexity, https://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/
mda/#Economic_Complexity_Ranking (accessed 31 December 2018).
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) (2018a), Energy and Biomass (Phase 1), UNDP Moldova, 
www.md.undp.org/content/moldova/en/home/operations/projects/climate_environment_energy/
proiecte-finalizate/moldova-energy-and-biomass-project01.html (accessed 31 December 2018).
UNDP (2018b), Energy and Biomass (Phase 2), UNDP Moldova, www.md.undp.org/content/moldova/en/
home/projects/moldova-energy-and-biomass-project2.html (accessed 31 December 2018).
UNDP (2017), Energy and Biomass Newsletter, No. 36, November-December 2017, www.md.undp.org/
content/moldova/en/home/library/climate_environment_energy/energy-and-biomass-newsletter/energyand-biomass-newsletter--no-36.html (accessed 31 December 2018).
UNDP and ECS (2016), Energy consumption in households, Results of the Survey on energy consumption, 
UNDP Energy and Biomass Project and Energy Community Secretariat, www.md.undp.org/content/dam/
moldova/docs/Publications/Energy consumption households.pdf (accessed 31 December 2018).UNDP (2010), Project Document, UNDP, www.md.undp.org/content/moldova/en/home/projects/
moldova-energy-and-biomass-project2.html and www.md.undp.org/content/dam/moldova/docs/Project 
Documents/ProDoc_Biomass.pdf (accessed 31 December 2018). 
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe) (2009), Republic of Moldova: National 
Energy Policy Information for Regional Analysis, Financing Energy Efficiency Investments for Climate 
Change Mitigation, UNECE, New York and Geneva, https://docs.google.com/viewer?docex=1&url=http://
www.clima.md/public/102/en/EnergyPolicyInformationForRegionalAnalysisMoldova.pdf
(accessed 31 December 2018). 
UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) (2017), The Interim NDC Registry, 
UNFCCC, www4.unfccc.int/ndcregistry/Pages/All.aspx (accessed 31 December 2018). 
WB (World Bank) (2018a), Doing Business 2019, The World Bank Group,
www.doingbusiness.org/en/data/exploreeconomies/moldova (accessed 31 December 2018).
WB (2018b), GDP per capita indicator, WB. Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0), 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=MD (accessed 31 December 2018).
WB (2015), Moldova Electric Power Market Options Sector Study, WB, Washington DC,
www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=2ahUKEwjqkKrCic3eAhUDixoKHcPeDvYQFjAAegQICRAC&url=http%3A%2F%2Fmd.one.un.org%2Fcontent%2Fdam%2Funct%2Fmoldova%2Fdocs%2Fdevmeetings%2F2015%2F4june%2FMoldova_ELectric_Power_Market_Options_Study.
pptx&usg=AOvVaw17xHzDhXkSxB0Nhp6GOdKf (accessed 31 December 2018).Annex. Key development steps for 
renewable energy projects in the 
Republic of Moldova
No.
Renewable energy power plants
with capacity of 5 MW and higher for
public consumption and 20 MW and
higher for internal use
Renewable energy power
plants with capacity below 5 MW
for public consumption and below
20 MW for internal use
Key development steps
1
Establishing the business
Competent institution: Public Services Agency 
Other institutions involved: National Commission for Financial Market (only in the case of Joint 
Stock Companies), State Tax Service of the Republic of Moldova
2
Registration of property rights
Competent institution: Public Services Agency 
Other institutions involved: State Property Agency
2.1
Change of land destination from agricultural land to land for construction purposes
Competent institution: Government of Moldova or Local Public Administration
Other institutions involved: Central or local public authorities, Design Institute for Territorial 
Planning, State Environmental Inspectorate of Moldova, General Inspectorate for Emergency 
Situations, National Public Health Agency, Public Services Agency
3
Urban Planning Certificate for Design Documentation
Competent institution: Local public authority
Other institutions involved: National Public Health Agency, Agency for Environment 
(Protection), General Inspectorate for Emergency Situations, Design institute “Urbanproiect”22 
or “Chişinăuproiect”23
3.1
Technical conditions for connection to utility networks
Competent institution: All responsible utility companies (water supply and sewage, electrical, 
gas, heat, telecommunications distribution networks and other utilities) 
Other institutions involved: Local public authority
3.2
Networks Routing Plan
Competent institution: Local public authority
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
3.3
Topographical study and geotechnical prospecting
Competent institution: Licensed institutions
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
22 For all localities except Chisinau city.
23 Only for Chisinau city.No.
Renewable energy power plants
with capacity of 5 MW and higher for
public consumption and 20 MW and
higher for internal use
Renewable energy power
plants with capacity below 5 MW
for public consumption and below
20 MW for internal use
Key development steps
3.4
Environmental Permit/ Environmental Impact Assessment24
Competent institution: Agency for Environment (Protection)
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
4
Detailed designing
Competent institution: Licensed institutions
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
4.1
Detailed design verification and approval
Competent institution: Agency for Technical Supervision, chief architect from the local public 
authority and experts or institutions authorised for verification of design documentations 
Other institutions involved: State Environmental Inspectorate, National Public Health Agency
5
Construction authorisation
Competent institution: Local public authority
Other institutions involved: Agency for Technical Supervision, Agency for Environment 
(Protection)
6
Obtaining the fixed price or fixed tariff25
Competent institution: Government of Moldova, ANRE
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
6.1
Approval to build a new renewable energy 
power plant with capacity above 20 MW and 
increase in capacities above 2026
Competent institution: Government 
of Moldova, Ministry of Economy and 
Infrastructure
Other institutions involved: Not applicable 
Not applicable 
7
Communication of construction works launch
Competent institution: Agency for Technical Supervision 
Other institutions involved: Agency of Inspection and Restoration of Monuments
8
Power plant construction
Competent institution: Licensed company
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
24 Thermal power plants, industrial and heating boiler plants with capacity of 300 MW and above; complex hydrotechnical structures (ports, big dams and water storage 
facilities); industrial sewage and wastewater treatment facilities in urban and rural areas, with a discharge of 10,000 cubic metres per day and higher; waste treatment and
 incineration plants; any construction activity in river basins, within river and water basin protection areas; power transmission lines with a voltage level of 330 kV and higher,
wind farms with a height bigger than 20m, etc. 
25 The difference between “fixed tariffs” and “fixed prices” supporting schemes is being determined by the power plant capacity and capacity limits set by the Government 
through its decision no. 689 as of 11.07.2018
26 According to a MoEI initiative on amending national legislation related to power generation, launched in 2018, renewable energy project developers that won the tender 
receive the government approval mentioned at pt. 6.1 automatically (ex officio).No.
Renewable energy power plants
with capacity of 5 MW and higher for
public consumption and 20 MW and
higher for internal use
Renewable energy power
plants with capacity below 5 MW
for public consumption and below
20 MW for internal use
Key development steps
9
Connection to power transmission or distribution network
Competent institution: Power transmission and/or distribution company
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
10
Testing and acceptance
Competent institution: Beneficiary/Investor
Other institutions involved: ANRE, Agency for Technical Supervision, National Public Health 
Agency, State Environmental Inspectorate, Power Transmission or Distribution Company, 
Local Public Authority, General Inspectorate for Emergency Situations, Designing Institution, 
Construction Licensed Company, National Bureau of Statistics, Territorial State Tax 
Inspectorate, Central Electricity Supplier
11
Power generation licence
Competent institution: ANRE
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
Not applicable 
11.1
Signing of the electricity supply contract
Competent institution: Central Electricity Supplier
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
11.2
Licence registration with the system operator27
Competent institution: Power transmission 
company
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
Not applicable 
12
Entering into force of the electricity supply contract and into operational phase
Competent institution: Central Electricity Supplier
Other institutions involved: Not applicable
27 Moldelectrica, which holds the license for electricity transmission and dispatch services in the Republic of Moldova.
Source: MoEI (2018d) 