File Name: MDG-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Madagascar
Country Code: MDG
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 August – 2 September 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2023
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
2 July 2021
Original: English
2109124X (E) 260721
Second regular session 2021
30 August – 2 September 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Madagascar (2021-2023)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Madagascar (2021-2023).................................................. 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Cooperation Framework
1. Since the end of the political crisis in 2014, Madagascar has experienced two electoral 
cycles, with the presidential, legislative, and municipal elections of 2018 and 2019.
1 The 
country has recently experienced recurring political crises reflecting the tensions and dissension 
within Malagasy society. This has resulted in average growth of 3.3 per cent over the last 
decade, barely higher than demographic growth (3 per cent). It has thus been impossible to 
reduce poverty, which still affects almost 72 per cent of the population2. 
2. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic accentuated structural socio-economic weaknesses,
causing a significant setback in human development indicators, and cancelling the poverty 
reduction and income gains of the last decade. Negative economic growth was recorded in 2020
– from an initially projected +5.2 per cent to -4.2 per cent – significantly affecting the poverty 
rate ($1.9 per day), which is estimated to rise from 74.3 per cent in 2019 to 77.4 per cent in 
2020, representing an increase of 1.38 million people in one year.
3
3. The most vulnerable are at risk of being left even further behind. People who were already 
economically and socially vulnerable – especially victims of discrimination and inequalities, 
including women and other vulnerable groups4 – will be more exposed to the consequences of 
the crisis, having minimal means or capacities to cope.
5
4. In this context, the Government has drawn up a new development framework for the period 
2020-2023 centred on the Madagascar Emergence Plan around thirteen strategic commitments
(“Velirano” in Malagasy), translated into the general policy of the State. 
5. This national development strategy is reinforced by a multisectoral emergency plan
(response to COVID-19), built around three axes: (a) Enhancing the management governance 
of the epidemic; (b) Strengthening social protection measures; and (c) Supporting economic 
resilience and the private sector. The United Nations system in Madagascar contributes to this 
emergency plan through the United Nations socio-economic immediate response to COVID19.
6. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2023, will
help Madagascar address its development challenges through four strategic priorities.
6
7. UNDP is strategically positioned to support Madagascar in addressing the development 
challenges7 of three strategic priority areas ‘SP1’, ‘SP3’ and ‘SP4’. 
8. SP1. Enhance good governance, the rule of law and security. The recurrent challenges 
to political and democratic legitimacy, the fragility of the rule of law and institutions, the 
precariousness of human rights, the lack of transparency, and the weakness of public 
accountability mechanisms are challenges to social cohesion and peace. They weaken
protections of citizens’ rights and are aggravated by persistent corruption in the justice system
and a weak state presence in remote areas, resulting in growing insecurity,. Disenchantment 
with the political system leads to low citizen participation (especially women and youth) in 
decision-making and accountability bodies. The result is violence, marked by popular 
1 Madagascar overview, World Bank (updated 22 Oct 2019)
2 Economic outlook in Madagascar, AfDB, 2019
3 Madagascar economic update: Setting a course for recovery, World Bank, December 2020
4
Including people with disabilities; lesbian, gay, transgender and bisexual people; and people living with HIV
5 Common country analysis report, April 2020
6 SP1: Enhance good governance, the rule of law and security; SP2: Ensure human capital development and exploitation of the demographic dividend;
SP3: Trigger work productivity and the creation of productive jobs for decent incomes and a competitive economy; SP4 Enhance sustainable, resilient, and 
inclusive environmental management.
7 Challenges analysed with more emphasis in the common country analysis report
2020vindictiveness instead of legal justice, and intensified social inequalities. Weak decentralization 
reduces access to quality basic public services, affecting women and youth disproportionately.8
9. SP 3. Trigger labour productivity and the creation of productive jobs for decent 
incomes and a competitive economy. The competitiveness of the Malagasy economy is 
hampered by structural factors linked to deficits in infrastructure, particularly connectivity 
(transport, telecommunications) and energy, the weakness of human capital and the lowincentive business climate, as well as by vulnerability to climate change and associated natural
disasters. The modest productivity of labour, especially in the agricultural and informal sectors, 
which remain the first job provider and largest share of employment, is an insufficient source 
of income, with returns that discourage any qualitative increase in human capital. These 
weaknesses prevent access to formal employment, finance, and productive assets (land), and to 
savings assets (modern and traditional, such as cattle), especially for women and youth. The
unfavourable climate for entrepreneurship and innovation, low foreign investments, and 
insufficient development of the financial sector, strongly constrain transformational 
investments required to improve economic productivity and competitiveness, inclusiveness of 
economic growth, and sustainable development.
10. SP 4. Enhance sustainable, resilient, and inclusive environmental management.
Madagascar is rich in natural resources (land, minerals, terrestrial and marine biodiversity), but 
their contribution towards inclusive growth and sustainable development remains low. The 
governance of natural resources is weak, leading to difficulty in establishing sustainable and 
transparent resources management, due to: (a) systemic plundering of natural (precious woods) 
and mineral resources by numerous illegal exploiters, and (b) overharvesting by poor and 
vulnerable populations (mainly women heads of households),
9 due to lack of sustainable 
alternatives. This accelerates the degradation of natural capital, jeopardizing the preservation 
of the environment and resources for future generations. Sustainable, inclusive management of 
the environment is essential to strengthening the resilience of the population (and systems) to 
confront climatic hazards.
10 Inadequate sustainable management practices lead to recurrent 
social and economic crises, hampering economic growth and sustainable development.
11. UNDP has comparative advantages in contributing to United Nations efforts to support the 
development of Madagascar. UNDP builds on its experience and development results obtained 
under the previous country programme, 2015-2021. The independent evaluation, as well as 
various project evaluations carried out between 2017 and 2021, highlighted significant results 
and substantial changes. UNDP contributed to the organization of the last presidential, 
legislative, and municipal elections.
11 UNDP supported the Government in contextualizing the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and identifying national priorities, taking into 
account the most vulnerable. UNDP helped strengthen state authority in the Grand Sud region 
by facilitating access to justice for 17,072 vulnerable people (74 per cent of them women) 
through formal and informal systems. UNDP enabled Madagascar to implement legislative 
reforms, putting in place instruments to lay the foundation for an effective fight against 
corruption.
12 UNDP helped relaunch the decentralization process. The strengthening of 
decentralization mechanisms enabled 58 municipalities in the south to develop and implement 
local development plans to reduce poverty. UNDP improved conditions for populations in the 
southern regions through sustainable self-employment created for 46,684 vulnerable people 
(11,787 women and 23,083 youth) and 7,370 green jobs (3,795 women). UNDP built and 
rehabilitated local socio-economic infrastructures through which 56,586 beneficiaries gained 
improved access to water, hygiene, sanitation, and hydro-agricultural infrastructure. UNDP
8 Common country analysis report, April 2020
9 Gender analysis report, ‘Improving adaptation and resilience capacities due to climate change’ project, October 2020
10 Such as cyclones, droughts, and floods
11 More than 10 million voters, including 46 per cent women and 42 per cent youth
12 National anti-corruption strategy
promulgation of the Law on anti-corruption polessupported reforestation in 5 regions through the production of 23 million seedlings, covering
9,000 ha, for effective climate-change management.
12. The country programme will build on recommendations and lessons learned from the 
evaluations, which revealed: (a) lack of a clearly stated theory of change, including a specific
theory for the challenges of southern Madagascar; (b) weak local ownership due to insufficient 
involvement in project formulation; (c) weak emphasis on environmental governance; and 
(d) insufficient support for political, social and economic empowerment of women.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
13. The proposed programmatic offer is anchored in the UNDP mandate as the lead United 
Nations organization for development, in an integrated approach. The country programme will 
contribute to the African Union Agenda 2063,
13 the 2030 Agenda, and the UNDP Strategic 
Plan, 2018-2022. It is aligned with the Madagascar Emergence Plan, 2020-2023, and will 
contribute to SP1: Velirano 01, 03 and 12;
14 SP3: Velirano 06, 07 and 08;15 and SP4: Velirano
10.
16
14. UNDP will adopt a holistic, risk-informed, humanitarian-sensitive intervention strategy 
that considers socioeconomic, political, and humanitarian contexts, particularly in the south. 
The programme will focus on the three most underdeveloped regions (Androy, AtsimoAndrefana and Anôsy) to continue the transformational change initiated in the previous 
programme. Additional regions will include Analamanga, for institutional advisory support,
and Menabe – due to its rich marine and aquatic resources – for thematic support on natural 
resource management. The programme will keep targeting the most vulnerable people and those 
left behind, including women, youth, people living with disabilities, and the informal sector. 
UNDP will consider both the already critical Sustainable Development Goals baselines and the 
socioeconomic consequences of COVID-19. UNDP will apply its six signature solutions – in 
poverty, governance, resilience, nature-based solutions, energy, and gender equality – to 
achieve results.
15. UNDP will perform its integrator role by: (a) establishing integrated platforms to support 
acceleration of the Goals; (b) supporting the development of an integrated data ecosystem with 
the United Nations country team; (c) mobilizing innovative financing; (d) transferring 
knowledge and technologies via South-South and triangular cooperation; (e) combining an offer 
of high-level policy advice and targeted downstream programmatic interventions during and 
after COVID-19; (f) creating innovative development approaches; (g) developing a fresh 
partnership with civil society and the private sector; and (h) continuing to adopt a human rightsbased approach leveraging our engagement with the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund 
through seven active projects – for a total budget of $7.5 million – to consolidate peace, social 
cohesion and women’s empowerment, jointly with other United Nations organizations.
16. The country programme seeks to strengthen sustainable development in Madagascar with 
poverty and inequality reduction within a strong governance framework, allowing efficient 
management of the environment and natural resources for inclusive growth and shared 
prosperity. This will be achieved in partnership with United Nations system organizations 
including the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the International Labour Organization 
(ILO), the United Nations Capital Development Fund, the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), UNFPA, the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization; with development 
partners including the African Development Bank (AfDB), the African Union, the European 
Union, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund; bilateral partners such as France, 
13 Aspirations 1, 3 and 6 of Agenda 2063
14 On peace and security, anti- corruption, public administration performance, and autonomy and responsibilities of decentralized bodies
15 On decent employment, industrialization, and empowerment of women and youth
16 On natural resource conservation
green and blue economymining managementand water for allthe German Development Agency (GIZ), and the United States Agency for International 
Development; and a focus on South-South cooperation with India and Senegal. In line with 
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework operational principles, the 
country programme will develop coordinated and joint programmes to ensure that we plan, 
implement and are accountable together with other United Nations organizations. The theory 
of change underlying the programmatic offer posits that: 
(a) If capacities, policies, and institutions for effective and inclusive governance of 
sustainable development are strengthened by building (i) an inclusive, transparent, 
accountable, and stable political system, (ii) effective economic development financing 
mechanisms;
(b) If performing, accountable and inclusive decentralized institutions are in place, and the 
judicial system that respects human rights and fights against corruption is strengthened and 
operational;
(c) If women, youth and rural people are empowered to develop innovative solutions and 
have access to means for jobs creation in the green and blue economy sector, and if 
measures are in place to facilitate sustainable business opportunities for individuals and 
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, contributing to rural economic diversification 
and transformation;
(d) If capacities of targeted communities, including women and youth, are enhanced to 
develop and practice innovative solutions using clean technologies, and if communities 
have access to factors of production (land, capital, water) and are able to sustainably 
manage natural resources, valuing natural capital and fostering alternative economic 
activities while adding value to natural resources and contributing to rural economic 
diversification and transformation;
Then the people of Madagascar, including women and youth, will enjoy stability, 
escaping the repetitive cycle of political crises, in an environment characterized by 
functioning rule of law and national cohesion, and will benefit from inclusive sustainable 
green and blue growth and more resilience to the adverse effects of climate change and 
natural disasters. 
Enhance good governance, the rule of law and security.
17. Priority will be given to strengthening the political system to build stable governance 
institutions with strong legitimacy to break the cycle of political crises, with continuous support 
to building a transparent, inclusive, and effective electoral system beyond the electoral period. 
UNDP will continue to support the independent national electoral commission and the electoral 
management bodies to modernize the electoral system through better reliability of voter 
registration records, including alignment with the digitalized and biometric national civil 
registry system supported by the World Bank.
18. The programme will strengthen the parliamentary bodies in their functions, including 
assessing public policies. Civic engagement and public participation in the law-making process 
will be supported to ensure the quality and relevance of laws and policies. 
19. UNDP will continue to support the decentralization process in collaboration with other 
development partners – the World Bank, the European Union, GIZ and AfDB – around the 
national objectives of territorializing public policies, strengthening the capacities of 
decentralized local authorities, and deconcentrating services for the provision of good-quality 
basic public services to the population.
20. UNDP support to the rule of law will centre on strengthening the independence, 
impartiality, and institutional capacities of the judicial system. The emphasis will be on fighting 
corruption, notably preventing and sanctioning offenses within and outside the justice sector. 
Human rights-based and people-centred approaches will improve access to justice, including 
fair trial and gender equality, accelerating judicial processes, and improving the conditions of detention. UNDP will forge partnerships with the European Union, the African Union, France, 
GIZ, and United Nations organizations to build a strong coalition towards this end. 
21. Another priority will be support to national governance systems – including the national 
response to COVID-19 –building confidence in institutions and bridging the gap between the 
people and the State. This will entail supporting state modernization through e-governance and 
digitalization of public administration to ensure continuity and effectiveness in delivering
essential services. 
22. To enhance the governance of natural resources and biodiversity systems, capacities of key 
actors will be strengthened to promote common understanding of the enforcement of laws and 
regulations, as well as respecting communities’ rights. Institutional and legal frameworks will 
be strengthened for intersectoral coordination of environmental and climate management at 
central and decentralized levels.
Competitiveness of the economy through labour productivity and promotion of decent 
jobs
23. UNDP will support the Government in reducing income inequalities and underemployment 
through innovative entrepreneurship and development of income and employment 
opportunities for vulnerable populations living in extreme poverty. Development and 
improvement of the entrepreneurial environment will be supported by promoting promising 
value chains specific to intervention areas, while addressing key barriers to women’s
entrepreneurship. 
24. The programme will promote eco-innovative incubators for the emergence of start-ups in 
the green and blue economy, taking into account achievements in ecologically rational access 
to natural resources; alternative use of resources in value chains; enhancement of natural 
capital; and innovative ideas in key sectors. UNDP will use the social protection scheme to 
encourage transition to green and blue jobs and discourage harmful environmental practices.
25. To enhance human capital productivity, UNDP will focus on the creation of decent jobs
and support to the informal sector through capacity-building of individuals and medium, small,
and micro enterprises/industries, and the formalization of their economic activities. To that end, 
UNDP will collaborate with ILO and the World Bank.
Enhance sustainable, resilient, and inclusive environmental management
26. UNDP will prioritize the sustainable management of landscapes, including land-based and 
marine protected areas, labelled areas, wetlands, and watersheds, through reforestation and 
prevention of wildland fire. UNDP will finalize the creation of community-managed protected 
areas, and support the formulation of the reforestation and fire management strategy,
strengthening institutions and communities to use spatial monitoring and reporting tools for 
protected area management. To that end, UNDP will collaborate with UNESCO.
27. UNDP will support communities’ access to factors of production (land, capital, water) and 
promote clean energy and natural resources conservation. The support will be linked to UNDP
efforts to promote innovative production technologies and processing techniques that are 
environmentally friendly and resilient in order to develop alternative economic activities and 
sustainable value chains. This will be complemented by support to green jobs creation through
the construction or rehabilitation of economic infrastructures,
17 opening economic opportunities 
around natural resources. UNDP will collaborate with United Nations organizations and will
seek to continue accessing climate and environment finance, including from the Global 
Environment Facility (GEF), the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the Adaptation Fund.
28. To better cope with climate change and disaster risks, UNDP will collaborate with 
UNESCO and other United Nations organizations to support development of tools and 
17 Including hydro-agricultural infrastructures
rural roadssolar power plantinstruments for climate and disaster management, strengthening national and local institutions
to create a multi-hazard, people-centred early warning system. 
III. Programme and risk management 
29. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results, 
including the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework and serves as 
the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at country level. This document is based on lessons from the past 
programme and aims to strengthen the achievements of UNDP in consultation with the 
Government of Madagascar. Accountabilities of managers at country, regional and 
headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework.
30. The programme will be implemented through national implementation modality under the 
coordination of the Ministry of Economy and Finance, in collaboration with sectoral ministries.
A national coordination body will be set up to act as the Government coordinating agency. In 
line with the national ownership principles,
18 the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfer will 
be gradually implemented, considering the specificities identified by the micro-assessment of 
implementing partners. If necessary, national execution will be replaced with direct execution 
for part or all of the programme to respond to force majeure. The Harmonized Approach will 
be used in collaboration with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost 
definitions and classifications associated with programme implementation must be charged to 
the respective projects.
31. The main risks that could negatively affect the achievement of the proposed programme 
relate to: the shorter implementation timeline for a country programme of this nature;
availability of financial resources; political stability at the national level; and security risks in 
the regions of intervention, particularly in the south. Risks of further socioeconomic shocks 
linked to the COVID-19 pandemic – as well as social and environmental issues, including 
natural disasters– could jeopardize UNDP access to target populations and the achievement of 
expected results. In line with United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
operational principles, UNDP will strengthen collaboration with development partners and 
other United Nations organizations to foster common conflict analysis, community, and human 
security approaches, as well as more integrated mainstreaming of climate change and disaster 
risk management in development planning, budgeting, and programming across the peacehumanitarian-development nexus.
32. The country office will adopt an ‘adaptive management’ approach to country programme 
implementation to ensure that regular stocktaking is informed by feedback loops that allow for 
adjustments to approach and direction based on clear evidence and feedback, including from 
national implementing partners. Particular attention will be paid to (a) imparting information 
and awareness to further involve people in project implementation, including researching 
endogenous solutions in case of risk occurrence; and (b) incorporating monitoring, evaluation 
and risk analysis measures to enhance decision-making by steering committees and enable 
possible adjustments to project initiatives. This will permit adoption of a ‘Plan B’ to resize the 
programme and adjust to resources available.
33. This country programme will include: (a) integration of risk mitigation and management 
plans in project documents and multi-year plans; (b) services contract agreement to local nongovernmental organizations with the capacity to act as relays, to consolidate the continuity of 
operations in the field; (c) long-term agreements with qualified consultants and consulting 
firms; (d) regular consultations with the Government in order to better target intervention areas 
18 The Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness
the Accra Agenda for Actionand the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Cooperationand rationalize the use of resources; and (f) contribution to joint programmes within the 
framework of ‘delivering as one’ to better cover people’s needs and maximize impact.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
34. An evidence-based monitoring and evaluation mechanism, with indicators aligned to those 
of the national and localized Sustainable Development Goals, will be put in place to measure 
and assess the results of the country programme. The mechanism will be anchored in the 
monitoring and evaluation system of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework and aligned to the national monitoring and evaluation framework of the Madagascar
Emergence Plan. UNDP will work with other United Nations organizations to strengthen 
government capacity and advance public policy evaluation.
35. Partners’ results-based management capacities will be strengthened, and the Sustainable 
Development Goals will be further localized to improve targeting of beneficiaries, with data 
disaggregated by sex, age, and degree of vulnerability. To complete the national information 
system, UNDP will support the National Statistics Institute to undertake studies on specific 
themes related to its comparative advantages.
36. Emphasis will be given to participatory monitoring of activities with beneficiaries and
decentralized state bodies, for data collection and feedback, completed by field visits. In the 
COVID-19 context, UNDP will partner with research institutions for knowledge-building and 
innovations in remote and real-time monitoring. Monitoring will be consolidated through: 
(a) biannual meetings with Government and implementing partners; (b) joint field visits to 
monitor achievements and impact on people’s lives; (c) annual programme reviews; and (d) 
results groups at the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework level. 
Decentralized evaluations will be conducted in accordance with the appended evaluation plan.
37. The UNDP gender marker will be used as a planning, implementation and monitoring and 
evaluation tool to ensure that gender is effectively mainstreamed in projects. It will also serve 
as a decision-making tool in the allocation of resources supporting initiatives targeting gender.
38. To strengthen the operationalization of the monitoring and evaluation system, UNDP will 
allocate 5 per cent of the programme budget to cover expenses, including for the collection of 
data for baseline and periodic surveys.Annex. Results and resources framework for Madagascar (2021-2023)
National priority: Madagascar Emergence Plan
Commitments: N° 1. Peace & Security, Accessible & Independent Justice; N° 3. Fight against Corruption; N° 12. Emerging Decentralization
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) OUTCOME (1.1) involving UNDP N° 1: By 2030, national institutions are effective, 
accountable, transparent and act within a constitutional and legal framework, while complying with the rule of law and respecting human rights, gender equality, 
environmental sustainability to ensure a foundation of political legitimacy.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Cooperation framework outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, target(s)
Data source and frequency 
of data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines, targets)
Major partners / 
partnerships /
frameworks
Estimated cost 
by outcome 
($)
Indicator 1.1. Participation rate in 
the presidential election
Baseline (2018): 1st round: 54.23%
 2nd round: 48.09%
Target (2023): 1st round: 60%
 2nd round: 60%
Independent National 
Electoral Commission (CENI) 
report; next report in 2023
Output 1.1. Constitutional, electoral, parliamentary bodies
and political actors, including media and civil society enabled
to promote an inclusive, transparent, accountable, and stable 
political system.
Indicator 1.1.1. Extent to which electoral management bodies
(Independent National Electoral Commission – CENI, High 
Constitutional Court, Funding Control Commission on political 
life) are able to conduct inclusive and credible elections (Rating: 
1=weak; 2=fairly good; 3=good; 4=very good; 5=excellent)
Baseline (2021): To be determined (TBD)
Target (2023): Baseline +1
Data source: CENI reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 1.1.2. Extent to which the parliamentary Legal 
Commission has capacities to undertake inclusive and 
accountable law-making decisions. (Rating: 1=weak; 2=fairly 
good; 3=good; 4=very good; 5=excellent))
Baseline (2021): TBD
Target (2023): Baseline +1
Data source: Parliament reports; Frequency: annual 
Indicator 1.1.3. Number of media and civil society organizations 
(CSOs) participating in law-making process to promote inclusive, 
transparent, integrated, and accountable political system. 
Baseline (2021): Media: 0; CSOs: TBD
Target (2023): Baseline + 20 (10 media; 10 CSOs)
Data source: CSO and media reports; Frequency: annual
Ministry of the Interior 
and Decentralization; 
Ministry of Justice
(MINJUS); Ministry of 
Public Security; CENI, 
High Constitutional 
Court; National 
Assembly; Senate; 
National Office for Risk 
and Disaster 
Management; 
Independent AntiCorruption Office
(BIANCO); Madagascar
financial intelligence 
service (SAMIFIN); 
Integrity Protection 
Committee(CSI)
Office of the 
United Nations High 
Commissioner for Human 
Rights, UNFPA,
UNICEF;
GIZ, World Bank, 
European Union, AfDB
Regular: 
18,398,000
Other: 
26,254,021
Indicator 1.2. Percentage of the 
population in the intervention 
areas expressing confidence in the 
justice system
Ministry of Justice (MINJUS) 
reports; annual
Output 1.2. Actors of the judicial system are more able to 
expand access to justice, promote rule of law and combat 
corruption and inequalities, with a focus on women and 
marginalized groupsBaseline (2021): TBD
Target (2023): Baseline + 10%
Indicator 1.3. Corruption 
Perception Index
Baseline (2020): Score 25/100
Target (2023): Score 25/100
Transparency International 
report; Annual
Indicator 1.2.1. Number of judicial system actors (formal and 
informal) with adequate technical and operational capacities for 
quality service delivery and implementation of the rule of law
Baseline (2021): 3 (Supreme Court; First Instance Court; legal 
clinics)
Target (2023): 5 (baseline + 2 [Superior Magistrates Council; 
Appeals Court])
Data source: MINJUS and legal clinics reports; Frequency: 
annual
Indicator 1.2.2. Number of new people (disaggregated by sex 
and marginalized groups) having access to justice with UNDP
support through formal and informal systems
Baseline (2021): formal: 0; informal: 0 
Target (2023): formal: 40,000 (55% women; 20% people living 
with a disability – PLWD); informal: 10,000 (55% women; 20%
PLWD)
Data source: MINJUS reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 1.2.3. Extent to which institutions (BIANCO; 
SAMIFIN; CSI; Pôle Anti-corruption; Illicit Asset Recovery 
Agency) and CSOs (Transparency International and five others)
are able to promote enforcement of anti-corruption measures
(Rating: 1=weak; 2=fairly good; 3=good; 4=very good; 
5=excellent)
Baseline (2021): TBD
Target (2023): Baseline + 1
Data source: CSO reports; Frequency: Annual
Peacebuilding Fund; 
Youth and Philanthropy 
Initiative; Norway
National Consortium for 
Citizen Participation; 
Associations of Young 
Human Rights Defenders; 
Legal clinics
Indicator 1.4. Local Governance 
Index in the intervention areas 
(Rating: 0 to 10points)
Baseline (2021): TBD
Target (2023): Baseline + 2points
Ministry of the Interior and 
Decentralization (MID) 
reports; annual
Output 1.3. Institutions at national and decentralized levels
have necessary skills and tools, including digital (egovernance), to effectively plan, implement, monitor, and 
evaluate public policies, and mobilize financial resources for 
improved basic public service delivery.
Indicator 1.3.1: Extent to which decentralization frameworks
(Policy Letter on Decentralization; National Programme for 
Decentralization and Territorialization of Public Policies) are 
updated, approved, and implemented (Rating: 0= none; 1=
updated incorporating gender and basic needs dimensions; 2= 
approved; 3= implemented)
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2023): 3
Data source: MID reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 1.3.2. Number of new institutions at national and 
decentralized levels with innovative tools (including digital) and 
skills to effectively plan, monitor, and evaluate public policies, and mobilize financial resources for improved public service 
delivery.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2023): 5 (General Directorate of Decentralization; 
National Institute for Decentralization and Local Development; 
Local Development Fund; General Coordination of Projects and 
Partnership; Parliamentary Commission on public policy 
evaluation)
Data source: MID and Parliamentreports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 1.3.3. Number of new people in the intervention areas
with access to improved public services (land certificate, civil 
servant status, civil status), disaggregated by sex. 
Baseline (2021): Land certificate: 0; Civil servant status: 0
Civil status: (a) Birth certificate: 0
 (b) Identitycard: 0
Target (2023): Land certificate: 3,500 (40% women); Civil 
servant status: 22,000 (30% Women)
Civil status: (a) 25 registrations/1000 inhabitants/year. 
 (b) 400,000 (60% women)
Data source: Decentralized Servicesreports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 1.3.4. Number of new reports measuring national 
accountability on socioeconomic progress available.
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2023): 5(National Human Development Report; 
Sustainable Development Goals; South-South cooperation; socio-
economic impact assessment; development financial assessment)
Data source: Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF)reports; 
Frequency: annual
Indicator 1.5. Proportion of 
environmental crimes/offenses 
treated and sanctioned in line with 
regulatory texts (trafficking in 
protected species, pollution, 
corruption, grabbing of natural 
resources, forest fires and land 
clearing) compared to 
crimes/offenses reported
Baseline (2021): TBD
Target (2023): Baseline +25%
Output 1.4. Key actors in the justice and security system, 
CSOs and communities have increased capacities to apply 
and enforce the law for the sustainable management of 
natural resources and the environment
Indicator 1.4.1. Number of regulatory texts on climate change 
and disaster risk management updated
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2023):1 (Water Code implementation decrees integrating 
climate change and disaster risk management)
Data source: Ministry of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene reports; 
Frequency: annual
Indicator 1.4.2. Extent to which new key actors (Justice, 
Defence Force, CSOs, communities) have capacities strengthened 
on environmental regulatory texts and law enforcement (Rating: 
1=weak; 2=fairly good; 3=good; 4=very good; 5=excellent)Baseline (2021): TBD
Target (2023): Baseline +1
Data source: MEDD reports; Frequency: annual
National priority: Madagascar Emergence Plan
Commitments: N° 6. Decent employment for all; N° 10. Green and blue economy
UNSDCF OUTCOME (3.3) involving UNDP N° 2. By 2030, young people’s access to decent, productive, sustainable, and resilient jobs is promoted through the development 
of entrepreneurship and the implementation of measures to accelerate the transition from the informal to the formal economy.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
Indicator 2.1. Percentage of
entrepreneurs in the domain of
green and blue economy
(disaggregated by sex and age)
Green economy
Baseline (2021): TBD
Women (xx%); Men (xx%);
Youth 15-34 (xx%)
Target (2023):
Women (B+5%); Men (B+10%);
Youth 15-34 (B+7%)
Blue economy
Baseline (2021): TBD
Women (xx%); Men (xx%);
Youth 15-34 (xx%)
Target (2023):
Women (B+2%); Men (B+5%);
Youth 15-34 (B+3%)
Indicator 2.2. Youth
unemployment rate
Baseline (2015): 3.4%
Target (2023): 3%
Indicator 2.3. Multidimensional
poverty rate
Baseline (2018): 70.3%
Ministry of Industry, Trade 
and Handicrafts (MICA) 
reports, annual
MEF report; annual
Survey on poverty and 
extreme poverty, National 
Statistics Institute (INSTAT), 
next survey in 2021
Employment survey, INSTAT
Output 2.1. Innovative measures in place to increase women’s
and youth empowerment and participation in economic
development processes in the green and blue economy sector
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of innovative incubators led by women 
and youth in the sector of green and blue economy supported 
Baseline (2020):30
Target (2023):130
Data source: MEF reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.1.2. Number of financial de-risking instruments in 
place benefiting women and youth entrepreneurs.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2023): 1
Data source: MEF reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.1.3. Number of new households benefiting from 
livelihoods and cash transfers through social protection scheme to 
encourage transition to green and blue jobs while discouraging
harmful environmental practices
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2023): 2,000 (50% women-headed)
Data source: MEF reports; Frequency: annual
MEF
MICA
Ministry of Livestock 
Agriculture and Fisheries
FAO; ILO
United States Department 
of Labour
Group of Women 
Entrepreneurs, Group of 
Exporters of Essential 
Oils 
Civil Society 
Organization for 
Extractive Industries 
University of 
Antananarivo, Higher 
School of Agronomic 
Sciences,
International Union for 
Conservation of Nature
(IUCN)
Regular: 
14,803,000
Other: 
5,859,000
Output 2.2. Inclusive and sustainable solutions adopted in the 
intervention areas to increase access to renewable energy.
Indicator 2.3.1. Number of new households benefiting from 
innovative clean, affordable, and sustainable energy 
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2023): 4,850 (30% women-headed)
Data source: MICA reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.3.2. Number of small-scale businesses set up using 
new sources of renewable energy.
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2023): 200 (30% women; 50% youth)
Data source: MICA reports; Frequency: annualTarget (2023): 69%
Output 2.3. Measures in place to facilitate sustainable 
business opportunities for individuals and micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs)
Indicator 2.2.1. Number of individuals and MSMEs targeting 
women and youth developed in strategic value chains
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2023): 100
Data source: MICA reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.2.2. Number of sustainable businesses formalized
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2023): 75
Data source: MICA reports; Frequency: annual
National priority: Madagascar Emergence Plan
Commitment N° 10. Conservation of natural resources; climate resilience; massive reforestation
UNSDCF OUTCOME (4.2) involving UNDP N° 3. By 2030, actors at different levels effectively apply measures to conserve, preserve and enhance biodiversity and natural 
capital so that the environment and natural resources are pillars of economic growth, sustainable development and improved living conditions for populations.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 3. Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
Indicator 3.1. Size of protected 
areas sheltering important sites 
for the conservation of land-based 
biodiversity (Integral Nature 
Reserve, Natural Park, Special 
reserve, Harmonious Protected 
Landscape, World Heritage sites)
Baseline (2018): 6,092,221 ha
Target (2023): 8,000,000 ha
MEDD report; annual
Survey on poverty and 
extreme poverty, INSTAT 
Output 3.1. Solutions scaled up for sustainable management 
of landscapes, including land-based and marine protected 
areas, labelled areas, wetlands, watersheds, through
reforestation and prevention of wildland fire
Indicator 3.1.1. Number of new community-managed protected 
areas created
Baseline (2021): 7 community-managed protected areas (CPAs)
at the creation stage
Target (2023): 7 CPAs fully created
Data source: MEDD reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 3.1.2. Number of land-based CPAs effectively 
managed (referencing METT management effectiveness 
assessment tool)
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2023): TBD
Data source: MEDD reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 3.1.3. National reforestation and fire management 
strategy developed
Baseline (2021): No
Target (2023): Yes
Data source: MEDD reports; Frequency: annual
MEDD
Ministry of Livestock 
Agriculture and Fisheries
Ministry of Transport 
Tourism and Meteorology
UNESCO; FAO
GEF; GCF
Aquatic Service
World Wildlife Fund
Madagascar, 
National Coalition for 
Environmental Advocacy 
Regular: 
9,060,000
Other: 
3,988,000Indicator 3.2. Proportion of 
agricultural areas in targeted 
localities used productively and 
sustainably
Baseline (2021): TBD
Target (2023): Baseline +6%
Indicator 3.1.4. Number of regions that have developed, 
implemented, and monitored their reforestation and fire 
management plans
Baseline (2021): 0; Target (2023): 2
Data source: Regional Directorate of Environment and 
Sustainable Development (DREDD)reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 3.1.5. Number of targeted institutions and CSOs with 
necessary skills to apply the Law Enforcement/Spatial 
Monitoring and Reporting Tools for CPA management
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2021):10 (1 DREDD; 9 CSOs)
Data source: DREDD reports; Frequency: annual
University of 
Antananarivo, Higher 
School of Agronomic 
Sciences 
IUCN
Output 3.2: Targeted communities supported to access land, 
capital, water; and to sustainably manage natural resources
Indicator 3.2.1. Number of new CBOs applying good 
environmental practices for alternative economic activities
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2023): 30
Data source: MEDD reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 3.2.2. Number of new households having access to 
means of production (land, capital, labour) 
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2023):3,000 (50% women-headed)
Data source: MEDD reports; Frequency: annual
Output 3.3. Capacities of national and local institutions 
strengthened to cope with climate change and disaster risks. 
Indicator 3.3.1. Number of tools/strategies integrating inter-
sectoral consistency on environmental, climate and disaster 
management developed or updated
Baseline (2020): 4 (nationally determined contribution, National 
risk and disaster management policy and strategy, sectoral
vulnerability of four regions’)
Target (2023): 9 (Baseline + CDN updated; PNGRC updated; 
national meteorological policy integrating climate change; tools 
to integrate the Rio conventions and sustainable development; biodiversity financing plan)
Data source: MEDD reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of instruments for multi-hazards and 
people centredearly warning system in place.
Baseline (2021):0; Target (2023):1
Data source: Dept. of Risk and Disaster Management reports; 
Frequency: annual