File Name: MDV-NREIP-2013-EN
Year: 2013
Country Name: Maldives
Country Code: MDV
Category: NREIP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2013
Start Year: 2013
End Year: 2017
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

MALDIVES SREP
INVESTMENT PLAN
2013 - 2017Ministry of Environment and Energy
Republic of Maldives
MALDIVES SREP
INVESTMENT PLAN
2013 - 2017FOREWORD
To the people of the Maldives, global climate change and the 
resulting rise in sea levels are a serious challenge to the prospect 
of life and the well-being of our current and future generations. 
This is why more than 20 years ago the Maldives raised its voice 
on this impending threat to the survival of our nation. Since then, 
we are striving to improve the quality of life of the people of the 
Maldives and to provide environmental quality for those who visit 
our country for holidays and business. Climate change associated 
with greenhouse gas emissions coupled with the realization that 
the world oil reserves will run out, has given strong impetus for 
the Government to explore alternative energy sources not only for 
energy security but also for meeting the sustainable development 
aspirations of the people of our nation.
The Government of Maldives has committed the country to become 
carbon neutral by 2020. Thus, this Scaling-up Renewable Energy 
(SREP) Investment Plan will guide us in this endeavour for the years 
ahead as we strive to achieve energy independence, setting our sights 
on the ultimate policy goal of carbon neutrality. This Investment 
Plan outlines the activities that we must implement to mitigate 
against climate change and it establishes specific goals, objectives 
and targets that the government, businesses and community must 
achieve together. Special attention is given to energy security as 
one of the key challenges for an import dependent nation and to 
creation of an environment that makes investing in the Maldives 
renewable energy sector as straightforward and risk free as possible. 
Affordable access to sustainable electricity for all our citizens is 
another deliverable. SREP will support the Government in reaching 
its target towards transforming the economics of the energy sector 
and moving renewable energy from niche to mainstream.
I note, with satisfaction, that the SREP Investment Plan was 
developed through extensive consultations and with wide 
stakeholder participation. The plan also benefited from the 
experiences and inputs of our development partners, the ADB and 
the WBG. I would like to express my gratitude to both institutions 
for the critical role they have played in developing the SREP 
Investment Plan for the Maldives and I look forward to their 
support in the implementation of this ambitious and transformative 
program.
Male’, October 2012
H.E. Dr. Mohamed Waheed
President of the Republic of MaldivesList of tables
List of figures
Acronyms and abbreviations
Executive summary 11
The Maldives SREP IP process 18
1. Country background 19
1.1 Geography 19
1.2 Environmental policy background 21
1.3 Economic policy background 21
1.4 Energy policy background 22
1.5 Electricity sector background 24
1.6 Island classification based on electricity demand 25
1.7 Electricity pricing and subsidy 30
2. Institutional framework for Maldives SREP IP implementation 32
2.1 Ministry of Environment and Energy 32
2.2 Maldives SREP IP implementation 33
2.3 Regulating functions 34
3. Maldives SREP IP as a key strategic tool 35
3.1 Maldives SREP IP contribution to carbon neutral strategy 35
3.2 Using Maldives SREP IP to overcome the barriers and challenges in the sector 36
3.3 Renewable energy resources in the Maldives 38
 3.3.1 Solar energy 38
 3.3.2 Wind energy 40
 3.3.3 Waste-to-energy 42
 3.3.4 Biogas 43
 3.3.5 Ocean energy 43
 3.3.6 Biomass 43
3.4 Energy efficiency 44
4. Rationale for Maldives SREP IP interventions 47
4.1 Renewable energy for greater Male’ region 47
4.2 Renewable energy for outer islands 49
4.3 Technical assistance and capacity building 52
4.4 Activities complementary to SREP 53
 4.4.1 Deep sea water utilization 53
 4.4.2 Energy efficiency 53
 4.4.3 Tourism industry 55
 4.4.4 Transport sector 55
5. Environmental and social management framework 56
5.1 Environmental and social impacts 56
6. Financing plan 597.1 Technical risks 60
7.2 Commercial risks 61
7.3 Institutional risks 61
7.4 Country risks 62
8. Results framework 63
9. Maldives SREP IP criteria 65
9.1 Maldives SREP IP co-benefits 67
Appendix 1 - Concept notes 69
Appendix 2 - Summary of stakeholder consultations 86
Appendix 3 - Ongoing or recently completed renewable energy projects 91
Appendix 4 - Energy efficiency projects 94
Appendix 5 - Electricity consumption by island categories 95
Appendix 6 - Proposed feed-in tariff 96
Appendix 7 - Profile of a typical small/medium electricity consuming island 100
Appendix 8 - Assessment of country absorptive capacity 103
Appendix 9 - Independent review of the Maldives SREP IP 105LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Financing summary 13
Table 2: Financing by programmes 15
Table 3: Installed capacities by types 25
Table 4: Island categories and SREP interventions 29
Table 5: Key barriers and challenges 36
Table 6: Summary of technology options considered under SREP and their 
 estimated potential 45
Table 7: Available PV potential in the islands of greater Male’ region 48
Table 8: Island classification by electricity consumption 50
Table 9: Electricity and water production potential 51
Table 10: Impacts and mitigation measures for the technology options 57
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Schematic diagramme for various stages of IP formulation 18
Figure 2: Map of the Maldives 19
Figure 3: A typical island of Maldives 20
Figure 4: Price comparison of four major fossil fuel imports to Maldives over the past decade 22
Figure 5: Greater Male’ region 26
Figure 6: Average population size among the outer island groups 27
Figure 7: Island categories based on electricity production and efficiency 27
Figure 8: Comparison of average fuel efficiency and unit cost of generation
 for the different categories of outer islands 28
Figure 9: Fuel surcharge compared with generation costs and subsidy for Male’ 31
Figure 10: Institutional framework for SREP implementation 32
Figure 11: Emissions by the major sectors in the country 35
Figure 12: Solar insolation in HA.Dhidhoo island 38
Figure 13: Solar insolation in Male’ 38
Figure 14: Solar insolation in Gn.Fuvahmulah island 39
Figure 15: Spatial variation in solar power insolation 39
Figure 16: Wind resource map and the atoll names for the Maldives 41
Figure 17: Complementary solar and wind resource patterns throughout the year 42
Figure 18: Renewable energy potential capacity and unit cost of generation for outer islands 44
Figure 19: Levelised cost of savings from equipment replacement at end of life 54
Figure 20: Levelised cost of savings from immediate equipment replacement 54ADB ADB
ASPIRE Accelerating Sustainable Private Investments in Renewable Energy 
CCAC Climate Change Advisory Council
CCTF Climate Change Trust Fund
CECM Clean Energy for Climate Mitigation Project
EE Energy Efficiency
ESMF Environment and Social Management Framework
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
EPC Engineering Procurement and Construction
FENAKA FENAKA Corporation Limited 
FIT Feed-In Tariff 
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEF Global Environment Facility 
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GIZ German Gesellschaft fuer Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GoM Government of Maldives
GST Goods and Services Tax
GWh Gigawatt Hour
IDA International Development Association
IDB Islamic Development Bank
IFC International Finance Corporation
IP Investment Plan
JICA Japanese International Cooperation Agency
kWh Kilowatt Hour
LCE Low Carbon Energy
MEA Maldives Energy Authority
MED Ministry of Economic Development
MEE Ministry of Environment and Energy
MDB Multilateral Development Banks
MoFT Ministry of Finance and Treasury
MGF Maldives Green Fund
MMS Maldives Meteorological Service
MtCO2 Millions of tons of CO2
MVR Maldivian Rufiyaa
MW Megawatt
NDP National Development Plan
NEAP National Environment Action Plan
NSDS National Sustainable Development Strategy
OTEC Ocean thermal energy conversion
POISED Preparing Outer Islands for Sustainable Energy Development
PPA Power Purchase Agreement
PMU Project Management UnitPV Solar Photo Voltaic
RE Renewable Energy
RET Renewable Energy Technologies
RWMF Regional Waste Management Facility
SAP Strategic Action Plan
SREP Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program in Low Income Countries
STELCO State Electric Company Ltd
TA Technical Assistance
TGST Tourism Goods and Services Tax
toe Tonne of Oil Equivalent
tCO2 Tons of CO2
TPD Tons Per Day
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization
USD United States Dollar
WBG World Bank Group
WTE Waste-To-EnergyRooftop 
solar panels
at Male’EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Republic of Maldives is one of the lowest lying countries in the world making the country 
particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change due to rising sea levels. In addition, the 
country is entirely dependent on imported oil as the primary source of energy making it exposed 
to fluctuations and increases in oil prices. This is further exacerbated by the lack of adequate oil 
storage facilities. 
The Maldives is one of the six pilot countries participating in the Scaling Up Renewable Energy 
Program in Low Income Countries (SREP). As a requirement of the SREP an Investment Plan 
(IP) was prepared demonstrating how SREP resources together with leveraging by co-financiers 
will be used to support scaling up renewable energy (RE) development in the Maldives. The IP 
was developed by the Government of Maldives (GoM) under the leadership of the Ministry 
of Environment and Energy. It identifies opportunities and presents a plan for achieving the 
objectives of SREP.
The IP has been prepared in line with the Maldives Vision 2020, Strategic Action Plan (SAP, 
2008-2013), National Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS, 2009), Maldives Energy Policy 
2010, 3rd Environment Action Plan (3rd NEAP, 2008), as well as different Climate Change 
Policies especially with the objective of becoming a carbon neutral country based on a zero 
carbon electricity sector. Thus, this IP is an integral part of the Maldivian Governments RE and 
climate change policies, programmes and initiatives.
Throughout the IP preparation process, a wide array of public stakeholders, private sector 
institutions and development partners were consulted extensively. The IP was presented and 
discussed at the Cabinet and it officially endorsed the investments proposed in the Plan. The 
IP also benefited from the experiences and inputs of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
and the World Bank Group (WBG). In addition, the independent reviewer provided valuable 
comments and suggestions during the final stages of the preparation of the IP. Through this 
IP, Maldives is seeking USD 30 million SREP funding together with leveraging from other 
sources of a total investment of over USD 138 million to design and implement projects, and 
to support the transformation of the energy sector by scaling up RE in the country. All public 
and private stakeholders are in agreement on the need to focus the Maldives SREP on the 
sustainable and socioeconomic development while highlighting the need to further develop and 
use RE technologies to support the overall objective of becoming a carbon neutral nation. Thus, 
common goals exist to reach the set targets. The main objective of Maldives SREP IP is to transform the electricity sector and to develop 
renewable energies on a large scale. Achieving this objective will support the socioeconomic 
development by generating new economic opportunities and widening the access to sustainable, 
clean and reliable energy; it will effectively contribute to poverty reduction and sustainable 
development - and thus benefiting the Maldives and its people as a whole. Investing in RETs 
has significant economic and financial benefits as it will not only displace the high fuel costs 
for diesel, but also contribute to lowering the amount of subsidies that go along with the diesel 
based electricity generation. The underlying principles guiding the Maldives SREP IP are in line 
with the 2010 National Energy Policy and Strategy, centred on the following strategic objectives:
•	 Create an enabling environment for the growth of a reliable and sustainable energy sector 
and meet the constitutional obligation of the Government in the provision of electricity 
to every inhabited island at reasonable standards commensurate to the island; 
•	 reduce over reliance of the energy sector and the national economy on fossil fuels through 
the diversification of energy supplies; 
•	 improve energy efficiency and conservation of energy use;
•	 encourage the adoption of low-carbon technologies in production, distribution and 
energy consumption through promotion of a healthy lifestyle; 
•	 exploit local energy resources and renewable technologies; and 
•	 engage private sector participation in the development of the energy sector, energy 
services and quality assurance mechanisms.
MALDIVES SREP INTERVENTIONS
The Maldives SREP objectives are consistent with Government policies and priorities. The SREP 
investments were screened and prioritised taking into account technical, financial, economic and 
environmental criteria and are appropriate to Maldivian electricity use, population distribution, 
and socioeconomic aspects. The following components for SREP interventions have been 
identified:
Renewable Energy for Greater Male’ Region
This component consists of greater Male’ region’s solar PV, a Waste-to-Energy (WTE) programme 
in Thilafushi and the region’s renewable power system integration study. The projects under the 
component are expected to require financing of about USD 69.5 million. Of this amount, the 
private sector will contribute about USD 31.5 million as equity and debt to finance about 19MW 
of RE (this includes 11MW solar PV for the capital Male’, 4MW solar PV for surrounding 
islands that are part of the greater Male’ region and another 4MW WTE in Thilafushi). SREP 
and WBG financing will be used to provide risk mitigation facilities and/or incentives to private 
investors to implement these initiatives on a Feed-In Tariff (FIT) scheme. 
Renewable Energy for Outer Islands
This component targeting the outer islands would finance full RE in about 10 small electricity 
consuming islandspower system upgrades in about 15 islands to be ready for large scale RE SOURCES OF FUNDING (USD 000)
Components SREP
315 315
11,500 2,500 3,000 12,000 0 10,000 0 11,000 31,500 0 0 69,500
16,000 8,000 2,000 8,000 6,000 0 960 0 16,000 3,000 10,000 61,960
2,185 1,500 0 0 400 0 2,300 0 0 800 0 7,185
30,000 12,000 5,000 20,000 6,400 10,000 3,260 11,000 47,500 3,800 10,000 138,960
GoM WB
IDA
WBG
Guara-
-ntee
ADB IFC/
ADB
(PSOD)
GIZ JICA Private Others IDB TOTAL
IP Preparation Grant
Sub Total
Renewable Energy for Greater Male’ Region
Sub Total
GRAND TOTAL
Technical Assistance and Capacity Building
Sub Total
Renewable Energy for Outer Islands
Table 1: Financing Summary (in USD ‘000 )
sector investments in RE through the FIT, and WTE supported by other incentive mechanisms. 
The projects under this component will require financing of about USD 62 million of which 
USD 16 million is expected to be financed by the private sector. SREP funding will be used in 
conjunction with ADB, IDB, GoM and WBG for these investments. 
Technical Assistance and Capacity Building2
This component will support the creation of an enabling environment for RE investments and 
human capacity building. It will also provide funding for project preparation and improved 
access to better quality and more comprehensive renewable resource data. The total resource 
allocation for the activities under this component is about USD 7 million. About USD 2.1 
million will be used from SREP for preparing the projects and for supporting the Government 
and relevant stakeholders with capacity building activities. WBG, ADB, GIZ and other bilateral 
donors will be providing additional TA funds to supplement SREP’s contributions. Although 
SREP resources have been allocated for TA and capacity building, consideration will be made to 
attract other bilateral and multilateral resources to fund this entire component with the view to 
reallocate released funds from this component to investments.
FINANCING PLAN
This IP envisages investments of around USD 139 million of which USD 30 million is from 
SREP funds while USD 109 million is from other sources with a leveraging ratio of about 1:4. 
The largest share of investments is expected to come from the private sector amounting to about 
USD 47.5 million (34%). A summary of financing sources for the components under the IP and 
associated technical assistances is shown in Table 1.The Maldives SREP IP is taking into consideration the unique geographical and demographical 
characteristics of the Maldives, having a densely populated greater Male’ region surrounded by 
a large number of outer islands differing in size and population. Due to the inherent challenges 
associated with small populations, remoteness and high transaction costs for project development 
and implementation, the interventions are designed and packaged in such a way to address these 
challenges: 
•	 Accelerating Sustainable Private Investments in Renewable Energy Programme 
(ASPIRE): All projects under this programme will be based on a FIT with the use of 
appropriate WBG guarantee instruments as a risk mitigation tool for leveraging private 
investments. It will also target a number of WTE initiatives. This programme consists of 
greater Male’ region solar PV, solar PV/wind for 30 medium and large electricity consuming 
islands (about 15 islands will be made RE ready under the POISED programme), and 
WTE for outer islands. The WBG will be the lead agency.
•	 Preparing Outer Islands for Sustainable Energy Development Programme (POISED): 
Electricity generation from solar PV, and wind in some locations, is less expensive than 
energy generation from diesel based on avoided cost of fuel. This programme will support 
achieving full RE systems on 10 small electricity consuming islands and make the power 
systems ready to accept a 20-30% share of intermittent RE on 15 large and medium 
electricity consuming islands through rehabilitating inefficient generators and other 
necessary adjustments. The ADB will be the lead agency.
•	 Waste-to-Energy (Thilafushi) Programme: The programme will provide an up to 4 MW 
WTE power generation facility to replace the existing diesel-based power generator on 
the island. It is part of the broader Governments National Solid Waste Management 
Policy adopted in 2008. IFC/PSOD supports the development of an integrated waste 
management project for the Male’ catchment area as a public-private partnership (PPP). 
Under Maldives SREP IP, only the implementation of the WTE facility is considered, 
even though this is part of the larger scale waste management solution that includes the 
collection, processing and disposal of waste in the Greater Male region. IFC/PSOD will 
take the lead on this programme.
•	 Technical Assistance for Renewable Energy Scale up Programme (TA): These activities 
will support the strengthening of the enabling environment, strengthen human resource 
capacities and identify additional RE investment opportunities and resource data 
collection. The WBG and the ADB will each lead TA activities as appropriate. MODALITIES OF THE PROGRAMME
In accordance with SREP programming modalities, the IP will be implemented through an 
integrated approach that is led by the Government through policy interventions and incentive 
schemes to attract the private sector, and supported by technical assistance, financial instruments 
and physical investments from the MDBs with SREP funding playing a catalytic role in achieving 
the IP objectives. 
The IP envisages implementation modalities that are tailored to the comparative advantage 
of each stakeholder. Where small-scale public investments may not attract additional private 
capital, the public utilities will assume responsibility for the design and implementation of the 
identified solutions. On the other hand, the private sector – both investors and developers – will 
have an important role to play in the supply of RE through a FIT. In addition, as significant 
investments will be undertaken by the state owned utilities and private sector, the MDBs will 
support the government on project preparation, implementation support, financing, tendering 
and awarding, and through innovative guarantee schemes to address prevailing risks and barriers 
to scaling up RE investments in the Maldives. Regarding a timetable for the implementation 
of the projects, it is expected that the Maldives SREP IP work will be spread over a 5 to 6 year 
period. 
TRANSFORMATIVE OUTCOMES AND OUTPUTS
The main outcome of the Maldives SREP IP will be to transform the energy sector and increase 
energy security in the country. Maldives SREP IP will aim to improve the regulatory environment 
for investors supported by a strong legal framework to reduce risks and transaction costs and 
encourage investment in RE; support the strengthening of the capacity of Government institutions 
and other relevant stakeholders and create new employment and business opportunities in the 
RE industry. This can lead to more gender and social inclusiveness, climate change mitigation, 
and ensure sustainable operations. 
Investments under Maldives SREP IP will result in the installation of 26MW of RE generation, 
a reduction in GHG emissions by approximately 56,000 tCO2
/year and about 22 million litres 
of diesel avoided per year
SOURCES OF FUNDING (US$ 000)
Components SREP GoM WB
IDA
WBG
Guara-
-ntee
ADB IFC/
ADB
(PSOD)
GIZ JICA Private Others IDB TOTAL
ASPIRE 10,750 2,600 5,000 20,000 0 0 1,160 11,000 42,500 0 0 73,010
POISED 12,750 8,000 0 0 6,000 0 400 0 0 3,000 10,000 40,150
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 1,185 1,400 0 0 400 0 1,700 0 0 800 0 5,485
WASTE-TO-ENERGY THILAFUSHI 5,000 0 0 0 0 10,000 0 0 5,000 0 0 20.000
Table 2: Financing by programmesThe IP for the Maldives has been designed to generate strong interest from private investors 
making this a unique aspect. Out of the total USD 139 million the Plan envisages USD 47.5 
million from private investments through various financial incentives and risk mitigation tools. 
This innovative aspect of the IP is expected to set a positive example for other countries. In order 
to attract relatively large financing from the private sector, a number of enabling policy measures 
have already been implemented and others are being planned. These include the elimination of 
the import duty on RE products as well as the introduction of a FIT. These positive measures 
coupled with strong commitment from the Government to realize the 2020 carbon neutral target 
are expected to send a strong signal to those wishing to invest and to develop a strong RE sector. 
Introducing appropriate policies and regulations to encourage the use of RETs over diesel is 
expected to mitigate the negative impacts that may arise during the phasing out of the FIT and 
guarantee instruments in the future. It is important to note that at today’s diesel prices, the FIT 
which would be introduced by the Government would still be lower than the avoided cost of 
diesel.
In order to make the investment environment even more favourable, a number of attractive 
instruments and measures have been proposed to be undertaken under the Maldives SREP IP. For 
projects under the FIT regime favourable tariffs and standard power purchase agreements (PPA) 
will be in place, taking into account perceived levels of risks and returns that are appropriate 
to this type of investments. The Maldives SREP IP will have a strong emphasis on utilizing 
guarantee instruments to cover payment, currency depreciation and related risks that may be of 
concerns to potential investors. The introduction of a FIT combined with incentives and guarantee 
facilities and strong regulatory framework is envisaged to encourage private investors to venture 
into the RE market. In addition, adequate resources have been allocated in the Financing Plan 
of the Maldives SREP IP for possible capital injection to make debt financing more attractive 
for private investor even at commercial rates. After the approval of the Maldives SREP IP, the 
Government, with support from the MDBs, will carry out an investment conference/road show 
to solicit feedback from investors on the level of guarantees needed as well as on the design of 
risk mitigation instruments to attract investment in the sector.
During the process of selecting the companies, suitable credibility criteria, substantial financial 
backing and appropriate experience will be considered. 
CORE INDICATORS AND CO-BENEFITS
While the current share of RE in the electricity mix in the inhabited islands is estimated to be 
less than 1%, RE investments planned under the Maldives SREP IP are expected to generate 
70GWh/year of electricity, therefore increasing the share of RE by approximately 16%. 
Currently contributions from the electricity sector on the national CO2
 emissions are estimated 
to be 0.25MtCO2
/year. With the full implementation of the Maldives SREP IP, 27% of CO2
emission reduction is expected compared to 2009 levels for electricity generation in inhabited 
islands. including an increased energy security for small and vulnerable communities to enhance the 
socioeconomic conditions. Furthermore, WTE projects will improve local environment in the 
islands by better management of waste and by reducing the extent of land needed for waste 
disposal. This is also expected to bring significant health and tourism benefits to the local 
communities.
Reducing the operational costs of power systems, improving the country’s balance of trade due to 
reduction of diesel imports and potential tariff reductions as a result of lower power generation 
costs as well as building private sector capacities and creating more employment opportunities 
are considered as significant fiscal co-benefits of the Maldives SREP IP.
The successful implementation of full RE in 10 small electricity consuming islands is expected 
to generate a strong demonstration effect which in turn can be translated for both other small 
islands in the Maldives and other countries learning from this experience and applying it to their 
own context to meet the energy needs of isolated populations. 
Male’,
the capital of 
MaldivesTHE Maldives SREP IP PROCESS
To identify the priorities, programmes and projects under the Maldives SREP IP and their 
investment potential, a strategic development approach was adopted:
The multi-phase approach as shown in Figure 1 started with extensive research and analysis of 
existing data by national and international energy sector experts to assess the energy demand 
and supply for the greater Male’ region and the inhabited islands that led into the preparation 
of the first draft of the IP. This first draft also included benefits and costs related to promising 
programmes and projects, the identification of incentive schemes and methods to attract, blend 
and leverage private sector finance for implementation, the selection of RETs best suited for the 
country’s needs as well the identification of programmes and projects for implementation under 
Maldives SREP IP. 
Based on extensive stakeholder consultations the second draft of the IP was prepared and 
shared with MDBs for extensive discussions and comments. To guarantee the most effective 
and efficient implementation the identified programmes and projects were packaged according 
to their potential to attract private investors. For RE ready islands, instruments such as the FIT 
and the guarantee facility would provide the necessary security for private investors (ASPIRE), 
island in need of power system upgrades or complete generator set replacement were packaged 
under POISED with the goal of making them RE ready to attract private investors under FIT 
and guarantee mechanism. 
The resulting updated IP was published for review and after including comments from public 
and private stakeholders as well as sector experts referred to the independent reviewer for further 
comments, questions and suggestions. After the final round of including additional information 
into the IP, it was presented and discussed with the cabinet and given endorsement as part of the 
ll RE ttf tht
Figure 1: Schematic diagram for various stages of IP formulation
2nd Draft IP
Expert Review
1st Draft IP
Research Final IP
Concept Development Cabinet Endorsement
Independent Review
3rd Draft IP
Stakeholder Consultation
7 4
6 5
8 3
1 2 9 10Figure 2: Map Of 
The Maldives
1. COUNTRY BACKGROUND
1.1 GEOGRAPHY
The Republic of Maldives is located 750 km South West of Sri Lanka and is 
made up of 26 natural atolls stretching 115,300 km2
 North to South across 
the equator (Figure 2). Made up exclusively of corals and sand, no single 
point is higher than 2.3m above mean sea level. The total land area is around 
300 km2
 and the average size of the islands is 25 hectares. The Maldivian 
islands experience a monsoonal climate, with little variation in temperature 
throughout the year. Daily temperatures range from 31o
C in the daytime, to 
23o
C during night time. The Maldives on average receives over 2,700 hours of 
sunshine each year3
.
Of the total 1192 islands, 194 are inhabited and 105 are self-contained 
tourist resorts. The total estimated population4
 in 2012 is 330,652 with an 
average annual population growth rate5
 of 1.69%. The largest urban centre 
is the greater Male’ region, which includes Male’, Hulhumale’’, Villingili, 
Thilafushi, Hulhulé and Gulheefalhu and has an estimated population of 
114,686. Over one third of the nation’s population reside in the capital island 
Male’ which has an area of about 2 km2
. Male’, Villingili and Hulhumale’’ 
are already inhabited islands and Gulheefalhu will soon be. Thilafushi is a 
landfill, waste management site and an industrial island, while Hulhule’ hosts 
the international airport.
The second largest population centre is Addu City in the South, with an 
estimated 19,940 residents. Besides Male’, only four islands have a population 
of over 5,000 and one fourth of the islands has a population less than 500. 
According to the Population and Housing Census 2006, there are a total of 
46,194 households in the Republic, of which approximately one third are 
located in Male’.
Maldives has been demonstrating progress in various indicators of 
development. The per capita GDP6
 of Maldives in the year 2010 was USD 5,273. On average, 
6.2 persons live in one household, and monthly household income is MVR7
 28,909 for Male’, 
and MVR 11,200 for the other islands. 
The islands of the Maldives are connected via a basic nationwide transportation system and 
therefore, transport between islands calls for investments to further strengthen and develop
3	 Maldives Meteorological Service. Climate of Maldives. [updated 2010; cited 2012 Aug 1]. Available from: http://202.21.178.203/mms//
4 Direct Communication with Department of National Planning, July 2012.
5 Miitf Plid Ntil DltPltid HiCf Mldi2006Ml’Miitf Plid Ntil Dlt2007Figure 3: A typical island of Maldives 
islands is supported by harbours and jetties 
(Figure 3). At present, a network of ferries 
enables affordable travel between the islands 
and atolls although the frequency remains 
an issue. Three regional ports have been 
established, one in the capital island Male’, 
one in the North in HDh.Kulhudhuffishi 
and a third in Addu City. For air travel, two 
international airports are in operation; one in 
greater Male’ region and the other in Addu 
City. Furthermore, three additional airports 
throughout the country serve domestic 
flights, and five more airports are currently 
under development. The Maldives is also home to one of the largest sea plane operations in the 
world, with sea plane access facilities established in 56 locations throughout the archipelago8
since 2009. Telecommunications are excellent, with an affordable mobile phone service that 
covers the entire country. 
Despite the many challenges posed by the geographically dispersed nature of the islands and its 
inhabitants, the Maldivian population enjoys universal access to electricity. In fact, electricity 
generation is one of the fastest growing sectors in the Maldives, with the annual electricity 
production in 2011 reaching over 428GWh9
 in inhabited islands. Since it is not possible to 
install a single national grid to provide electricity to the population, each inhabited island in the 
Maldives, as well as resorts and other industrial islands are required to install their own power 
generation and distribution facility and are therefore, self-contained. This results in high costs for 
installation and maintenance of such systems. 
Almost half of the population in the country resides in the greater Male’ region and Addu city. 
These two regions account for half of the installed electrical capacity in inhabited islands. In 
the year 2011, Male’ consumed roughly 217GWh of electricity which accounts for nearly half 
of the total electricity generated for inhabited islands. The power demand increases at a rate of 
11% per year for Male’10. Tourist resorts produce and consume 60% of the national electricity 
production. 
The Maldives relies almost exclusively on imported petroleum to meet its energy demands, and 
the cost of importing fossil fuels for the year 2011 accounted for roughly 20% of the national 
GDP. 
8The President’s Office“Aneh Dhivehiraajje” The Strategic Action Plan 2009 2013Male’: Government of Maldives; 2009Article 22 of the Constitution of the Republic of Maldives provides the basis for the 
environmental policy formulation. The Constitution stipulates the fundamental duty of the State 
to protect the environment for present and future generations, and to ensure that the pursuance 
of economic and social development goals is not at the cost of the natural environment. The 
Environment Protection and Preservation Act (Law No. 4/93) further reiterates the need for the 
protection of the natural environment for present and future generations. The Third National 
Environment Action Plan (2009-2013) highlights goals towards carbon neutrality, advancement 
of energy security and establishment of an efficient transport network. The National Sustainable 
Development Strategy adopted in 2009 sets out the targets for achieving carbon neutrality for the 
energy sector.
As one of the most low-lying countries in the world, Maldives is exceptionally vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change. Although the contribution of the Maldives to global climate change 
is negligible, the government wants to demonstrate international leadership. It has declared a 
policy commitment to become a carbon neutral country by 2020. This carbon neutral objective 
is supported by a number of policy decisions, including the National Energy Policy (2009-
2013) and the National Energy Action Plan (2009-2013) that have been adopted to guide the 
development of the energy sector in the Maldives. In addition, a number of policies have been 
developed to encourage private investments in the energy sector - including a zero import duty 
for RE related merchandise and the introduction of FIT regulations.
1.3 ECONOMIC POLICY BACKGROUND
Tourism and fisheries are the mainstays of the Maldivian economy. These two sectors directly 
account for approximately 40% of the national GDP and are the main sources of foreign exchange 
earnings11 . The Government, recognizing the role of the private sector in the development of 
these two vital industries, encourages its greater involvement in all development activities12.
Foreign direct investment in the Maldives employs very simple procedures, whereby prospective 
investors may be granted permission to commence operations within a very short period of time 
from submission of necessary documentation13 . Furthermore, transfer of profits through foreign 
investment is not subject to restriction.
As part of the Government tax reforms, the Goods and Services Tax Act was introduced in 
2011. The Goods and Services Tax (GST) became operational in October 2011, and the Tourism 
Goods and Services Tax (TGST) was raised from 3.5 % to 6 % from January 2012 and to 8% 
from January 2013.
Maldives has an open economy and is highly dependent on imports. In the past five years, 
imports have averaged 61% of the GDP while exports ranged between 11-15 %, resulting in a 
large trade deficit.
11	 Maldives Monetary Authority. Overview of the Maldivian Economy [homepage on the Internet]. Male’, Maldives: Maldives Monetary Authority. [updated 2011 May 24;
cited 2012 Aug 1]. Available from: http://www.mma.gov.mv/stat.php
12Shf FSdiHBliStdCtSil RibilitPtiiMldiMl’UNDPin 2012 this is expected to reach USD 450-500 million, which would be approximately 33-36% of 
GDP. If the oil price rises to USD150/bbl by 2020, and consumption grows by 8% per annum, 
oil imports are expected to reach around USD 700 million – or almost USD 2,000 per capita by 
2020. This is clearly unsustainable. Therefore, the twin objective of the carbon neutral policy, 
other than being a flagship for climate change, is to make the economy largely independent of 
oil. Decarbonisation is as much a matter of national economic security and social welfare as it 
is a matter of environmental concern.
Figure 4 below shows the price comparison of 4 major fossil fuel imports to the Maldives in the 
past decade (2001 to 2010). In 2011, Maldives spent USD 261 million to import 316 thousand 
toe of diesel which is about 20% of the GDP of the country. Approximately 81% of the fuel 
import is diesel and more than 44% of the diesel imported is used for electricity generation.
1.4 ENERGY POLICY BACKGROUND
The Government has formulated and adopted policies to provide affordable and reliable electricity 
to its citizens while at the same time introduced some necessary interventions to diversify its 
energy mix by focusing on other alternate sources. This includes measures to diversify the energy 
mix by introducing RE and by concentrating on the feasibility of installing solar, wind, WTE 
and ocean energy generation based projects across the country. 
RE resources will be developed to optimum levels to minimize dependence on fossil fuel, 
subject to resolving economic, environmental and social constraints. In order to minimize the 
vulnerability of energy supplies to external factors such as international socio-political problems, 
the use of indigenously available RE resources will be maximized. In addition, the use of RE 
resources in energy generation will reduce the pressure on the country’s balance of payments. 
The Energy Action Plan (2009-2013) includes a series of actionsmeasuresprogrammes and 
Petrol
Aviation
LPG
Diesel
1,000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
Energy Price (USD/toe)
20012002200320042005200620072008200920102011
Figure 4: Price comparison of four major fossil fuel imports to Maldives over the past decadeand individual citizens that energy conservation is the responsibility of all. The key strategies 
that have been envisaged in the action plan are as follows:
•	 Provide all citizens with access to affordable and reliable supply of electricity through:
- Developing utilities to upgrade and manage power infrastructure on the islands and 
 improve the efficiency and quality of services;
- encouraging private sector participation to develop, manage and sustain electric 
 services;
- encouraging national and international investments to develop and sustain energy; 
 and
- introducing incentives to power sector developers to ensure affordability of energy 
 supply by facilitating access to grants and concessional finance.
•	 Achieve carbon neutrality by year 2020 through:
- Developing plans for energy sector to include forecast of energy usage by different 
 sources, GHG emissions and assessing status of carbon neutrality;
- setting and monitoring targets to track energy sources, composition, efficiency and 
 losses to achieve carbon neutrality and sustaining it;
- adopting standards for exhaust emission for power plants, vehicles and vessels that 
 use fossil fuel in order to improve air quality; and
- promoting carbon capture and sequestration.
•	 Promote energy conservation and energy efficiency to reduce costs through:
- Promoting energy efficiency and energy conservation to achieve economic use of 
 energy without lowering the quality of service rendered;
- promoting energy efficiency in electricity production, distribution and usage via 
 workshops involving necessary stakeholders;
- promoting demand side management with focus on large energy users;
- identifying all areas of improvement and provide technical advice in fuel 
 conservation and efficiency in different modes of transport; and
- introducing incentives to encourage greater use of electric vehicles by establishing 
 charging stations using RE sources.
•	 Promote RE technologies through:
- Introducing and demonstrating new renewable technologies application;
- facilitating and promoting research opportunities for locals and international parties 
 by informing about potential of RE sources within the country;
- developing human resource capacity for RE throughout the country by introducing 
 RE related courses in college curriculum;
- encouraging and promote bio fuels; and
- encouraging the development of power generation capability by utilizing the 
 household waste and bio fuels.Provision of electricity as a service in the Maldives started 63 years ago. In 1949, a generator 
set of 6kW was installed in the capital Male’ to produce electricity for the first time. Initially, 
electricity was supplied to presidential palace and a few Government office buildings; this was 
later extended to the entire population of Male’. Recognizing the importance of providing 
electricity to the outer islands for social and economic development and poverty eradication, 
a state-owned company (STELCO) with a mandate to provide electricity was formed in 1997. 
STELCO developed electricity facilities on 32 of the most populated islands and developed 
human resource capacities to an acceptable level. Although most power systems are set up, 
operated and managed by state owned utilities, a few were developed and are being operated by 
either the community or private parties. 
Due to the geographic formation of the archipelago, each island has its own infrastructure 
including power generating facilities with several diesel generators of varying ages and capacities. 
Some of these systems were not properly designed and continue to be manually controlled with 
each island having only one supplier. In addition, where there are industrial facilities such as icemaking plants for the fishing industry, private generation is the norm. The physical dispersion of 
the islands makes it virtually impossible to connect the entire country on a single grid. 
Diesel generators have been chosen as the primary mode of power generation as the initial 
investment required is less and these systems provide a relatively reliable source of energy. On 
the other hand, this makes the nation completely dependent on fossil fuel imports, as the country 
does not have proven fossil fuel reserves. Limited demand and storage capacity does not allow 
the importing of large quantities of fuel which makes the import of diesel relatively expensive. 
As a result, the country purchases its fuel requirements at the prevailing market rates. 
In 2009, six new utility companies were formed to provide affordable and quality utility services 
to the respective populations in six regions of the Maldives. In addition, STELCO’s mandate was 
expanded to include the islands in the North Central Region. The idea behind this change was 
to develop and manage utility services by qualified and trained personal to avoid inefficiencies 
and losses caused due to lack of knowledge and necessary skills. On formation, these utility 
companies took over most of the power systems operated by the island councils and private 
parties. 
With the recent changes in the Government’s administration structure, the former regional 
utility companies have been merged into one company; FENAKA Corporation Limited. 
FENAKA provides electricity to 115 out of 194 inhabited islands, STELCO currently operates 
and manages power systems on 10 islands, the island councils provide electricity to 63 islands 
and private parties provide electricity to 6 islands. It is expected that FENAKA will take over all 
power systems that are currently managed by councils or private parties as this would make the 
management more efficient and effective and save operational as well as maintenance costs by 
pooling resources.Energy consumption in the Maldives increased from 224,000 in 2002 to 396,000 toe in 2011 
due to a rise in the demand for electricity and transportation. Electricity generation is by far the 
single largest consumer of imported fuels. Diesel accounts for 81% of the total primary energy 
demand in the country. In 2011, 316,000 toe of diesel was consumed of which 44% was utilized 
for electricity generation.
The production of electricity is the fastest growing energy consumption sector led by increased 
electrification of inhabited islands and growth in the tourism industry. Electricity generation 
for the capital Male’ and the islands in its vicinity (collectively called as greater Male’ region) 
accounts for approximately 51% of the total electricity generated for all inhabited islands in the 
country.
Electricity demand in the Maldives is expected to continue to grow at more than 8.5%/year, with 
this growth rate being influenced most significantly by the increase in electricity demand for the 
greater Male’ region.
Rising fuel prices prompted the Government to subsidize the operational cost of electricity 
generation to maintain the stability of the price of electricity which in turn has imposed a 
significant burden on the Government’s budget in 2011, USD 25 million was spent on electricity 
subsidy. 
Today Maldives has a total installed capacity of approximately 245MW of diesel generators 
to cater for electricity demand. Electricity generation in the Maldives is in three main types of 
Islands: inhabited islands, tourist resort and industrial islands. Table 3 below shows the installed 
capacity for the different types. 
Types Installed Capacity (MW)
Inhabited Islands 120
Tourism Resorts (estimated) 105
Industrial Islands 20
Total 245
Male’ accounts for 48 MW which is approximately 20% of the total installed capacity of the 
country or one third of the installed capacity on inhabited and industrial islands combined.
Since Maldives SREP IP will be targeted towards transforming the electricity sector of the 
inhabited islands only, the current situation of the electricity sector was analysed and the 
inhabited islands have been divided into two main categories: the greater Male’ region and the 
outer islands.
Table 3: Installed capacities by typesGreater Male’ region consists of the capital island Male’, Thilafushi (Industrial and waste 
management island), Gulheefalhu (newly reclaimed island), Villingili, Hulhule (airport) and 
Hulhumale’’ (Figure 5). The greater Male’ region is the largest consumer of electricity with an 
consumption of about 225 GWh/year (excluding Hulhule). Of this, Male’ with approximately 
one third of the entire population has an electricity demand of 217GWh/year with an installed 
capacity of 48 MW. The electricity demand in Male’ is increasing at an average rate of 11% 
annually. 
However, Male’ does not have enough space to expand the power generating capacity and hence, 
it is important to find alternative options to supply electricity to Male’ to meet this demand. 
STELCO, does not have enough capacity to provide electricity to all its customers, some 
businesses in Male’ operate standby generators, and some have their own private full time power 
supply. Since the lack of any interconnection between islands means there is no opportunity to 
generate electricity on one island and supply to another. 
Outer islands:
For the purpose of this IP, the islands outside greater Male’ region are referred to as outer 
islands. Out of a total of the 194 inhabited islands, power systems on 113 islands were analysed 
on an island-by-island basis, regarding their electricity production/consumption, installed 
capacities, and associated costs. Annual electricity consumption varies significantly, ranging 
from 8,000MWh to less than 95MWh. Similarly, the fuel efficiency varies from 0.68l/kWh to 
0.26l/kWh. The average population14 among the island groups ranges from 5700 people to less 
than 550 people (Figure 6). Based on these factors, the outer islands have been divided into four 
sub-categories: large electricity consuming islands, medium electricity consuming islands, small 
electricity consuming islands and very small electricity consuming islands as shown in Figures 
7 and 8
Figure 5: Greater Male’ region
Gulheefalhu Villingili
Thilafushi Male’
Hulhule
Hulhumale’8100
7100
6100
5100
4100
3100
2100
1100
100
Large electricity
consuming islands
Medium electricity
consuming islands
Small electricity
consuming islands
Very small electricity
consuming islands
Polulation
5,723
2,447
1,141
519
Figure 6: Average population size among the outer island groups
Figure 7: Island categories based on electricity production and efficiency
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
Large electricity
consuming islands
Electricity Production (kWh/year)-log Scale
Efficiency (Litres/kWh)
75000 750000 7500000
Efficiency
threshold
Medium electricity
consuming islands
Small electricity
consuming islands
Very small electricity
consuming islands15
Large electricity consuming islands:
Outer islands that consume electricity exceeding 3GWh/year have been classified as large 
electricity consuming islands. Power systems operating on these islands have been properly 
designed and are considered reasonably efficient with an average fuel efficiency of 0.35l/kWh. 
In addition, the average cost of electricity production on these islands is considered to be lowest 
at USD 0.31/kWh while the cost varies between USD 0.30/kWh and USD 0.32/kWh. Even 
though these islands have the lowest average electricity tariff among all outer island clusters, 
the unit cost of diesel electricity is still higher than that of solar/wind generated electricity. The 
islands under this category have an average population of 5,723 people. All nine islands that 
fall under this category are considered as RE ready under the FIT with some possible system 
upgrading (See Appendix 5 for more details).
Medium electricity consuming islands: 
Medium electricity consuming islands have electricity consumption between 1GWh/year to 
3GWh/year. This category includes 21 islands with a fuel efficiency between 0.26l/kWh to 
0.52l/kWh. In addition, the average cost of electricity production on these islands is considered 
to be USD 0.34/kWh while the cost varies between USD 0.28/kWh and USD 0.43/kWh. Power 
systems on some of these islands have been upgraded in the past and are considered efficient 
and RE ready for FIT. Also several islands can be identified where the power houses and the 
distribution systems would need to be upgraded to reduce the diesel usage per unit of electricity 
consumed and to make the islands ready for RE through the FIT. The islands under this category 
have an average population of 2,447 people (Appendix 5). 
Small electricity consuming islands:
Electricity consumption in these 62 islands is in the range of 250MWh/year to 1GWh/year with 
a fuel efficiency between 0.27l/kWh to 0.68l/kWh. In addition, the average cost of electricity 
production on these islands is considered to be USD 040/kWh while the cost varies between 
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
Avg. unit cost
(USD/kWh)
0.35 0.35 0.34
0.37
0.40
0.42
0.46
0.31
Categories
Avg. efficiency
(Litres/kWh)
Large electricity
consuming islands
Medium electricity
consuming islands
Small electricity
consuming islands
Very small electricity
consuming islands
Figure 8: Comparison of average fuel efficiency and unit cost of generation
for the different categories of outer islands15the islands in the category, on most of these islands power systems are considered inefficient. In 
addition, the electricity demand as well as the electricity growth rate are relatively small. Due to 
small size, low return on investment, small population coupled with small growth in electricity 
demands these islands are not very attractive for private investors. This makes them potential 
candidates for complete RE transformation including necessary power system upgrading16. 
The complete RE transformation will have a strong demonstration effect that would potentially 
inspire others to follow the model both on other Maldives islands, but also on a global scale. The 
islands under this category have an average population of 1,141 people (Appendix 5). 
Very small electricity consuming islands:
All islands that have a consumption of less than 250MWh/year are considered as very small 
electricity consuming islands. The fuel efficiency on those islands ranges between 0.311/
kWh to 0.67l/kWh which indicates extremely inefficient power systems. The 20 plus islands 
under this category all have a very small demand and have virtually no potential for further 
growth. Investments in these islands are not considered to be economical and will therefore not 
be considered under Maldives SREP IP. The Government is considering promoting voluntary 
relocation programmes for these small populations to islands where development potential and 
other opportunities are greater. The islands have an average population of 519 people (Appendix 
5). Based on the above assessments, Table 4 summarizes those outer islands selected under the 
Maldives SREP IP for RE investments.
17
Category Total No. of 
Islands 
studied
No. of islands 
selected under 
Maldives SREP IP
Mechanism of 
intervention
Additional comments
Greater Male’ region 6 3 (Male’, Thilafushi
& Hulhumale’’)
FIT Some minor adjustments to
the power systems
Large electricity
consuming islands
4 4 FIT Some minor adjustments to
the power systems
Medium electricity
consuming islands
21 26 FIT Power system of 15
islands may need complete
replacement or major
upgrading
Small electricity
consuming islands
62 10 Complete
power system
transformation
to full RE with
storage
Power distribution systems
upgrading is needed.
Very small electricity
consuming islands
20 Not considered under
Maldives SREP IP
Total 11317 43
16	 These islands would have solar PV installed with batteries at a generation cost of around USD 0.35/kWh, whereas the current cost of generation for the diesel 	 	
systems is at around USD 0.40/kWh. Based on the difference a decrease in subsidies for the fuel surcharge might occur, even though there might be the need for
keeping diesel generators as backup which as a result would lower the cost reductions .
 Table 4: Island categories and SREP interventionsAll 105 islands that are operated as tourist resorts (one island one resort exclusively) have their 
own private generating facilities. Although there is no accurate record of the installed capacity 
at these resorts, a reasonable working estimate is 1 MW per island, making the tourism sector 
as big as the state sector. The tourism sector was not considered under Maldives SREP IP due 
to the fact that grant finance allocated for the Maldives should benefit the local populations as 
a priority as opposed to lucrative businesses that can afford to invest own finance to run similar 
programmes. Maldives SREP IP will however share lessons learnt to tourist islands to motivate 
and encourage them to follow a similar path. This may be important to deepen the opportunities 
for PV sales, providing an additional attraction for investment when there is a clearer path to an 
increase in the scale of the market. 
1.7 ELECTRICITY PRICING AND SUBSIDY
The tariff methodology and structure currently applied by the regulator, Maldives Energy 
Authority (MEA) was introduced in 2009. Electricity tariffs are determined based on average 
tariff, dividing customers into three categories: residential, business and governmental (see 
Figure 9).
Tariffs for each group are fixed by using an ad-hoc method (trying to produce small adjustments 
to previously existing tariffs) and a reconciliation test (assuring that with the approved tariffs 
each region is capable to collect the allowed revenues). Tariffs are single part (only energy) and 
increase with consumption. 
With the current tariff a correction mechanism was introduced in order to adjust end-user tariffs 
to the variation in fuel prices (the latter currently represents above 80% of total costs in the 
Maldives). This adjustment is carried out monthly through a fuel surcharge mechanism which 
is added to the monthly invoices. The fuel surcharge is calculated according to a formula, which 
assumes an average efficiency of the generation sets of USD 0.35l/kWh of fuel.
When the tariff was first introduced the price for a litre of diesel was around USD 0.5. Today, 
this price has almost doubled to about USD 1 per litre. As a result of this increase, the fuel 
surcharge amounts to about 45% of the final bills.
With the current tariff, the Government also introduced a subsidy scheme for domestic consumers. 
This is part of the social welfare protection, to make access to electricity affordable to average 
households. The tariffs actually paid by end-users are reduced by the application of subsidies. 
Two types of subsidies exist as shown in Figure 9.
Cross subsidies (among customers or customer categories): Governmental and business tariffs 
are higher than residential ones, although the costs imposed by these customers are roughly 
similar than domestic consumers.
Direct subsidies are paid for domestic customers as Fuel Surcharge Subsidies and Usage Subsidies. 
Fuel surcharge for domestic customers (although reflected in the customer’s bill) is paid in full by who claim it under the social welfare scheme. On average, 57% of the domestic customer’s bill 
is written off as subsides and paid to the service providers. 
Figure 9 depicts the average tariff and fuel surcharge compared with the generation costs using 
diesel and solar PV. The average cost of generating a unit of electricity in the greater Male’ 
region is around USD 0.30 using diesel compared with USD 0.23 using solar PV. 
Current tariffs are based on existing (historical) costs rather than expected (future) ones:
Several important investments are currently being evaluated which, if materialize, may lead to a 
further increase in electricity costs making future overall costs even higher than the historic ones 
and therefore RE even more favourable18.
The requirements of important investments in the short term (islands interconnection, 
replacement of old, inefficient generators etc.): As investments (capital costs) are not a factor 
explicitly incorporated into the current tariff methodology, it is not possible to guarantee that 
these costs will be properly recovered, which challenges the overall sustainability.
To find a balance between the right incentives for sector investors and the appropriate level of 
subsidies, major structural change to the system are required. Recognising this, the Government 
has initiated several programmes, with the assistance of the WBG’s economic stabilization and 
recovery credit programme, to stabilize the economy and to put in place some key elements 
needed for a sound recovery including laying the foundations for a harmonized national social 
protection system to better target subsidies prevalent in the current electricity structure.
In parallel, and to remedy the challenges identified above, a comprehensive new tariff structure 
for both conventional and RE will be introduced under ongoing technical assistance from ADB. 
The proposed FIT structure is provided in Appendix 6.
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Domestic
Fuel
Surcharge
Subsidy
Paid by
customer
Usage
Subsidy
Business
Profits Cost of
Generation using Diesel
Cost of
Generation using Solar PV
Government
Average Tariff (US Cents/kWh)
Consumer Catagory
Fuel Surcharge
Figure 9: Fuel surcharge compared with generation costs and subsidy for Male’2. INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR
MALDIVES SREP IP IMPLEMENTATION
In order to improve governance and sector management, the Government has restructured the 
former Ministry of Housing and Environment, which had a mandate for energy amongst other 
sectors, and created a new Ministry of Environment and Energy (MEE). The new Ministry has 
a more focused mandate on energy, climate change, environment and water resources. Within 
MEE, a dedicated Energy Department is responsible for development and implementation of 
policies, legislation, and project/programmes including Maldives SREP IP. In addition, the 
Ministry coordinates directly with other stakeholders and government agencies on cross-sectoral 
initiatives. The government through its existing institutions has devised a mechanism to design, 
develop and implement investments in the energy sector and specifically for Maldives SREP IP. 
The proposed institutional relationships are described in Figure 10.
2.1 MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND ENERGY
The Minister of Environment and Energy represents the energy sector in the President’s Cabinet 
of Ministers. A Minister of State solely dedicated to the energy sector has also been appointed 
to help the Maldives bolster its energy security and create important RE and energy efficiency 
policies and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Government has appointed the Permanent 
Secretary of MEE as the Focal Point for SREP coordination. 
Figure 10: Institutional framework for SREP implementation
SREP IP
MDBs MED
MEE
Ministry of
Finance & Treasury
Other multilaterals,
bilateral donors
IFC, PSOD, equity
Energy Task Force
CCAC
EPA
MEA
Island
councils
Advisory Groups
Implementers
Private Financiers
Regulator
MGF
Public Utilities
PMU
Private•	 Promote energy security by increasing the use of RE and diversifying the fuel mix;
•	 devise innovative financing for the development of the energy sector;
•	 advocate policies for efficient energy use by households, private and public sector;
•	 reform the energy market to ensure a diverse, safe, secure and affordable energy system; 
and
•	 tackle climate change internationally through ambitious international agreements. 
MEE will be advised by Climate Change Advisory Council (CCAC) which is a high-level body 
setup under a Presidential decree and chaired by the Vice President of the Maldives. This council 
will advise, facilitate and enhance inter-agency cooperation and strategic guidance on climate 
change related issues. It will also play a strategic role in ensuring the timely implementation of 
Maldives SREP IP. 
Within MEE, the Energy Department is responsible for overall coordination, management 
and implementation of Maldives SREP IP activities and projects. The Energy Department will 
also draw on expertise and technical inputs from proposed Energy Task Force comprising of 
experts from key Maldivian institutions as well as necessary experts from the public sector and 
internationally.
2.2 MALDIVES SREP IP IMPLEMENTATION 
Day to day implementation of the Maldives SREP IP within the Energy Department will 
be handled by the PMU. The PMU is currently operational within the Department and is 
responsible for managing a number of externally-funded projects and programmes including 
four ongoing WBG operations. The existing PMU will be strengthened through Maldives SREP 
IP to handle the increased workload especially in the early years during the preparatory activities. 
Eventually, lead responsibility for RE and energy efficiency projects and programmes will be 
transferred to the Maldives Green Fund (MGF) which is being established. Once operational, it 
is expected to become a key element of the environmental management system of the Republic 
of the Maldives. MGF is expected to become the Maldives Government’s dedicated institution 
for financing and enabling a wide range of priority projects/investments in the areas of climate 
change, environment and energy. 
Project implementation will be led by the public sector utilities, private sector and other national 
agencies as outlined below: 
•	 State Electric Company (STELCO): provides electricity service to the greater Male’ region. 
The company has a comparatively long history of existence and technical capacity to 
handle projects in the region. The role of STELCO in Maldives SREP IP implementation 
would be to purchase electricity from private suppliers as well as public sector investments 
in the power sector.all inhabited islands in the Maldives, with the exception of the greater Male’ region. The 
role of FENAKA in Maldives SREP IP implementation is similar to that of STELCO 
but for the outer islands. Presently, the company lacks sufficient technical and financial 
capacity to implement large scale RET projects. Therefore, in the initial phases of Maldives 
SREP IP, the PMU will be supporting FENAKA in implementing the relevant Maldives 
SREP IP programmes and projects, while simultaneously strengthening FENAKA’s 
capacities. Eventually FENAKA will assume full responsibility for Maldives SREP IP 
implementation and RE expansion in the outer islands. 
•	 Private Sector: domestic and international private investments are central for achieving 
Maldives SREP IP and national goals. They bring financing, advanced technologies, 
strong technical and professional business management expertise. Recognizing their 
importance, the government of Maldives through its own initiatives and Maldives SREP 
IP will be addressing investment barriers and risks of concern to these investors and proactively reaching out to them through road shows and investor conferences. Domestic 
commercial banks are currently not financing RE investments, but may do so as experience 
in the sector builds up.
•	 Other National Stakeholders: The Government through the Ministry of Finance and 
Treasury will support the programme through contributions from the national budget 
as well as structuring Overseas Development Assistance guarantees through MDBs to 
cover commercial and non-commercial risks. The Ministry of Economic Development 
will support and assist local and foreign investors and provide incentives for private 
sector engagement. The Central Procurement Agency will carry out tender processes for 
larger procurement packages. The Maldives Meteorological Service (MMS) will lead RE 
resource data collection and management required for Maldives SREP IP funded projects 
and beyond. At island levels the projects will be implemented with the consent of the 
Island Councils who will play a major role in implantation of the projects. 
2.3 REGULATING FUNCTIONS
Maldives Energy Authority (MEA): as the regulator, will have a critical role to play in establishing 
tariffs, issuing guidelines and regulations to ensure the reliability, security of the grids, and that 
the rights and obligations of consumers and service providers are safeguarded. MEAs role 
is crucial for the success of Maldives SREP IP implementation as the programme envisages 
significant private investment in delivering renewable electricity. In this regard, MEA is 
developing a comprehensive energy sector regulatory framework with technical assistance from 
WBG and ADB. Through this support, regulations on licensing, standards of performance, 
energy efficiency labelling, investment approvals and technical regulations are being developed. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): will be responsible for implementation of the Maldives 
Environment Act and the Environmental Impact Assessment Regulation. This will ensure that 
investments under Maldives SREP IP are compliant with Maldivian Law as well as applicable 
MDB safeguards requirements3. MALDIVES SREP IP AS A KEY STRATEGIC TOOL
3.1 MALDIVES SREP IP CONTRIBUTION TO CARBON NEUTRAL 
STRATEGY
The carbon neutral policy has multiple benefits in terms of CO2 emission reduction, energy 
security, electricity cost reduction and ecosystem conservation. According to the Carbon Audit 
200919 the present status of emissions is at 1.3 MtCO2
 equivalents which, by 2020 will increase 
up to 2.5 MtCO2
 equivalents under a usual business scenario (Figure 11). Maldives SREP IP 
is targeting the electricity sector which contributes 19% of the total CO2 emissions. Maldives 
SREP IP also has a very significant demonstrative effect to the tourism sector which is one of 
the largest emitters of CO2 in the country. There are number of Government led programmes 
targeting various sectors (see Appendix 3 and 4 for details). Therefore, the Maldives SREP IP is 
part of a larger programme tackling the climate change agenda.
Reaching the target of a carbon neutral energy sector by the year 2020 is of high priority to the 
Government. Even though there is universal access to electricity in the Maldives, it is based 
entirely on diesel generators. Maldives SREP IP will complement the overall RET development 
programme stated in the National Sustainable Development Strategy from 2009 that sets out the 
targets for achieving carbon neutrality for the energy sector.
Maldives SREP IP will support the RE development in the greater Male’ region and the outer 
islands with a strong focus on solar PV, wind and WTE, including public and private investment 
as well as related capacity building of government bodies, utilities and other stakeholders. 
MEE is in the process of formulating a Renewable Energy Law with a long term perspective for 
the RET development including a functioning FIT system. The Government is also supporting 
the establishment of a coherent and efficient structure for the electricity market through the 
flliid lii
Figure 11: Emissions by the major sectors in the country
1.3 Mt
+97%
2.5 Mt
36%
32%
18%
18%
15%
19%
3 000 000
2 500 000
2 000 000
1 500 000
1 000 000
500 000
0
Others
Waste
Electricity
(residentials,commercial
& institutional)
Fishing
(industry & transport)
Tourism
(resort & transport)
Transport for
inhabitants
(excl. tourism & fishing)
2009 2020
tC02eqmitigate associated risks; 
•	 development of an institutional framework to support RE development by the private and 
public sectors; 
•	 strengthening of MEE and related institutions and instruments such as the MGF; and 
•	 development of a financing mechanism, including risk mitigation instruments, to address 
the needs of project developers and banks. 
Maldives SREP IP will further strengthen the above actions and policies through appropriate 
interventions. 
3.2 USING MALDIVES SREP IP TO OVERCOME THE BARRIERS 
AND CHALLENGES IN THE SECTOR
Table 5 outlines the key barriers and challenges which will be addressed through Maldives SREP 
IP interventions. 
Barriers and Challenges Maldives SREP IP interventions
Inadequate information on the availability of RE
resource – Presently with the exception of solar and
apart from some data on wind speed, there is limited
information on the magnitude of RE resource potentials
in the country, which could be utilized in designing and
developing RE-based projects either for electricity and
non-electricity purposes.
By collecting and supplying quality resource data to the
RE community.
People in the country, particularly in the outer islands
are not aware of the various aspects of the installation
and operation of RE systems. In addition, many perceive
RE as a free resource and therefore may not have to pay
for electricity service.
As a complementary activity to Maldives SREP IP
the government plans to introduce an RE module
in training programmes conducted for the island
counsellors at the Institute of Local Governance and
Development to sensitise them of the socio-economic
and environmental aspects of RE technologies. MEE will
also carry out media campaigns using mass media to
raise awareness of the public on RE benefits.
Inadequate policies on the utilization of RE – Although
theGoM has committed itselfto pursue the development
of RE resources as a means to sustainable development,
inadequate policies are in place to support efforts to
engage in RE-based projects in the country. There is a
need for policies and regulations regarding financial and
economic incentives to undertake RET applications.
Through Maldives SREP IP technical assistance the RE
policy and the regulatory framework will be strengthened
by developing and implementing policies, laws,
regulations, rules, standards and incentive schemes
to integrate RE in the energy sector. Electricity FIT and
tariff mechanisms, standardized PPAs, guidelines for
investment approval, licensing of electricity operators,
etc. to support RE development have been carried out
and will continue to be supported under Maldives SREP
IP.
Table 5: Key barriers and challengessector in the development, design, implementation and
management of RE technology application activities –
Because of the complete dependence on fossil fuels,
capacity among policy makers and technical people in
RE development is very limited. Presently, there is very
limited trained manpower in the country to assess, plan,
implement and monitor RE technology development
and implementation on a significant scale. In addition,
limited institutional mechanism exist to support the
dissemination of RE technologies, as well as in the
diffusion of knowledge and skills in the operation and
maintenance of RE.
enable utilities to enter into and manage good contracts.
In addition, skill development for the public sector
will be developed for better planning, implementation
and operation of RE systems. In addition to training,
international expertise will be sought to supplement
local capabilities for example on advisory services on
technical design, procurement, packaging projects,
bidding & awarding contracts, legal and commercial
aspects, etc. for Maldives SREP IP.
 
Furthermore, MEE is considering introducing a degree
level programme at Maldives National University to
build long term capacity and develop/retain a cadre of
energy professionals that become the future catalysts
of change and can help sustain these transformative
investments. Funding will be sought from other sources.
Limited involvement of entrepreneurs in producing and
servicing RE systems – Except for a few entrepreneurs
that are interested in engaging in RE business, there
is a general perception that the private sector is not
interested in investing in RE business.
By reducing commercial and sovereign risks through
guarantees, capital injection (where needed) and by
marketing RE projects in the Maldives and overseas this
would make investments in the sector more attractive.
Lack of significant field demonstration of RE technology
applications–onlyfewindividualshavesomeknowledge
about RE technologies, plenty are still doubtful if such
technologies will work in Maldives. There is a need for
successful demonstration of actual applications of the
appropriate RETs in order to convince potential users.
Although a few pilot projects have been implemented,
they are often too small and do not demonstrate the
needed scale to bring transformative change to the
sector.
Lack of financing available for RE applications as well
as for RE-based livelihoods projects.
The introduction of the FIT, incentives and guarantee
facilities and strong regulatory framework will
encourage investor to venture into this market. Maldives
SREP IP provides the opportunity to target vulnerable
island communities where cost of financing is usually
prohibitive.
Small scale and high complexity of transactions. By aggregating projects, providing regulatory clarity,
and by providing technical information and support to
developers to reduce pre-investment costs.
Power station readiness- a sizable group of islands
currently requires significant upgrading of the diesel
generators, grid system and controls. This is prerequisite
to transitioning to increased share of solar/wind.
By adapting power stations to accept high levels of
intermittent RE on a ‘plug and play’ basis. This will be
done in conjunction with a major power station upgrade
programme to reduce fuel use.3.3.1 SOLAR ENERGY
Solar energy will play a crucial role for the RET development in the Maldives. There are already 
some successful installations of solar PV and solar heating applications in the Maldives20.
Maldives is blessed with an abundance of sunshine year round. As it is located on the equator, 
solar declination is not an issue throughout the year. As shown in Figures 12-14, there is a 
constant level of sunshine throughout the year taken from a sample of three islands in the north, 
central and south of Maldives, respectively.
Figure 12: Solar insolation in HA.Dhidhoo Island (source: www.gaisma.com)
Figure 13: Solar insolation in Male’ (source: www.gaisma.com)The spatial distribution shows little variation of sunshine, indicating that solar declination is 
not an issue when the geographic span of the islands is considered. Therefore installation of the 
solar PV units would be easier compared to other parts of the globe where the units have to be 
south or north facing to get the maximum output from the units.
Figure 15 shows the spatial variation in solar power insolation in Maldives. It shows maximum 
of approximately 7kWh/m2
/day and a minimum of 4.5kWh/m2/day. This shows that there is 
little spatial variation of the sunshine received throughout the country
Figure 14: Solar insolation in Gn.Fuvahmulah Island (source: www.gaisma.com)
Figure 15: Spatial variation in solar power insolation
Insolation, kWh/m2/dayspace of individual households and public buildings for solar panel installation. The calculation 
shows roof space availability to meet 30% of the electricity demand in some islands while it 
reaches 80% in some other islands. Further surveys are likely to identify additional suitable roof 
space for solar PV installations.
Solar photovoltaic:Photovoltaic technology is generally used for power generation as an alternative 
to conventional methods. The technology was introduced to the Maldives as a power generation 
technology fairly recently in 2005. Since then, popularity of the technology rose with multiple 
private companies providing PV solutions and increased number of utility projects embracing 
this technology. This was driven mainly by the high cost of generation from diesel coupled with 
falling solar PV prices. For instance in the case of large electricity consuming islands the unit cost 
of diesel based electricity production is USD 0.35/kWh while the cost of electricity generation 
from solar PV is USD 0.23/kWh. Even with battery storage, in the case of small electricity 
consuming islands, the cost of electricity generation using solar PV is found to be USD 0.35/
kWh which is lower than diesel based electricity generation (USD 0.40/kWh) making this a 
viable technology for consideration under Maldives SREP IP. 
Solar heating technologies: Solar heating technologies are a commonly used technology in the 
world and well known in the Maldives. Solar energy is used for water heating as an alternative 
to electric heaters and even air conditioners to increase its efficiency. Although the technology 
is widely available, lack of awareness, limited service providers competent in dealing with the 
technology and quality assurance is still an issue. The technology is currently used in tourism 
industry for water heating and has little or no application in local islands due to limited demand. 
Further, since Maldives SREP IP projects are mainly targeting local inhabited islands and solar 
water heating is currently serving a niche market this technology has not been selected under the 
Maldives SREP IP.
3.3.2 WIND ENERGY
According to preliminary assessments based on satellite data (Figure 16), the wind resource in 
Maldives is found between 4.5o N Lat. and approximately 6.5o N Lat. Covering the following 
atolls: North Maalhosmadulu, South Maalhosmadulu, North Miladhunmadulu, South 
Miladhunmadulu, and Faadhippolhu. This information would to be verified through meso-scale 
mapping to improve the quality and accuracy of the data throughout the country.Figure 17 shows that wind has a particular advantage and that the resource is most plentiful 
for the period of the year when the solar resource is at its weakest. Thus, wind power may be 
important to maximize diesel savings in the short term, and minimize the cost of energy storage 
in the longer term. Wind will therefore be supported under the Maldives SREP IP when used in 
conjunction with solar PV to provide a more consistent RE supply over the year.
Although predominantly focused on solar PV investments, where the conditions allow, Maldives 
SREP IP can support a material proportion of small scale wind to be used to supplement solar 
Figure 16: Wind resource map and the atoll names for the Maldives3.3.3 WASTE TO ENERGY
Waste management in the Maldives, just as with energy, is an unequivocal environmental 
issue which requires immediate and sustained investment to resolve. The National Solid Waste 
Management Policy (2008) and the Government’s Strategic Action Plan identify that in order to 
overcome the lack of economy of scale for investment in waste management, up to 7 Regional 
Waste Management Facilities (RWMF) should be established within the Maldives. Such facilities 
are expected to promote integrated waste management in the Maldives and demonstrate waste 
as a resource that can benefit both economically and environmentally. The waste management 
policy encourages use of waste to generate electricity using sound technologies. There are 
considerable potential synergies between waste technology solutions and energy generation 
which are mutually beneficial.
A pre-feasibility study supported by UNDP and undertaken by IT Power India in 2007 identified 
that the incineration of waste to generate electricity is a suitable waste treatment technology 
for the Maldives. The pre-feasibility study considered that WTE technologies are viable for 
regional incineration facilities with a throughput of 15 ton/day or more. Principally waste heat 
extracted in the flue gas cooling process is captured and used for power production as well as 
in commercial enterprises such as desalinated water plants. The heat extracted from incinerator 
flue gas cleaning represents equivalence to the imported fossil fuel which would otherwise be 
required to produce the same quantity of water. Heat produced in the flue gas cooling process 
is an intermediate by-product of the incineration process and if it is not utilized for some other 
purpose it is simply vented to the atmosphere. 
Currently the GoM is investing USD 4.5 million in R.Vandhoo RWMF. The waste treatment 
technology under consideration is incineration with a heat exchanger for flue gas cooling. The 
waste throughput is approximately 40 tons/day. 
The IT Power India study identified that conversion of low pressure steam heated by the waste 
incineration process into electricity is technically feasible for RWMF with a throughput of 
40tons/day or more. The technological options for developing WTE incineration facilities are 
more complex and come at a cost. Unlike waste for energy where heat is extracted from a heat 
exchanger which is an integral part of the flu gas cleaning technology, additional technology 
is required to produce lopressure steam and to produce electricitthrough a lopressure 
Wind power fraction of annual production
Percentage
Solar power fraction of annual production
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Figure 17: Complementary solar and wind resource patterns throughout the yearnear populations, additional investment may be required to transfer electricity produced from 
the incineration facility to potential users. Such investment would reasonably involve undersea 
cabling. Given the cost constraints potential for WTE incineration is likely to be limited to 
population centres where the demand is likely to be greatest such as in Male’ and Addu.
Another technical WTE solution that may have potential in the Maldives is the syn gas technology. 
Rather than convert steam into electricity through a low pressure steam generator, syn gas 
technology uses pyrolysis to produce combustible gasses which are captured and introduced into 
a syn gas generator. Air emissions from such technology are generally more acceptable, and such 
technology can be provided in modules potentially making it more accessible to smaller regional 
populations. The constraints with such technology are that the capital cost is proportionally 
higher than more conventional technology, besides the complexity of the technology. 
While it has limited potential, appropriate WTE technology is found to be technically and 
financially feasible in the Maldives and is the only technology which is not intermittent. Cost is 
highly competitive, much lower than diesel and hence has been selected under Maldives SREP 
IP.
3.3.4 BIOGAS
Biogas can provide a clean, easily controlled source of RE from organic waste materials, replacing 
firewood or fossil fuels. Since small scale units can be built and operated relatively simply, biogas 
can be used directly for cooking, heating or lighting. On the other side, both electricity generation 
and the compression of the gas (for storage or for use in vehicles) needs large amounts of energy 
compared to a relatively small output of useful energy. Therefore, biogas might only be an option 
when it can be used directly at the source, i.e. where waste is treated, or sludge is reused locally, 
and will not be considered under Maldives SREP IP.
3.3.5 OCEAN ENERGIES
Deep Sea Water Cooling: This technology utilizes the supply of cold sea water from depths over 
1000 meter which can be used for offsetting electricity generated for cooling purposes. Maldives 
Water and Sewerage Company (MWSC) is studying a potential project at the new International 
Airport terminal in Hulhule Island. 
Tidal and Currents: A preliminary desktop study by Robert Gordon University of Scotland 
in 2011 concluded that there was limited potential for tidal energy in the Maldives given 
topographical features. These may be some potential in channels between islands; however this 
would need to be systematically surveyed.
3.3.6 BIOMASS
There are only very limited biomass resources available in the Maldives. At a smaller scale, 
biomass gasifiers operate successfully in many countries. However, they require considerable 
maintenance, the conversion from biomass to electricity can be very low, and they are generally 
run only for a limited number of hours per day. 
Introducing biomass powered electricity at small scale in the outer islands would require residues or wood needed are not available in the Maldives and are not likely to be growing in 
required quantities. If Maldives is to generate energy by utilizing biomass as fuel source at a large 
scale, it has to depend on imported biomass. Impacts of importing biomass for large scale energy 
generation will be studied further as a possible option under the feasibility study for the greater 
Male’ region power integration.
3.4 ENERGY EFFICIENCY
Given the high cost of power generation, energy efficiency will play an important and 
complementary role to the development of RET in the Maldives. On the supply side, increasing 
the efficiency of generators and distribution network would offset and defer the requirement 
for upgrading diesel generation capacity. Similarly, on the demand side there exist several 
opportunities for efficient air conditioning, lighting, motors, appliances, industrial processes etc. 
21
As shown in Figure 18, which presents a comparison of unit generation cost for the various 
RE sources that have been studied in some level of detail and their potential capacities in the 
country, WTE is the most cost effective but it has resource limitations followed by wind with 
similar shortcomings. Solar has immense potential and is economically favourable compared to 
generation cost using diesel. In small electricity consuming islands solar is found to favour over 
diesel even with battery storage. Table 6 sets out a summary of technology options considered 
under Maldives SREP IP and their estimated potential.
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Unit Cost (US Cent/kWh)
Resource Potential (MW)
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 Solar PV
12 cents profit/kWh
for large islands
5 cents profit/kWh
for small islands w/b
Unit cost of production using diesel in large islands Solar PV with battery
Unit cost of production using solar in large islands
Unit cost of production using diesel in small islands
Wind
Waste to energy
Figure 18: Renewable energy potential capacity and unit cost of generation for outer islands21Table 6: Summary of technology options considered under Maldives SREP IP and their estimated potential
hnology Potential in 
Maldives
Cost (USD) Focus for 
Maldives SREP IP
Justification
ar PV Unlimited 0.23 w/o
batteries0.35 w/batteries
Yes RE technology with the largest potential and scalability. Solar radiation throughout the year with
little variation throughout the country. Modular approach would allow gradual roll out. Both smaland large investors might find their niche.
ar heating Limited
application
No Limited demand mainly focused in the resorts which are not covered in the IP. Technology is
mature and does not require major subsidies.
gas <1MW No The studies conducted show very little potential for the technology.
al and currents ~10MW No Technologies are not commercially available and costs seem to be prohibitive for the time being.
Tides and currents have seasonal nature which would not help to address the problem. Still,studies are underway to explore the potential.
ste-to-energy 20MW 0.20 Yes While it has limited potential, it is found to be technically and financially feasible in the Maldives
and is the only technology which is not intermittent. Cost is highly competitive and is much lowethan diesel. It has major environmental benefits in term of utilization of waste which often ends in the ocean damaging fragile marine ecosystem
nd (small
dium) 10-20MW 0.25 Yes The technology has limited potential and significant seasonal variability. Large wind farms are unlikely feasible due to the variability and intermittency. However, small wind turbines can be a
good complement to solar PVs in areas with good wind resource reducing the overall costs.
ep sea water
zation for
oling
Feasible No Due to lack of distribution network the technology can currently serve only large industrial users
(there is one pilot project under preparation). Expansion of the technology will be analysed as paof the study for Male’ generation options.
at recovery 0-10MW No The technology can be used for desalination of water and some industries but it is not considere
RE and will not be qualified for Maldives SREP IP support. Some heat recovery for desalination wbe used in WTE projects.
mass 0.20 No No local biomass is available. Feasibility of building a biomass plant for Male’ based on imported
fuel will be analysed as part of the Male, study on generation options to be supported by MaldiveSREP IP.Rooftop solar panels 
at STELCO, Male’
Island powerhouse4. RATIONALE FOR MALDIVES SREP IP 
INTERVENTIONS
In selecting components for Maldives SREP IP interventions, consideration was given to 
such initiatives that have the potential to be scaled up, can leverage private investments, have 
transformational impact, innovation, poverty reduction, gender/social inclusiveness, and 
contribute to climate change mitigation. The IP takes into consideration the unique geographical 
and demographical characteristics of the Maldives having a densely populated Male’ region 
surrounded by a large number of outer islands differing in size and population. The Maldives 
SREP IP will support the following three main components:
4.1 RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR GREATER MALE’ REGION 
As the national capital, the main industrial and economic growth point and the largest electricity 
consumer, Male’ needs a large and reliable source of power. Current barriers for reaching a 
higher RET penetration are:
•	 Lack of awareness and capacity among stakeholders on RETs;
•	 risk and high costs of appraisal;
•	 lack of interest among the private sector to invest in RETs;
•	 inadequate policies, financial and regulatory mechanisms to promote RETs; and
•	 weaknesses in the overall and financial management capacity of local institutions 
combined with limitations of capital for accessing loans, along with the incapacity of 
local financial institutions to analyse RE projects. 
This intervention aims to reduce above mentioned barriers. It will support successful portfolio 
development of the sector and lower risks by means of demonstration and through training 
and experience gaining and sharing provided to stakeholders in the market such as developers, 
financial institutions and communities to enable the transformation of the energy sector. 
Scope
Greater Male’ Region Solar PV: it is possible to feed solar PV generated electricity amounting to 
20-30% of the peak day time demand in greater Male’ region without significant investment in 
sophisticated systems upgrading. Considering the respective peak demands for various islands 
in the region as shown in Table 7, 15 MW of solar PV can be safely fed in to grid systems in the 
greater Male’ region by 2015. Additional solar generation potential exists on rooftops of industrial 
sites in Thilafushi, Gulheefalhu, Hulhule, Hulhumale’ and transmitted to Male’ via submarine 
cable. This will relieve the pressure of providing the capital Male’ with a huge standalone power 
supply, which would be physically impossible to install within the capital. Additional benefits 
include improved system efficiency and reliability with larger and more diverse power sources.Island Peak Demand by 2015 
(MW)
Existing & Planned PV 
(MW)
Available PV potential 
(MW)
Male’ 37.2 0.7 13
Hulhumale’’22 4.9 0.06 5
Villingili 1.1 0.3 1
Thilafushi22 1.9 0 1
Hulhule (Airport) 13.7 0 4
MWSC 5.2 0.05 2
Total 18.9 1.11 26
The FIT mechanism will be used in deploying the solar PV on greater Male’ region. FIT is 
already in place and MEA is updating it. The final draft of the standardized PPA is ready and 
drafts with solar PV - grid connection specifications and guidelines are available at MEA. Off 
taker is STELCO as mandated by MEA.
Financing requirement of this component is expected to be about USD 49 million, of this 
the private sector will contribute about USD 26.5 million as equity and debt to finance the 
installation of about 11MW in Male’ and additional 4MW on other islands in the greater Male’ 
region. USD 11 million for investments will come from JICA, SREP and WBG financing will be 
used to provide risk mitigation facilities and/or incentives to private companies during the early 
stages of the implementation of the FIT scheme. 
Waste-to-energy (Thilafushi): will be considered under the greater Male’ region electricity supply. 
Thilafushi receives more than 200 tons of combustible waste per day, which would allow the 
installation of a facility to generate up to 4MW. The electricity produced can be used to meet the 
demand of the island and will generate additional revenue from the sale of water. 
The project is part of a larger scale integrated waste management system including waste 
collection and transportation to Thilafushi and waste processing and disposal on Thilafushi 
(segregation, recycling, composting, gasification and inert waste disposal in the landfill). Under 
the Maldives SREP IP, only the construction of an up to 4 MW WTE power generation project to 
replace the existing diesel-based power generator on the island is considered. It will be developed 
under a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement. The investor is expected to self-finance 
the project. This project is expected to cost around USD 20 million, of this the private sector 
will contribute about USD 5 million to finance the installation of about 4MW, USD 10 million 
will be provided by IFC and ADB’s PSOD. Maldives SREP IP financing will be used to cover 
electricity payment risk. SREP funds may be required to meet the financing gap described above 
or cover the incremental costs or risks of project implementation. ADB and IFC will consider 
the following options for deploying the SREP funds: (i) parallel concessional loans; (ii) partial 
credit or risk guarantees or other risk sharing mechanisms; (iii) buying down of fees and/or risk 
premiums from the commercial political risk insurance market; (iv) covering the risks associated 
with electricity off-take under a GoM FIT scheme; and (v) other forms of subordinated or 
mezzanine finance.
Greater Male’ Region Renewable Power System Integration: In order to further displace the use 
of diesel generation, additional RETs are required. A feasibility study will be carried out under 
Maldives SREP IP to identify RE options to deliver large-scale dispatchable power for greater 
Ml’ id hiif lhh iild iiThdill The feasibility of a submarine cable to connect the islands of the greater Male area will be 
studied. The region will profit from an improved energy infrastructure, which in turn will support 
the social and economic development of the region.
Phase 1 (attracting investors for solar PV) and WTE in Thilafushi will serve as learning platforms 
for RE for outer islands, they will show the effectiveness of the new institutional set-up and can 
provide the necessary insight for MEE and MGF. 
Last but not least, successful implementation will improve the investment climate in general 
and might lead to more competition between RE producers and a better understanding of the 
banking sector to strengthen its capability in providing project finance for the RET sector. 
4.2 RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR OUTER ISLANDS 
Electricity generation from solar PV, and wind in some locations, is less expensive than energy 
generation from diesel based on avoided cost of fuel in the Maldives. Given that these are 
intermittent generation technologies these would be supplemented by either energy storage and/
or diesel back up. 
Based on island classifications as detailed in Section 1.6 the RE development strategy for these 
islands is summarized below in Table 8. For the small electricity consuming islands installation 
of solar/wind with battery storage is economically justifiable based on the fact that generation 
cost of electricity using diesel is found to be USD 0.4/kWh while solar PV with adequate battery 
storage unit cost of generation is USD 0.35/kWh. This being the case, proper assessments will 
be necessary in order to identify the best RE mix for each of the selected islands, including 
potential savings due to energy efficiency measures, additionally considerations will also be 
given to take the advantage of gradually decreasing world market prices23 for battery storage 
and solar PV systems. Hence, a 2-step approach will be adopted in order to optimize the use of 
the available financial resources. Under this phase-wise approach, 70% of electricity demand 
of 10 small electricity consuming islands will be converted to RE within the first 2 years and 
subsequently leading up to 100% RE conversion in the next 3-4 years of the Maldives SREP IP 
implementation. The lessons gained in the first step would serve the purpose of gaining valuable 
experience that can be later used to convert remaining 30% to RE more efficiently and effectively 
and it would also serve as a best practice for other islands, resorts and islands in other islands in 
SIDS, where RE transformation is possible24.
For medium to large electricity consuming islands with inefficient energy generation power 
system, upgrading is a prerequisite to increase the share of solar/wind. On efficient medium 
and large electricity consuming islands increasing the share of solar/wind can start immediately 
minor adjustments to existing power systems. The share of solar/wind in the energy mix is 
dependent on the cost of storage and cost of diesel.
23RblthliCt AliSiVl1PStI4/5 lhtltiIttil RblEA2012Small electricity consuming 
islands (~10)
1 - Full solar/wind with batteries
Inefficient medium and large 
electricity consuming islands 
(~15)
2a - Upgrade power system with new
efficient generators, controls to be
‘plug and play’ and distribution network
compatible with up to 30% of peak
demand.
2b - Install sufficient solar PV and/or
wind to meet up to 30% of peak demand.
Efficient medium and large 
electricity consuming islands 
(~ 15)
3 - Install sufficient solar PV and/or wind to meet up to 30% of peak demand.
The objective of this is to achieve full RE systems on small electricity consuming islands and 
upgrade power systems on medium to large electricity consuming islands to make them RE 
ready and install sufficient solar PV/wind. 
Scope
Smallelectricity consuming islands RE: Approximately 10 power stations (between 250-350MWh/
year) will be converted to full RE (approximately 2MW) in two steps, using an optimum mix of 
wind and solar PV, with batteries to provide energy storage. On average diesel electricity supply 
costs on those selected islands are high (~USD0.40/kWh). In addition, they have been selected 
for implementation because they are the most difficult to fund commercially and they involve 
tight integration - at small scale - of wind, solar, energy storage and generator control. This will 
be implemented by the state-owned utility, FENAKA, and will support the design of operational 
systems for the eventual full RE penetration across all islands. In addition, distribution system 
improvements, energy efficiency measures and productive usage of energy would be explored 
on these islands.
A 2-step approach for full RE on the identified small electricity consuming islands would be 
developed during the project preparation phase that will be based on the assessment of demand 
on the islands, RE resource assessments, potential for energy efficiency, space constraints, 
environmental and social safeguard aspects etc.
Power system rehabilitation: This is a necessary pre-cursor to the introduction of high levels of RE 
on the large electricity consuming islands. This is a necessary pre-cursor to the introduction of 
high levels of RE on the medium electricity consuming islands that have inefficient generators. 
It involves the refurbishment and/or replacement of inefficient generators in about 15 medium 
electricity consuming islands (>1GWh/year), with a range of modern, electronically controlled, 
generators as well as installing improved control systems to enable generators to run efficiently 
at low loads and to stabilize the grid. Distribution system upgrades and energy efficiency 
measures would be attempted where appropriate. Once the refurbishment/replacement is done, 
those islands can attract private investors under the FIT supported by the guarantee schemes. 
In addition, there are nearly 15 islands with efficient power generation and distribution systems 
that have been developed in recent years. These systems would be assessed for readiness to 
integrate RE additions. Necessary investments would be identified and undertaken to attract 
private investors to meet 30% of peak demand. This will be implemented by FENAKA.USD 3 million, IDB USD 5 million and the Government USD 5 million) required for preparing 
power systems to accept RE. These funds will be on-lend to FENAKA by the government and 
repayments will be used to replenish MGF which in turn will be used to scale up further RE 
investments.
RE investments underthe FIT:Installation of about 3MW of combined solar and wind is envisaged 
on medium to large electricity consuming islands (>1GWh/year) under the FIT mechanism 
to offset up to 30% of peak day time demand. This will be carried out by the private sector 
on a commercial basis with the electricity sold to FENAKA at the FIT. This is a precursor to 
investments in a greater share of RE on these islands once storage costs decline. SREP resources 
may be used to mitigate against payment or currency risk and/or providing initial subsidized 
capital for the first movers. The exact modalities will be finalized during the project preparation 
and will be based on feedback received from potential investors collected during the planned 
investor conference and other consultations.
The financing requirements of this component are expected to be about USD 12.9 million, 
of this private sector will contribute about USD 9 million as equity and debt to finance the 
installation of about 3MW. USD 1 million of SREP, USD 0.9 million of GIZ and USD 2 million 
of WBG financing will be used for guarantee and/or investments, in addition WBG will provide 
risk mitigation facilities and/or incentives to private companies during the early stages of the 
implementation of the FIT scheme.
Waste-to-Energy (WTE): Based on technical, financial and economic assessments carried out, 
there is potential for utilizing waste management solutions on islands where the waste streams 
exceed 15 tons/day (TPD). Three islands have been identified as candidates for this, namely: 
HDh Kulhudhufushi, R. Vandhoo and S. Hithadhoo where diesel used for electricity and water 
production will be displaced by WTE. Table 9 shows the electricity and water production potential 
on these islands. These private sector projects will sell water and electricity to FENAKA under 
purchase agreements.
S. Hithadhoo Kulhudhufushi R.Vandhoo
Proposed solution Combustion based
solution to provide
electricity and potable
water
Combustion based solution
to provide potable water
Incineration based solution
to provide electricity
Capacity – input waste 50 TPD 20 TPD 40 TPD
Capacity – output
electricity + water
1 MWe + 95 TPD 76 TPD 1 MWe
Diesel electricity avoided
(kWh/year)
635,000 175,000 613,000
The financing requirements of this component are expected to be about USD 10 million, of this 
private sector will contribute about USD 7 million as equity and debt to finance the installation 
of about 2MW. USD 3 million will come from SREP, in addition, WBG financing will be used 
to provide risk mitigation facilities and/or incentives to private companies. 
Table 9: Electricity and water production potentialThis is a critical pre-requisite of any significant development of the RE sector. Lack of skills 
has been a major factor in holding back progress to date, and needs to be addressed as an urgent 
matter. Technical assistance and capacity building is therefore one of the important task to be 
managed and funded under Maldives SREP IP.
Without the necessary training and technical support, the existing institutions in the Maldives 
will face significant challenges in delivering the ambitious Maldives SREP IP targets and beyond. 
While the country has set up a cabinet level Ministry responsible for energy sector development, 
the Maldives Energy Authority for the enforcement of the sector related regulations, and state 
owned utilities to manage and operate utility services throughout the country, these organizations 
are constrained by human resource shortages. 
The knowledge of island specific RE resources in the Maldives remains nascent. Given the 
sparseness of the Maldivian islands and low availability of funding for such country-wide 
exercises, there has been little or negligible work carried out in the past to systematically collect 
RE resource data. In general, knowledge of RET exists mainly on solar and slightly on wind, 
though the country has not experimented with such technologies on a broader scale. There are 
no known biomass resources indigenous to the Maldives, conventional hydro-power is not an 
option as there are no rivers, streams, or inland water bodies suitable for harnessing such energy. 
However, there is huge interest in the country to explore other renewable resources such as 
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC), tidal and marine currents, etc. 
Objective
To create an enabling environment, strengthen human resource capacities and improve access to 
credible data in order to achieve the long term objectives in the RE sector. 
Scope
Creating an enabling environment: through Maldives SREP IP technical assistance the RE policy 
and the regulatory framework will be strengthened by developing and implementing policies, 
laws, regulations, rules, standards and incentive schemes to integrate RE in the energy sector. 
Electricity FIT and tariff mechanisms, standardized PPAs, guidelines for investment approval, 
licensing of electricity operators, etc. to support RE development have been carried out and 
continue to be supported by the WBG and ADB. This will increase the efficiency and speed of 
project development. Additional SREP resources may be utilized.
Financing requirement of this component is expected to be about USD 2.2 million. USD 0.2 
million of SREP funding will be used in conjunction with ADB, GIZ and GoM to create an 
enabling environment for RE investments. 
Human capacity building: will be developed for planning, implementation and operation of 
RE systems. In addition to training, international expertise will be sought to supplement local 
capabilities for example on advisory services on technical design, procurement, packaging 
projects, bidding & awarding contracts, legal and commercial aspects, etc. for SREP investments. 
Resources from SREP will be used where needed. The German cooperation project implemented 
by GIZ is supporting institution building for the energy and climate change sectors, and will 
offer important synergiesmillion of SREP funding will be used in conjunction with GIZ and GoM to develop human 
resource capacity in the country. 
Improved access to quality data: The proposed activity is expected to finance the construction of 
a national network of wind and solar data collection stations that will allow the optimization 
of wind, solar and energy storage components of the island power systems. Wind data will 
be collected at a range of heights up to ±80m, and solar data will include direct and diffuse 
radiation, and radiation reflected off lagoon surfaces. Funds will be used for real-time data 
collection, monitoring and analysis. In addition, ocean energy data will be gathered.
The MMS will be strengthened and supported under the Maldives SREP IP in managing a 
national network of RET measuring stations, capable of providing reliable data to allow proper 
planning and design of RET based power systems across the islands.
Financing requirement of this component is expected to be about USD 1.1 million. Funding 
from multilateral donors channelled through the WB in addition to funds from GoM will be 
used in improving RE resource data collection and management system in the country. 
4.4 ACTIVITIES COMPLEMENTARY TO MALDIVES SREP IP
4.4.1 DEEP SEA WATER UTILIZATION
Detailed planning is underway by Maldives Water and Sewerage Company for a district cooling 
project at the new International Airport terminal in Hulhule Island. The project will supply cold 
sea water from a depth of 1,400m for AC/cooling, offsetting electricity generated by diesel. An 
intake system and chiller plant will be installed at Hulhumale’ which will allow future expansion 
into residential housing. The project is expected to supply about 2,500 refrigerant tons, will result 
in an estimated GHG reduction of approximately 14,000 tCO2/year, and will save approximately 
5 million litres per year of diesel fuel. The anticipated date of commissioning is 2014; the project 
will be privately financed. 
4.4.2 ENERGY EFFICIENCY
Abatement costs are difficult to derive for many classes of consumption because the variables are 
so great, and deriving reliable samples across the islands is difficult. Nonetheless, data has been 
measured for three crucial areas of demand which represent the bulk of night time energy use. 
These are air conditioners, fridges, and street lighting. Normal domestic lighting is universally 
provided by compact fluorescent lamps and offers little potential for energy saving.
The estimated costs and scale of abatement opportunities, based on replacing equipment at the 
end of its life with more energy efficient units are shown in Figure 19. Even if equipment were 
to be replaced immediately, levelised costs of the savings the net benefit would still be lower than 
the avoided cost of electricity as shown in Figure 20.
It is clear that potential energy savings are highly cost effective and significant in scale. By 
focusing on these three items of equipment, energy use at night will be significantly reduced – 
thus reducing the overall cost of providing 24 hour RE.Savings for both graphs are shown in MWh/year. The scale of savings is based upon extrapolation 
from limited data, and may well underestimate the actual savings possible.
While Maldives SREP IP may not directly finance energy efficiency initiatives, the government 
believes that there will be significant benefits complementing RE investments. Therefore, funding 
opportunities are expected be sought from the Governments budget, MDBs and other financing 
sources. There is a potential role for MGF in reinvesting savings from programmes which may 
likely be funded in the future
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 70,000
MWh saving
Levelised Cost of Saving USD/kWh
Street lighting
Air conditioning
Diesel power costs
Refrigeration
Figure 20: Levelised cost of savings from immediate equipment replacement
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 70,000
MWh saving
Levelised Cost of Saving USD/kWh
Street lighting
Air conditioning
Diesel power costs
Refrigeration
Figure 19: Levelised cost of savings from equipment replacement at end of lifeThe tourism industry being a large consumer of energy in the Maldives, has a significant role 
to play in transforming energy sector. It has to increase activities on renewable energies and 
energy efficiency. In order to better engage tourism industry, demonstrative effects on low carbon 
investments, proper regulations and incentive mechanism have to be established. Examples of 
good practice and cost saving from the public utilities projects coupled with technical support 
available from MEE will be used persuade the resort sector to move from diesel to solar PV and 
higher levels of energy efficiency. An energy conservation programme assisted by IFC has been 
initiated to support resorts in identifying energy wastage and in assisting them making their 
investments greener. 
4.4.4 TRANSPORT SECTOR
Marine transport accounts for approximately 22% of current GHG emissions. The high cost 
of fuel is a major factor in the economics of both fishing and public inter-island transport. In 
order to explore feasibilities of introducing RETs and fuel efficiency in the transport sector the 
government, in collaboration with bilateral partners, will undertake necessary studies and pilot 
projects. 5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL
MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
The Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will outline the positive impacts 
on the island’s environment as well as remedial measures, preventative and control strategies for 
potential negative environmental and social impacts due to proposed project activities.
Community consultation and engagement will be an integral part of identifying potential 
environmental and social impacts and mitigation measures to address any adverse impacts 
associated with projects. In implementing the proposed projects under the IP, EPA will ensure that 
all projects are carried out in accordance with Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations of 
the Maldives. Where applicable, projects will comply with WB/ADB Safeguards Policies. 
 
The following illustrates the ESMF stages for the approval of projects to be implemented under 
the IP. The process would consist of: 
a) Screening for projects requiring significant environmental/social impact assessments;
b) scoping to identify potential positive and negative environmental and/or social impacts 
on the communities and natural environment;
c) determining the likely negative environmental and social impacts; 
d) undertaking stakeholder consultations and public disclosure;
e) setting and implementing the appropriate mitigation and management measures; and
f) monitoring and reporting on environmental and social parameters during the 
implementation of project activities.
5.1 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS
Environmental impacts are expected as a result of the proposed Maldives SREP IP projects. 
Due to the nature of activities, investments will result in minor civil works from the construction 
and installation of new RE generation systems, future decommissioning of RE installations, 
batteries, rehabilitation and expansion of existing power generation systems, and disposal of 
inefficient or old appliances.
Further risks may be associated with minor impacts to biodiversity, land or other assets, generation 
of solid waste from construction debris, oil spill from motorized construction equipment, 
accumulation of used batteries, etc. Some of these impacts may be unavoidable especially during 
construction and installation. Nevertheless, impacts would likely be of a temporary nature 
and can be prevented, minimized or mitigated using appropriate mitigation and management 
measures. Potentially identifiable environmental and social impacts and mitigation measures 
for the technology options used in the proposed projects in the IP are summarized in Table 
10. While there are negative impacts, the majority of proposed projects is expected to have Table 10: Impacts and mitigation measures for the technology options
pes of Impacts Solar PV Wind Energy Waste-to-Energy
vironmental
pact /
nstruction and
eration
•	 Construction waste and noise
•	 Disposal of components at end of life
(Batteries, PV panels, inverters, etc.)
•	 Possible impact on the marine environment due to
fixing poles in the shallow lagoon for lagoon mountsschemes.
•	 Dealing with construction waste and impacts from
work force.
•	 Bird strikes
•	 Visual impact as any wind energy system will be
mounted on tall masts in clear spaces.
•	 Noise and dust during the construction may be
nuisance to the neighbourhood.
•	 Noise during operation of wind turbine .
•	 The construction will involve activities t
will create environmental disturbancesnormally encountered in majorconstruction projects.
•	 Improper storage/handling of, waste
dumps and other sources of contaminanmay lead into ground water pollution.
•	 Noise and dust during the construction
may be nuisance to the neighbourhood.
•	 Construction waste•	 Emissions from the combustion of wast•	 Management of fly ash.
cial Impacts •	 Disruption to households during
installation of solar panels and cables.
•	 Reduced fossil fuel-based power
generation and reduced dependencyon fuel import costs
•	 Increasing community resilience to
changes in fuel prices.
•	 Encouraging productive usage of
energy in small electricity consumingislands.
•	 Reduced fossil fuel-based power generation
and reduced dependency on fuel import costs –increasing community resilience.
•	 Loss of land or other immovable properties
•	 Reduced primary fuel costs will help
reduce energy costs and improvecommunity resilience.
•	 Increased surface water runoffpes of Impacts Solar PV Wind Energy Waste-to-Energy
igation Measures
nvironment
ticipated
vironmental
pacts of projects
be minor,
alized and
nageable.)
•	 Proper disposal of construction waste•	 EPA will be developing and enforcing
regulations on safe disposal ofcomponents at end of life,
•	 To minimise the social impacts, efforts
need to employ Maldivians during theconstruction and operation stage ofthe projects.
•	 Proper siting decisions can help
to avoid aesthetic impacts to thelandscape and seascape. Sitingdecisions will be taken in consultationwith all local stakeholders.
•	 Good construction management
practices in place that reduce negativeimpacts to the environment.
•	 Arrangements for safe disposal
of solar panels and batteries ondecommissioning or replacement.
•	 Siting of turbines to avoid areas of live coral cover
and marine life.
•	 Proper disposal of construction waste and avoiding
marine spillage.
•	 Chances of bird strikes are extremely rare but may
not be completely avoidable.
•	 Proper siting of the wind farms to avoid aesthetic
impacts to the landscape and seascape. Sitingdecisions will be taken in consultation with all localstakeholders.
•	 Carrying out the work during acceptable hours of the
day, contractor prepares schedule of activities andkeeping public informed.
•	 Maintaining coastal vegetation belt.
•	 Selection of site that has least impact o
biodiversity and water.
•	 Best practicable technology to effective
control gaseous emissions need toimplemented to control the air quality.
•	 Effective storage mechanism that
addresses ground water contamination,odour, etc.
•	 Acceptable disposal site in place for ash
disposal.
•	 Good construction management practic
in place that reduces negative impacts tthe environment.
igation: Social
pacts
•	 Maintaining site cleanliness during
construction.
•	 Carrying out the work during
acceptable hours of the day, contractorprepares schedule of activities andkeeping public informed.
•	 Equipment and machinery kept in good
condition in meeting acceptable noisestandards.
•	 Public complains registration.
•	 Place wind turbines away from the community as
much as possible.
•	 Replacement of lost assets.
•	 Construction site fencing.•	 Careful management of site operations.6. FINANCING PLAN
e following table provides a detailed overview of the Maldives SREP IP costing and financing plan by component and sources of funds:
315 315 IP Preparation Grant
11,500 2,500 3,000 12,000 0 10,000 0 11,000 31,500 0 0 69,500
Renewable Energy for Greater Male’ RegionSub TotalTechnical Assistance and Capacity Building
6,000 2,500 3,000 12,000 11,000 26,500 49,000 Greater Malé Region Solar PV Investments
5,000 10,000 5,000 20,000 Waste-to-Energy (Thilafushi)
500 500 Greater Malé Region Renewable Power System Integration
5,000 3,000 5,000 13,000 Power system rehabilitation
12,000 3,000 3,000 3,000 5,000 26,000 Small power station RE
1,000 2,000 8,000 960 9,000 12,960 Outer island solar and wind investments (under FIT)3,000 7,000 10,000 Outer island Waste-to-Energy investment
485 100 1,100 1,685 Human Capacity Building200 1,000 400 600 2,200 Creating an enabling environment
1,500 100 600 2,200 Project Preparation and feasibility studies
300 800 1,100 Imporves access to quality data
16,000 8,000 2,000 8,000 6,000 0 960 0 16,000 3,000 10,000 61,960
Renewable Energy for Outer IslandsSub Total
SOURCES OF FUNDING (USD 000)
Components SREP GoM WB IDA WBG Guara-
-ntee
ADB IFC/
ADB(PSOD)
GIZ JICA Private IDB TOTAL* Others
30,000 12,000 5,000 20,000 6,400 10,000 3,260 11,000 47,500 3,800 10,000 138,960 GRAND TOTAL
2,185 1,500 0 0 400 0 2,300 0 0 800 0 7,185 Sub Total
Total does not include WBG Guarantee Allocation between components is indicative and will be adjusted based on feedback from Investors7. RISK ANALYSIS
7.1 TECHNICAL RISKS
The principal technical risks and mitigation measures associated with this programme are as 
follows:
•	 Outputs may be lower than expected due to environmental factors or performance 
reliability issues. For private power projects, where revenues are based on performance, 
developers have a strong incentive to ensure project function as designed. Supply of waste 
resources will be based on agreements between the island council and the WTE developer. 
In the case of the small electricity consuming islands 100% RE generation projects in the 
outer islands, diesel generators will continue to be used as a backup. A phased approach 
would be adopted to study the impact of a high proportion of RE with batteries and 
diesel prior to a transition to eventual 100% RE. In small electricity consuming islands 
existing diesel generator sets will remain as redundancies. For RE projects under the FIT 
mechanism the electricity generation is a small proportion, therefore, any shortfalls will 
be met with existing diesel generator sets.
•	 Technology may not perform as expected. The German GIZ project is contributing to 
evaluate alternative power station configurations (specifically diesel-PV hybrid systems), 
with a view to testing the best solutions under the project on Support for the Climate 
Neutral Strategy of the Maldives. SREP and MDB counterpart funding will be used 
to design and specify projects for tendering and to make sure best practice technology 
solutions appropriate to the Maldives will be specified.
•	 Corrosion is a potential challenge. This risk can be reduced by using marine grade 
equipment.
•	 Designing and implementing systems for high levels of RE in small electricity consuming 
islands would be a challenge. System design would need to factor in renewable resource 
assessments, load profile, expected growth in demand over the medium term, productive 
energy usage, necessary distribution system improvements etc. In addition, regarding 
storage - there would be maintenance and battery replacement issues that would need to be 
studied. This would be undertaken under the feasibility studies in the project preparatory 
phase with SREP and MDB counterpart funding.
•	 Rapid increase in demand. Previous investment projects in the outer islands have seen 
significant growth in load (annual growth of 20% in some cases) on completion of 
installations. This is a challenge that would need to be considered during the project 
design. Efficiency in energy usage including through tariff signals and energy labelling by 
MEA and load management measures would be assessed.Key commercial risks are as follows:
•	 Insufficient interest by developers, many are likely to be foreign investors, in projects 
targeted for private sector investments. For projects, that sell electricity under the FIT 
regime, MEA will devise tariffs and purchase agreements taking into account perceived 
levels of risks and returns that are appropriate to this type of investments. Maldives SREP 
IP will explore guarantee instrument to cover payment, currency depreciation and related 
risks that are of concerns to potential investors. 
•	 Individual installations may be too small to be of interest to investors. MEE will support 
investors and utilities to aggregate projects to offer suitable scale. 
•	 The regulatory frameworks for RE investments are inadequate. MEA (with support 
from ADB and WBG) is putting in place required planning criteria, technical codes and 
standards, as well as tariff regulations to support private sector RE investments.
•	 Lenders may have limited capacity and/or interest in lending for RET investments. 
Appropriate financing from SREP and from MDBs will be available to mitigate risks 
that international investors may perceive in lending for RET projects in the Maldives. 
The power purchase agreements and other legal documents will be drafted taking into 
consideration that many of the developers and investors will be from offshore.
•	 Selection of the small electricity consuming islands for RE would include criteria on 
the financial and economic cost of supplying diesel based power to such islands and the 
replacement cost with solar and batteries. A phased approach to RE for small electricity 
consuming islands would be adopted based.
7.3 INSTITUTIONAL RISKS
The principal risks are as follows:
•	 There is a small pool of technically qualified staff with experience in RETs;
•	 a few senior civil servants are highly experienced and capable administrators, but they are 
overloaded already; and
•	 the electricity sector has no tradition of either strategic planning or technical innovation. 
Even the largest utility, STELCO, has no experience outside its traditional area of diesel 
generation. 
SREP and MDB partners are working closely with MEE and will be working with utilities in order 
to overcome these shortcomings. Under the Maldives SREP IP resources have been allocated 
to further strengthen the capacities within the MEE, the MEA and the Utilities. There are no 
restrictions in bringing in expatriate experts where investors perceive skill shortages for design, 
installation and operation of their power plantsThe ongoing organisational restructuring of organisations.
7.4 COUNTRY RISKS
•	 Political risks: Changes in the administrative structure within the Government may create 
uncertainty for developers. The creation of an enabling environment (through Maldives 
SREP IP and other initiatives) independent of political consideration and greater 
transparency in decision making mitigates this risk. 
The provision of training and capacity building would enhance the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the workforce in the sector.
•	 Fiscal constraints: Maldives, as a small island State, has limited access to external financial 
resources. This is coupled with high borrowing rates that in turn translates into high 
investment cost. 
Blending SREP funds with leveraged resources may reduce the cost of capital and 
associated risks. 
•	 Geographic constraints: Dispersed islands and lack of sufficient land mass leads to high 
logistics and transportation cost. In addition, it offers limited opportunities for building 
large scale power generation facilities which are often more economic than small scale 
applications. RETs such as solar PV are inherently modular and well suited to meeting the 
needs of relatively small dispersed communities. The limited transport network linking 
most of the population centres, increases cost to investors. During the construction phase 
available bulk transport strategically used can reduce transport costs. During operations, 
difficulties associated with inter island transport, is lessened as RETs do not require 
regular fuel shipments.
Seasonal exposure to rough seas and stormy weather can disrupt inter island transport. 
However, rough weather conditions are short and can easily be avoided through proper 
planning. 8. RESULTS FRAMEWORK
 future monitoring and evaluation of the results of the Maldives SREP IP funded activities, an indicative results framework for the IP 
sented below. The Ministry, through the PMU, will have overall
sults Explanation of the result statement Indicators Baseline Targets Assumptions Means of
verification
Maldives SREP IP Transformative Impact
pport low carbon
velopment pathways
reducing energy
verty and increasing
ergy security
SREP is the major intervention
in the Maldives supporting thegovernment’s carbon neutralitygoal. In addition to the globalbenefit of CO2 reduction, the
projects contribute significant toenergy security both at the nationallevel and in the most vulnerableislands by displacing diesel requiredfor electricity generation.
Share of RE in the nationalelectricity mix in theinhabited islands.
<1% 100% Carbon neutrality
by 2020 assumingadequate resourcesare available, lowertechnology costs andhuman capacity is inplace.
NationalStatistics
Annual electricity outputfrom RE in GWh
<7GWh 1700 GWh25 Carbon neutrality
by 2020 assumingadequate resourcesare available, lowertechnology costs andhuman capacity is inplace.
National
Statistics
In order to achieve the above
objective, GoM will need to mobilizesignificant resources from privateand public sources over the next 20years.
Increased public and
private investments (USD)in RE sector per year
USD 3M USD 100M National M&E system
and M&E frameworkof the implementingagency
Increased publi
and privateinvestments(USD) in targetesub-sector(s) pcountry per yea
1700GWh is needed to achieve carbon neutrality by 2020 in the inhabited islands (excluding tourist resorts) based on the assumptions of 10% growth, and a plant factor of 0.8.sults Explanation of the result statement Indicators Baseline Targets Assumptions Means of
verification
SREP Programme Outcomes
ncreased supply of
In order to achieve thetransformation to increased energysupply and demand based on RE theeconomic viability of the RE sectorwill need to increase. This meansthat the sector will need to growin size and provide the benefit ofincreased employment.
Additional energy output
from new RE (GWh)
CO2 emissions avoided
(tCO2/yr)
< 1GWh/year<1,000 tCO2/yr
~70 GWh/year56,000 tCO2/yr
Electricity production
based on resourcecharacteristics and technologyperformance of theMaldives.GHG emissionscalculated basedon avoiding dieselgeneration andtransmission losses fordistributed solar PV.
Government M&framework
mproved macro
onomic and fiscal
uation.
Presently diesel import is about 350
million litres (20% of the GDP). Oneimportant benefit is to replace diesel
electricity with RE to reduce theimpact on the balance of trade andgovernment subsidies.
Quantity of diesel avoided.
Amount of subsidy
provided to public utilitiesfor diesel relative to 2011subsidy.
NilNil
23 million litres per
year (6% of totaldiesel import)~USD 7 millionper year (30% ofsubsidy provided)
Based on 2011 fuelprices.
Government
M&E framework
New and additional
ources for RE
jects
The SREP will involve the leveragingof new and additional resources,clean production and consumptiontechnologies. This will occur in thecontext of projects where multiplesources of funding will be leveragedby SREP for particular investments.
Leverage factor of SREP
funding; USD financingfrom other sources(contributions from MDBs,governments, multi-lateralsand bi-laterals, CSOs,private sector)
N/a USD 100M/year These would be actual
investment amountscommitted or providedfor total SREP.
GovernmentM&E framework9. MALDIVES SREP IP CRITERIA
Increased installed capacity from renewableenergy sources: Annual energy consumption in the outer 
islands is estimated to be 428GWh. Almost all of this is generated from diesel based sources with 
the exception of small RE demonstration projects that generate less than 1GWh/year. The RE 
investments planned under the Maldives SREP IP are expected to generate 70GWh/year which 
is approximately 16% of the annual electricity demand of the inhabited islands. 
Increased access to energy through renewable energy sources: At the moment there is no inhabited 
island in the Maldives providing electricity entirely on RE sources. Maldives SREP IP is envisaged 
to install RE in 10 inhabited islands that would be completely transformed from diesel based 
energy to RE. In addition, 24% of all inhabited islands will have a greater share of RE in their 
energy mix as a result of the Maldives SREP IP. Furthermore, 71% of the population will be 
benefiting from the RE installations. 
Low Emission Development and “leap-frogging” technologies: Currently Maldives depends entirely 
on diesel fuel for electricity generation, to a cost of which is equivalent to approximately 20% 
of the GDP. By installing RE electricity generating facilities under the Maldives SREP IP, 
approximately 22 million litres of diesel will be avoided annually. This will help to avoid emission 
of approximately 56,000 tons of CO2
/year. The current RE installed capacity in the Maldives 
is approximately 2MW, at the end of the Maldives SREP IP this will increase to 26MW. The 
ambitious Maldives SREP IP is expected to bring state of the art RE technologies and expertise 
to the Maldives within a relatively short period.
Affordability and competitiveness of renewablesources: The unit cost of electricity generation in the 
Maldives is believed to be the highest in the South Asia region due to its dependence on imported 
diesel for energy generation. Electricity generation cost (or diesel costs) ranges from USD 0.31/
kWh to USD 0.46/kWh. High electricity generation costs translate into heavy subsidies in order 
to make electricity affordable to the population. In the year 2011 alone, the Government spent 
about USD 25million through fuel subsidies. With the increased penetration of RE into the 
energy mix under the Maldives SREP IP it is expected to save at least USD 7million/year on fuel 
subsidies while in addition saving the cost of some 22 million litres of diesel fuel. 
Productive use of energy: Although all islands have access to electricity service in most islands 
the power systems are very poorly designed and maintained. As a result, the quality of the 
electricity supply on these islands is very low and does not allow the consumer to use modern 
electrical appliances. The implementation of the power system rehabilitation programme under 
the Maldives SREP IP will improve the performance of the power systems as well as the overall 
system efficiency and make the systems RE ready. With better and more reliable electricity service 
provided at an affordable price due to better systems and increased share of RE the productivity 
of the beneficiary communities will be further improved.
Economic, social and environmental development impact: Access to sustainable, affordable and 
reliable energy will not only foster economic, social and environmental development but it will 
also enhance the national energy security. The savings achieved due to reduced cost of energy 
generation can be used to stimulate developments in other socioeconomic sectors for the betterment environments. Noise, associated with operation and maintenance of diesel generator sets on 
small islands, is often seen as highly destructive for the vulnerable members of the communities. 
These impacts can be largely mitigated and/or avoided through the introduction of RE based 
energy generating facilities. In addition, opening up the RE market to attract private sector and 
to increase foreign investments, a cadre of green jobs which in the Maldives are virtually nonexistent will be created. 
Economic and financial viability: Comparison of the generation costs for RE based and that of 
diesel based electricity clearly indicates competitive advantage of RE based electricity over diesel 
based electricity generation in the Maldives. The current FIT structure has been found to be 
open to improvement, but still attractive to private investors. The further strengthening of the 
FIT together with the overall regulatory framework under the Maldives SREP IP is expected to 
generate significant interest among the potential investors. 
Leveraging of additionalresources: The proposed investments are expected to be leveraged by more 
than USD 4 for each dollar invested by SREP - making this a total investment of over USD 138 
million. The largest share of the leveraging is expected to come from the private sector followed 
by contributions from the Government of Maldives and MDBs. The significant investments 
expected from the private sector would be a unique, an innovative aspect of this IP and a positive 
example for other countries.
Gender: In principle, there is no gender disparity in the Maldives with regards to access to 
electricity service is concerned. However, the energy sector is largely male dominated with very 
few trained female professionals. The technical capacity building component under the Maldives 
SREP IP will focus on bridging this gap through providing opportunities in particular to women 
interested to work in this sector. 
Co-benefits of renewable energy scale-up: Significant co-benefits will include an increased 
energy security to vulnerable and small communities and enhance socioeconomic conditions. 
Furthermore, the proposed WTE projects will improve the local environment in the islands by 
a better management of waste and by reducing the extent of land needed for waste disposal. 
The WTE components are expected to bring significant health and tourism benefits to the local 
communities.
The reduction in operational costs of the power systems, an improved country’s balance of 
trade due to reductions of diesel imports and potential tariff reduction as a result of lowered 
power generation costs and the creation of more employment opportunities are considered as 
significant fiscal co-benefits of the Maldives SREP IP.
Last but not least would the successful implementation of full RE systems on small electricity 
consuming islands generate a strong demonstration effect to be translated to other island or 
countries to learn from this experience and apply it to their own context to meeting the energy 
needs of isolated populations.Significant direct benefits, such as lower cost of electricity, enhanced energy security, reduction 
in CO2 emissions were described previously. The following are some of the co-benefits of the 
Maldives SREP IP implementation:
Social and economic: The programme envisages significant investments in small, more vulnerable 
islands by transforming their electricity supply to be 100% RE based. Increased energy security 
should contribute to enhanced socioeconomic (and environmental) conditions in these small 
communities.
Energy security: The country is entirely dependent on imported oil as the primary source of 
energy, making it exposed to fluctuations and increases in oil prices. The cost of importing fossil 
fuels in the year 2011 accounted for roughly 20% of the national GDP. Diversifying the fuel mix 
not only contributes to an increase in RE generation but also contributes to energy security by 
reducing the Maldives dependence on oil imports as a large percentage of their economy and by 
utilizing indigenous resources of energy.
Improvement in local environment: Waste management is one of the most pressing environmental 
concerns for the government. Unsustainable waste management practices on the islands have 
been resulting in damage to marine life and degradation of the fragile ecosystems including coral 
reefs, wetlands, and beaches. In addition, groundwater becomes contaminated as a result of 
waste oil penetration and toxic chemicals given the sandy nature of island soils and the shallow 
water lens. The WTE projects, in particular, will improve the local environment in the islands by 
better management of waste and reduce the extent of land needed for waste disposal. In islands 
where solar and wind displace diesels local benefits will accrue due to reduced risk of oil spills 
during transport and lessening problems associated with improper waste oil disposal.
Health benefits: Due to the unsustainable waste management practices, in particular open burning 
at the largest dump sites in the Maldives, workers and residents (including school children) are 
exposed to associated health hazards. For example, people working in Thilafushi and other waste 
disposal islands and those living downwind have been suffering from respiratory diseases caused 
by open burning of waste, which often required treatment overseas. As a result of sustainable 
waste management and disposal, coupled with power generation and water production, these 
hazards would be eliminated.
Tourism benefits: Maldives is seen as a clean, beautiful environment that is visually appealing to 
tourists from all over the world. One of the major deterrents of tourism is the image of waste 
disposal on some of the inhabited islands neighbouring the resorts. For example, Thilafushi 
is located in an area where there are many existing tourist resorts. Tourist complaints of open 
burning and unsustainable waste management practices at Thilafushi have become a cause of 
concern for the Government needing urgent attention and intervention given the importance of 
tourism on the economy of Maldives. a) State-owned utilities – reduction in operational costs, power systems efficiency, less 
volatility, and transfer of power generation risks to the private sector. 
b) Budget – improving the country’s balance of trade due to reduction of diesel imports and 
the government will require less funds for diesel fuel subsidies to the public utilities.
c) Households – potential revenues from renting of the rooftops to investors and revenues 
from sale of electricity through FIT.
Global demonstration effect: Small island States are often faced with many challenges to promote 
RETs. The Maldives’ determination to demonstrate leadership in overcoming those - including 
the pledge to become carbon neutral by 2020 - can show that if small island States can take 
significant strides towards achieving greater energy security, other countries can follow this 
examples. Maldives wants to encourage other countries to learn from its experience and apply it 
to their own context. 
Creation of green jobs: The programme emphasises significantly enhancing institutional and 
human capacity in the sector. The emergence of healthy and growing RE and energy efficient 
sectors will contribute to the creation of intellectually stimulating high quality green jobs around 
the atolls where most of the work will take place. APPENDIX 1 - CONCEPT NOTES
ACCELERATING SUSTAINABLE PRIVATE INVESTMENTS IN 
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAMME (ASPIRE)
Background
This programme will cover distributed PV and wind RE investments under the FIT, private 
investments in WTE and associated technical assistance. 
Public sector financial resources are limited, thereby constraining RE investments that are typically 
capital-intensive. Therefore, the ASPIRE programme aims to address this by encouraging and 
facilitating private investments in the sector through targeting the following key barriers:
•	 Investment climate uncertainties due to currency and payment risks as well as those 
related repatriation of profits. This leads to premiums which affect the economic viability 
of RE projects;
•	 regulatory frameworks are at a nascent stage;
•	 domestic capital has little experience and/or appetite for investing in this sector; and
•	 small scale of power distribution and dispersed investment projects make it difficult to 
attract private sector and to reach economies of scale.
As a result of these barriers, distributed RE supply has been happening on an ad-hoc and 
opportunistic basis.
Objective
For the Maldives to achieve the scale of RE deployment and make greater strides into its policy 
objectives on the carbon neutral strategy, it must put in place the required safeguards that would 
lead to the scale-up of RE in the country. 
Project Selection
The ASPIRE Programme will consist of the following projects: 
•	 Project 1: Renewable Energy Investments under a Feed-in Tariff
•	 Project 2: Utilization of Waste-to-Energy Technologies in Outer Islands
•	 Project 3: Implementation Support and Institutional Development
Project 1: Renewable Energy Investments under a Feed-in Tariff
•	 Sub-Project 1.1: Greater Male’ Region Solar PV investments - it is possible to feed PV 
generated electricity amounting to 20-30% of the peak day time demand in greater Male’ safely fed in to grid systems in the greater Male’ region. PV installations will be undertaken 
for Male’ (11MW) and in Hulhumale’ (4MW). There is the potential for more, once the 
submarine cable is in place. The FIT is already in place with MEA updating it and will be 
the basis for deploying the solar PV programme.
•	 Sub-Project 1.2: Outer island solar and wind investments (under FIT) - combined RE 
investments in solar PV and wind will be undertaken on the outer islands. Some 15 out of 
30 of the islands selected will be made RE ready under the POISED programme funded 
through ADB and IDB. The project envisages an installation of about 3 MW on medium 
to large electricity consuming islands (>1GWh/year). The installed RE will offset up to 
30% of peak day time demand.
This will be carried out by the private sector on a commercial basis with the electricity sold to 
FENAKA at the FIT. This is a precursor to investments in a greater share of RE on these islands 
once storage costs decline. SREP resources, blended with IDA, may be used to design guarantee 
instruments to mitigate sovereign, currency and counterparty risks. 
Project 2: Utilization of Waste-to-Energy Technologies
There are islands in the Maldives where WTE has been found to be technically, financially and 
economically feasible based on assessments which were carried out. These are: S.Hithadhoo, 
HDh. Kulhudhufushi and R. Vandhoo. Through this investment, diesel used for electricity and 
water production will be displaced by the WTE systems. The private sector will finance the 
installation of about 2MW, SREP and WBG financing will be used to provide risk mitigation 
facilities and/or incentives to private companies. 
Project 3: Implementation Support and Institutional Development 
Support to MEE, STELCO and FENAKA for preparation and implementation of FIT scheme 
including mobilization of private investors. Some support may be needed for improving the 
technical requirements for successful RET deployment as well as developing standards for 
interconnection and performance monitoring. Funds will be sought from SREP and other 
bilateral sources for preparing the utilities for planning for the future phases of RE expansion 
beyond Maldives SREP IP. 
In addition to training, international expertise will be sought to supplement local capabilities of 
decision-makers and implementation staff. Support is envisaged for human resource development 
at MEE and the public utilities for strengthening their technical, planning and management 
capacities.Financing Plan
Implementing Arrangements
Preparation activities as well as technical assistance required to implement the Maldives SREP IP 
programmes and projects will be carried out by PMU/MEE. Guarantee facilities and channelling 
of subsidies, soft loans, and grants to private developers are envisaged to be administered by 
MGF when fully operational. An interim arrangement will be considered while MGF is being 
setup. This will be evaluated and decided during project preparation stage. 
Outer island investments will be implemented by FENAKA with PMU support if required. 
Grant agreements between WB and MoFT will be executed with on lending agreements to the 
utilities. Technical assistance, monitoring, evaluation and oversight will be the responsibility of 
MEE/PMU together with the implementing utility. 
RE investments under the projects will be implemented by the private sector with risk mitigation 
/ guarantee facilities by the WBG. STELCO and FENAKA will be the buyers of electricity 
under the FIT. MEE will provide policy, promotion and implementation support coupled with 
regulatory support from MEA. 
The WTE investments will be developed under a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement 
where the investor is expected to self-finance the project(s). SREP funds could be used to cover 
electricity payment risks. The following Figure gives an overview of the proposed guarantee 
arrangements.
SOURCES OF FUNDING (USD 000)
Components SREP
10,750 2,600 5,000 20,000 0 0 1,160 11,000 42,500 0 0 72,010
GoM WB
IDA
WBG
Guara-
-ntee
ADB IFC/
ADB
(PSOD)
GIZ JICA Private Others IDB TOTAL
ASPIRE
6,000 2,500 3,000 12,000 11,000 49,000
1,000 2,000 8,000 960 12,960
3,000
200
10,000
750 100 1,050
Greater Malé Region Solar PV Investments
Outer island solar and wind investments (under FIT)
Outer Island Waste-to-Energy investments
Implementation Support & Institutional Development
Sub Total
26,500
9,000
7,000
Participating
Private
Companies
Commercial
Lenders
WB
(Guarantor)
Government
of Maldives
INDEMNITY AGREEMENT
WB GUARANTEE
AUG
EETNAR
PPA
Guarantee arrangements under SREP Lead Agency
WBG
Transformative Outcomes and Outputs 
The outcome of ASPIRE will be to tap into the full potential of RE development and 
implementation in the Maldives. This will support portfolio development for the sector and serve 
as learning platform for moving towards the achievement of the carbon neutral strategy. 
The following outputs are expected to be achieved under ASPIRE:
•	 20MW of RE generation installed (approximately 15MW (solar PV) in the greater Male’ 
region and 5MW (3MW solar PV/wind26 and 2MW WTE) in the outer islands);
•	 increased energy security;
•	 reduced cost of electricity generation with possible reduction to tariff; 
•	 creation of new employment and business opportunities in the RE industry;
•	 about 12 million litres of diesel avoided per year; and
•	 reduction in GHG emissions by approximately 31,000 tCO2
/year.PREPARING OUTER ISLANDS FOR SUSTAINABLE ENERGY 
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (POISED)
Background
As of today, almost all outer-islands produce their electricity by diesel generators. Several of these 
systems especially on the smaller islands have evolved rather than being designed. In most cases, 
generators were added ad-hoc without regard for maintenance issues, or the cost of operation. 
Maintenance is carried out by able and resourceful local personnel, but there is no provision for a 
national spares stock, or any centralized expertise. In consequence many generators are wrongly 
sized for their load and most are consuming much more fuel than necessary. 
In addition to problems with generation, there are major issues with the distribution grids on 
some small islands where losses are estimated to be high27. 
For small electricity consuming islands, immediate installation of solar/wind with battery 
storage is economically justifiable for offsetting nearly 100% of diesel in a phased manner. For 
medium to large electricity consuming islands with inefficient energy generation, power system 
upgrading is a prerequisite to increasing the overall share of solar/wind. In the case of efficient 
medium and large electricity consuming islands the transition to an increased share of solar/
wind can be brought about almost immediately. In the latter cases, the share of intermittent 
solar/wind is expected to be maintained at under 30%. Further increase in share of RE will be 
considered, once solutions for addressing grid stability issues associated with greater share of 
RE are available28. 
Objective
As electricity generation from solar PV, and wind in some locations, is less expensive than energy 
generation from diesel based on avoided cost of fuel in the Maldives, this programme will support 
achieving full RE systems on 10 small electricity consuming islands and deploying RE-diesel 
hybrids on some medium to large electricity consuming islands. 
Project Selection
POISED will consist of the following projects: 
Project 1: Small Power Station RE
Approximately 10 small power stations (between 250-350MWh/year) will be converted to full 
RE (approximately 2MW) using an optimum mix of wind and solar PV, with batteries to provide 
energy storage. Diesel electricity supply costs are in high on small electricity consuming islands 
(~USD0.40/kWh). These have been selected for implementation by the state-owned utility 
FENAKA. They are the most difficult to fund commercially and they involve tight integration 
- at small scale of wind, solar, energy storage and generator control. In addition, distribution 
systems on these islands would need to be assessed and upgraded to handle high levels of RE 
27	 Distribution losses were appraised at around 25% or more in some of the small and medium electricity consuming islands that were covered under the ADB financed
Outer Island Electrification Project
These were brought down to 4-10%can be used for ice making to support the local fishing industry). Measures to support energy 
efficiency including through tariff signals by MEA and load management would be assessed 
and supported. In addition, productive usage of energy on such islands would be supported 
including through linking up with ongoing ADB/IDB supported investments in the Maldives. 
The phase-wise plan for full RE on the identified small electricity consuming island would be 
developed during the project preparation phase and will be based on assessment of demand 
on the islands, RE resource assessments, potential for energy efficiency, space constraints, 
environmental and social impact.
Project 2: Power System Rehabilitation
Up-gradation of power systems is a prerequisite to introducing high levels of RE to the mediumand large electricity consuming islands’ power stations that have inefficient generators and grids. 
Under this project, about 15 power systems that are least efficient will be replaced and made ready 
for RE installations. The replacement of inefficient generators and up-gradation of distribution 
systems in 15 islands with a small range of modern, electronically controlled generators will be 
funded through an ADB loan possibly blended with other sources of financing.
Another 15 power systems developed under ADB outer islands electrification project will be 
assessed for additional investment requirements in control systems to make them ready for about 
30% RE installation by capacity. Preparatory grants from SREP would support these studies 
while required investments could be supported by MDBs. 
Private sector investments of about 3MW on these 30 outer islands would be supported through 
a FIT set by MEA. There is ongoing technical assistance support from ADB and WBG to MEA 
on a FIT, standardized contracts etc. These investments would benefit from guarantees under the 
ASPIRE programme. At a subsequent phase, taking on larger capacities of RE can be tackled 
once energy storage costs have fallen.
Project 3: Implementation Support and Institutional Development
Support will be provided to FENAKA to design and implement these projects, to train FENAKA 
staff in operating and maintaining these systems, to monitor performance and to support planning 
for greater RE scale up on these islands. International expertise will be sought to supplement 
local capabilities within FENAKA.
Financing Plan
SOURCES OF FUNDING (USD 000)
Components SREP
12,750 8,000 0 0 0 400 0 0 3,000 10,000 40,150
GoM WB
IDA
WBG
Guara-
-ntee
ADB IFC/
ADB
(PSOD)
GIZ JICA Private Others IDB TOTAL
POISED
12,000 26.000
13,000
750 400 1,150
5,000
5,000
Small power station RE 3,000
Power system rehabilitation
Implementation support & institutional development
Sub Total 6,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
5,000The implementing agency will be FENEKA. The power station work is closely integrated with 
the operations and equipment already installed in power stations. It will therefore be carried 
out by FENEKA, supported and advised by MEE (and later MGF). Actual engineering work 
will be done either by FENEKA or under Engineering Procurement and Construction (EPC) 
contracts where initially the utility would lack the skills and resources needed to carry out this 
task. Support relevant for energy efficiency initiatives under POISED for small and medium 
electricity consuming islands to MEA and MGF or would be provided through MDB funding.
Lead Agency
ADB
Transformative Outcomes and Outputs 
The outcome of POISED will be to demonstrate 100% RE based systems starting with 2MW 
of RE with storage on the 10 small electricity consuming islands that would be made 100% RE 
based systems in phases. In addition, 3MW of RE will be developed in 30 medium islands by 
private sector under the FIT to be announced by MEA with about 12 million litres of diesel 
avoided per year and reductions in GHG emissions by approximately 31,000 tCO2
/year. The 
ASPIRE programme would provide guarantees that would support the FIT. 
The following outputs are expected to be achieved under POISED:
•	 2MW of RE generation installed with adequate storage on 10 islands;
•	 reduction in GHG emissions by about 5,000 tCO2/year; 
•	 approximately 2 million litres of diesel avoided/year; 
•	 power systems on 15 islands will be upgraded to reduce the generation and distribution 
losses; 
•	 power systems on 15 islands will be assessed and made ready to accept about 30% RE; 
•	 productive use of power supported in small and medium electricity consuming islands 
linked to employment creation and business opportunities; and
•	 capacity would be developed in FENAKA to design, procure, implement and maintain 
renewable projects on a larger set of islands.THILAFUSHI WASTE-TO-ENERGY PROGRAMME
Background
Growing urbanization and the importance of tourism explain the critical need for an efficient 
and sustainable waste management system in the Maldives. The capital Male’ is one of the 
most densely populated cities in the world with around 47,000 inhabitants per km2
. As such, 
Male’ cannot afford inefficient waste collection and disposal. In addition, many tourist resorts 
are located in the islands surrounding Male’, and the preservation of a pristine environment is 
an absolute condition for the continued ability of these resorts to attract tourists and to sustain 
growth of any economic largely driven by tourism. The current practice where waste is collected 
in an ad-hoc manner and dumped at the shore, disposed of in the ocean, or transported to 
Thilafushi, where it is burnt openly destroys the marine environment, pollutes the air and puts 
people’s health at risk. 
The WTE power facility under this programme will be part of the larger waste management 
framework and contribute to the National Solid Waste Management Policy which provides a 
vision for an efficient waste management system. In September 2009, the Government appointed 
Advisory Services from the International Finance Corporation (IFC) to help structure and 
competitively tender an integrated waste management project for the Male’ catchment area as 
a public-private-partnership (PPP). A competitive engagement process with the private sector is 
currently underway for implementation.
Objective
Implementation of an effective PPP waste management solution for the collection, processing 
and disposal of waste in the greater Male’ region catchment through the implementation of a 
WTE facility. 
Project Selection
The implementation of the WTE facility will be part of a solid waste management system for 
the greater Male’ region and the neighbouring resort islands. The overall system will include 
waste collection and transportation to Thilafushi, waste processing and disposal on Thilafushi 
(segregation, recycling, composting, gasification and inert waste disposal in the landfill); and an 
up to 4 MW WTE power generation facility to replace the existing diesel-based power generators 
on the island – the latter being considered under the Maldives SREP IP. 
The project is designed as a concession agreement where the project company will receive tipping 
fees and transportation fee, adjusted annually for certain factors. The rates will be applied to the 
quantity of waste handled and processed. The project company will need to serve greater Male’ 
region, the outer islands and resorts that are within the catchment area identified by the MEE. In 
addition to the tipping and transportation fees, the project will sell compost, recyclable materials, 
and electricity.As is typical with such projects, project financiers will analyse the various risks to the project 
including, but not limited to, sponsor’s experience and track record, suitability of technology, 
waste supply arrangements, power off-take arrangements, foreign exchange risk, contractual 
arrangements, legal and regulatory environment, creditworthiness of contracting parties include 
state and state-owned entities and support structures. The current fiscal position of the Maldives 
government creates a counterparty risk for the project and the lenders that will need to be 
sufficiently addressed to provide necessary comfort to potential financiers.
Financing Plan
For all of the components of the integrated waste management system, the estimated total cost 
is approximately USD 58 million. This will likely be financed through an optimal mix of debt 
from lenders (e.g. 70%) and equity (30%) from the private sector sponsors. Both ADB’s private 
sector operations department and the IFC have indicated their initial interest to consider funding 
up to USD 15 million each (USD 30 million total) of the long-term senior debt financing for 
the project(s). Additional sources of debt financing or commercial risk participations (through 
a B-loan or other structures through ADB and IFC) are likely to be needed to complete the 
financing of the project.
The WTE facility is considered under SREP, even though it will remain part of the waste 
management operations. Therefore, the financing plan for this programme is adjusted accordingly 
and based on estimated costs of approximately USD 20 million.
Implementing Arrangements
Local banks are unable to provide long-term financing for projects, and the country risks have 
constrained the international commercial banks from actively considering financing projects 
without extensive political risk insurance. Such insurance may not be available for the tenors 
required for this project to be viable. As this project will have a strong developmental impact on 
the Maldives and promote the use of PPP structures to promote RE generation, SREP funds 
may be required to meet the financing gap or cover the incremental costs or risks of project 
implementation. ADB and IFC will consider the following options for deploying the SREP 
funds: (i) parallel concessional loans; (ii) partial credit or risk guarantees or other risk sharing 
mechanisms; (iii) buying down of fees and/or risk premiums from the commercial political 
risk insurance market; (iv) covering the risks associated with electricity off-take under the FIT 
scheme; and (v) other forms of subordinated or mezzanine finance. Once the feasibility study 
has been completed and a project structure determined in conjunction with the investors, a more 
specific financing plan will be proposed by the joint ADB-IFC team.
SOURCES OF FUNDING (USD 000)
Components SREP
5,000 0 0 0 10,000 0 0 5,000 0 0 20.000
GoM WB
IDA
WBG
Guara-
-ntee
ADB IFC/
ADB
(PSOD)
GIZ JICA Private Others IDB TOTAL
Waste-to-Energy Thilafushi 5,000 5,000 20.000
Sub Total 0
10,000Lead Agency
IFC and ADB’s Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD).
Transformative Outcomes and Outputs
The project will contribute to a reduction in pollution and greenhouse gas emission through the 
generation of electricity from indigenous RE resources, greater private sector participation in 
municipal services, and improved economic conditions through the provision of efficient urban 
infrastructure. It will provide electricity generation for the greater Male’ area complementary to 
the Maldives SREP IP solar PV initiatives and support the Government’s carbon neutral goal, 
while helping it comply with good global practices on the treatment and disposal of solid waste.
The following outputs are expected to be achieved under the Thilafushi WTE project:
•	 Up to 4 MW of the generation capacity;
•	 reduction of CO2
 emissions by 20,000 tons of CO2 /year;
•	 approximately 7.5 million litres of diesel avoided/year; and
•	 environmentally safe disposal of 200 tons of waste/day.CONCEPT NOTE
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY 
SCALE UP PROGRAMME (TA)
Background
The primary mandate of the MEE is to ensure the delivery of reliable, low cost and environmentally 
sustainable energy to support the economic development and enhance energy security of 
the islands. MEE is in the process of formulating a Renewable Energy Law with a long term 
perspective for RET development including a functioning system of FIT as well as supporting 
the establishment of a coherent and efficient structure for the electricity market. 
The state-owned utilities and the proposed MGF will play an important role in the successful 
implementation of Maldives SREP IP and future RE expansion in the country. Furthermore, the 
MEA, as the regulator for the sector, is critical to the success of the FIT and private investment 
in the sector. Therefore, there is a strong need for building the capacities of these institutions and 
improving the access to quality and reliable data to inform future policy decisions and investment 
opportunities. 
Objective
The TA activities will support the strengthening of an enabling environment, strengthen human 
resource capacities and identify additional RE investment opportunities.
Project Selection
The following TA activities will be supported through the Maldives SREP IP:
Project 1: Greater Male’ Area Renewable Power System Integration
In order to further displace use of diesel generation additional RE is required. A feasibility study 
will be carried out under Maldives SREP IP to identify the RE options to deliver large-scale 
dispatchable power for greater Male’ region and achieve economies of scale through inter-island 
connectivity. The study will recommend further initiatives to be supported from other resources.
Project 2: Improved Access to Quality Data
Country-wide RE resource mapping is needed to inform strategic policy decisions and support 
future development of RE programmes. The activity is expected to finance the construction of 
a national network of wind and solar data collection stations that will allow the optimization 
of wind, solar and energy storage components of the island power systems. Wind data will 
be collected at a range of heights up to ±80m, and solar data will include direct and diffuse 
radiation, and radiation reflected off lagoon surfaces. Funds will be used for real-time data 
collection, monitoring and analysis. In addition, ocean energy data will be gathered as well as 
strengthening of the MMS.Project 3: Creating an Enabling Environment
Through Maldives SREP IP technical assistance the RE policy and the regulatory framework 
will be strengthened by developing and implementing policies, laws, regulations, rules, standards 
and incentive schemes to integrate RE in the energy sector. This includes the FIT, standardised 
PPAs, guidelines for investment approval, licensing of electricity operators etc. to support RE 
development. MEA is already in the process of carrying out those tasks and will continue to do 
so with the support from the WBG and ADB. In addition, business models for RE projects to 
attract private investments will be developed.
Project 4: Human Capacity Building
This project provides the necessary support for any significant development of the RE sector. 
Human resource capacity will be developed for planning, implementation and operation of 
RE systems. In addition to training, international expertise will be sought to supplement local 
capabilities. In addition, the project will provide support for setting up the MGF and MGFs 
spending policies in the RET and energy efficiency areas by providing necessary information, 
training, knowledge sharing, operational procedures and financial support for projects to increase 
their bankability. Assistance with the formulation of a suitable electricity tariff and mechanism 
to support RE including technical standards and information required for project financing is 
being provided by ADB.
Financing Plan 
Implementing Arrangements
The implementing agency will be MEE. SREP resources will be channelled through the WBG 
to carry out Project 1. Funding for Project 2 is being sought from bilateral sources through 
the WBG. SREP funds may be used to supplement, where needed. ADB will also carry out a 
number of TA activities under Maldives SREP IP.
SOURCES OF FUNDING (USD 000)
Components SREP
1,185 1,400 0 0 0 1,700 0 0 800 0 5,485
GoM WB
IDA
WBG
guarantees
ADB IFC/
ADB
(PSOD)
GIZ JICA Private Others IDB TOTAL
T/A for RE Scale Up
500
500
485 1,100 1,685
Greater Malé Region Renewable Power Sys Integration
Improved access to quality data
Human Capacity Building
Creating and enabling environment 200 600 1,100
Sub Total 400
400
800
100
1,000
300Lead Agency
WBG and ADB
Transformative Outcomes and Outputs
•	 The greater Male’ region renewable power system integration study will identify RE 
options to deliver dispatchable power including energy storage and to achieve economies 
of scale through island connectivity;
•	 a strong legislative framework will reduce risks and transaction costs and encourage 
investment in RE; 
•	 strengthening of the capacity of government institutions and other relevant stakeholders 
as well as a clearer definition of responsibilities to improve regulatory environment for 
investors; and
•	 a network of masts and solar measuring stations covering the country in a representative 
fashion to provide real time data collection and distribution. PROGRAMME PREPARATION GRANT REQUEST
SREP PROGRAMME
Project/Programme Preparation Grant Request
1. Country/Region: Maldives 2. CIF Project ID#: (Trustee will assign ID)
3. Project Title: Preparing Outer Islands for Sustainable Energy Development (POISED)
4. Tentative SREP 
Funding Request (in 
US million total) for 
Project29 at the time 
of Investment Plan 
submission (concept 
stage):
Grant: USD700,000 Loan: N/A
5. Preparation Grant 
Request (in USD):
MDB: ADB
6. National Project Focal 
Point:
Ahmed Saleem
7. National 
Implementing Agency 
(project/programme):
Ministry of Environment and Energy
8. MDB SREP Focal Point 
and Project/Programme 
Task Team Leader (TTL):
Jiwan Acharya Len George
Description of activities covered by the grant: 
The grant will provide institutional support and training to FENAKA to develop projects for approval under
SREP for
1.	 Conversion of 10 power station on small electricity consuming islands to full RE.
2.	 Replacement of the inefficient power systems in 15 medium electricity consuming islands to
prepare them for installing 30% of demand from RE.
3.	 Readiness assessment of 15 efficient power systems in medium electricity consuming islands to
prepare them for installing 30% of demand from RE.
4.	 The grant will also support MEA and other stakeholders (including MEE and MGF) on POISED related
preparation, design, implementation aspects.
The activities covered under the grant would support
a)	 Review oftechnically suitable options forRE scaling up on the differentisland groups and preparation
of feasibility studies.
b)	 Strengthening of FENEKA and other stakeholder implementation capacity to design and implement
the POISED programme.
c)	 Preparation of project for review by SREP and MDBs.
d)	 Development of technical specifications and configuration for bid process and initiation of bid
process related support.
e)	 Stakeholder consultations and support.
Suitable international expertise would be soughtto supplementlocal capabilities within FENAKA operational
and managerial staff to carry out the identified tasks.9. Outputs:
Deliverable Timeline
Completion of feasibility studies Within a 10 month period
FENEKA and other stakeholders develop capacity to
design and implement POISED
Over a 15 month period
Project prepared for approval from SREP subcommittee and ADB BoardOver a 12-15 month period
Bidding documents prepared for initiating the
Programme
Over a 12-15 month period
Support for stakeholder consultations on POISED
design aspects including transition path to prepare
islands for RE integration
Over a 12-15 month period
10. Budget (indicative):
Expenditures30 Amount (USD) – estimates
Consultants 460,000
Workshops/seminars 50,000
Travel/transportation 70,000
Others (admin costs/operational costs) 50,000
Contingencies (max. 10%) 70,000
Total Cost 700,000
Other contributions:
• Government 0.00
• MDB 0.0031
• Private Sector 0.00
• Others (please specify)
11. Timeframe (Tentative) Over 15 months.
Other Partners involved in project design and
implementation:
Funds will be sought from other multilateral,
bilateral sources to prepare the utilities for planning
and implementation of the projects while planning
for future RE expansion.
12. If applicable, explanation for why the grant is 
MDB executed: 
Will be executed through ADB coordinating with
MEE for project preparatory activities.
Implementation Arrangements
(incl. procurement of goods and services):
The implementing agency will be FENAKA,
supported and advised by MEE (later MGF) and
ADB. Support to MEA would be provided on POISED
related elements.
29
30PROGRAMME PREPARATION GRANT REQUEST
SREP PROGRAMME
Project/Programme Preparation Grant Request
1. Country/Region: Maldives 2. CIF Project ID#: (Trustee will assign ID)
3. Project Title: Accelerating Sustainable Private Investments in Renewable Energy (ASPIRE)
4. Tentative SREP 
Funding Request (in 
US million total) for 
Project32 at the time 
of Investment Plan 
submission (concept 
stage):
Grant: USD1.000.000 Loan: N/A
5. Preparation Grant 
Request (in USD):
MDB: WBG
6. National Project Focal 
Point:
Ahmed Saleem
7. National 
Implementing Agency 
(project/programme):
Ministry of Environment and Energy
8. MDB SREP Focal Point 
and Project/Programme 
Task Team Leader (TTL):
Gevorg Sargsyan Abdulaziz Faghi
Description of activities covered by the grant: 
The grant will provide technical assistance and institutional support to MEE, MEA, STELCO and FENAKA to:
1.	 Develop FIT and WTE projects for approval under SREP.
2.	 Strengthen the institution’s technical, planning and management capacities to attract national and
international investors and lenders.
3.	 Carry out the feasibility study for greater Male’ region.
The activities covered under the grant would support:
a)	 Set up of guarantees facility for political, regulatory and commercial risks.
b)	 Strengthening of MEE, MEA, FENAKA and STELCO.
c)	 Development of technical specifications, legal and commercial aspects, FIT and tariff mechanisms,
standardized PPAs, guidelines for investment approval, licensing of electricity operators.
d)	 Development of marketing strategy to promote the Maldives SREP IP to national and international
investors and lenders (incl. an investor’s conference and/or roadshow for the first half of 2013).
e)	 Carry out of feasibility study for greater Male’ region.
f)	 Carry out consultations with sector stakeholders.
31Deliverable Timeline
Set up guarantees facility 18 months from approval
Strengthened capacity within MEE, MEA, STELCO
and FENEKA to develop and implement the projects
1-2 years
Projects prepared for approval from SREP
sub-committee and WB Board
1 year from approval
Consultation with sector stakeholders 1-2 years
Marketing strategy and mechanisms 1-2 years
Investors Conference 6 month from approval
Feasibility Study 12 months from approval
Stakeholder consultations 2 month from completion of study
10. Budget (indicative):
Expenditures33 Amount (USD) – estimates
Consultants (study) 500,000
Consultants (project preparation) 150,000
Consultants (marketing activities) 100,000
Workshops/Seminars 50,000
Travel/Transportation 50,000
Others (admin costs/operational costs) 50,000
Contingencies (max. 10%) 100,000
Total Cost 1,000,000
Other contributions:
GIZ 500.00
11. Timeframe (Tentative) 18 month from approval.
Other Partners involved in project design and
implementation34
Funds will be sought from other multilateral
and bilateral sources for preparing the national
institutions for RE expansion beyond SREP.
12. If applicable, explanation for why the grant is 
MDB executed: 
Implementation Arrangements
(incl. procurement of goods and services): 
MEE will provide policy, promotion and
implementation support combined with regulatory
support from MEA.
32
33APPENDIX 2 - SUMMARY OF STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS
A number of stakeholder consultations were carried out between September 2011 and January 
2012. The following is a summary of the discussions and feedback received from public and 
private stakeholders. Prior to the submission of the IP for approval, a third and final round of 
consultations was carried out in September 2012 which is also summarized below.
Summary of 3rd Public Consultation (12th September 2012)
A public consultation meeting was held on September 12, 2012, inaugurated by Dr. Mariyam 
Shakeela, Minister of Environment and Energy. She highlighted the importance for stakeholder 
participation for the successful implementation of the Maldives SREP IP and thanked the WBG 
and ADB for their support and assistance provided during the process of the IP formulation. 
Minister Dr.Shakeela then requested the participants to critically comment on the document and 
to provide their inputs to improve the document. 
Opening remarks were also made by the representatives from MDBs highlighting the importance 
of stakeholder participation and their inputs to the IP followed by the presentation of the 
Maldives SREP IP by Mr. Ahmed Saleem, Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Environment 
and Energy. 
Stakeholders gave their inputs on the overall structure of the Maldives SREP IP as well as on the 
proposals for RE for greater Male’ region, RE for outer island and institutional arrangements. 
The following comments and feedbacks were received from the stakeholder.
Comments Actions taken
Concerns were raised for not having a strong regulatory
framework including a transparent tariff structure with
a FIT that reflects the proper costs of electricity for
consumers and foreign investors. The importance of
having FIT regulation in place prior to the implementation
of SREP activities was highlighted by all participants.
Has been explained, it already one of the main pillars of
Maldives SREP IP.
Participants suggested other options to be considered to
utilize access to energy from RE sources other than Solar
and Wind, as well as new forms of storage other than
battery storage. To scale up RE in the greater Male’ region
in particular, additional investments in infrastructure
(submarine cable) might be needed.
Is already included as part of the Feasibility study for
greater Male’ region.
Clarity was requested regarding the role of the proposed
institutions to be created. Suggestions were made to also
include MED into the structure in addition to develop a
strong evaluation and monitoring mechanism.
Was explained during the meeting, MED is included as part
of the institutional structure.
Participants requested the overall strengthening and
clarification of private sectors role in the development and
implementation of RE projects as well as the inclusion of
civil society organizations and island councils.
New chapter was added to Maldives SREP IP to include
the different stakeholder better into the implementation
activities.how among utility staff and private sector stakeholder,
following by suggestions to include technical training to
utility staff and private sector. In general, the importance
of building more local expertise for the RE sector was
highlighted.
part of the Maldives SREP IP.
Concerns were raised regarding the energy security for
smaller communities related to the proposed shift from
diesel based electricity generation to 100% RE.
Will be work out during the actual project preparation
phase. The existing diesel generator sets will act as
redundancy in case of PV system failure.
Concerns were raised regarding some of the technical
risks such as corrosion, following suggestions to consider
additional factors to address these risks in the technology
selection.
Have all been covered under the risk assessment and
appropriate considerations will be made during detailed
design phase.
Suggestions were made to supplement SREP by
programmes and projects on energy efficiency.
Energy efficiency is a necessary supplementary activity
for the successful implementation of the SREP. There
are already a number of on-going programmes, the
Government will further strengthen this sector and seek
support from other multi- and bilateral sources.
To better include the population, participant suggested
that the government should carry out a number of
awareness raising programmes on RE advantages or the
proposed tariff structure. This could also educate people
to why they should pay their electricity bills. 
Government plans to introduce an RE module in training
programmes conducted for the Island counsellors at
the Institute of Local Governance and Development to
sensitise them of the socio-economic and environmental
aspects of RE technologies. MEE will also carry out media
campaigns using mass media to raise awareness of the
public on RE benefits.
Summary of prior consultations:
1. A public consultation meeting was held on September 7, 2011 to solicit comments on the 
Renewable Energy Investment Framework (REIF) – which forms the basis of government 
policy and thinking on RE and underlies the preparation of the Maldives SREP IP. 
2. The following aspects were highlighted by the participants:
Comments Actions taken
a.	 RE sector developments in the Maldives were
to focus on energy efficiency and use of solar
photovoltaic for RE generation.
b.	 Concerns were raised regarding energy security in the
proposed shift from dependence on diesel imports
to imported biomass which is proposed for the Male’
region.
Based on concerns raised, IP was revised and biomass
investment removed.across strongly in the consultations and stressed
that private sector should play a greater role in the
development and implementation of RE initiatives.
document now reflects the important role private sector
is expected to play in the IP. In fact 34% of the total
investment is expected from the private sector.
d.	 Concerns were raised regarding the role of the
proposed institutions to be created, namely Maldives
Energy Services Company (MESCO) (then referred to
as Maldives Energy Finance Corporation (MEFCO)
and Maldives Energy Technology and Support Unit
(METSU) with respect to ensuring that competition
will be enhanced and that these organizations do not
bias project development and technology selection.
This concern was seriously taken into consideration and
eliminated creation of new organisations and emphasis
put on use/strengthening of existing institutions in the
implementation of IP.
e.	 Concerns were raised on whether MESCO and METSU
would be creating new bureaucracies and that priority
should be given to strengthening existing institutions.
See above
f.	 Highlighted that there is a strong need to build local
expertise and have less dependence on foreign
consultancies to roll out the RE programme.
This concern too was considered and emphasised training
of locals on the revised IP.
3. The REIF was placed on the web for public comment in October 2011.
4. A consultative meeting was held on November 28, 2011 with all the major Male’ area 
power producers to understand better the forecasts of demand and plans for supply. The 
following key points were highlighted by the participants:
Comments Actions taken
a.	 Reflected the uncoordinated nature of power
planning in Male’ area and importance of
operationalising a coordination mechanism to
establish a holistic approach to power planning for
the greater Male’.
A detail study will be conducted under SREP to identify
best options to meet the electricity need for the greater
Male’ region.
b.	 Highlighted the importance of a strong independent
energy sector regulator to ensure sector development
in an orderly fashion to safe guard interests of both
producers and consumers of power.
MEA is developing a comprehensive energy sector
regulatory framework with technical assistance from WBG
and ADB. Through this support, regulations on licensing,
standards of performance, energy efficiency labelling,
investment approvals and technical regulations are being
developed.
c.	 Establishment of an Energy Ministry or a Ministry
which has “Energy” in its title was proposed to reflect
the significance of the sector and establish a central
authority that will provide information and direction
on energy sector development.
The Minister of Environment and Energy represents the
energy sector in the President’s Cabinet of Ministers. A
Minister of State solely dedicated to the energy sector
has also been appointed to help the Maldives bolster
its energy security and create important RE and energy
efficiency policies and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
d.	 Suggestions were made to establish more clarity on
which government agency is driving the energy sector
to ensure roll out of a consistent and coherent energy
policy framework nationwide.
See comment c.site on January 8, 2012. No formal comments were posted online. 
6. A consultative meeting for all the major power producers (utilities and private) outside the 
resorts was held in Male’ on January 17, 2012 to review the latest draft of the Maldives SREP 
IP. The discussions mainly surrounded on the proposal for having a biomass plant as a baseload power for Male’ region and building local capacity of utilities to implement RE projects. 
The following key points were highlighted in the meeting:
Comments Actions taken
a.	 To undertake an independent detail study to
determine the best technology option for Male’ baseload. 
A detail study will be conducted under SREP to identify
best options to meet the electricity need for the greater
Male’ region.
b.	 Not to discount totally the future prospects of Ocean
thermal and marine currents as possible future
technology options for base-load or backup power. 
See comment a.
c.	 To integrate STELCO as a key player in implementing
the base-load power project for the Male’ region.
STELCO will be playing key role in implementing project
related to greater Male’ region.
d.	 Considering the many developments planned for the
Male’ region, it was highlighted that timing when to
commission the proposed base-load power plant was
critical.
It will be identified once the activity on comment a is
completed.
7. A public consultation on the Maldives SREP IP was held in Male’ on January 18, 2012 open 
to all comers. It was attended by a wide selection of stakeholders including NGOs, the Bank 
of Maldives, major power generators and consumers, RE entrepreneurs, and senior ministers. 
The meeting revealed that most of the concerns addressed by stakeholders on September 7, 
2011 have been reasonably addressed in the draft IP that was published in the MED website 
for public consultation on January 8, 2012. In the consultation session, the following were 
highlighted;
Comments Actions taken
a.	 Mild levels of concerns were expressed purely on
environmental grounds to the proposal to consider
biomass as a reference case for Male’ base-load.
Participants were reassured that the technology
option for Male’ area will be determined based on
an independent study to verify the best technology
option. Most participants were satisfied with the
approach and expressed support for the study.
Based on concerns raised, IP was revised and biomass
investment removed.
b.	 Suggestions were made not to discount the available
technology options, particularly ocean thermal and
marine currents. 
A detail study will be conducted under SREP to identify
best options to meet the electricity need for the greater
Male’ regiongrids and adopt a cluster approach to deliver power
in some of the outer islands.
conducted with the assistance from other sources to
cluster potential islands to interconnect.
d.	 The need for strengthening the regulatory framework
was highlighted to facilitate take up of both RE
projects and EE measures. It was also highlighted the
importance of integrating these aspects in the design
phase with better and improved building codes, FIT
etc. Discussions also surrounded in using incentives
and regulatory options to increase the compliance
and take up of RE/EE pathways by the tourism sector.
The importance of building and engaging local talent
was highlighted during the discussions.
MEA is developing a comprehensive energy sector
regulatory framework with technical assistance from WBG
and ADB. Through this support, regulations on licensing,
standards of performance, energy efficiency labelling,
investment approvals and technical regulations are being
developed.APPENDIX 3 - ONGOING OR RECENTLY COMPLETED
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROJECTS
Project for Clean Energy Promotion in Male’ 
The main objective of this Japanese grant aid project is to implement grid connected electricity 
generation through Photovoltaic technology. This would serve as an alternative means of 
producing electricity to cater for the growing electricity demand in Male’, and also promote 
adaptation of clean energy as a means of Climate Change Mitigation. Under the project total of 
395kWp of Solar PV systems has been installed at rooftops of 5 public buildings in Male’. These 
systems have been operational since March 2012. 
Installation of additional amount of 280 kWp of solar PV systems will start in September 2012 and 
will be completed in March 2013. On completion of this project Male’ will have approximately 
775kWp solar PV rooftop mounted electricity generating facilities. This is approximately 1/12 
of the absorption capacity of the Male’ grid.
Clean Energy for Climate Mitigation (CECM) Project
Under the multi-donor Maldives Climate Change Trust Fund (CCTF) the Clean Energy for 
Climate Mitigation (CECM) Project has been developed to have a RE and energy efficiency 
demonstration activities on GDh.Thinadhoo Island. 
Under the project 300kWp solar PV grid tied system will be installed on the various public 
buildings of GDh.Thinadhoo Island. This is almost one third of the maximum electricity 
demand of the island. By installing this amount it is expected to produce 500 MWh annually 
from solar PV and will avoid approximately 270 tCO2 per annum.
In addition to the above installation energy efficiency and conservation activities will be carried 
out in the island together with additional studies on potential RE technology which could be 
used for electricity generation for GDh.Thinadhoo and nearby Islands. 
STELCO Six Island Solar PV Project
This is the first project in its kind in the Maldives which have been completed under a powerpurchasing agreement signed between State Electric Company (STELCO) and Renewable Energy 
Maldives (REM). Under the project total of 652kWp PV panels were installed in five different 
islands where STELCO provide electricity service. 294 kWp were installed in K.Villingilli, 64 
kWp were installed in K.Guraidhoo, 78 kWp were installed in K.Himmafushi, 120 kWp were 
installed in K.Maafushi, 48 kWp were installed in K.Kaashidhoo and 48 kWp were installed in 
K.Thulusdhoo.
Support of the Climate Neutrality Strategy of the Maldives
This joint undertaking of the Maldivian-German cooperation of MEE and GIZ operates on three 
levels in order to improve the conditions for the implementation of a climate neutrality strategy 
in the MaldivesThe project provides advisory services for ministriesgovernmental agencies and private decision makers as well as for engineers or project developers will be carried out 
under the project in close cooperation with Maldivian training institutions.
Low Carbon Development Project- GEF
A project to promote low carbon energy and energy efficient technologies is under implementation 
by MEE in collaboration with United Nations Environment Programme and United Nations 
Office for Project Services. The project is co financed by various partners including a USD 
3.9 million grant from the Global Environment Facility, and USD 21.2 million co financing 
leveraged from various partners.
The project is specially targeted towards the building sector. Under the project, an assessment 
and monitoring system for Energy Efficiency Road Maps for the building sector focused on small 
island tropical environments will be established and new design parameters for Energy Efficiency 
(EE) & Low Carbon Energy (LCE) buildings selected and recommended. The project aims to 
develop local technical expertise and facilitate technology transfer in the sector. Furthermore, 
the project will undertake commercial-scale demonstration of EE & LCE technologies and 
finance EE and LCE building technologies. The project will also contribute to the formulation 
of policies for transformation of markets for EE & LCE technologies.
At present, a memorandum of understanding to be signed between MEE and UNEP is being 
negotiated to manage the operational aspects of the project. The contract is expected to be signed 
within four weeks time.
Energy Efficiency Project- UNIDO
The MEE and MEA are currently working with United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization to develop a project on improving energy efficiency in the Maldives. The overall 
objective of this project is to establish a sustainable mechanism for promoting energy efficiency 
in the tourism and manufacturing industries in Maldives. Under the project, it is planned to 
develop national policy, guidelines and programmes on energy management standards in the 
Maldives, and facilitate voluntary commitments and companies policies to implement EnMS 
in selected tourism and manufacturing industries. The project will facilitate the adoption of 
national EnMS based on ISO 50001. In addition, a curriculum for energy audit certification 
scheme conforming to international standards will be developed, and a system for certification 
of national experts as EnMS auditors will be established. 
The project is currently being designed with assistance from UNIDO. The project is expected to 
utilize 1.1 million US dollars from GEF from its STAR allocation to Maldives, and will be co 
financed by the various project partners.CompanyContracted to ToyotaTsusho CorporationKEPCOX.E.M.C New EnergyDhiraaguSoneva ResortREM and WIRSOL APAC GmbHJICA
ProgrressOn-goingOn-goingOn-going Data collection onlyCompletedCompletedCompleted i July 2012Completed
RemarksInstalled 395kWp solar PV grid connected systemon selected public rooftops in Male’.Solar PV grid connected system on selected public rooftops in GDh.ThinadhooSolar PV grid connected system in K.DhiffushiWind/Gas hybrid systemTotal 258kW PV in 174 Locations10kWp Solar array in the resortInstalled solar PV up to 30% of the peak demandSolar PV systems at L.Gan and L.Fonadhoo
Size (k
~7~3
20,0
26
Finance SourceGovt. of JapanCCTFGSEP,Govt. of JapanPrivate SectorDhiraaguPrivatePrivate sectorGovt. of Japan
roject
NGOING PROJECTS
roject for Clean Energy Promotion in
Male’
lean Energy for Climate Mitigation
CECM)
olar Grid Connected System for Small
land (K.Dhiffushi)
ROBABLE/POSSIBLE PROJECTS
Wind in Malé Region - Power Purchase
greement (STELCO)
UCCESSFULLY COMPLETED PROJECTS
V powered mobile phone masts
olar PV system
V power for 6 islands in Male’ atollooftop Solar PV System 
Ongoing or recently completed renewable energy projectsAPPENDIX 4 - ENERGY EFFICIENCY PROJECTS
Energy Efficiency
In order to deliver the highest possible level of GHG reductions at the lowest possible cost, 
a series of activities parallel to those funded by SREP will be pursued. The objectives will be 
to reduce the costs to society of energy use by increasing energy efficiency, and to reduce the 
absolute amount of power used at night, in order to reduce the costs of providing solar power 
through energy storage devices. (Solar power delivered through batteries can cost 250% as much 
as the cost of using power in the day when the sun is shining). Much of the technical support 
for this work will be carried out by Energy Department of the Ministry of Environment and 
Energy.
Energy Efficiency In Government Estate
The GoM spends of the order of USD 10 million a year on electricity. Major potential savings 
have been identified in this sector. These savings will be used to support energy efficiency 
programmes elsewhere to reduce subsidies and emissions. In addition, significant wastage 
occurs at night when demand should be low, but lighting, cooling, and appliances that are 
left running unnecessarily. MEE will initiate and implement a 20% Savings Campaign to use 
untapped efficiency and to lift saving potential for government buildings as this is the single 
most effective step in achieving greenhouse gas reduction at the lowest cost to the economy. This 
will not only save money because it lowers the energy bill of the government, but can also raise 
public awareness for clean energy and serve as a best practice example for other private buildings 
or industry. 
Domestic Energy Efficiency
Domestic energy efficiency is a key target for reducing emissions and the energy costs for 
consumers. Research in one of the islands shows that 25% or more of electricity is used for 
cooling devices (air conditioners and fridges) and that these are frequently grossly inefficient.
Complementary work on building insulation will contribute significantly to reducing airconditioning load.
Promotion To Resort And Industrial Sectors
The resort and industrial sectors are one of the major power generators and consumers. One 
key objective of Energy Department will be to offer these sectors working examples of energy 
efficiency and RE generation – with complete transparency of costs – and to actively promote 
these to private energy generators and users. This will help to persuade and encourage these 
sectors to take their own steps to becoming oil independent. 
The GoM may support this activity by making fiscal adjustments to encourage the transition to 
low carbon. Even now Government is working together with IFC in conducting Cleaner Audit 
programmes at resort.
Financing Energy Efficiency
The principal energy efficiency measures identified have very rapid paybacks. These will be 
funded through a combination of GoM budget support, MDB loans, and private sector capital 
(on a shared saving basis). Savings made will be returned to MGF and re-invested in further 
savings programmes.APPENDIX 5 - ELECTRICITY 
CONSUMPTION BY ISLAND 
CATEGORIES
Large electricity consuming islands
Island kWh/year
1. Kulhudhuffushi 8,078,052
2. Fuahmulah 7,627,596
3. Thinadhoo 5,437,900
4. Addu City (per island) 3,648,335
Medium electricity consuming islands
Island kWh/year
1. Villingili 2,752,160
2. Kudahuvadhoo 2,663,828
3. Naifaru 2,620,240
4. Hulhumeedhoo 2,480,760
5. Hinnavaru 2,414,704
6. Dhidhdhoo 2,246,440
7. Maafushi 2,047,932
8. Eydhafushi 2,000,408
9. Hanimaadhoo 1,825,748
10. Manadhoo 1,824,520
11. Velidhoo 1,709,440
12. Thimarafushi 1,667,728
13. Hoarafushi 1,500,156
14. Gadhdhoo 1,308,976
15. Himmafushi 1,281,688
16. Milandhoo 1,231,496
17. Alifushi 1,183,642
18. Holhudhoo 1,167,316
19. Ihavandhoo 1,158,264
20. Vilufushi 1,103,908
21. Gan-Mathimaradhoo 1,052,908
Small electricity consuming islands
Island kWh/year
1. Guraidhoo 992,880
2. Thulusdhoo 991,600
3. Gan-Thundi 909,000
4. Gan-Maahinna 857,372
5. kanditheemu 853,336
6. Kashidhoo 846,252
7. Kolamaafushi 811,020
8. Kelaa 789,552
9. Dhaandhoo 759,456
10. Maduvvaree 737,351
11. Hulhudhuhfaaru 728,588
13. Makunudhoo 701,112
14. Dharavandhoo 692,186
15. Maamendhoo 687,593
16. Madaveli 655,088
17. Gemanafushi 637,704
18. Maavah 585,228
19. Baarah 556,452
20. Isdhoo 554,352
21. Miladhoo 534,413
22. Kurendhoo 532,465
23. Faresmaathodaa 519,003
24. Hoadedhdhoo 518,652
25. Kendhoo 513,644
26. Madifushi 506,688
27. Meedhoo 474,028
28. Gan-Mukurimagu 458,704
29. Maamendhoo 457,560
30. Neykurendhoo 456,668
31. Bilehdhoo 450,704
32. Innamaadhoo 417,641
33. Landhoo 406,594
34. Maalhendhoo 398,139
35. Hithadhoo 394,272
36. Nellaidhoo 390,812
37. Fiyoree 389,972
38. Vaadhoo 378,960
39. Hithaadhoo 359,838
40. Rathafandhoo 359,292
41. Hulhudheli 350,468
42. Ukulhas 342,932
43. Kamadhoo 341,869
44. Magoodhoo 341,220
45. Nolhivaram 338,098
46. Maafaru 337,456
47. Nadella 335,744
48. Maalhos 326,100
49. Rasgetheem 320,058
50. Kanduhulhudhoo 314,564
51. Filladhoo 311,748
52. Kudafari 307,192
53. Olhuvelifushi 306,400
54. Bandidhoo 305,748
55. Rasmaadhoo 302,730
56. Lhohi 301,450
57. Kandoodhoo 294,776
58. Dhevvadhoo 289,212
59. Buruni 287,272
60. Meedhoo 250,723
61. Dhiyamigili 245,276
62. Inguraidhoo 330,525APPENDIX 6 - PROPOSED FEED-IN TARIFF
Proposed Feed-in Tariff
The proposed FIT and Net Metering regime is expected to form the core of RE development in 
the Maldives, and be the catalyst in scaling up RE technologies. To support this objective it is 
proposed that the existing FIT regime is supplemented with a new FIT regime aimed at meeting 
the needs of larger developers as well as small rooftop systems.
The Existing FIT Programme
To encourage private investments in RE, the Government instructed the 7 regional utilities in 
March 2011 to purchase electricity sold to the grid from RE sources at the rates shown below. To 
incentivise the utilities, it was decided, that the government would provide the utilities with USD 
0.03/kWh purchased from RE source.
Utility Services Provider Existing FIT (USD/kWh)
1. State Electric Company Limited: Greater Male’ Region 0.22
2. Upper North Region (Ha, Hdh, Sh) 0.29
3. North Region (N, R, B, Lh) 0.29
4. Central Region (M, F, Dh) 0.26
5. South Central Region (Th, L) 0.35
6. Upper South Region (Ga, Gdh) 0.35
7. South Region (Gn, S) 0.26
To demonstrate the commitment to this policy, state owned utilities were quick to participate in 
this programme even without a mandatory Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS). Immediately 
after the FIT order was issued, STELCO singed a PPA with Renewable Energy Maldives Pvt 
Ltd to install 652kW of Solar PV on rooftops of 6 selected islands operated by them. Though the 
government approved FIT was USD 0.22/kWh, the agreed tariff under this 20 year contract was 
USD 0.25/kWh. To satisfy the investor STELCO had to sacrifice its share of USD 0.03/kWh.
It was evident at the time if the government forced STELCO to apply the official approved 
FIT of USD 0.22, there was a good possibility that the contract would not have materialised as 
USD 0.25/kWh was the absolute minimum Renewable Energy Maldives Pvt Ltd was willing to 
accept despite the first mover advantage and full market capitalisation in these 6 islands. 
As this FIT failed to have desired effect, the government decided to revise the tariff. The new 
existing FIT (henceforth eFIT) was introduced in September 2011. The eFIT was set after taking 
into consideration regional fuel prices variations and fuel efficiency variations prevalent in the 
respective regions. As an incentive for utilities, the eFIT was set 10% lower than it would cost to 
produce a kWh using diesel from their existing power plants. 
The new eFIT also failed to materialise into contracts. To date, the only installation which has 
been successfully implemented under the eFIT is the “Project for Male’ Clean Energy Promotion” 
funded under a Japanese grantThereforecommercially the eFIT cannot be considered a existing diesel generators on the islands are extremely expensive to run as they have a capacity 
far above the demand of their islands, with electricity costing up to USD 0.70/kWh in some 
areas. 
Despite its obvious commercial appeal, the lack of general awareness and success stories continue 
to hamper new project development in the sector. There are also clear indications that very few 
Maldives have funds to invest in rooftop solar PV systems, even if such systems were to cut the 
average electricity bill in half and pay for itself in 5-6 years. Therefore, to make the FIT successful, 
financial incentives such as concessional loan arrangements to cover part of initial investments 
and long term price guarantees are considered to be introduced as necessary preconditions as 
utilities and investors are now requesting the revision of the eFIT as they cannot continue further 
contracts based on just good will alone without financial and regulatory safeguards.
Proposed Modified FIT and Net Metering Programme
To remedy these weaknesses and to provide a low cost, streamlined and effective way of 
decarbonising the national electricity system the following modified FIT (henceforth mFIT) will 
be introduced for large scale installations taking into consideration cost-based compensation for 
RE generation, with different prices offered to different technologies, project sizes, and regions.
In addition, the Government is also planning to allow electricity customers that generate 
electricity using a RE source, to connect its facility to the distribution network under a Net 
Metering scheme. Unlike in the mFIT programme, these customers owned facilities are expected 
to be of small capacity, and hence they would be allowed to be connected through the existing 
electricity connection of the customer’s premises. 
The distinguishing feature of this approach is that there will be no payment for the electricity 
feed in by the customer into the grid. All feed ins will be set off against the customer’s own 
consumption, first in the current billing period, and if there are any further access credits, in 
future billing periods.
The mFIT and Net Metering programme will be backed by a Renewable Portfolio Standard 
(RPS) policy and subsequent regulations to obligate the utilities and large power consumers to 
generate part of their energy from RE source.
The following specific features will be considered in the design of the mFIT that would be 
reviewed under the ongoing technical assistance by ADB to MEA to formulate a new RE tariff 
structure for Maldives.
Proposed mFIT Tariff Components
Balancing the needs for efficient land use, maximum penetration of renewables into the grid, 
and minimum cost of power, mean that the mFIT needs to be slightly more complex than a 
simple payment per kWh. Although it may seem overly complex for relatively small projects, 
these projects are potentially very large in proportion to any individual island grid. 
Three components are proposed, a land rent and a capacity reservation charge payable by the 
developer, and the tariff itself payable to the developer. The tariff will be set high enough to Due to the scarcity of land available, a substantial land rent is needed to ensure the project 
developers use land efficiently. There should be active encouragement also to use space that 
cannot be used for other future developments.
Capacity Charge
The Utility needs to have a clear understanding of how much power any developer is likely to 
produce and the capacity to absorb it. By taking up a slice of capacity a developer is denying this 
slice to another potential developer. Thus, there needs to be a mechanism to ‘reserve’ capacity, 
and to provide strong encouragement to a developer to actually deliver their reserved capacity, 
or alternatively to release it if a project is not performing to specification.
In addition, the Utility has a need for power over as long a period of the day as possible instead 
of in a single peak. This will reduce storage and voltage stabilisation requirements. With solar 
PV this can be achieved either by tracking, or with some interesting new mounting geometries.
Therefore a Capacity Reservation Charge is proposed. To be effective, the Capacity Reservation 
charge needs to be high; six months Capacity Reservation charge will be payable immediately 
upon the signature of the agreement with the utility in order to secure the commitment of the 
developer. After six months the charge will be levied monthly.
The Capacity Reservation Charge will apply equally to wind or solar PV. Combined wind and 
solar installations may be managed by the developer to ensure that when operated together they 
do not exceed the capacity booked even if the sum of the nameplate capacity of the devices 
is greater than the booked capacity. They can do this by shedding some power generation at 
infrequent times of year in case they exceed the booked capacity.
The Reserved Capacity will be fixed at the time of application by the developer for the mFIT. 
The amount of capacity reserved must be supported by technical details of the planned scheme 
and expected generation.
The developer may change the Reserved Capacity subject to 3 months notice and, in the event of 
increase, there being sufficient grid capacity to accept the increase. The capacity that the Utility 
guarantees to take will change accordingly.
Penalties will be imposed on developers whose project fails to achieve at least 80% of reserved 
capacity within 24 months of contract signature.
Tariff
The disadvantage of FIT mechanisms is that they do not offer price discovery through competitive 
tendering. The tariff needs to be set at a level that attracts developers, without giving away more 
than is necessary. This can only be ascertained by careful market research and discussion with 
potential developers.Once established, the tariffs and charges for a project will not be changed over the lifetime of 
the project. For new projects, the Government of the Maldives may review tariffs upwards at 
any time. Review tariffs downwards, and rents or Capacity Reservation charges upwards, at any 
time, subject to a six month notice that such a review may take place.
New Regulation on mFIT Power Purchases
New regulations on power purchases need to be introduced. Regulation is proposed to ensure 
that the Utilities are the ultimate buyers of all privately generated electricity, except where a 
supplier and consumer are not connected to any Utility and place no burden on the public purse 
for the provision of power. This covers all installations except resorts and possibly some isolated 
businesses. This ensures that all installations are separately metered, and that the Utility can 
manage the balance of supply and demand over seasons, days, and within any day and night 
economically. 
Utilities should have a duty to publish their power purchase capacity. This will be a time series 
based on average current demand profiles, and the sum of contracted power purchases and 
expected power purchases. This will allow project developers to see what scope exists for new 
projects in any island. 
Stakeholder Perspectives on the mFIT
Developer Perspective
The developer will have a strong incentive to build the project rapidly as the Capacity Reservation 
Charge will be levied whether the project is performing or not. The provision of guarantees will 
allay most of the concerns related to investment in the Maldives. 
Utility Perspective
The payment of the capacity charge up front will give the Utility time and funds to prepare the 
island to accept the new project, and to put in place such measures that are necessary to ensure 
grid stability, energy storage, and load deferral.
The initial years of the mFIT regime will see electricity generating costs fall compared to existing 
diesel generation – thus allowing the utilities to build their balance sheets and become viable 
economic units.
Subsequently, utilities will be in a much stronger position to invest in the energy storage capacity 
needed to deliver the second round of RE penetration – lifting total RE supply to around 90%.
Government Perspective
This tariff regime will save money immediately for all the power systems not operating at 
maximum efficiency. Donor funding will help secure guarantees in the first years of the FIT 
regime. Over time, as its reputation and some capital base is build, the amount of the guarantees 
dd ill dliAPPENDIX 7 - PROFILE OF A TYPICAL SMALL/MEDIUM ELECTRICITY 
CONSUMING ISLAND
Socio-economics
The main economic activities on these 
islands include fishing and small scale 
agriculture. However, there is an increasing 
trend of employment in tourism sector due 
to development of resorts in close by islands. 
Moreover, the government offices, schools, 
healthcare facilities also provide some 
employment to the residents. In addition, 
small industrial activities exist in some islands. 
The infrastructure of the typical small-to 
medium electricity consuming islands consist 
of an island office, a school, a health post, 
a mosque, a power house, few retail shops, 
harbours and breakwaters and boat building 
sites.
Natural water resources are limited to rain 
water collected from roofs and ground water 
which is boiled or treated before consumption. 
Few islands operate desalination plants to 
produce potable water.
Generally all islands are staffed with a 
healthcare worker while health centres/hospitals are found in islands with larger population. 
Similarly schooling up to grade 10 is found within the atoll but the highest level of education 
taught varies from island to island.
Electricity production and use
As of today, all islands of the Maldives are 
electrified through diesel based generation, 
and the power system of the island is operated 
either by government owned companies 
(STELCO or FENAKA Corporation) or by 
the Island Council. Although the electricity 
service is available in all islands, the reliability 
and quality of the service as well as general 
operating condition of the power systems 
are poor in some of these outer islands. This 
is mainly due to the lack of trained persons 
availability as well as limited resources and 
iildhh
An aerial view of a typical inhabited island
A diesel generator installed at a powerhouse
A healthcare centre system, control panels and distribution cables connections enclosed within one building. The 
distribution cables extend underground and go into distribution boxes in the street, and goes into 
the household/building.
Despite the regulations of MEA which enforce 
the power quality and safety measures, and 
regulations related to environmental protection 
enforced by the EPA, some powerhouses 
in these islands do not fully comply with 
all regulations. This is mainly attributed 
historically due to lack of proper feasibility 
studies and future planning, resulting in ad-hoc 
basis of power system installation in various 
islands. Moreover, in general there is only one 
technician at the powerhouse to oversee the 
operation of the system and rarely can attend 
major faults from the generation side.
In addition to this, fuel handling process from 
the operation side is not very well monitored, 
which sometimes lead to contamination 
of the fuel and lube oil by salt water (while 
being unloaded from the boats) and leakage 
of oil from the containers during transport 
and storing, all of which indirectly results in 
enhanced degradation of the generator sets 
which results in decreased performance of 
electricity production.
Some islands were observed to have large amounts of loss 
in generated units where losses from the generation side 
was possibly due to running of oversized generators and 
poor maintenance. There is also loss on grid side, which 
is possibly due to aged or undersized distribution cables 
and poor corrective measures taken to improve quality of 
the system such as phase balancing, harmonics, etc. 
The operation of powerhouse also has various impacts on 
the environment mainly due to the noise, emissions and 
fuel handling. Moreover, spillage of fuel and lubricating 
oil during handling have diverse impacts the fresh water 
lens which is used as a source of drinking water in many 
Distribution box at an island
Black smoke emitted from 
Fuel storage at the back of the 
power house at an islandThe average demand of these islands varies from 30kW to 300kW while the installed generator 
capacity of the island may be undersized or oversized which hinders the quality and efficiency 
of the electricity production process. These are factors which are generally difficult to address 
when the system is in operation due to high costs involved and the customers end up paying for 
the losses. 
Tariff for the electricity service provided varies from one island to the next based on the generation 
cost, and is approved by the MEA. Electricity users are categorized into Domestic, Business and 
Government Customers, where Government and Business categories are charged at a higher 
tariff. Although the approved tariffs are applied, there is a large amount of subsidy provided by 
the government to cover the fuel costs. 
As fuel costs is the main portion of the running cost of the power system, the increase of fuel cost 
due to the fuel being transported from long distances adds burden to the economics. Moreover, 
fuel reserve/ storage is very limited on these islands and there is always the potential of bad 
weather delaying fuel shipments from farther island, which adds to the risks of fuel security. kW
Weekend
Time
600
500
400
300
200
100
0:00 1:00 2:00 3:00 4:00 5:00 6:00 7:00 8:00 9:00 10:00 12:00 14:00 11:00 13:00 15:00 16:00 18:00 20:00 17:00 19:00 21:00 22:00 23:00 0:00
Weekday
Load profile of a medium size electricity consuming island of the MaldivesAPPENDIX 8: ASSESSMENT OF COUNTRY ABSORPTIVE CAPACITY
Overall Fiscal Outlook
1. The overall macroeconomic situation in Maldives continues to be challenging. The 
budget deficit (after grants) is expected to reach 30 percent of GDP in 2012 while the 
primary deficit is estimated to register 20 percent of GDP. Total revenue collection for 
2012 is likely to fall short by around MVR1.2 billion34 against the budget. Financing the 
rising budget deficit is also challenging as commercial banks showing reluctance to hold 
government paper that leads to a cash flow constraint for the government which it had 
met with domestic borrowings35. Given that domestic sources of finance are limited, the 
government is turning to foreign financing. A significant portion of the public debt is a 
result of the country borrowing significant amounts of foreign currency (largely to pay 
for fuel imports). The Indian government has agreed to provide USD 25 million in budget 
support36 while the ADB is also expected to disburse USD 17 million as part of their 
economic reforms package (ERP) program. Both these inflows are expected in the 2012 
(Q4) – which will provide some respite to the Government cash flow. 
2. A number of debt service commitments are coming up in the next 3-5 months which may 
require some form of refinancing to reduce the public debt management burden. Two 
bonds of USD50 million owed to the Indian State Bank of India come for redemption in 
December 2012 and February 2013, respectively, and the Government is likely to seek an 
extension for payment of debt to keep an adequate balance of usable foreign exchange 
reserves which now stand at about 1 month of imports. 
3. Against this backdrop, the government has taken a number of measures to prevent 
further escalation of the macroeconomic outlook. In June 20, 2011 the government 
presented four bills –collectively referred to as the ERP to the Majlis (Parliament). The 
ERP comprised of: (a) a (general) Goods and Services tax (GST) bill (b) a Corporate 
Profits Tax (CPT) bill; (c) a Personal Income Tax Bill (PTB) and (d) an amendment bill 
to the Tax Administration Act. Of the measures the GST was passed by the house in 
end August and was ratified into law in early September. The tax will come into effect in 
October. The GST Act also had provisions to raise the hitherto applicable TGST rate to 6 
percent in 2012 and thereafter to 8 percent37 in 2013. The proposed SREP interventions 
are also aimed at relieving public expenditures on diesel imports, subsidies and foreign 
exchange. 
4. Inflation has also been rising since the currency depreciation in April 2011 and has been 
trending upwards as of May 2012. High food prices are mainly due to rising global food 
prices –given that Maldives depends heavily on imported food – as well as increase in 
domestic fish prices. From the second half of 2011, significantly higher international oil 
prices have also driven up domestic diesel prices, particularly on transport-related costs. 
In a bid to limit the pass-through, the government in January 2012 lowered customs duties 
on gasoline and diesel which in turn adversely affected revenue collection. Investment in 
renewable energy through SREP is expected to offset some of these adverse effects as the 
country reduces its exposure to volatile oil prices and external shocks. 34
Ttl jtif MVR 92 billiit bdt f MVR 104 billi5. The trade balance is skewed with high import growth outstripping export growth. Total 
imports reached USD884 million during the first seven months of 2012 largely due to 
higher imports of public enterprises, notably the State Trading Organization (STO), 
which accounted for around 27 percent of total imports. Fuel imports – the single largest 
import item in the country accounting for nearly 30 percent of total imports38 rose 28 
percent (year-on-year) during the period to July 2012 with average oil prices remaining 
more or less same levels as in the corresponding period in 2011 (around USD 102 per 
barrel). Support to offsetting diesel fuel by using solar, wind and waste to energy for 
power generation will contribute significantly to an improving the trade balance. The 
successful implementation of SREP investments would contribute to a reduction of about 
23 million liters of diesel per year (or 6% of total diesel imports).
Absorptive capacity and SREP Implementation
6. The Government has a reasonably good track record in terms of implementation of projects 
on the ground through its line ministries. In particular, the Ministry of Environment and 
Energy has four active World Bank assisted projects under implementation, each at various 
stages of the project cycle. The ministry has capable staff to manage the procurement 
and implementation which they coordinate with the relevant national agencies (utilities, 
island/atoll councils, etc.) but will need additional support and strengthening as the 
program of activities increases under SREP. 
7. As state-owned utilities, both STELCO and FENAKA have similar constraints on capital 
expenditures and limitations on their balance sheets. Under the SREP IP, the government 
(with support from the MDBs) would take appropriate measures to ensure that the utilities 
are able to carry out the public programs and disburse funds accordingly. The formation 
of FENAKA is expected to streamline decision making, standardize project design and 
facilitate procurement and installation activities for the outer islands under the SREP. 
Capacity strengthening and implementation support for the ministry and utilities will be 
part and parcel of the overall Maldives SREP IP.
8. The expected level of SREP resources is comparable to the envelope of IDA39 and ADF 
allocations for the country. This may present a challenge if these were to be channeled 
to a single Ministry; however, the design of the program is informed by the political and 
macro-fiscal risks in the country and thus inherently contains risk mitigation measures. 
The proposed SREP interventions are designed to enable the program to be implemented 
and financed largely by the private sector, with the ministries and utilities undertaking 
the critical public sector activities necessary to facilitate private sector investments and to 
finance investments where private sector participation is not likely. 
9. Furthermore, one of the key attributes of the Maldives SREP is the provision of a portion 
of available resources to be used as some form risk mitigation instruments, such as 
World Bank partial risk guarantees or other similar facilities. Through this approach, the 
Government would limit its exposure to using SREP and leveraged resources for direct 
investment into public-sector projects which would otherwise significantly limit its ability 
to absorb all of these funds and disburse/implement in a timely manner. APPENDIX 9 - INDEPENDENT REVIEW OF THE MALDIVES SREP IP
Dr Mike Allen
27th September 2012 
1.0 INTRODUCTION
This review of the Maldives SREP IP has been undertaken in a number of steps. A limited 
number of versions of the draft document have been reviewed, with the final version received 
on 25th September 2012. On 26th September a call was arranged with representatives from the 
Maldives Government, WBG, ADB and the IFC in response to points raised during the review 
of the final draft IP. 
It should be noted that the reviewer has not had the opportunity to visit the Maldives, nor to 
meet face to face with any of those listed above who are involved in this opportunity. He was 
however engaged during the preparation and review of the previous IP in January 2012 which 
covered many of the aspects in the current, updated IP.
As noted during the review of the previous IP, it is clear that considerable effort has been 
directed at the preparation of this Investment Plan. The Maldives provided one of the more 
comprehensive packs of information in originally seeking consideration under the SREP. Again 
this all highlights the focus that the Government of the Maldives has on moving to RE and the 
issues that are faced by the island nation with such wide spread centres of population. Importantly 
the approach being suggested in this IP has removed some of the complexity around government 
agencies that was apparent previously.
While there are no major concerns with the Investment Plan as presented, there are a number of 
points that have been raised and were addressed in writing from GoM and thoroughly discussed 
during the call on 26th September. These are included here for completeness and a record. The 
reviewer is confident that these issues have been noted and will be reflected as appropriate in the 
final version of the IP to be submitted to the SREP Sub Committee.
It is not the intention to present step by step comments on the Investment Plan. A summary of 
initial comments are included in the Appendices and various discussions are summarised there 
for the record.
2.0 COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL AND SPECIFIC CRITERIA
In the review undertaken of the prior IP the notes below were included to briefly summarise 
the compliance of the Investment Plan with the General and Specific Criteria as specified in the 
TOR for that review. They are retained in this report with some modification as they provide 
an important gauge of the overall interpretation of the IP within the SREP aims and objectives. 
The plan does outline how it is anticipated that SREP investments and programme support will 
help attract other public and private funding. This is explained in some detail. The leadership 
of government agencies is expected to assist in establishing strategies that will provide public 
funded examples in remoter and smaller market segments and help aggregate the markets so that 
private investors have larger scale opportunities to develop.
2.2 Enabling environment:
The plan clearly elaborates the Government’s commitment to drive as quickly as possible 
towards a low carbon economy. There is acknowledgement that there is a need for a simple, 
transparent but robust set of policies and regulations to attract and hold the interest of investors 
/ developers. Experience to date with FITs is providing guidance as future FIT arrangements 
through a modified approach are being evaluated.
2.3 Increase energy access: 
Access to electricity is not a major issue as power is available to most households. It is however 
diesel generation and the programmes under the SREP funding will allow displacement of diesel 
with predominantly solar PV, improving the cost of generation, eliminating a portion of the 
government funded subsidies to offset increasing diesel cots and offering longer term security 
and sustainability. 
2.4 Implementation capacity: 
The limited local capacity is clearly recognised and programmes reflect how this will be addressed. 
There is a determination to move away from long term dependency on consultant support and 
to build a national capacity drawing on local and international alliances. The private sector is 
seen as a key element of this development and various financial incentives to buy down risk are 
anticipated to encourage their participation.
2.5 Improve long-term economic viability of the renewable energy sector: 
Specific funding allocations for guarantees and mechanisms to reduce the exposure to sovereign 
and payment risks are a central part of the financial plan. An adjusted FIT is proposed to ensure 
adequate returns while making sure that the overall commercial structure does not disadvantage 
the Maldives’ economy. The need to build capable local enterprises to underwrite the needs of 
an expanding market is well defined and considered. 
2.6 Transformative impact: 
The Investment Plan describes in detail how it will initiate transformative change in achieving 
national-scale outcomes and the delivery of SREP aims and objectives. It also clearly identifies 
the contribution of programmes funded through other sources to complement this change.It is believed that a number of features of the Investment Plan deserve comment. As noted above 
they are not major issues but points that should be considered as the programmes supported by 
the SREP investments are implemented.
3.1 Private Sector Engagement
The encouragement of private sector participation is a key focus of the SREP. The Investment Plan 
recognises this and has several initiatives directed at attracting private investment. Discussions 
suggest that only limited, and somewhat anecdotal, information has been gathered to determine 
what the market sees as hurdles to investment. The obstacles to raising capital (whether by the 
public or private sector) that are suggested are common – sovereign risk, the resultant cost of 
capital, the high transaction costs for small scale investments, lack of familiarity/experience in 
the Maldives for many investors. It is suggested that this may need to be more rigorously tested 
in the finance markets.
The differences between reasonable IRRs determined in an analytical model and the real cost of 
doing business and actual returns are often quite large. Where there is limited investor interest in 
smaller (island) markets care needs to be exercised to ensure that entities invited to participate in 
the market have credibility, appropriate experience and substantial financial backing. There are 
a number of examples (outside the Maldives) where offers have been accepted from entities with 
questionable capacity largely because they were the only groups showing interest – offers are 
well intended but cannot be backed up with real experience and an ability to perform in what are 
often challenging environments. Subsidised costs and aggressive FITs for example can attract 
entrepreneurial groups with limited experience. The situation in the Maldives is complex and 
will require well experienced partners to ensure effective implementation of the plans as now 
envisaged. 
It is noted that marketing of the opportunity will be a key requirement – this marketing should 
not hesitate to be selective in soliciting interest from those who have real value to offer. It will 
also be important that these marketing exercises provide feedback to build a better understanding 
of what will really attract private investment. A simple and transparent process for engaging the 
private sector will be build confidence in the market.
3.2 Technologies
The discussion on the selection of technologies appears well balanced. The options are limited 
as all appreciate. The extensive use of solar PV over lagoon sites (mentioned in the earlier IP 
but not reiterated in the current version) may well present some issues around corrosion, panel 
cleanness and maintenance. These are obviously being considered but their impact should not 
be underestimated. While there is extensive experience with the construction of accommodation 
facilities above lagoons there may no doubt be some opposition to extensive coverage of lagoons 
with solar panels.
3.3 Engagement of the Tourism Sector
With no in-country experience there is some reluctance to challenge the approach being promoted 
in the IPHowever as the tourism industry represents almost 50% of electricity consumptiontourism sector will naturally follow. This may not be the case given their varied interests and it is 
recommended that the sector be engaged as early as possible to ensure that as the approaches to 
increased renewables evolve they reflect strategies that the tourism industry will adopt without 
resistance. This may also be an important pro-active opportunity to deepen the opportunities for 
PV sales within the Maldives, providing an additional attraction for investment when there is a 
clearer path to an increase in the scale of the market. 
3.4 Economic and Financial Benefits
It is suggested that care be taken where analysis and reporting on anticipated cost and price 
reductions for electricity are being undertaken. There is a moderately complex mix of diesel fuel 
costs, fuel surcharge subsidies, FITs, residual O&M and amortisations expenses for upgraded 
diesel installations (irrespective of their reduced load factor with RE in the grid) being balanced 
against the actual costs of hybrid operations. The economic benefits to GoM are clear; the longer 
term impacts of FITs is to be considered and there may be some phasing out / reduction over time; 
the final pricing of electricity is not entirely clear and a caution is that whilst economic benefits 
accrue the real financial impact on end users may be muted. Raising unrealistic expectations is 
very easy; recovering from failing to deliver on these expectations can have significant impacts 
on the effectiveness of RE programmes.
APPENDIX 1
A1.1 Comments by reviewer and discussion Government of Maldives during call of 26th 
September
Comment: There are many references to SREP and I wonder if in fact some of these should be 
adjusted to reflect that SREP is just part of a wider Maldives programme? This is just terminology 
but may cause some confusion in any submission to SREP itself?
Discussion: This has been noted and will be adjusted in the final text.
Comment: I can’t see any reference anywhere to a timetable for the projects. Given there is a gross 
budget of USD131m it would be informative to understand the time frame of the expenditure 
to assess how realistic this is.
Discussion: The expectation is that the SREP work will be spread over a 5 to 6 year period.
Comment: In my earlier review I have raised my concerns around the private sector response 
and how realistic it is to expect the levels of investment that are shown – 35% of the total 
sourcing, more of the project investments. Is there a Plan B if this fails?
Discussion; It was acknowledged that there had been limited opportunity to test the interest of 
the private sector widely. It was noted that STELCO operates a number of operations under 
PPAs with private developers. It was also suggested that the “road-shows” to attract potential 
investors will be targeted and are expected to generate wide interest, based on the response from 
contacts with a number of groups to date
Comment: I am also cautious about the variety of financial incentives, capital contributions, that may have limited experience and may not be able to complete the project. This all requires a 
very robust analysis of offers – not always so easy in a smaller, more remote market. There needs 
to be an equitable sharing of risks across the parties involved so that the interests are aligned.
Discussion: This point was noted and the risks appreciated. The intention is that there will be a 
well-managed and regulated process to engage the private sector.
Comment: I recognise that the IP is choosing not to engage early with the tourism sector but as it 
uses about 40% of electricity (and hence diesel used for generation) it must be a critical element 
of any energy market improvement. I think that some effort should go into an early canvassing 
of the industry to formally test the opportunities. I am a bit uncomfortable that it is suggested 
SREP should not support the (profitable) private sector – it may be the solution to getting an 
early step change away from fossil fuels and that is what SREP is designed to do. In contrast 
the smaller island initiatives may have less economic and environmental impact. The question is 
what are the benefits per USD invested from the various schemes, and I think that the tourism 
sector should be part of this assessment. 
Discussion: There is reluctance to spend limited SREP resources on the tourism companies, 
many of which are foreign owned and well financed. The point was made however that a proactive approach with the tourism sector could help build a larger and healthier overall market for 
RE and hence encourage broader participation by the private sector.
Comment: In my attached comments (marked up version of the IP) I note the issue around costs 
and prices. Given the heavy subsidies being provided to end users of electricity now, even with 
a reduction in the cost of production of electricity, it is likely that prices may in fact not fall. 
There is a danger in raising expectations around this. In a number of places there are comments 
about the fact that PV is cheaper than diesel generation – while in isolation this may be true, 
what is important is the effective cost in a hybrid system. All the major systems will still have 
diesel installations and their fixed costs (amortisation of upgraded plant, maintenance etc) will 
still be required to be covered. This may mean that the cost of generation does not in fact drop 
substantially but that the fuel surcharge can be reduced, as will the diesel costs. These latter are 
economic benefits (as the surcharge is subsidised by GoM currently) but will not necessarily see 
any reduction in power pricing to end users.
Discussion: The importance of these points was noted and the question of false expectations 
discussed. The example of islanders expecting that solar PV would be free highlights the market 
education that is needed
Comment: There are suggestions that national RE resources will be studied. In other areas there 
are notes that there are a limited number of options. Perhaps the focus should be on PV and 
wind and other longer term options left until later. Coping with just two or three technologies 
will be a challenge given limited national capacity at this stage.
Discussion: It is not intended to look beyond PV, wind and WTE at this stage. However the 
efforts to utilise deep cool seawater for cooling was noted
Comment: There is limited discussion about the MGF and how that will operate. The overall 
structure being considered appears more straightforward than was outlined in the 2011 proposal 
but the question needs to be raised as to whether there are still too many agencies in place given experience with RE roll out to justify its presence.
Comment: The FIT regime looks reasonable but simplicity will be important in making the 
opportunities more transparent to new participants.
Discussion: Had been discussed earlier. The ADB explained that it was working with GoM 
on reviewing the FIT structure / pricing and that it anticipates that there will be a progressive 
reduction of the FIT over time. Consideration is being given to a stepped sequence in which 
accelerated recovery of investment may be permitted in the initial (5) years.
A.1.2 Specific Comments on the IP Draft
A number of comments were provided in a marked up copy of the 25th September version of 
the IP. These were covered under various headings during the call of 26th September and the 
reviewer is confident that the matters raised have been addressed adequately.Ministry of Environment and Energy