File Name: MDV-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Maldives
Country Code: MDV
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 January–4 February 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
30 November 2021
Original: English
2117637X (E) 021221
[Start1]
First regular session 2022
31 January–4 February 2022, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Maldives (2022–2026)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Maldives (2022–2026) ..................................................... 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Maldives is an upper-middle-income country, with a 2019 Human Development Index of 
0.74,
1 placing the country in the high human development category. Since 1990 mean years of 
schooling have increased by 3 years, life expectancy by 17.4 years and gross national income 
by 132 per cent. The population is projected to reach 568,362 by the end of 2021.
2 High-end 
tourism is an engine of rapid economic growth, contributing to improvements in socioeconomic 
indicators, and economic growth averaged 5.1 per cent annually from 2000 to 2019.
3 Gross 
domestic product (GDP) per capita stands at $18,914 as of 2019.
4
2. Deep-rooted socioeconomic, structural and systemic vulnerabilities have undermined the 
inclusiveness, sustainability and resilience of development gains. Suboptimal economic 
diversification, the dominance of ‘enclave’ tourism offering limited employment and 
opportunities for locals to integrate into value chains, a weak environment for private sector 
growth and inadequate investments in human capital have hampered equitable development.5
Geographical dispersion limits opportunities for economies of scale, and providing services in 
the country’s outer islands is costly.
3. As a small island developing state (SIDS), Maldives is among the countries most vulnerable 
to climate change. With 80 per cent of its coral islands less than 1 metre above sea level, it faces 
existential threats from global warming, sea level rise and climate and geophysical hazards.6
Maldives relies heavily on imported fossil fuels.7 The biggest sources of greenhouse gas 
emissions are electricity generation (67 per cent) and transportation (25 per cent).8
4. Maldives has progressed on some Sustainable Development Goals (the Goals). It has
reduced poverty (which affected 2.1 per cent of the population in 2019; the 2020 estimate is
7.2 per cent),9improved health and well-being, and raised levels of education.10 The 
Multidimensional Poverty Index11 revealed that 28 per cent of the population experienced 
poverty prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, which exacerbated inequalities between people 
living in the capital, Malé, and atoll islands, and between men and women.12 A third of the 
country’s population is foreigners from neighbouring countries,
13 and 53 per cent of the 
population living in Malé is migrants.
14
5. COVID-19 threatens to reverse the country’s progress towards poverty alleviation.
15 It
affected health and socioeconomic conditions, brought the tourism industry to a standstill, 
weakened the country’s economy and increased food insecurity due to global supply chain
disruptions. The government relied on external borrowing to finance recovery efforts, leading
to high levels of debt, and the economy contracted an unprecedented 29 per cent in 2020.
16 This 
underscored the urgency of re-imagining tourism and diversifying the economy. COVID-19
also highlighted the need for more effective social protection and wealth distribution systems.
The government’s quick response to the pandemic included provision of income support for 
vulnerable groups and micro, small and medium-size enterprises (MSMEs) and establishment
of emergency shelter and repatriation programmes to reduce the impact on migrants. As of 
1 UNDP, ‘Briefing notes for countries on the 2020 Human Development Report – Maldives’, 
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/Country-Profiles/MDV.pdf.
2 Maldives Bureau of Statistics, http://statisticsmaldives.gov.mv/nbs/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/WPD-2021.pdf.
3 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/648151/cps-mld-2020-2024.pdf.
4 UNDP, Maldives human development indicators, http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/MDV.
5 Asian Development Bank, ‘Country Partnership Strategy’, September 2020.
6 Asian Development Bank, ‘Multi-hazard Risk Atlas of the Maldives’, March 2020. 
7 Ministry of Environment, ‘Updated Nationally Determined Contribution of the Maldives’, 2020. 
8 Ministry of Environment, ‘Maldives First Biennial Update Report’, 2019.
9 World Bank, ‘Maldives Development Update: A digital dawn’, April 2021.
10 Ministry of Environment and Energy, ‘Voluntary National Review’, July 2017. 
11 statisticsmaldives.gov.mv/nbs/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Multidimensional-Poverty-in-Maldives-2020_4th-june.pdf.
12 UNDP Maldives, ‘Maldives Human Development Report’, 2014.
13 Maldives Bureau of Statistics, ‘World Population Day’, July 2021. 
14 Maldives Bureau of Statistics, ‘Household Income Expenditure Survey’, 2019.DP/DCP/MDV/4
September 2021, the country had vaccinated over 84 per cent of eligible populations, providing
free vaccination for all migrants. It is working to revive primary health care service delivery
with quality, equity and better access. 
6. There is potential to strengthen democratic processes and enhance accountability, 
transparency and justice for all. Internal migration and urban poverty have compounded 
socioeconomic inequalities. Violent extremist ideologies pose a significant threat to 
development gains, the root causes of which are manifold and inter-connected.
17 Multifaceted 
interventions are needed to prevent violent extremism and hate speech. The United Nations
Human Rights Council reviewed the country’s human rights record under the Universal 
Periodic Review mechanism in 2021, and Maldives fully accepted 187 of its 259 
recommendations. Strengthening capacities of civil society and protecting civic space remain 
critical to ensuring sustainability in areas including gender equality and human rights.
7. Women occupy 4.6 per cent of seats in Parliament. Their labour force participation rate is 
45.6 per cent, but men’s gross national income per capita ($1,529) is triple that of women’s
($527).
18 COVID-19 is expected to push more women out of jobs permanently.19 Intimate 
partner violence is high, with 42.4 per cent of ever-married women aged 15-49 having 
experienced some form of abuse.
20 Young people, women, migrant workers, persons with
disability and older persons have a limited role in policy formulation, increasing their risk of 
remaining vulnerable, disadvantaged and at risk of mental health conditions or addiction.21
Some social protection schemes exist for single parents, foster parents and persons with 
disability, but reaching target beneficiaries has been challenging.
22,23
8. The government’s UNDP-supported Strategic Action Plan (SAP) 2019-2023 articulates the 
principle of leaving no one behind and prioritizes the blue economy, dignified family, good 
governance and Jazeera Dhiriulhun (island life). The National Resilience and Recovery Plan 
2020-2022 was developed in response to COVID-19, prioritizing key elements of SAP and 
identifying sector-specific strategies to diversify the economy, decentralize government and 
build resilience. United Nations efforts to support the formulation of a national planning act are
a crucial step towards an inclusive, long-term national development plan (NDP). 
9. The country programme evaluation in 2019 recommended an adaptive management approach 
to respond to likely shifts in the political environment and focus on interventions with potential 
for cross-party support, given the political and human rights context at that time. The evaluation 
also recommended matching programming ambitions with the limited resources available so
UNDP can align its comparative advantage with national priorities, while focusing on 
addressing the gender gap.
10. In response to COVID-19, UNDP re-programmed its support to the government’s health 
and social sectors. It emphasized legal aid and protection for women and migrant workers, 
continuity of essential public services, economic livelihoods, food security and supporting 
MSMEs, while ensuring environmental sustainability. UNDP heavily invested in digital 
technologies and other innovations across sectors, laying the foundation for an integrated 
programme offer built around UNDP’s six signature solutions.
24 Building on the SDG Fund’s 
joint programme with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations 
Population Fund (UNFPA) and World Health Organization (WHO) to develop a national 
financing strategy for the 2030 agenda, UNDP will further engage in joint efforts to strengthen 
17 UNDP, ‘Youth Vulnerability Assessment’, February 2019. 
18 UNDP, ‘Human Development Report 2020’.
19 UNDP Maldives, ‘Rapid Livelihood Assessment,’ August 2020.
20 National Bureau of Statistics, ‘Demographic and Health Survey’, 2017. 
21 UNDP, ‘Youth Vulnerability Assessment’, February 2019.
22 International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth, ‘COVID-19 and social protection in South Asia: Maldives’, 
https://ipcig.org/pub/eng/OP451_COVID_19_and_social_protection_in_South_Asia_Maldives.pdf
23 London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, ‘Impact of the Disability Allowance in the Maldives’,disaster and climate change adaptation at the local level. It will also work with the Global Fund 
for Coral Reefs (GFCR) on local financing mechanisms.
11. In supporting United Nations efforts led by the Resident Coordinator, and while positioning 
itself in the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 2022-2026 
(UNSDCF) as an integrator of the Goals, UNDP will draw on its comparative advantage to 
address complex development challenges requiring coordinated interventions. Aligned with the 
UNSDCF’s priorities,
25 UNDP will add value in developing social and economic policies, 
promoting inclusive governance systems and strengthening climate and disaster resilience. It
will anchor its innovation expertise through its Accelerator Lab and regional economist network
(in conjunction with UNDP’s Global Policy Network) to scan development trends, scale up 
grassroots solutions and experiment with pilot projects. UNDP will strengthen partnerships 
with United Nations entities, encouraging collaboration across thematic areas and leading the 
COVID-19 socioeconomic response. Pursuant to the Secretary-General’s recommendation, 
UNDP has scaled up its SIDS offer supporting climate action, blue economy, digital 
transformation and innovative financing, while adopting common approaches for United 
Nations collaboration.
12. In line with the UNSDCF’s theory of change, the country programme theory of change is 
built on the premise that if inclusive, sustainable and thriving livelihoods are in place, and if an
anticipatory and accountable government is functioning for and by the people, and if natural 
resources are managed in a sustainable, climate-friendly and disaster-resilient manner, then the 
people of Maldives – especially the most vulnerable – will benefit from an inclusive, resilient, 
healthy, tolerant and skilled society. There, people will meaningfully participate in and 
equitably benefit from sustainable socioeconomic development and environmental protection, 
leading to achievement of the Goals. While managing risks and assumptions, this requires 
flexible development solutions that will (a) lead to structural transformation supporting a 
sustainable, inclusive and equitable future; (b) prioritize gender equality and ensure no one is 
left behind, working from a human rights approach; and (c) build resilience.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
13. Based on national and UNSDCF priorities, building on achievements of the previous 
programme, and drawing on recommendations from evaluations, studies and lessons learned 
from the COVID response, UNDP will focus on enhancing the capabilities of rights-holders 
and duty-bearers to make sustainable and equitable choices, especially targeting marginalized 
and vulnerable populations. 
14. As a trusted development partner in Maldives, UNDP’s comparative advantage has been 
its ability to form solid partnerships with a broad range of stakeholders, across all levels of 
government, civil society, academia, the private sector and local and global networks. Through 
national and joint consultations with stakeholders, including UNICEF and UNFPA and with 
government endorsement, UNDP identified three priorities for the new country programme
(described below). Enabling an adaptable work force (future proofing), decentralization and 
resilience building underpin UNDP’s work, while digitalization, data-driven solutions and
development financing support accelerating achievement of results. Support will be provided 
for equitable COVID-19 recovery, including reversing its deleterious effects on gender 
equality. UNDP will engage in a United Nations system-wide programme for strengthening 
gender equality and empowerment of women, and will undertake the Gender Equality Seal 
initiative to contribute to transformative results. Inclusion of youth and people with disability
will be prioritized.DP/DCP/MDV/4
Programme priority 1: Inclusive, sustainable and thriving livelihoods (supporting 
UNSDCF outcome 1). Key results:
15. Development of policies for economic diversification, inclusivity, private sector 
engagement and investment. UNDP will support the development of an economic 
diversification strategy (aligned with a blue economy framework) and of policies and strategies 
to increase labour force participation of marginalized groups, such as women and people with 
disability. In collaboration with the International Labour Organization (ILO), UNICEF, 
UNFPA, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN
Women) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM), UNDP will support the 
government to establish a robust labour market information and monitoring system with highquality data for evidence-based policies. Assistance will be provided to national efforts to 
formulate an economic census survey and undertake the nation’s first labour force survey.
16. Strengthened blue, green and digital value chains. UNDP will support skills-building for 
women, young people, people with disability and those recovering from addiction to acquire
technologies and digital and extension services so they can meaningfully contribute to blue, 
green and digital value chains. UNDP will work with United Nations partners as well as
ministries, island councils, civil society organizations, academia, international financial 
institutions (IFIs) and the private sector at national and subnational levels to leverage datadriven solutions and innovation platforms focusing on inclusive livelihood opportunities for 
women and men.
Programme priority 2: Sustainable natural resource management and climate resilience 
(supporting UNSDCF outcome 3). Key results:
17. Reduction in carbon footprint in priority sectors. UNDP will assist the government to 
fulfil its commitment to the Paris Agreement and implementation of its nationally determined 
contribution and net zero emissions target by 2030. UNDP will promote integration of 
renewable energy in tourism, fisheries and the agriculture sector, along with renewable energy
innovations in the private sector and households. Data analysis of these sectors will inform lowcarbon policies to support a transition towards practices that are market oriented and
environmentally sustainable. Interventions will incubate a new generation of MSMEs, focusing
on women entrepreneurs. UNDP will support the government’s climate education and public 
awareness initiatives for responding to climate change. Access to sustainable financing will be 
facilitated to improve sustainable environmental practices to protect ecosystems. 
18. Enhanced capacities to integrate disaster risk management (DRM) and climate 
adaptation and mitigation into development planning. UNDP will support the government to 
advance its national adaptation planning process to address medium- and long-term priorities 
for climate change adaptation. This includes strengthening national/subnational capacities for 
planning that is evidence informed, gender responsive, inclusive and participatory,
incorporating as core principles land-use planning that integrates disaster risk reduction as well 
as climate adaptation and mitigation. National information systems will be strengthened to 
collect and analyse environmental data for informed development planning. Technical support 
will be provided for reporting on climate change and disaster risk to international treaties and 
protocols. UNDP will collaborate with UNICEF, the United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP), United Nations Office for Disaster Risk 
Reduction (UNDRR) and WHO to provide technical support in disaster preparedness and 
response, and in health emergencies.
19. Strengthened policies, regulatory frameworks and capacities for sustainable 
management of water and waste resources. A systems-based approach to water conservation 
will be promoted, focusing on women’s role as beneficiaries and environment managers, and 
ensuring their participation in decision-making. UNDP will support the adoption and 
implementation of policies based on circular economy principles for integrated solid waste 
management. Regulatory and policy frameworks for sound management, monitoring and 
disposal of chemicals, persistent organic pollutants and waste will be strengthened. Formulationof national policies and plans to address marine litter and microplastics will be supported.
Institutional strengthening of the National Ozone Unit will continue.
20. Increased engagement of civil society organizations, communities and individuals on 
climate action. UNDP will promote sustainable lifestyles, raising public knowledge on the 
relationship between human behaviours and the environment, disasters and climate change. 
Behavioural change research will be used to tailor communication strategies, and deep listening 
methodologies will be implemented to help understand structural barriers and social norms. 
UNDP will work with the government, UNICEF, UNFPA, WHO and IFIs to mainstream 
climate change education in school curricula and with youth groups to amplify voices on 
climate action. Through the Global Environment Facility Small Grants Programme (GEFSGP), UNDP will accelerate local solutions supporting climate-resilient communities.
Programme priority 3: Anticipatory and accountable governance for and by the people
(supporting UNSDCF outcome 4). Key results:
21. Strengthened capacities to effectively plan, finance and implement development policies 
and strategies. UNDP will strengthen its support for national planning, including a national 
planning act and NDP. This will include capacity building for national and local government 
authorities (LGAs), local councils and women’s development committees (WDCs). UNDP will
technically support and advise on resource allocations in results-based, evidence-informed, 
gender-responsive, resilient and forward-looking local development planning, and effective 
management of human and financial resources. It will work to integrate these efforts with 
subnational climate mitigation and adaptation capacity-building under priority 2. With support 
from United Nations partners, UNDP will facilitate government efforts to establish and 
implement an integrated national financing framework to mobilize public and private financing
for achievement of the Goals; use of diagnostics such as development finance assessments; and 
partnerships with the private sector, development partners and IFIs. It will also catalyse climateresponsive investments through budget-tagging, investor mapping and innovative financing 
instruments to expand opportunities for action on the blue economy and climate change. 
22. Digitalization of public administration and service provision in an efficient and equitable 
manner. UNDP will reinvigorate its support to the government, started during COVID-19, 
to enable digital access to justice and business continuity. Reflecting the increasing demand for
digital transformation, UNDP will help to build inclusive and ethical digital societies and bridge 
socioeconomic inequalities. This entails ensuring that digital services are affordable, accessible 
and relevant for all, and that communities and institutions have the skills to use them.
23. Strengthened rule of law, human rights and access to protection and justice. UNDP will 
support the implementation of effective legal aid mechanisms, with attention to continuing 
partnerships with civil society organizations in providing pro-bono legal aid for victims of
sexual- and gender-based violence, and for migrant workers concerning labour rights. Learning
from the legal and justice sector baseline study and the ‘rights side of life’ study, and working 
with duty-bearers, rights-holders and United Nations partners, efforts will be undertaken to 
strengthen access to justice, protection of human rights and establishment of an independent 
and impartial justice sector. UNDP will support the government in judicial reform, including 
addressing unequal gender representation in the judiciary.
24. Inclusive civic space and effective participation of citizens. UNDP will seek to increase 
citizen voice and participation to strengthen governance by establishing stronger linkages 
among government, civil society and communities, and by promoting inclusive policymaking 
mechanisms. The emphasis will be on incorporating voices of excluded groups, especially 
women, persons with disability, migrant workers and people living outside Malé. In line with 
the United Nations Maldives disability inclusion strategy, UNDP will focus on empowering 
persons with disability through leadership programmes, social protection mechanisms and 
policy advice. Building on its engagement with the government in achieving reservation of 33
per cent of seats for women in local councils, UNDP will continue to emphasize women’s 
political participation. It will capitalize on progress made in initiating unprecedented dialogues DP/DCP/MDV/4
women’s wings, will be strengthened, and structural and cultural barriers preventing women 
from contesting elections and achieving political leadership will be addressed. UNDP will 
support implementation of the national action plan on preventing violent extremism, focusing 
on empowering young people and women as peacebuilders and change agents, coupled with a 
United Nations system-wide effort across the country.
25. To successfully deliver the programme, UNDP will partner with the government, civil 
society, development actors and the private sector. In addition to fostering a UNSDCF common
agenda with resident and non-resident organizations, UNDP will contribute to country team
coherence across policy, programme and operations. South-South and triangular cooperation
will be facilitated through technical assistance and sharing of knowledge and experience, 
including on digitalization and COVID-19 response.
26. UNDP will further apply its experiences with SIDS and countries in the Asia Pacific region. 
This includes experience with the Global Centre for Technology Innovation and Sustainable 
Development in Singapore, for support of data management to the Maldives Bureau of Statistics
(MBS) through South-South and triangular cooperation. Partnership with UN Volunteers will 
be explored to tap into volunteer expertise. Coalitions with bilateral entities and IFIs will be 
pursued. Bilateral support from Australia, China, the European Union, Japan and the United 
Kingdom will be complemented by collaboration with emerging partners. UNDP will continue 
to work with vertical funds including the Adaptation Fund, GEF, Green Climate Fund and
blended financing mechanisms such as GFCR to catalyse private investments, while expanding 
its partnership with the Multi-Partner Trust Fund. Partners for each outcome are shown in the 
Annex.
27. Given the range of interventions involving the private sector, a private sector engagement 
strategy will be developed to help nurture a common agenda for achievement of the Goals. 
Partnerships with civil society will be strengthened through exploration of alternative and 
sustainable financing mechanisms. 
III. Programme and risk management 
28. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in 
the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework.
29. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all the programme to enable response to force majeure. 
The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other 
United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
30. The theory of change identified several risks that could affect programme implementation 
and development objectives: economic crisis, climate change, protracted COVID-19 pandemic,
continued political polarization, lack of shared vision for national development across the 
political spectrum, shortfall in financial resources, lack of access to quality data, natural 
disasters and delayed implementation, leading to diminishing trust and affecting achievement
of the Goals. 
31. UNDP will strengthen risk identification, mitigation and diversification procedures
throughout the project life cycles in line with UNDP’s social and environmental standards and 
accountability mechanisms, while ensuring a robust pipeline of projects. Risk mitigation and 
management arrangements will be built into the programme as per UNDP’s enterprise risk 
management policy. Assurance activities including micro-assessments, spot checks and audits 
will be conducted in line with the harmonized approach to cash transfers. Systems will ensure 
hliihlblildiidFmonitoring of the political economy and operating context will inform programme 
modifications.
32. To mitigate the impact of political cycles on the programme, UNDP will work closely with 
a broad spectrum of stakeholders. In addition to conventional partners in the government, civil 
society and the private sector, this includes political parties, religious scholars, WDCs,
collectives, academic institutions, think tanks and minority groups. Participation of groups 
marginalized because of geographic location, gender, disability, income, education, migration 
status, race, health conditions or any other excluded minorities will be ensured through targeted 
engagement. Digital solutions and platforms will be leveraged to ensure efficient programme 
implementation. If resource mobilization opportunities are limited, UNDP will focus on policy
advisory services informed by selected area-based interventions. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
33. UNDP will partner with United Nations organizations and data-generating entities such as 
the MBS and the Ministry for National Planning, Housing and Infrastructure (MNPHI) to 
strengthen national capacity for monitoring achievement of the Goals while updating selected 
global indices such as the planetary-pressure-adjusted Human Development Index, inequalityadjusted Human Development Index, Gender Social Norms Index and material footprint per 
person. Innovative methods will be used for monitoring, and to support evidence-based realtime decision-making and anticipatory governance, using reliable gender-disaggregated data. 
At least 15 per cent of the budget will be allocated for gender-specific results across the 
programme. The gender marker will be used for integration of gender equality, with 70 per cent 
of active projects having gender markers. At least 5 per cent of programme resources will be 
allocated for monitoring and evaluation and communication of results.
34. The country office will establish a protocol for results-based monitoring and evaluation
and report it at project and portfolio level. The evaluation plan will be closely monitored and 
adequately resourced. Recommendations and lessons learned from independent 
evaluations/assessments will strengthen dialogue with partners, and will be utilized to revisit
project design and make course corrections. DP/DCP/MDV/4
Annex. Results and resources framework for Maldives (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Strategic Action Plan sector – Blue economy; Sustainable Development Goals 1, 9, 14 
UNDP OUTCOME 1 (UNSDCF OUTCOME 1): By 2026, youth, women and others at risk of being left behind contribute to and benefit from inclusive, resilient, sustainable economic and human capital development, 
fostering innovation, entrepreneurship and decent work
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions
UNSDCF outcome indicators
Data source, frequency of 
data collection, 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs Major partners 
Estimated cost 
by outcome 
(USD)
1. Proportion of population living below 
the national poverty line, by sex, age, 
employment status 
Baseline: 
Male: 8.1%; female: 8.2% 
Children (0-14): 10.1% 
Working age population (15-64): 7.5% 
Elderly (65+): 6.2% 
Target: Reduce by 50% 
2. Unemployment rate, by sex and 
persons with disability
Baseline (2019): Both sexes: 5.3 (2019) 
Male: 5.6, female: 4.8 
Persons with disability, both sexes: 7.1% 
Male: 4.2%, female: 10.2% 
Target: Under 5% overall 
3. Proportion of youth (aged 15–24) not 
in education, employment or training 
Baseline (2019): Both sexes: 29%; male,
15%; female, 41% 
Target: Below 10%
4. Manufacturing added value as a 
proportion of GDP 
Baseline (2019): 2.20 
Target (2030): 4.4% 
Source: HIES 
Responsibility: MBS
Source: HIES/Census
Responsibility: MBS
Source: Census/HIES
Responsibility: MBS 
Source: Economic update 
reports 
Responsibility: MBS, 
Maldives Monetary Authority
Output 1.1. Government capacities are strengthened to formulate and 
implement policies that promote economic diversification and facilitate 
private sector engagement and investment
Indicator 1.1.1: Number of policies implemented to support inclusive 
livelihoods, private sector growth and innovation [SPIRRF* 4.2.2]
Baseline: 0 
Target: 2 
Source: MED, Civil Service Commission
Frequency: Annually 
*Strategic Plan Integrated Results and Resources Framework
Indicator 1.1.2: Status of implementation of BCC’s strategic action plan for 
MSME development [SPIRRF 1.3]
Baseline: Action plan developed
Target: Action plan fully operationalized
Source: BCC
Frequency: Annually 
• Ministry of Economic 
Development (MED)
• Ministry of Environment, 
Climate Change and 
Technology (MoECCT)
• Ministry of Fisheries, Marine 
Resources and 
Agriculture (MoFMRA)
• Ministry of Tourism (MoT)
• Ministry of Higher Education
• Ministry of Gender, Family and 
Social Services (MGFSS)
• MBS
• Maldives Pension 
Administration Office 
• Civil Service Commission 
• Maldives Polytechnic
• Business Centre Corporation 
(BCC)
• Maldives National Skilling 
Authority 
• LGAs
• Local councils 
• WDCs
• Civil society organizations
• ILO 
• UNICEF 
• UNFPA 
• UN Women
• IOM
• UNESCAP 
• United Nations Capital 
Development Fund (UNCDF)
Regular: 
$360,000
Other: 
$7,730,000
Output 1.2. Innovative development solutions ensure inclusive and meaningful 
livelihoods, contributing to blue, green and digital value chains for sustainable 
economic growth
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of partners applying innovative, data-driven solutions 
and inclusivity criteria to ensure meaningful livelihoods for all [SPIRRF E.2.2]
Baseline: 0
Target: 15 – Ministries, 5; island councils, 5; civil society organizations, 3; private 
sector, 1; academia, 1 
Source: MED, MOF
Frequency: Annually 
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of new enterprises contributing to lucrative value chains 
in blue, green and digital economies. [SPIRRF 4.1.1]
Baseline: 0 
Target: 2000 (70% led by womenyouthrecovering addictspersons with DP/DCP//4
7. Women’s labour force participation 
rate
Baseline (2019): 45.6% 
Target: Above 60%
Source: HIES 
Responsibility: MBS
Source: United Nations, MoT, AGRONat, polytechnic, MED and schools; 
Frequency: Midterm evaluation
• Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO)
• United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO)
• World Trade Organization
• International Fund for 
Agricultural Development 
(IFAD)
• World Bank
• Asian Development Bank
• Islamic Development Bank
NATIONAL PRIORITY: SAP sectors – Jazeera Dhiriulhun and blue economy; Goals 1, 6, 7, 11, 13, 14
UNDP OUTCOME 2 (UNSDCF OUTCOME 3): By 2026, national and subnational institutions and communities in Maldives, particularly at-risk populations, are better able to manage natural resources and achieve enhanced 
resilience to climate change and disaster impacts, natural and human-induced hazards, and environmental degradation, inclusively and in a sustainable manner
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 – Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk 
1. Proportion of population using safely 
managed drinking water services by sex 
Baseline (2019): 61.7% 
Target: 85%
2. Renewable energy share of total final 
energy consumption 
Baseline (2018): 4% 
Target (2023): 24% 
3. Proportion of urban solid waste 
regularly collected and with adequate 
final discharge out of total generated by 
cities
Baseline: 0%
Target: 30%
5. Existence of a gender-sensitive and 
integrated policy/strategy/plan that
increases Maldives’ ability to adapt to 
climate change and foster climate 
Source: Household income 
expenditure survey (HIES),
progress reports on national 
water and sewerage strategic 
plan
Responsibility: MBS, 
MoECCT, MNPHI, NDMA
Source: Goals data update
(SDU), State of the 
Environment report. 
Responsibility: MBS,
MoECCT
Source: SDU; State of the 
Environment report. 
Responsibility: MBS,
MoECCT
Source: SDU 
Responsibility: MBS
Output 2.1. Enabling environment and multisector engagement for carbon 
footprint reduction in priority sectors
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of sectors integrating and implementing gender-sensitive 
sustainable practices, policies and strategies [SPIRRF 1.1.2]
Baseline: 0
Target: 7
Source: MoECCT 
Frequency: Annually 
Indicator 2.1.2: Percentage of government sectors prioritized within nationally 
determined contributions for climate change adaptation and mitigation in 
planning, budgeting and financing mechanisms [SPIRRF 1.1.1]
Baseline: 0%
Target: 100%
Source: MoECCT 
Frequency: Annually 
• President’s Office 
• MoECCT
• MoFMRA
• MED
• MoT
• Ministry of Transport
• MNPHI
• National Disaster Management 
Authority (NDMA)
• BCC
• SME Development Finance 
Corporation 
• AgroNat
• Fenaka Corporation Limited
• State Electric Company Limited)
• Waste Management Corporation 
Limited 
• LGAs
• Local councils
• WDCs
• Civil society organizations
• UNESCAP
• UNDRR
• UNEP
Regular: 
$360,000
Other: 
$34,890,000
Output 2.2. Government institutions at national/subnational levels have 
enhanced capacities to integrate DRM and climate adaptation and mitigation 
into development planning
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of councils with island development plans incorporating 
evidenced-based, gender-sensitive, climate-resilient disaster risk reduction strategies 
and enhanced protection, governance and management of terrestrial and marine DP/DCP/MDV/4
resilience and low greenhouse gas 
development without threatening food 
production 
Baseline: Partially established
Target: Fully established and partially 
operationalized
6. Proportion of national exclusive 
economic zones managed using 
ecosystem-based approaches
Baseline: 0.0006%
Target: 20% of the exclusive economic 
zones under protected area management
7. Status of phase-out of 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and 
hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) consumption
HCFC baseline: 4.60 ozone depleting 
potential
HFC baseline: Average consumption 2020-
2022 plus 65% of baseline
Target: Phase out HCFC consumption by 
2025
8. Percentage reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions across all sectors that 
contribute to achievement of the national 
determined contribution targets.
Baseline: No baseline required
Target: 50% 
9. Existence and implementation of 
national DRM plan in line with the 
Sendai Framework
Baseline: None
Target: Plan adopted and being 
implemented
Source: SDU
Responsibility: MBS
Source: Montreal Protocol
Article 7 report
Responsibility: MoETCC
(National Ozone Unit)
Source: Biennial update 
reports
Responsibility: MoETCC
Source: Sendai Framework
reporting
Responsibility: NDMA
Baseline: 10
Target: 60
Source: LGAs
Frequency: Annually 
Indicator 2.2.2: Production frequency of disaggregated early warning alerts, 
disaster preparedness, and climate change information and data [SPIRRF 3.1.2]
Baseline: Non-existent
Target: Annual
Source: NDMA, MoECCT
Frequency: Annually 
• WHO
• UNICEF
• UNFPA
• IFAD
• UNDRR
• World Bank
• FAO
• Multi-Partner Trust Fund
• UNCDF
• Government of Japan
• Japan International Cooperation 
Agency
• GEF
• Green Climate Fund
• GFCR
Output 2.3. Policies, regulatory frameworks and capacities at 
national/subnational levels strengthened for sustainable management of 
water and waste resources 
Indicator 2.3.1: Existence of regulatory frameworks for sound management and 
disposal of chemicals, persistent organic pollutants and waste [SPIRRF 4.1.2]
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
Source: MoECCT 
Frequency: Annually 
Indicator 2.3.2: Number of islands supported by UNDP practising genderresponsive, decentralized, sustainable waste and water management [SPIRRF
4.1.2]
Baseline: 12
Target: 52
Source: GEF-SGP, LGAs 
Frequency: Annually 
Output 2.4. Increased engagement of civil society organizations and 
individuals on climate action
Indicator 2.4.1: Number of civil society organizations implementing localized 
programmes on natural resource management, sustainable energy transitioning, 
conservation and related areas [SPIRRF 2.4.5]
Baseline: 77
Target: 152
Source: GEF-SGP
Frequency: Annually 
Indicator 2.4.2: Percentage of local councils with programmes for community 
education, awareness and engagement for climate change action [SPIRRF 4.1.1]
Baseline: Not available
Target: 20%
Source: LGAs
FAllDP/DCP//4
NATIONAL PRIORITY: SAP sectors: Jazeera Dhiriulhun, caring state, dignified families and good governance; Goals 5, 17
UNDP OUTCOME 3 (UNSDCF OUTCOME 4): By 2026, Maldives has strengthened decentralized and accountable governance under the rule of law so people are empowered, meaningfully participate in transparent 
and transformative processes for public policy, and fully enjoy access to justice, public services, human rights, gender equality and women’s empowerment in a tolerant and peaceful society
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development
1. Percentage of seats held by women in 
(a) national parliament and (b) local 
governments. 
Baseline (2020): (a) 4.3% (2019), (b) 6% 
Target: (a) 33%, (b) 33%
2. Existence of systems to track and 
make public allocations for gender 
equality and women’s empowerment. 
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
3. Percentage of women and men aged 
15-49 who consider a husband to be 
justified in hitting or beating his wife for 
at least one of the specified reasons
Baseline: Women, 25.8%; men, 20.7
Target: Women, 15%; men, 10%
5. Existence of a gender-responsive and 
inclusive mechanism to enhance policy 
coherence of sustainable development.
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
7. Percentage of accepted Universal 
Periodic Review recommendations 
implemented by the government
Baseline: 6% 
Target: 80% 
Source: Election records 
Responsibility: Elections 
Commission
Source: Tracking system
Responsibility: MOF
Source: DHS 
Responsibility: MBS
Source: Annual report
Responsibility: MNPHI
Source: Implementation 
updates 
Responsibility: Attorney 
General’s Office (AGO)
Output 3.1. Government capacities at national/subnational levels are 
strengthened to effectively plan, finance and implement development 
policies and strategies
Indicator 3.1.1. Extent of alignment of local development plans with long-term 
national development vision (NDP) and extent to which they are gender sensitive 
and results based [SPIRRF-1.1.1]
Baseline: Long-term NDP and mechanism not in place
Target: Long-term NDP in place and local development plans are fully aligned, 
gender-responsive and results-based
Source: MNHPI and LGAs
Frequency: Annually 
Indicator 3.1.2. Number of financing frameworks, standards, instruments and 
mechanisms developed and resourced at national/subnational levels to 
mobilize public and private financing towards achieving Goals and facilitating 
climate action [SPIRRF 2.1.3]
Baseline: National, 0; island, 0
Target: National, 1; island, 20
Source: Ministry of Finance
Frequency: Annually
• President’s Office
• MNPHI
• Ministry of Finance
• Ministry of Youth, Sports and 
Community Empowerment
• MoECCT
• National Centre for Information 
Technology (NCIT)
• Ministry of Home Affairs
• Ministry of Health
• MGFSS
• AGO
• LGAs
• Local councils
• WDCs
• Department of Judicial 
Administration (DJA) 
• Judicial Service Commission 
• National Counter Terrorism 
Centre
• Elections Commission
• Human Rights Commission of 
the Maldives 
• MBS
• Ombudsperson’s Office on 
Transitional Justice 
• NCIT 
• Bar Council of Maldives (BCM)
• Academia
• Faith-based organizations
• Civil society organizations
• WHO 
• UNFPA
• UNICEF
Regular: 
$360,000
Other: 
$7,490,000
Output 3.2. State capacities are enhanced to digitalize public administration 
and service provision in an efficient and equitable manner
Indicator 3.2.1. Number of interventions to implement the pillars26 of national 
digital transformation [SPIRRF E.1.1]
Baseline: 0
Target: 5 
Source: UNDP, NCIT 
Frequency: Annually
Indicator 3.2.2. Number of digital solutions for (a) delivery and monitoring of 
public service; (b) citizen engagement for monitoring; (c) access to and protection 
of information; (d) legal identity and civil registration [SPIRRF E.1.2]
Baseline: 0
Target: 4DP/DCP/MDV/4
Source: UNDP, NCIT
Frequency: Annually
• United Nations Office on Drugs 
and Crime
• ILO 
• IOM 
• United Nations High 
Commissioner on Human Rights
• UN Women
• UNESCO
• Government of Australia 
• Government of China 
• Government of Japan 
• Government of United Kingdom
• European Union
Output 3.3. Strengthened rule of law, human rights and access to protection 
and justice
Indicator 3.3.1. Number of gender-sensitive policy, legal and regulatory 
frameworks on rule of law, business, and human rights and justice developed and 
rolled out [SPIRRF 2.2.1]
Baseline: 0
Target: 4
Source: DJA, BCM, AGO
Frequency: Annually
Indicator 3.3.2. Number of people receiving legal aid including vulnerable groups
[SPIRRF 2.2.3]
Baseline: 150 (2020) 
Target: 10,000 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Quarterly
Output 3.4. Inclusive civic space and effective participation of citizens, 
especially vulnerable groups, in decision-making, and enhanced social 
cohesion.
Indicator 3.4.1. Proportion of women contesting in local and parliamentary 
elections [SPIRRF 6.2.1]
Baseline: To be determined
Target: 40% each
Source: Election Commission
Frequency: Per election cycle 
Indicator 3.4.2. Number of at-risk individuals reached through social cohesion 
and prevention of violent extremism interventions annually [SPIRRF 3.2.2]
Baseline: 85 (2020)
Target: 1,000 (constituting 15% persons with disability, 15% youth at risk, 50% 
women) 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annually 
TOTAL 
Regular: $1,080,000
Other: $50,110,000
Total: $51,190,000