File Name: MDV-NEP-2010-EN
Year: 2010
Country Name: Maldives
Country Code: MDV
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2010
Start Year: nan
End Year: nan
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

MALDIVES NATIONAL ENERGY 
POLICY & STRATEGYList of Abbreviations 2
Foreword 3
The Need & Urgency for a National Energy Policy 5
Institutional Framework for the Energy sector 7
Guiding Principles 9
Energy Supply and Utilization 11
Energy Supply 11
Energy Utilization 13
Energy Policy Statements 15
POLICY 1: Provide all citizens with access to affordable and reliable supply of electricity 17
POLICY 2: Achieve carbon neutrality in the energy sector by year 2020 19
POLICY 3: Promote energy conservation and energy efficiency 21
POLICY 4: Increase national energy security 23
POLICY 5: Promote renewable energy technologies 25
Strengthening the Institutional and Legal Framework of the Energy Sector 27
POLICY 6: Strengthen the management capacity of the energy sector 28
POLICY 7: Adopt an appropriate pricing policy for the energy sector 28
POLICY 8: Ensure customer protection 29
POLICY 9: Enhance the quality of energy services 29
Contributors 30
Reviewers 31
Photo Credits 32
ContentsADB Asian Development Bank
CCS Carbon capture and sequestration 
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
GEF Global Environmental Facility
GHG Green House Gas
HEA Hydrocarbon Exploration Act
IMF International Monetary Fund
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MEA Maldives Energy Authority
OTEC Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
RE Renewable Energy
STELCO State Electric Company Limited
TOE Tons of Oil Equivalent
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNDP United Nations Development Program
List of 
Abbreviationsthe energy use patterns of various 
sectors. Workshops and interviews in 
rural areas in the atolls and with energy 
providers were conducted to gather 
first-hand information. The results of the 
consultations and data analysis provided 
the necessary information regarding 
potential areas for energy efficiency 
applications and will serve to guide 
activities.
The success of the Energy Policy and 
Strategy set out henceforth is achievable 
through our collective commitment and 
participation.
I would like to express my deep 
gratitude to respective Government 
Authorities, Utility Companies, UNDP, 
GEF, NGOs and everyone for their 
contribution to this work. I am also 
grateful to the officials of the Climate 
Change and Energy Department of the 
Ministry of Housing and Environment.
I am confident that with the support of 
all parties we can achieve the goals and 
targets encompassed in this document.
27 September 2010
Mhd Al
Energy is crucial for development, 
notably for a small island nation 
such as the Maldives that is heavily 
dependent on imported fuel for meeting 
all of its energy needs and highly 
vulnerable to external shocks. The 
Government is aware and concerned 
about environmental degradation 
while deeming it necessary to provide 
a reliable, affordable and sustainable 
energy supply to all citizens. As such 
the Government has set itself the 
ambitious goal of becoming a carbon 
neutral country by 2020. The need to set 
concrete policies and strategies to direct 
the development of the energy sector is 
essential to implement and achieve the 
Government’s overall objectives. 
The National Energy Policy and Strategy 
is significant in that it embodies 
the principles that are set out in the 
Strategic Action Plan of the Government 
and provides for developing greater 
sustainability, conservation and 
efficiency in energy whilst promoting 
low carbon technologies and the 
quality of energy supply. The National 
Energy Policy and Strategy has been 
compiled based on comprehensive 
ForewordThe Need & Urgency 
for a National Energy 
Policy
Energy needs for the Maldives are 
primarily met through the import of 
fossil fuels since the Maldives does not 
have access to conventional sources 
of energy. Energy security is critical 
for the Maldives whose 300,000 plus 
population reside in over 190 islands 
that are flung across more than a 
100,000 square kilometers of the Indian 
Ocean. Economic progress and social 
development are at risk as the country 
depends on an unpredictable global 
market for its energy resources.
The islands and natural habitat of the 
Maldives have been ideal and conducive 
for economic progress with the growth 
of a robust tourism sector that makes 
up a third of the gross domestic product 
and the growth of fisheries which is the 
biggest contributor to export receipts 
and employment. Both sectors are 
energy intensive with the tourism sector 
being the single most energy intensive 
sector in the economy. Other sectors 
such as fisheries and construction also 
rely heavily on energy. Thus, the entire 
economy of the country is extremely 
vulnerable to external shocks caused by 
fluctuations in the price of fossil fuels
At the same time, land is an extremely 
scarce resource in the Maldives. It 
is estimated that the 1190 island 
of the Maldives combined have an 
approximate total land area of 300 
square kilometers. This has meant that 
Maldives relies heavily on imports to 
meet all of its demands including basic 
necessities of life such as food, water 
and shelter. Inhabited islands have 
a limited supply of freshwater in the 
ground and land for agricultural uses is 
usually non-existent. Thus, air and sea 
based distribution is essential for many 
primarily in terms of food security.
The spread of population also means 
that access to social services such as 
healthcare and education and the 
delivery of these services is not possible 
without transport and complicated 
logistics. The Government is consciously 
taking measures to minimize distances 
to social and public services by 
providing all services to clusters of 
islands. 
The Government of Maldives recognizes 
that adequate energy supplies are 
important for food security, the delivery groups including women and children, 
governance and for economic growth 
throughout all of its inhabited islands 
and as such the Government considers 
energy security a right of every citizen 
and is committed to the provision of 
energy resources at the lowest cost to all 
Maldivians.
The Government is addressing the 
significant growth in developmental 
activities at regional and national level 
that has led to an escalation in the use 
of energy by restructuring transport 
networks using regional hubs rather 
than the capital Male’, privatization and 
opening of markets to energy suppliers 
and promoting renewable energy. The 
country can no longer rely entirely on 
imports to meet its energy demands 
in order to sustain socio-economic 
development, thus, the urgency for 
developing policies to guide the growth 
of the energy sector, to ensure effective 
use of energy and for the management 
of the sector.
Furthermore, the Government has 
set an ambitious national goal of 
achieving carbon neutrality by 2020 
achieving greater energy efficiency. 
Energy efficiency is therefore a central 
component of the National Energy 
Policy and will help reduce, greenhouse 
gas emissions and energy costs, and 
contribute directly to energy security 
and affordable energy. Developing 
energy efficient products and services 
will support the growth of the energy 
sector and create jobs. 
International cooperation and 
commitments were a fundamental 
consideration in the formulation of 
the policies and strategies herein. The 
Maldives was one of the first countries 
to sign the Kyoto Protocol and ratify it 
in 1998. The Maldives is also a member 
of the UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC).Lead agency
Climate Change and Energy Department
Ministry of Housing and Environment 
Regulatory body 
Maldives Energy Authority 
Government Institutions and their 
role in the Energy Sector
The President’s Office – Overall policy 
guidance. 
Ministry of Finance Treasury – Assists in 
seeking external and domestic finance 
to develop the energy sector 
Department of National Planning 
– Develop, coordinate and monitor 
the Strategic Action Plan of the 
Government, provide inter-sectoral 
policy coordination and implement 
development projects. 
National Disaster Management Centre 
– Coordinate emergency relief efforts 
across sectors and supply fuel and 
mobile electricity generators in an 
emergency
foreign investment opportunities for 
energy sector development. 
Province offices – Involved in the 
decentralization of the energy sector
Ministry of Education – Assist in 
mainstreaming energy issues including 
renewable energy, energy conservation 
and develop an interest for people to 
work in the sector.
Maldives College of Higher education – 
Training institution for technical energy 
sector related programme delivery 
among others. 
Attorney General’s Office – Assist 
the lead agency in development of a 
national legal framework for energyrelated acts and regulations
People’s Majlis – Legislature 
Ministry of Tourism, Arts and Culture 
– Implements energy regulations as 
well as offers the opportunity to learn 
from innovative private sector energy 
development programs
Marine Research Centre - Collects ocean
Institutional 
Framework for the 
Energy sector(gy)
Maldives Meteorological Services – Data 
repository and forecasting for renewable 
energy sources like solar and wind 
power
Ministry of Communication and Civil 
Aviation - Formulates the national 
Science and Technology Master Plan 
Utility Companies – State owned 
providers of energy and other utility 
services in the provinces.
Maldives Customs Services – 
collaborates on energy imports and 
exports to the country
Ministry of Health and Family - Identifies 
health-impact in relation to energy use 
and power generation. 
Local governance system 
Province Offices – Oversee regional 
utilities in providing energy to 
the communities and assist in the 
decentralization of the lead agencies 
policies and strategies
Atoll Councils – Assess needs for power 
and energy requirements at atoll level. 
Island Councils - Assess needs for power 
and energy requirements at island level. 
Private sector involvement 
Fuel importers and distributors, energy 
technology distributors and engineering 
companies 
dld
Bank Group, ADB, JICA, Bilateral donors 
and friendly countries for financial and 
technical assistance 
Legal Framework 
Formulate energy Act/ Law
Legal framework to provide incentives 
for renewable energy technologies, 
energy efficiency and energy 
conservation
Revision/establishment of Maldives 
electricity regulation and standards
Establishment of Maldives energy 
standards
Ensuring inclusion of energy efficiency 
and conservation measures in the 
relevant sector codes: water, transport, 
waste management, heating and 
cooling, building code and the 
residential sector.Guiding 
Principles
◊ Create an enabling environment for the growth of a reliable and 
sustainable energy sector and meet the constitutional obligation of 
Government in the provision of electricity to every inhabited island 
at reasonable standards commensurate to the island. 
◊ Reduce overreliance of the energy sector and the national economy 
on fossil fuels through the diversification of energy supplies
◊ Improve energy efficiency and conservation of energy use
◊ Encourage the adoption of low-carbon technologies in production, 
distribution and energy consumption through promotion of a 
healthy lifestyle
◊ Exploit local energy resources and renewable technologies
◊ Engage private sector participation in the development of the 
energy sector, energy services and quality assurance mechanisms
◊ Ensure energy equity through social protection mechanisms and/
or safety nets for vulnerable groups of the population. 
Guiding 
PrinciplesInternational energy prices are therefore 
closely monitored by the Government 
to anticipate shocks and introduce 
appropriate measures such as taxes, 
levies and/or concessions for vulnerable 
sectors such as fishing so that the 
impact of fluctuating international oil 
prices on the economy is minimized. 
The national energy policy and 
strategy attempts to pave the way to 
increase renewable and other lowcarbon technologies into our energy 
mix and propel the country towards 
a low-carbon economy through the 
implementation of a an appropriate 
market strategy that mitigates the 
demand for fossil fuels in the country.
Energy Supply 
The Government is acutely aware of 
the changing international energy 
landscape. Growing global populations 
and strong growth of emerging markets 
are compelling demand for conventional 
energy resources and burdening global 
energy supplies. Energy supplies are at 
further risk from geopolitical tensions 
and natural disasters. It is in this 
increasingly challenging international 
context that Maldives needs address the 
security of its energy supplies. 
The Maldives is entirely dependent on 
imports of fossil fuels to meet its energy 
needs. Imported fossil fuels, primarily 
diesel dominate energy consumption 
making up 82% of the total primary 
energy demand. Since the Maldives has 
not been successful in finding its own oil 
reserves, the steady supply of petroleum 
products is strategically critical for 
continued economic growth and social 
development for the country. Diesel 
and petrol are significant inputs to the 
tourism, fishing and transport sectors 
that together directly contribute to 
more than 50 percent of gross domestic 
Energy Supply 
and UtilizationLPG, 12,538
Kerosene, 1,422
Diesel, 280,746
Petrol, 27,729
Jet A1, 17,080
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
Electricity
Bio
Jet A1
Petrol
Diesel
Kerosene
LPG
Solar
Energy Consumption by Sector and type of fuel in toe 2009oil equivalent (toe) in 2002 to 340,311 
toe in 2009 due to a rise in the demand 
for electricity and transportation. 
Electricity generation is by far the single 
largest consumer of imported fuels. 
The production of electricity is the 
fastest growing energy consumption 
sector led by increased electrification 
of inhabited islands and growth in the 
tourism industry. Approximately two 
thirds of all electricity produced in the 
country is produced and consumed in 
tourist resorts. Producers of electricity 
in the Maldives are the State Electric 
Company (STELCO), which until recently 
supplied power to 32 main population 
centres in the Maldives, provincial utility 
companies, community or private run 
operators on inhabited islands, tourist 
resort island producers and electricity 
produced in islands designated for 
industrial processes such as fisheries 
processing. Electricity generation for 
the capital Male’ and its satellite islands 
Hulhumale’ and Vilingili accounts for 
approximately 62 percent of the total 
power generated for all inhabited 
islands in the country. 
Energy demand in the Maldives is 
expected to continue to grow at more 
than 8.5 % per annum. The growing 
demand for energy consumption 
is attributed to the rising number 
of modern high rise buildings with 
increased use of air conditioning and the 
increase in the number of vessels and 
vehicles for transportation. 
y 
67.7 percent was utilized for electricity 
generation, 21 percent for sea transport, 
8.9 by fishing boats and 1 percent for 
land transport. The demand for diesel 
by the tourism sector for electricity 
generation, sea transport and leisure 
activities amounts to 36.6 percent of the 
diesel imported in 2009. 
Rising fuel prices has meant that the 
Government has had to subsidize the 
operational cost of electricity generation 
in Male’ and other inhabited islands to 
maintain the stability of the price of 
electricity which in turn has imposed a 
significant burden on the Government’s 
budget. 
At the same time, financial support 
and intervention by the Government 
has contributed to the success of 
improving access to electricity for the 
entire population. Access to electricity 
rose from two-thirds with access to 100 
percent within the past decade. Energy Policy 
StatementsThe geography of dispersed islands in 
the Maldives is such that a national grid 
to provide power to the population has 
not been a viable option thus far. This 
literally means that each island has to 
install and operate a power to generate 
electricity to meet its needs albeit at 
considerable costs. The Government 
has provided some financial assistance 
to many of the communities or private 
parties, that have installed, operate and 
manage their power house on inhabited 
islands. 
The lack of regulation or national 
standards has resulted in the 
development of weak individual 
island grids that are unsustainable 
and unreliable. Reliability is further 
impeded by a lack of technically skilled 
personnel for maintenance, operation 
and management. It is not uncommon 
to find islands that have frequent 
power outages or are unable to provide 
24 hours of electricity either due to 
mechanical failures or the price and 
availability of fuel supplies.
Electricity generation for any small 
island is unsustainable as it is expensive 
to operate and the costs of the high 
initial capital investment cannot be 
recovered. The cost of production is 
further exacerbated by the fact that 
transport costs of fuel from storage 
facilities near the capital island Male’ 
is added, resulting in huge disparities 
between islands on electricity tariffs and 
in the quality of service. 
power infrastructure on islands and 
to improve the efficiency and quality 
of services. 
◊ Engage private sector participation 
to develop, manage and sustain 
electricity services.
◊ Source national and international 
investments to develop and sustain 
energy sector.
◊ Establish a transparent mechanism 
to provide targeted subsidies to 
vulnerable groups to ensure access 
to basic energy at affordable prices. 
◊ Introduce incentives to power sector 
developers by facilitating access 
to grants, concessional finance 
and duty concessions to ensure 
affordability of energy supply.As an extremely low-lying small island 
state situated in the middle of the Indian 
Ocean, Maldives is perhaps one of the 
most vulnerable countries to the effects 
of climate change. Many of our islands 
are already experiencing first hand 
stronger storm surges, severe erosion 
and incidents of flooding. 
On a global scale our efforts to reduce 
emissions of GHG will not have much 
effect on reversing the effects of climate 
change. However, Maldives announced 
its intention to achieve carbon neutrality 
at the UN General Assembly in 2009 and 
is committed to meeting this goal as a 
responsible citizen of the international 
community. 
In 2009 GHG emissions amounted 
to 1,034,354 tons of carbon dioxide 
equivalent for the whole of Maldives of 
which 55.4% is from the production of 
electricity. The conversion efficiency of 
diesel to electricity varies from 26-39% 
and distribution losses throughout the 
country vary from 5-24% depending 
on the quality and design of the 
distribution system on any given island. 
These variances demonstrate that 
improvement of energy efficiency 
coupled with the application of 
renewable energy technologies is 
essential in the pursuit to achieve net 
zero carbon emissions. 
forecasts of energy usage by 
different sources, GHG emissions 
and status of carbon neutrality.
◊ Establish, apply and monitor 
targets to maintain energy source 
composition, efficiency and losses 
to achieve and sustain carbon 
neutrality.
◊ Promote carbon capture and 
sequestration (CCS) by conducting 
research and development of CCS 
projects necessary for the reduction 
of GHG emissions. 
◊ Ensure compliance of energy 
sector utility companies and other 
energy service providers with safety 
standards issued by Maldives Energy 
Authority as well as environmental 
standards stipulated by the 
Environmental Protection Agency.
◊ Establish an environmental division 
in every energy sector utility 
company staffed by qualified 
personnel able to conduct 
environmental safety audits of 
existing and new facilities to ensure 
compliance with the standards 
and regulations under the National 
Environment Act.Greater efficiency and conservation of 
energy will benefit the country through 
a reduction in energy imports which 
directly translates into, savings for the 
country’s foreign exchange reserves, 
reduced dependence on imported fossil 
fuels, increased energy security and 
reducing GHG emissions. On the supply 
side, measures are needed to increase 
efficiency particularly in the production 
and distribution of electricity. 
Conversion efficiencies in some islands 
are low and in others distribution 
losses caused by poorly designed and 
maintained systems are high. Reducing 
these variations through regulatory 
intervention will conserve more energy. 
On the demand side, the level of 
awareness, our lifestyles and outlook 
need to be encouraged towards 
placing a greater importance on energy 
conservation and the wise consumption 
of resources. For example, in the Male’ 
area, which accounts for approximately 
62 percent of the total power generated 
for all inhabited islands in the country, 
households consume approximately 
the same amount of electricity as 
public, government, manufacturing and 
commerce sectors combined and 75% of 
household electricity usage is attributed 
to air-conditioning of homes. 
greener attitudes and behaviour in 
our society. 
◊ Encourage energy efficiency in 
both the supply side and demand 
side through financial and other 
incentives/disincentives in respect 
of energy end-use and mandatory 
measures such as appliance energy 
labelling, building codes and energy 
audits.
◊ Engage and facilitate private sector 
participation in providing expertise 
and specialized services needed to 
increase energy efficiencies across 
sectors. 
◊ Carry out awareness programs on 
energy efficiency and conservation 
as a priority and on a sustainable 
basis.
◊ Identify all areas for improvement 
and provide technical advice in 
fuel conservation and efficiency 
in different modes of transport, 
including marine and air 
transportation.
◊ Introduce incentives to encourage 
greater use of electric vehicles and 
vessels by establishing charging 
stations using renewable energy 
sources.
◊ Encourage utilization of waste heat 
from power generation for other 
applications (e.g. water heating, air 
conditioning, desalination).Energy security for a small island nation 
such as the Maldives can only be 
achieved through the diversification of 
the country’s energy resources to reduce 
our dependency on imported fuels. 
The burden of rising global oil prices is 
compounded by the fact the Maldives 
relies heavily on imports to meet almost 
all of the country’s domestic demand. 
All fuel imported into the Maldives is 
currently stored in facilities in Male’ and 
its neighbouring islands. The 190 or so 
inhabited islands are located anywhere 
from 3 kilometres to 541 kilometres from 
the capital Male’. This results in access 
and cost disparities across the country 
for fuel, electricity, food and other 
consumer goods. Provincial hubs are 
needed to be developed for storage and 
distribution of fuel and other imported 
goods such as food to ease both access 
and reduce cost to all energy producers 
as well as end-users and provide a 
cushioning stock in the event of any 
unforeseen rises in the international 
oil prices as well as to increase 
preparedness for natural disasters. 
To ensure continuity of supply the 
energy mix must be considered along 
with important factors such as the 
economic cost, environmental impacts, 
reliability of supplies, convenience to 
consumers and strategic independence. 
sources of energy while reducing 
the reliance on imported fossil fuels.
◊ Ensure fuel diversity in electricity 
generation through diversification in 
power generation technologies that 
do not use hydrocarbon fuels.
◊ Develop and maintain fuel reserves 
in strategic locations of the country.
◊ Identify feasible regions and open 
the fuel market for investors.
◊ Prepare for emergency supply needs 
by developing a reserve stock of 
energy.
◊ Diversify sources of fossil fuel 
imports.
◊ Encourage diversification in fuel 
consumption in the transport sector.
◊ Facilitate the implementation of a 
nationwide electricity grid.In order to minimize the vulnerability of 
energy supplies to external factors, the 
use of indigenously available renewable 
energy resources for energy generation 
is necessary. This will in turn reduce the 
pressure on the country’s balance of 
payments. 
The Maldives has the potential for 
utilization of renewable resources such 
as solar, wind and biomass for energy 
needs. Pilot projects have been carried 
out and hybridized systems consisting of 
combinations of solar, wind, diesel and 
LPG have shown success in electricity 
generation that could be implemented 
nationwide. Commercial use of 
renewable energy is presently limited to 
solar photovoltaic panels in navigation 
lights and telecommunications systems. 
Solar thermal is used in some tourist 
resorts for water heating and lighting. 
The renewable energy sector does 
face some barriers such as; a lack of 
capacities in development, design, 
implementation and management, lack 
of financing available for renewable 
energy applications and renewable 
energy based livelihood projects, as well 
as a lack of adequate information on the 
options available in renewable energy 
technology, renewable energy statistics 
and research. 
renewable energy resources.
◊ Promote renewable energy sources 
and their advantages to the public 
through mass media, workshops 
and through a renewable energy 
information centre.
◊ Facilitate and provide research 
opportunities for locals and 
international parties through the 
establishment of a platform for 
information exchange on potential 
renewable energy resources and 
their application within the country.
◊ Seek concessionary external 
financing to improve the economic 
feasibility for renewable energy 
projects that are environmentally 
and socially sound.
◊ Assist the development of the 
renewable energy sector in 
increasing its contribution to 
the energy supply through the 
introduction of incentives and/
or access to green funding that 
will attract the participation of the 
private sector. 
◊ Facilitate research and development 
and technology transfer programs 
to aid the exchange of innovative 
ideas.The existing legal framework requires 
improvement to cater to the evolving 
energy sector particularly with respect 
to meeting goals set out for renewable 
energy technologies, energy efficiency 
and energy conservation. Specific 
regulation for governing areas such as 
independent power generation, and the 
pricing and use of renewable energy 
technologies are currently not in place. 
Therefore, formulation of a Maldives 
Energy Act, a Maldives Hydrocarbon 
Exploration Act, Maldives Energy 
Standards and incorporation of energy 
efficiency and conservation measures 
into the national building code is critical. 
Likewise, institutions in the energy 
sector are weak in terms of technical 
capacity to effectively deliver technical 
and regulatory functions for a vibrant 
energy sector. Hence it is important 
that the regulatory and policy making 
institutions are developed with defined 
roles and responsibilities and the 
technical capabilities to perform their 
functions. 
Institutional and Legal 
Framework of the 
Energy SectorThe lead agency for the energy 
sector the Ministry of Housing and 
Environment and the regulatory 
authority the Maldives Energy Authority 
needs to develop local capacity to 
manage the energy sector effectively 
and to keep abreast with technological 
developments and good governance 
practices. There is insufficient capacity as 
the needs of these two institutions have 
not been regularly assessed or catered 
for. The Maldives Energy Authority is 
severely understaffed. 
STRATEGIES
◊ Improve the capacity of the Ministry 
that is mandated for the energy 
sector in a sustainable manner 
ensuring continuity of capacity 
development to strengthen the 
Ministry in developing integrated 
long-term energy plans and 
conducting policy analysis for the 
energy sector.
◊ Improve the capacity within 
the Provincial Utility companies 
to enhance and expand their 
contribution to energy supply 
development.
◊ Develop and manage a national 
energy database.
◊ Develop management capabilities 
of the energy sector institutions 
through appropriate training, 
empowerment and proper 
delegation of authority.
In Maldives, the energy pricing structure 
follows a top-down approach. The Trade 
Ministry sets energy prices, which are 
implemented by most local bodies with 
minor adaptations. However, electricity 
pricing is a little more diffused for 
the provincial utility companies that 
determine electricity tariffs which are 
then approved by the Maldives Energy 
Authority. 
The lack of a proper regulatory 
mechanism has led to non-cost 
reflective price. Making it difficult for 
companies that operate in the energy 
sector to become financially feasible. 
In addition, non-targeted subsidization 
of electricity production in the past 
has diverted the states scarce financial 
resources.
The Maldives Energy Authority needs to 
be strengthened to deliver the functions 
of regular review of pricing policies and 
to take action against noncompliance 
under this policy. 
STRATEGIES
◊ Empower Maldives Energy Authority 
(MEA) to regulate the energy sector 
and the pricing policy.
◊ Formulate and implement pricing 
strategies to achieve a cost-reflective 
pricing policy for all commercial 
energy products (electricity, 
petroleum products, etc.).
◊ Formulate and implement optimal 
energy supply expansion plans for The sector lacks standards to ensure 
that energy services meet quality 
requirements. The variation of the 
quality of energy services and prices 
particularly electricity throughout 
the islands of the Maldives produces 
inequalities in access as well as quality. 
STRATEGIES
◊ Standardize the quality of 
services provided by energy 
suppliers through the formulation 
and adoption of a law and/or 
regulations. 
◊ Introduce disincentive mechanisms 
to maintain a minimum standard 
of quality in the supply of energy 
products and services. 
Existing regulations does not include 
adequate measures to protect the 
customers’ rights and to safeguard their 
interests.
STRATEGIES
◊ Protect the rights and interests of 
energy utilizing customers through 
the formulation and adoption of a 
law and/or regulations. 
◊ Empower and support MEA to 
ensure fairness to the customers 
of various energy products and 
services.Mr. Ahmed Iqbal
State Electric Company Ltd. 
Ms. Jimzeena Musthafa
Ministry of Tourism, Arts and Culture
Mr. Muawiyath Shareef
Maldives Energy Authority
Mr. Adam Manik
Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture
Ms. Hudha Ahmed
Climate Change Advisory Council
Mr. Ali Hassan 
Northern Utilities Ltd. 
Mr. Ayathulla Hussain
Northern Utilities Ltd.
Ms. Fathimath Niuma
President’s Office / Invest Maldives
Mr. Abdulla Wahid
Maldives Meteorological Services
Mr. Mohamed Inaz
UNDP
Mr. Ryo Hamaguchi
UNDP
Ms. Razana Ibrahim
Attorney General’s Office
Mr. Amjad Abdulla 
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Ahmed Ali 
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Ali Shareef 
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Zammath Khaleel 
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Akram Waheed 
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Ms. Fathimath Raufa Moosa 
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Mohamed Asif 
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Mohamed Rasheed 
M. Maadu
Mr. Abdul Gayoom 
Upper North Utilities Ltd. 
Dr. Ibrahim Nashid 
Renewable Energy Maldives Pvt. Ltd. 
Mr. Abdullah Nazih 
Maldives Water and Sewerage Company
Dr. Zaid Mohamed
State Electric Company Ltd. 
Mr. Ali Azwar
State Electric Company Ltd. Mr. Ahmed Saleem
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Ahmed Ali
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Ali Shareef
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Zammath Khaleel
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Ms. Fathimath Raufa Moosa
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Akram Waheed 
Ministry of Housing and Environment
Mr. Ahmed Yasir
Maldives Environment Management 
Project
Ms. Najfa Shaheem Razee
ICCRRIP ProjectMinistry of Housing and Environment 4
Ministry of Housing and Environment 10
Ministry of Housing and Environment 14
Ministry of Housing and Environment 16
Ministry of Housing and Environment 18
Ministry of Housing and Environment 20
Ministry of Housing and Environment 22
Mohamed Ali, The President’s Office 24
Ministry of Housing and Environment 26Ministry of Housing and Environment
Male’, 20392
Republic of Maldives
tel: +960 3004300
fax: +960 3004301
email: secretariat@mhte.gov.mv
website: www.mhte.gov.mv
design & layout - najfa shaheem razee