File Name: MEX-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Mexico
Country Code: MEX
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 1–4 February 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
1 December 2020
Original: English
2016214X (E) 040121
First regular session 2021
1–4 February 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Mexico (2021–2025)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management .................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Mexico (2021–2025)………………………………………… 9Framework
1. In its National Development Plan 2019-2024, the Government of Mexico adopted the 
principle “Leave no one behind, leave no one out”. Together with the establishment of the 
National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Mexico, it showcases the
commitment of Mexico to achieving sustainable development.
2. This country programme document explains how UNDP will contribute to achieving the 
results agreed in the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework for 
Mexico, 2020-2025, within the third joint planning cycle of the United Nations system in the
country.
3. The framework and the country programme document were developed in a participatory
manner to safeguard their link with federal, state and municipal priorities. Five technical 
consultations were held in developing the framework: three regional, with local actors; one 
national, with civil society, academia, the private sector and international organizations; and 
another with the federal government. Stakeholders, partners and allies of UNDP participated at
every stage, and their needs and views form the basis of this country programme document.
4. With a gross domestic product of $1.242 trillion, Mexico ranked 15th among the largest 
economies in the world in 2019. For that same year, with a Human Development Index of 0.767, 
Mexico was considered a country with high human development, 76th out of 189.
5. However, Mexican society faces challenges that are not captured by income-based 
measurements. Such challenges include inequality and poverty, manifested in unequal regional 
development and contrasts between population groups. According to the multidimensional 
poverty measurements of the National Council for Evaluation of Social Development Policy 
and figures from the National Institute of Statistics and Geography, 41.9 per cent of the 
population live in poverty, while 7.4 per cent live in extreme poverty. Of the indigenous 
population, 69.5 per cent live in poverty and 27.9 per cent in extreme poverty. Only 
43.6 per cent of women of working age are economically active, in contrast to men, at 
77.7 per cent. Of the population aged 15-24, 17.4 per cent do not study or work; 78.9 per cent 
of this group are women. Of the population under 18 years of age, 49.6 per cent live in poverty. 
These figures encompass the main vulnerable groups that UNDP will prioritize: people in 
poverty, indigenous population, youth, and women.
6. Those groups are particularly vulnerable to the development challenges identified by the 
United Nations system in Mexico: (a) inequality, social backwardness, discrimination, and 
marginalization of broad population groups; (b) insufficient, uneven economic growth with high 
wealth concentration; (c) economic model with high environmental costs; and (d) rule of law 
with structural challenges of violence, insecurity, corruption, human rights violations, impunity 
and unequal access to justice, coupled with institutional weakness, mostly subnationally.
7. The COVID-19 pandemic has magnified development challenges, particularly in the 
reduction of poverty and inequality, access to education, health, and the ability to prosper,
disproportionately affecting the poor, women, and people in the context of human mobility.
8. To face these challenges, UNDP will leverage its comparative advantages: its experience 
and presence in the territory, enhanced by the accumulated knowledge and lessons learned in 
identifying social and environmental issues at the national and regional levels; developing
analytical products and systematizing local data; supporting the formulation and 
implementation of evidence-based public policies that prioritize the fight against 
multidimensional poverty and inequality; adapting and creating resilience to climate change;
installing anti-corruption capacities, and promoting transparency and citizen participation in 
public decision-making — all supported by accountability mechanisms.
9. During the 2014-2020 programme UNDP contributed in several areas of development:
10. Mexico constructed a robust institutional architecture for monitoring and implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with UNDP as a key partner. Since 2015, UNDP
has supported the creation of the National Council for the 2030 Agenda and national planningpg g
officials to incorporate the principles of the 2030 Agenda into public plans and programmes.
11. The final evaluation of the Sixth National Communication of Mexico to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), “Support to the Sustainable 
Development Goals in Mexico through open government practices, citizen participation and 
the strengthening of transparency”, confirms the UNDP contribution to fighting corruption
through open government practices promoted at the federal and state levels by engaging with 
academia and civil society.
12. Key social development institutions of the Government escalated UNDP methodologies 
addressing hard exclusions affecting youth, children with disabilities, and migrants. UNDP 
contributed to scaling up the public child care services of the inclusive care and attention model
for boys and girls with and without disabilities. As part of the Migrant Support Fund, returnees 
obtained tools to undertake ventures and furthered their financial education.
13. UNDP supported the early post-earthquake recovery of 2017. Through demonstrative 
community workshops involving six damaged structures, 360 persons and 55 public institutions 
were trained in resilient housing reinforcement. With 170 micro-enterprises supported by “En 
marcha con PNUD” and the reconstruction of 300 totoperas furnaces, 1,500 beneficiaries, 
including 431 women, recovered their livelihoods. Municipal and state capacities for resilience,
as well as future risk reduction, were strengthened in Puebla, Morelos and several municipalities 
in Oaxaca.
14. With the support of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), a long-standing partner, 
UNDP played a key role in climate change, energy, and biodiversity issues, working hand in 
hand with the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources and the National Commission 
of Natural Protected Areas. The UNDP role was confirmed in the final evaluation of the Sixth
National Communication, among others. UNDP supported the National Institute of 
Environment and Climate Change in developing key instruments such as the National 
Vulnerability Atlas to Climate Change, as well as the implementation of climate change
adaptation programmes, including disaster risk reduction plans in 13 protected areas.
15. The government of Mexico relied on UNDP to support the submission of national reports 
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Convention on 
Biological Diversity. Reporting paved the way to updating nationally determined contributions 
and linking the natural capital of the country with its Human Development Index.
16. UNDP supported three national electoral institutions in securing civil society electoral 
oversight and access to electoral justice. UNDP fostered women’s political participation and 
the prevention of gender-based violence and femicide. With the United Nations Entity for 
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), UNDP generated the 
Women’s Political Participation Index, and developed alternative means of addressing and 
preventing gender-based violence, including support during the COVID-19 emergency, 
initiatives in which the role and importance of the alliance with UNDP was publicly recognized 
by the Ministry of Women of Mexico City.
17. The independent country programme evaluation of October 2017 confirms that “UNDP 
contributed to improving the impact of public policies that support poverty reduction, the 
environment, sustainable development and democratic governance by creating knowledge, 
fostering dialogue, providing skills training and implementing projects”. The evaluation
recommended aligning UNDP programme cycles to national development plans, a 
recommendation incorporated into the new country programme document.
18. Supported by Accelerator Lab methodologies, UNDP will embed innovation in its 
programmatic offer; develop new cooperative and technological solutions to emerging issues;
promote digitalization and the use of real-time data; and scale up promising local solutions.
UNDP will continue to accelerate sustainable development learning with partners such as the 
Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, the Ministry of Culture and the Interoceanic Corridor of 
the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.) pg
South and triangular cooperation mechanisms. As a partner of the Government for its 
implementation with consistent presence in these countries, UNDP can mainstream sustainable 
development approaches into the public policy cycle. UNDP will bolster the profile of the 
Government as an implementer of development cooperation projects, building capacities, 
strengthening policies, and creating new strategic partnerships for development, leveraging its 
long-standing relationship with the Mexican Agency for International Development Cooperation.
20. UNDP will tackle the two cross-cutting challenges identified in the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework: gender inequalities, and the systemic 
challenges to managing migration and human reintegration in mobility contexts under a human 
rights approach, in close interaction with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), 
UN-Women, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), among other 
United Nations organizations.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
21. This programme is based on the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework vision: “Approaching 2025, the Mexican State will move towards an inclusive and 
sustainable development model that generates shared prosperity with equal opportunities and 
results for all people and regions of the country. The model will be environmentally-cost
effective, based on the sustainable, inclusive, and efficient management of resources, and 
resilient to the effects of climate change and disasters. In this vision, a more robust rule of law 
will contribute to peace, equality, inclusion, integrity, and justice; and the full exercise of human 
rights will be achieved, with no one left behind”.
22. UNDP is well positioned to be an effective partner for the Government in addressing 
complex development challenges, leveraging its leadership in socio-economic recovery –
particularly in post-crisis settings – and its expertise in policy support, technical assistance, 
capacity development, and advocacy. This programme is derived from and aligned with the 
UNDP Strategic Plan, the ‘signature solutions’ approach, and the regional strategy of 
strengthening effective governance comprised of productivity, inclusion, and resilience.
23. UNDP will base its work on three pillars: strategic commitment; solid content; and 
impeccable administration. UNDP will expand its alliances within the United Nations 
development system, with academia, donors, civil society, the private sector, and individuals. 
Reliable content will be provided through quality advice and support in the design and 
implementation of policies and budget allocation. UNDP will emphasize efficiency, 
accountability, integrity, and transparency in the processes.
24. Through its role as an enabler, UNDP will continue to create platforms that enhance
dialogue and the construction of multi-actor and multi-sector development solutions between 
the three levels of government, academia, the private sector, and civil society to accelerate the 
action path outlined for fulfilment of the Sustainable Development Goals. Within the country 
team, UNDP will harness its comparative advantages to lead the economic approach of the 
United Nations response framework for socio-economic impact of COVID-19.
25. UNDP will contribute to results by implementing a combination of the signature solutions
cross-cutting approaches across four programme priority areas:
A. Inclusion and equality: inclusive evidence-based policies with a 2030 Agenda 
approach
26. UNDP will support mainstreaming of the 2030 Agenda approach in plans, programmes 
and the full cycle of public policy. Emphasis will be placed on local governments such as
Estado de México, Yucatán, Nuevo León, Puebla, Baja California and Guanajuato where 
continuing efforts exist, and within programmes that catalyse comprehensive strategies to 
further inclusion and fight inequality. These efforts will extend to engaging private sector 
industrial chambers and foundations to support business initiatives and best practices aligned pg gg, y
protection system, to be included in the Regional Human Development Report, and the socioeconomic overview of development challenges following the impact of COVID-19 in Mexico. 
These materials benefit public servants, think tanks, civil society organizations and academia
nationwide.
28. UNDP will continue to support, promote and enable initiatives that mainstream gender and 
protect and empower women and young girls to open spaces where they can strengthen their 
capacities. Towards this goal, UNDP seeks a gender marker level 2, at minimum, in all its
interventions, promoting gender equality significantly. In partnership with public and private 
institutions, such as the Monte de Piedad Foundation, UNDP will tailor methodologies, 
practices and standards to promote and achieve diversity and gender equality in civil society
interventions.
B. Generate shared prosperity to reduce inequality and poverty
29. UNDP will promote job creation, associativity, productivity and competitiveness through 
integral and scalable solutions such as “Empodérate”, supporting entrepreneurs in developing
start-up companies that leverage socio-emotional skills, “En marcha”, providing local 
businesses with capacities to innovate and position themselves strategically in markets and 
sustainable value chains, and the GEF Small Grants Programme, promoting community-based 
innovation into business models that lead to sustainable livelihoods. Priority will be given to
people in poverty, indigenous populations, women, and youth, and actions geared towards
sustainable recovery in the aftermath of shock and crisis.
30. UNDP will continue to collaborate with IOM and the private sector in solutions such as 
“Intégrate”, enabling the economic reintegration of people in human mobility contexts and
advocating for human rights approaches to strengthening corporate policies and practices.
31. In partnership with the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit and the legislative branch, 
UNDP will develop innovative financial solutions for biodiversity and sustainable development 
that accelerate recovery from the consequences of COVID-19 and support achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals. Solutions will focus on both the demand and the supply side:
increased flows of blended finance on the supply side, and increased quality spending, costeffectiveness and efficiencies on the demand side.
32. UNDP will leverage its network, especially at the local level, by brokering partnerships 
among government, academia, foundations and the private sector to scale up the inclusion of 
vulnerable groups in productive environments and sustainable and profitable supply valuechains, thereby generating shared prosperity while reducing inequality and poverty.
C. Green economy, mitigation of climate change, sustainable energy and production
33. UNDP strategies in this area comprise inclusive and sustainable management of resources, 
energy, and waste (including chemical and dangerous materials); preservation of natural 
resources, ecosystems and biodiversity; transition to a green economy; achievement of the 
climatic goals established in the nationally determined contributions and the key role of Mexico
in regional greenhouse gas mitigation efforts; and comprehensive risk management and 
adaptation to climate change. These strategies will be further prioritized in the confluence of 
biodiversity hotspots (including natural protected areas) with climate and socio-economically
vulnerable regions (including indigenous populations), emphasizing the south and south-eastern
region of the country, in states such as Chiapas, Oaxaca, Tabasco, Campeche, and Yucatán.
34. UNDP will strengthen legal and institutional frameworks and mainstream environmental 
considerations in social and productive sectors. It will also encourage the design of financial 
instruments for the rational use of the vast natural capital, taking into consideration the need to 
exploit sustainable ecosystems, promote ecological restoration, and create resilient and 
sustainable communities. Vertical funds (such as GEF and the Green Climate Fund), bilateral
funds (such as UK Pact and the NAMA Facility of Germany) and promotion of private sector 
financing will ensure the financial sustainability of these efforts.g, g, 
Commission on the Use of Biodiversity, the National Commission of Natural Protected Areas, 
and the Forestry Commission, among others, with an integrated approach to the relationship 
between climate change and biodiversity, as well as gender issues, particularly the use of the 
differentiated contributions of women and men as enhancers of the conservation of their 
livelihoods in the productive sectors essential for development.
36. Partnering with the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources, the National Institute 
of Environment and Climate Change and local non-governmental organizations, UNDP will 
emphasize nature-based solutions as a pathway to generating social and environmental benefits 
and long-term co-benefits, applying an array of institutional tools and methodologies, including 
the Climate Promise. UNDP will support the visibility of indigenous and local communities and
will work to reduce conditions of vulnerability determined by access to basic services such as 
water and energy, aiming to construct resilient low-carbon communities in isolated regions such 
as Wixárika (states of Nayarit, Durango, Jalisco and Zacatecas).
37. Given the potential to generate renewable energy and the willingness of some local 
governments, such as that of Mexico City, to adopt supporting measures – consistent with 
national and international goals, as reflected in the nationally determined contribution – within 
their development plans, UNDP will provide methodological tools to improve energy 
efficiency, incorporating new sectors and geographic areas, hand in hand with energy 
producers, regulators and end users. UNDP will continue to support the Government in 
implementing the Montreal Protocol and developing sustainable cooling solutions, including
policies to increase energy efficiency in appliances.
38. UNDP will address adaptation to climate change and comprehensive disaster risk 
management to reduce systemic vulnerabilities mainly in south-south-eastern states, partnering
with the General Coordination of Civil Protection, local non-governmental organizations and 
donors such as Fundación Rio Arronte, and private sector groups such as Zurich Re. UNDP 
will support the transition from a civil protection system to a risk management system with an 
emphasis on prevention, response, and recovery. Intersectoral and multi-level coordination will 
be promoted. A pooled approach to funds will be further piloted to expand work on disaster risk 
management programmes.
D. Anti-corruption, transparency, accountability, social and political participation, and 
inclusive decision-making
39. UNDP will enable the consolidation of the ‘open institutions’ agenda pursued by the
Government, strengthening institutions to encourage public participation and give volume to 
the voices of women, civil society and young people. UNDP will equip entities in the National 
Transparency System and other independent institutions with tools and strategies to foster 
transparency and openness to the public.
40. With respect to anti-corruption, UNDP will support the Ministry of Public Management in
designing and implementing mechanisms that allow effective control of corruption risks in 
specific sectors. In dealing with complex corruption-related phenomena, UNDP will promote 
spaces for dialogue between the Government and civil society to build anti-corruption solutions 
with a comprehensive vision, within the context of participatory processes where all voices are
heard. Emphasis will be placed on addressing the differentiated impacts of corruption on 
vulnerable groups. These strategies will be implemented at the subnational level, highlighting 
the need to strengthen capacities among social actors, the private sector and public servants.
41. To advance towards a more just and inclusive society, the participation of women in the 
public and political spheres is key. UNDP will favour actions that ensure the full and effective 
participation of women at all levels of decision-making in political life, regardless of electoral 
cycles. By continuing its partnership with the judiciary, UNDP will consolidate its position as a 
pioneer in empowering women to attain the highest-level political positions.
42. UNDP will strengthen the capacities of specialized justice courts such as the Electoral 
Tribunal of the Federal Judicial Branch and will contribute to enhancing its international 
cooperation strategiesppgg g
discrimination by generating and disseminating specialized knowledge. UNDP will work with 
the National Institute of Women to achieve the targets set in the National Programme for Equal 
Opportunity and Non-Discrimination.
44. To amplify the reach of the programme, UNDP will promote joint work with several 
members of the country team in Mexico, such as UNFPA, the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), UN-Women, UNHCR, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and OCHA. 
A strong effort will be added to work with international financial institutions.
45. A comprehensive communications strategy will be produced to share alliances and 
programme results broadly. Communicating results with relevant and interested parties will 
promote a virtuous cycle that will lead to amplifying programme impact, enabling new 
partnerships and greater advancement for sustainable development in the country.
III. Programme and risk management
46. This country programme document outlines the contribution of UNDP to national results. 
It serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels concerning country programmes are prescribed in the 
Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework.
47. The programme will be nationally executed and coordinated with the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, through the Mexican Agency for International Development Cooperation. If necessary, 
national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or all the programme in response 
to force majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated 
fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned
projects.
48. UNDP will periodically review the performance and efficiency of the programme, ensuring 
that work plans are validated by their different counterparts, to coordinate its joint 
implementation with the Mexican Agency forInternational DevelopmentCooperation. National 
ownership, as a basic principle of United Nations system work streams, will serve as a crosscutting axis of planning instruments for UNDP in Mexico.
49. The main risk faced by the programme is a decrease in domestic resources mobilization 
following government austerity policies, in addition to resource rerouting due to post-pandemic 
recovery measures. In response, existing partnerships will be strengthened and financing 
sources, such as those with the private sector and bilateral and multilateral cooperation actors, 
will be diversified to ensure sustainability.
50. Social, economic, political, and environmental changes may affect several of the national 
sustainable development fields. For instance, migration flows have increased unprecedentedly 
within a region considered as the mayor migrant corridor of the world: the United States of 
America, Mexico, and Central America. Stronger social movements and demonstrations in the
region, largely due to inequality, make the corridor vulnerable to economic turmoil. Rising levels
of insecurity have compounded these issues and changes by weakening public trust in national 
institutions. Environmental risks, manifested in climate change, natural disasters, biodiversity 
loss and the collapse of ecosystems, demand effective governance responses. Further, the 
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, which have yet to be fully gauged, will require allencompassing recovery strategies and solutions that include preventive and preparedness 
approaches to facing potential threats.
51. UNDP will carry out prospective analyses to identify possible risks and formulate 
evidence-based mitigation measures by leveraging lessons learned, monitoring data and 
recommendations from evaluations to continually shape and reshape approaches to policy
construction. It will use the Social and Environmental Standards and the Accountability 
Mechanism as risk-management tools., pjggQy 
ensure that the perspective and needs of vulnerable groups are effectively incorporated into 
project management.
53. Early warning measures will be installed for immediate institutional attention, and the 
Social and Environmental Compliance Unit will serve as the social and environmental 
mitigation mechanism.
54. Anyperson or community believing thatthe environment ortheir well-beingmaybe affected 
by a UNDP-supported project or programme may file a complaint. A representative such as a 
civil society organization may also file a complaint on behalf of affected communities. UNDP 
will ensure that information about the available response and grievance mechanisms is 
accessible.
55. A business continuity plan has been put in place. It will be constantly monitored and 
updated to ensure staff safety and security, as well as to maintain the continuity of essential 
functions during a critical incident of any nature.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
56. In coordination with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through the Mexican Agency for
International Development Cooperation, UNDP will promptly follow up on the commitments 
of this programme. To that end, a monitoring group, consisting of the Agency, country office 
senior management, the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit, and representatives of programme 
partners and beneficiaries, will be established.
57. Each year, UNDP will convene the monitoring group to discuss results, target 
achievements, and possible corrective measures. The group will make recommendations to 
inform the subsequent annual work plan, ensuring that decision-making is appropriately 
supported.
58. As a permanent guest of the SDGs Specialized Technical Committee, a coordination entity
established within the framework of the National System of Statistical and Geographic 
Information to advance monitoring and statistical capacities for the 2030 Agenda, UNDP is 
uniquely equipped to address data-related risks. UNDP will continue to strengthen country 
capacities for analysis, reflection and learning in connection with sustainable development 
progress, focusing on the local level and data disaggregation. Nationally owned sources
qualified by the Committee will be prioritized to track UNDP contributions to national results.
Evaluation
59. A balanced evaluation plan will be implemented, in agreement with the Government, 
following the UNDP evaluation policy and United Nations Evaluation Group guidelines. This 
plan may be complemented with thematic and outcome evaluations as the monitoring group 
deems necessary.DP/DCP/MEX/3
Annex. Results and resources framework for Mexico (2021-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: National Development Plan (PND) 2019-2024, axis 2. Social policy
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGs) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 1. By 2025, the Mexican State has a comprehensive strategy for social development, combating multidimensional poverty and inequality, with an 
integrated approach to human rights, gender, inter-culturalism, life cycle and territory, which incorporates redistributive mechanisms, leaving no one behind.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME A. Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions.
Cooperation framework 
outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities Indicative country programme outputs Major partners / partnerships frameworks
Estimated cost by 
outcome, 
(in thousands of $)
Indicator 2.b Percentage of 
the population in a 
condition of vulnerability 
due to social deprivation.
Baseline (BL) 2018:
Total: 29.3%
(a) Lack of access to social 
protection: 57.3%
(b) Lack of housing quality 
and spaces: 11.1%
(c) Lack of access to basic 
services: 19.8%
Goal (2025)
Total: 21.9%
(a) Lack of access to social 
protection: 43%
(b) Lack of housing 
quality and spaces: 8.3%
(c) Lack of access to basic 
services: 14. 8%
Source: National Council for 
Evaluation of Social Development 
Policy (CONEVAL), Methodology for 
multidimensional poverty 
measurement in Mexico
Frequency: Biennial, at national 
and state levels; five-yearly at the 
municipal level
Output 1. Strengthened institutional 
capacities to integrate 2030 Agenda into 
development plans, budgets and policies that 
combat inequalities and multidimensional 
poverty
Indicator 1.1. Number of institutions that have 
strengthened capacities to integrate 2030 
Agenda into plans, budgets and policies [IRRF 
SP 1.1.1.1] **
BL:
(a) National level: 0
(b) Subnational level: 0
Goal:
(a) 3
(b) 5
United Nations system
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(OHCHR), International Labour Organization (ILO), 
UN-Women, UNFPA, UNICEF
Public sector
Mexican Agency for International Development 
Cooperation (AMEXCID), Ministry of Social Welfare 
(BIENESTAR), Ministry of Economy (ECONOMIA), 
Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare (TRABAJO), 
CONEVAL
Academia
Centre for Economic Research and Teaching (CIDE), 
El Colegio de México (COLMEX), Latin American 
Faculty of Social Sciences (FLACSO), National 
Polytechnic Institute (IPN), Autonomous National 
University of Mexico (UNAM)
Regular
$238
Other
$9,303
Output 2. Strengthened programmatic 
structures at all levels of government based 
on evidence for good planning and 
comprehensive regulations
Indicator 2.1. Number of policy instruments 
that strengthen capacities to plan, budget, 
manage and monitor actionsthat combat
inequalities and multidimensional poverty, 
including access to basic services [IRRF SP
1.2.1.1].
BL:
(a) Public sector: 0
(b) Other: 0
Goal:
(a) 10
(b) 5DP/DCP/MEX/3
NATIONAL PRIORITY: PND 2019-2024, axis 2. Social policy
SDGs 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 4. By 2025, the Mexican State has a strategy for productive development that promotes associativity, innovation, productivity and competitiveness, 
as well as higher levels of national inputs in production chains, with better governance for equality based on a human rights framework, with gender perspective
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN. 2018-2021. OUTCOME A. Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions.
Indicator 4.b. Annual rate of change in 
the number of jobs held by women over 
30 years old and youth (men and women) 
between 15 and 29 years old
BL (2017):
(a) Women over 30: 9,627,117 jobs
(b) Youths between 15 and 29:
- Women: 4,783,163 jobs (37.3%)
- Men: 8,030,512 jobs (62.7 %)
Goal: (2025):
(a) Women over 30: 13.42 %
(b) Youths between 15 and 29:
 - Women: 15.52 % (38.7%)
 - Men: 8.9 % (61.3 %)
Source: Total factor 
productivity
(National Institute of 
Statistics and 
Geography – INEGI)
Frequency: Biennial
Output 3. Strengthened inclusion of women, 
youth, and migrantsin production chains,
labour markets, and financial and educational 
services
Indicator 3.1. Number of inclusion initiatives 
and/or models adopted or implemented byvarious 
agents (public and private sector, academia, civil 
society organizations, international organizations) 
for [IRRF SP 1.1.2.2]:
(a) Women
(b) Migrants and/or youth
BL:
(a) 0
(b) 0
Goal:
(a) 5
(c) 8
Output 4. Increased capacities of local 
businesses and productive organizations to 
implement inclusive and sustainable business 
models that lead to sustainable livelihoods
Indicator 4.1. Number of organizations that 
improve their commercial performance and/or are
positively empowered by capacity development 
for better management. [IRRF SP 1.4.1.1]**
BL:
(a) Total 0
(b) Led by women 0
Goal:
(a) 240 organizations
(b) 100 organizations led by women.
United Nations system
Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations (FAO), United 
Nations Industrial Development 
Organization (UNIDO), ILO, UNWomen, UNFPA
Public sector
AMEXCID, BIENESTAR, 
ECONOMIA, TRABAJO, SEMARNAT, 
INMUJERES
Ministry of Public Education
Private Sector
Mexican Chamber of Industry, 
Mexican Confederation of Savings and 
Loan Cooperatives, Executive Council 
of Global Enterprises, Mexican 
Employers’ Confederation 
(COPARMEX),
CSOs
Regular
$238
Other
$14,743DP/DCP/MEX/3
NATIONAL PRIORITY: PND 2019-2024, axis 2. Social policy
SDGs 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 6.By 2025,theMexican State implements policies,strategies, and programmesthat allow moving towards a green economy that promotesthe mitigation 
of climate change and the strengthening ofthe institutional framework, taking into consideration energy efficiency, promotion of clean and renewable energy, production, consumption, transportation, 
cities, and sustainable agriculture, with a focus on health, human rights, gender, interculturality, life cycle, and territory.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME C. Build resilience to shocks and crises
Indicator 6.a Proportion of total gases and 
compounds emitted into the atmosphere in 
relation to the gross domestic product 
(GDP) for energy use of fossil fuels
BL: (2015) 27.34 tonCO2eq*/GDP
Goal: (2025) 26.55 tonCO2eq*/GDP
*equivalent carbon dioxide emissions
Source: National Inventory 
of Emissions of Gases and 
Greenhouse Compounds
Frequency: Annual
Source: GDP and 
national accounts, INEGI
Frequency: Quarterly, semiannually, and annually.
Output 5. Strengthened capacities and 
partnerships between key actors for promotion 
of sustainable economies and strengthening 
institutional frameworks to create resilience to 
climate change
Indicator 5.1. Number of initiatives adopted, 
and/or partnerships established with the private 
sector and subnational governments, to promote 
and support the use and adoption of clean,
renewable energies and environmentally 
appropriate disposal of waste. [IRRF SP
1.5.1.1]**
BL:
(a) Initiatives: 0
(b) Partnerships: 0
Goal:
(a) 5
(b) 5
Indicator 5.2. Number of gender-responsive 
policies and/or measures applied at national and 
subnational levels to adapt and/or mitigate climate 
change and respond effectively to crisis [IRRF SP 
2.4.1.1]**
BL: 0
Goal: 15
United Nations system
FAO, UNEP
Public sector
SEMARNAT, Ministry of Energy , 
CONABIO, Forestry Commission, Ministry 
of Finance and Public Credit
Private sector
National Association of Companies that 
Commercialize Products from the 
Countryside , COPARMEX, Zurich 
Foundation
International cooperation
Inter-American Development Bank 
Latin American Development Bank
GEF 
International Climate Protection Initiative 
NAMA Facility
UK Partnering for Accelerated Climate 
Transitions (UK PACT)
Regular
$238
Other
$60,830
Indicator 6.c Economic value of the 
environment and natural resources 
impact derived from economic activities 
in relation to GDP
TCEEDGDP: Total cost of exhaustion and 
environmental damage in relation to GDP
BL: (2016): 4.5%
Goal (2025): 6.2%
Source: Ecological and 
national accounts, INEGI
Frequency: Annual
Output 6. Supported strategies focused on 
consolidatingconservation policy and
sustainable management of ecosystems and 
biodiversity from a perspective of green 
economy and inclusion
Indicator 6.1. Percentage increase of funds 
mobilized by UNDP from the public (external to 
FederalGovernment) and private sources, to 
support conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity and ecosystems, with measures 
focused on closing gender, cultural and/or age 
gaps [IRRF SP 1.2.2.2].
BL: 0%.
Goal: 30 %3DP/DCP/MEX/3
strengthen the sustainable development 
perspective in productive environments
BL: 0
Goal: 3
NATIONAL PRIORITY: PND 2019-2024, axis 1. Politics and government
SDGs 10, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 9. By 2025, Mexican State institutions and civil society have articulated and installed capacities to prevent, denounce and sanction acts of corruption, 
promote accountability mechanisms, and guarantee social and political participation in inclusive decision-making, in a transparent manner, on equal terms, and leaving no one behind.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME B. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Indicator 9.a. Percentage of state public 
administrations with spaces for citizen 
participation and/or consultation regarding:
(a) Transparency
(b) Surveillance and / or reporting of 
public servants.
(c) Comptroller
(d) Planning and evaluation.
(e) Design of regulatory provisions 
initiatives
(f) Participatory budgeting
BL (2018) 
(a) 75% (24 state entities)
(b) 53.12 % (17)
(c) 71.87% (23)
(d) 62.5% (20)
(e)40.62% (13)
(f) 28.12% (9)
Goal (2025)
(a) 93.75% (30)
(b) 71.87% (23)
(c) 90.62% (29)
(d) 81.25% (26)
(e) 59.37% (19)
(f) 46.87% (15)
Source: National Census of 
Government, Public Security, 
and State Penitentiary 
System, INEGI
Frequency: Annual.
Output 7. Increased social participation in 
public decision-making fostered by accessible, 
democratic mechanisms put forward by 
transparent, trustworthy public institutions
Indicator 7.1. Number of policy instruments 
implemented by public institutions that allow civil 
society to participate in public decision-making 
and foster transparency/accountability [IRRF SP 
2.2.2.5]
BL: 0
Goal: 6
United Nations system
OHCHR, UN-Women, the United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime 
Public sector
AMEXCID, National Human Rights 
Commission, Ministry of the Interior, 
Ministry of Public Management, National 
Anticorruption system , National 
Transparency system
Academia
Colegio de la Frontera Norte 
COLMEX
National Autonomous University of Mexico
Regular
$238
Other
$4,311
Indicator 9.c Corruption incidence rate per 
hundred thousand inhabitants
BL (2017): 25,541 acts of bribery per 
hundred thousand inhabitants
Target (2025): 7,026 acts of bribery per 
hundred thousand inhabitants
Source: National Survey of 
Quality and Governmental 
Impact, INEGI
Frequency: Biennial
Output 8. Strengthened capacities in the public 
sector for effective prevention, denunciation 
and prosecution of corruption at all 
government levels
Indicator 8.1. Number of public institutions with 
strengthened capacities to prevent and denounce 
corruption [IRRF SP 1.2.3.1]
BL: 0
Goal: 4
**[Contributes to the Strategic Plan, 2018 -2021, Integrated Results and Resources Framework]