File Name: MHL-NEPEAP-2016-EN
Year: 2016
Country Name: Marshall Islands
Country Code: MHL
Category: NEPEAP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2016
Start Year: 2016
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Republic of the Marshall Islands
National Energy Policy and Energy Action Plan
April 2016This is a publication of the Republic of the Marshall Islands.
The 2016 National Energy Policy was prepared by the Energy Planning Division of the 
Ministry of Resources and Development with the technical assistance of the Energy 
Programme of the Economic Development Division of the Secretariat of the Pacific 
Community. This document was developed through extensive consultation within 
government, development partners and the general public. It expresses the RMI’s 
commitment towards a new energy direction and serves as the foundation for planning and 
development in the energy sector over the medium term.
A special thanks for their generous assistance in preparing this document goes to Ms. 
Angeline Heine, Mr. Walter Myazoe, Jr., Ms. Dolores deBrum-Kattil, the Secretariat of the 
Pacific Community and the ADMIRE Program, as well as the many people and organization 
listed in Annex 3 of this document.
The policy review and national consultations were further supported by the SPC/EU North 
Pacific ACP Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Project (North-REP) and the EU Energy 
Initiative Partnership Dialogue Facility (EUEI PDF). Contents
Abbreviations..........................................................................................................................................4
Map of Republic of the Marshall Islands ................................................................................................5
Foreword.................................................................................................................................................6
Executive summary.................................................................................................................................7
1. A framework for the national energy policy and its implementation ..............................................11
1.1 RMI national development plan vision.................................................................................11
1.2 Energy policy logical process ................................................................................................12
1.3 Guiding principles .................................................................................................................14
1.4 Goals, baseline indicators and targets..................................................................................16
1.5 Rationale for revising the National Energy Policy.................................................................19
1.5.1 National.........................................................................................................................19
1.5.2 Sub-regional ..................................................................................................................19
1.5.3 Regional.........................................................................................................................19
1.5.4 International .................................................................................................................20
1.6 National energy policy areas.................................................................................................21
1.6.1 Energy policy administration and coordination............................................................21
1.6.2 Petroleum .....................................................................................................................24
1.6.3 Electric power ...............................................................................................................26
1.6.4 Energy efficiency (Supply and Demand) .......................................................................28
1.6.5 Transport and energy use .............................................................................................29
1.6.6 Renewable energy.........................................................................................................31
2.0 Linking the policy outcomes, expected outputs to the strategies..................................................33
3.0 Monitoring and evaluation .............................................................................................................37
3.1 Monitoring ............................................................................................................................37
3.2 Evaluation .............................................................................................................................37
Annex 1: Energy Action Plan 2016 - 2019.............................................................................................38
Annex 2: Monitoring Plan ...................................................................................................................60
Annex 3: Organizations and people consulted .....................................................................................68Abbreviations
ADB Asian Development Bank
ADMIRE Actions for the Development of Marshall Islands Renewable 
Energies (GEF/UNDP)
AG Attorney General
DOI United States Department of Interior
EAP Energy Action Plan
EPA Environmental Protection Authority
EPD Energy Planning Division
EPPSO Economic Policy, Planning and Statistics Office
ETF Energy Task Force
GEF Global Environment Facility
IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature (World 
Conservation Union)
KAJUR Kwajalein Atoll Joint Utility Resource
MEC Marshalls Energy Company
MOFA Ministry of Foreign Affairs
MOF Ministry of Finance
MIA Ministry of Internal Affairs
MIDB
MIMA
Marshall Islands Development Bank
Marshall Islands Mayor Association
MPW Ministry of Public Works
MRD Ministry of Resources and Development
MTC Ministry of Transportation and Communications
NEP National Energy Policy
OEPPC Office of Environmental Planning and Policy Coordination
PPA Pacific Power Association
PPM Parts Per Million
PSC Public Service Commission
RE Renewable Energy
REP Regional Energy Programme
RMI Republic of the Marshall Islands
SE4ALL Sustainable Energy For All
SPC Secretariat of the Pacific Community
TA Technical Assistance 
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
USA United States of America
USD United State Dollars
USDA United States Department of Agriculture
WB World Bank Group
WUTMI Women United Together Marshall IslandsMap of Republic of the Marshall IslandsForeword
I am pleased to present this National Energy Policy and Action Plan that 
will guide the development of the country's energy sector in the next five
to ten years.
The policy and action plan is an output of the review of the National 
Energy Policy and Energy Action Plan 2009 and is aligned to the Strategic 
Development Plan Framework 2003–2018: Vision 2018. 
The National Energy Policy encompasses government’s energy sector priorities, outcomes and goals; 
it brings to our attention our energy sector situation – where we stand in terms of the energy targets 
and goals we aim to achieve by 2020. Aligned to the National Energy Policy is a three-year action 
plan that brings to the forefront urgent actions to be carried out and turn our visions into reality. 
We also reflect in this decade on our commitments towards achieving and contributing to the goals 
of the UN Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) initiative, a global initiative that Marshall Islands is 
closely aligned to. Our combined policy goals at the national level will take us to meeting our 
regional commitments, in particular the Majuro Declaration for Climate Leadership, the Pacific 
Regional Energy Minister’s Resolution and Communique, the Green Energy Micronesia Initiative and 
the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) that was communicated and submitted 
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Let us not forget our 
continued efforts to adapt to and mitigate the impact of climate change.
While the government is trying its best to acquire resources to improve access to modern energy 
services and to reduce our fossil fuel dependence, it can only do so much. I am glad to state that this 
policy includes enabling frameworks to improve the partnership between government and the 
private sector, creating financial incentives to foster the participation of the business community to
integrate renewable energy with energy efficient technologies and practices. 
The contributions from development partners and non-government organizations and the private 
sector are considered vital to meeting our national goals, and they have done so much over the past 
years. Our national visions and goals cannot be met without the commitment, the partnerships and 
the willingness of all the Marshallese people.
I wish to thank the people and organizations that have contributed in one way or another to the 
completion of the National Energy Policy and Energy Action Plan.
I trust that the National Energy Policy will enhance our efforts to improving the quality of life 
through securing resources, and improving coordinated efforts towards an efficient and sustainable 
energy future for the Republic of the Marshall Islands.
Honorable Alfred Alfred, Jr.
Minister of Resources and DevelopmentExecutive summary
This 2015 National Energy Policy of Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) integrates the findings and 
recommendations of the review of the National Energy Policy and Energy Action Plan 2009, and the 
outcomes of two national consultations held in Majuro in January 2014 and in October 2014. In 
reviewing the 2009 national energy policy (NEP), the issues listed below were considered important 
and will form part of the 2015 NEP undertakings and commitments. There is a need to:
 Review and update the current 2009 national energy targets and goals for the development of 
the energy sector.
 Review the current policy vision, outcomes, goals, policy statements/outputs, key thematic 
areas, strategies and activities to better reflect national, regional and global developments in the 
energy and climate change areas, including the development of baseline indicators for 
monitoring progress and impacts.
 Improve policy efficiency to ensure reliability, security and high quality of energy services and 
energy access.
 Strengthen the overall policy and regulatory framework in the energy sector.
 Put in place and institutionalize the implementation of a sustainable monitoring and evaluation 
mechanism for the implementation of activities in the energy sector, including financial regimes 
to promote private sector participation.
 Improve coordination and partnerships between key local stakeholders and development 
partners.
 Mainstream energy across all sectors and regional and global initiatives, including the 
Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) initiative.
The 2015 National Energy Policy is presented as follows: 
Chapter 1: A framework for the national energy policy and its implementation
Chapter 2: Linking the policy outcomes, expected outputs to the strategies
Chapter 3: Monitoring and evaluation 
A separate report, Energy sector review, provides complementary data and information on RMI’s 
physical, social, economic status, including energy sector baseline information and current projects. 
An energy action plan for 2015 – 2019 is annexed to this policy.
Vision
The vision1for energy sector is aligned to the national vision:
“an improved quality of life for the people of the Marshall Islands through clean, reliable, 
affordable, accessible, environmentally appropriate and sustainable energy services.”
Broad goals
Four broad goals from the 2009 NEP remain, and an additional four have been added. The goals are:
• To strengthen financial, policy and legislative frameworks for the energy sector;
• To supply 100% of urban households with electricity by 2015;
 
1 2014 NEP vision is the same as the 2009 NEP vision.• To provide 95% of rural outer atoll households with off grid electricity by 2015;
• To provide access to modern forms of cooking to 90% of all households by 2020;
• To make households and businesses 50% more energy efficient and government buildings 
75% more energy efficient by 2020;
• To achieve a 20% efficiency improvement in transport sector fuel use by 2020;
• To reduce supply side energy losses from MEC by 20% by 2017; and
• To provide 20% of power generation through indigenous renewable resources by 2020.
Priority outcomes2
The 2015 National Energy Policy has four priority outcomes:
• improved enabling frameworks for reducing dependence on imported fossil fuel;
• all Marshallese have equitable access to modern energy services;
• smarter uses of energy in households, businesses, government, transport sector and 
power utilities; and
• reliable, sustainable and affordable energy supply.
The National Energy Policy lays out the strategies and activities in six thematic or key result areas of 
energy policy administration and coordination, petroleum, electric power, energy efficiency and 
conservation, transport energy use and renewable energy.
The strategies and estimate costing for the energy action plan for three years 2016 – 2019 are given 
in the table below.
Key Result Area Strategies Estimated 
budget /USD
Energy policy 
administration and 
coordination
A new energy law, (Energy Sector Management Act) will be 
considered as appropriate to clarify powers and 
responsibilities within government for energy
88,000
Annual work plan developed for MRD’s Energy Planning 
Division, with clear objectives, priorities and timeframe, to 
be reviewed quarterly
8,000
Informal training of EPD staff through attachments, RE/EE 
training and possible diploma or degree level training in 
energy
20,000
EPD coordinates energy database development, production 
and regular revision with relevant stakeholders 18,000
The Marshall Islands to engage effectively with national, 
regional and global stakeholders, including energy service 
providers, private sectors, non-government organizations 
and community-based organizations and vulnerable groups 
to promote energy initiatives 
4,000
MRD participation in the budget reform process, including 
advocacy of performance-based budgeting within the 
government, with energy criteria as performance measures 
for each government ministry and agency
5,000
 
2 Outcomes are also called recognized as purpose or immediate objectivesEPD introduces a communications plan using multiple media 
and having targeted messaging to address particular 
interests of local stakeholder and international 
development partners
10,000
TOTAL ENERGY POLICY ADMINISTRATION AND 
COORDINATION
149,000
Petroleum
Develop a Petroleum Act with provision of licensing as well 
as supply of petroleum data and reports
5,633,000
Conduct an independent study of petroleum pricing on 
Majuro and outer atolls to determine benefits and costs and 
a proper pricing mechanism
35,000
Establish and maintain a system for inspection and 
certification of storage, handling and safety procedures, and 
licensing of petroleum storage and distribution facilities
25,000
TOTAL PETROLEUM SECTOR 6,008,000
Electric power
Conduct a comparison of two sustainability models 
currently in use – through selling of handicrafts and through 
the local government funds.
8,000
Establish an effective and sustainable plan to address tariff 
collection and SHS maintenance
4,000
Assessment of costs and benefits to the government subsidy 
to MEC as part of government's efforts to rationalise 
payments to landowners
500,000
Promote cleaner fuels and efficient cooking technologies to 
improve health and environmental protection, particularly 
the women and children
154,500
TOTAL ELECTRIC POWER 668,500
Energy efficiency 
and conservation
Effective implementation of the RMI Sustainable Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency Measures in Micronesia 
including RMI3
189,500
Effective implementation of the SIDS DOCK project titled 
Energy Efficiency Loan Schemes (EELS) 4 24,000
Revise taxation system to encourage the import of energy 
efficient air conditioners/major household appliances and 
introduce mandatory standards and labeling system 
8,000
Develop energy efficiency standards for new buildings and 
renovations including homes, businesses and government 
premises, with financing on subsidized terms for designs 
and construction/renovation meeting the standards
60,000
Carry out energy audits on the remaining government 
facilities, business communities and households and 
implementation of recommended energy efficient measures
1,500,000
 
3 RMI SREEM (Sustaining Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Measures in Micronesia) Project includes 
energy efficiency at MEC power plants
4 The project includes activities to establish the energy efficiency loan schemes (EELS), to be completed by 
April 2015TOTAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION 1,781,500
Transport Energy 
Use
Establish guidelines for the maintenance of government 
vehicles with adequate budget allocation 48,000
Promote, increase awareness and create incentives (in the 
private sector) on efficient mode of transport, e.g. bicycles, 
sail boats, fuel efficient taxis
50,000
Investigate the practicality of retrofits to reduce fuel use in 
sea transport (e.g. more efficient propellers, sail-assist 
technologies, and other alternate energy sources)
100,000
TOTAL TRANSPORT ENERGY USE 198,000
Renewable Energy
Develop appropriate legislation and regulations with clearlydefined authority, obligations and responsibilities for 
electric power supply in Majuro and throughout the 
Marshall Islands
110,000
Quantify reduction in the national energy import bill for 
power generation 9,000
Determine the indigenous energy resources that are 
available for development through feasibility studies 62,500
Expand solar electrification for off-grid areas 1,015,000
Expand the solar PV grid-connected capacity in Majuro, 
Kwajalein, Jaluit and Wotje 10,355,000
Increase awareness and provide training to public and 
private sectors on appropriate renewable energy systems 50,000
Develop policy regimes including incentives and a marketing 
plan to increase private sector involvement and facilitate 
introduction of renewable energy systems
10,000
Conduct an independent study of the viability of alternatives 
to diesel fuel for power generation where economically 
sound (e.g. coconut oil, LNG, grid-connected solar, ocean 
energy, wind energy, etc.). Implementation of 
recommended viable alternatives
20,000
TOTAL RENEWABLE ENERGY 11,631,500
TOTAL COST OF RMI ACTION PLAN 2015 - 2019 20,316,500.001. A framework for the national energy policy and its implementation
This NEP is intended to be a pragmatic document, guiding the planning, communicating, financing
and advancing of the energy sector in RMI through a 'whole of sector' energy development 
approach. This approach, as defined in a 2012 paper by Charles Feinstein et al. for the Forum Energy 
Ministers' Meeting, Brisbane, seeks to strike a balance among the following:
 the desire for increased access to secure, reliable, affordable and high quality energy 
services, in both the urban areas and outer islands and atolls of the country;
 improvement of, and increased efficiency in the use of energy in all sectors, including the 
residential and commercial sectors, the transport sector, and government buildings and 
utilities;
 enhancement of the potential for an increased share of renewable energy resources in the 
overall national energy mix; and
 the potential benefits from adopting more efficient practices in petroleum supply chain 
management and procurement.
1.1 RMI national development plan vision
This 2015 NEP also aspires to contribute to achieving the vision of the Strategic Development Plan 
Framework 2003–2018: Vision 2018, and therefore all of its broad mission outcomes, strategies and 
prioritised activities should be effectively mainstreamed into national development budgeting and 
strategic planning.
The vision of the Marshall Islands, as expressed in Vision 2018, is:
“to become a country within an inter-dependent world, with an enhanced socio-economic selfreliance, and an educated, healthy, productive, law-abiding and God-loving people in which individual 
freedom and fundamental human rights are protected, and culture and traditions are respected, and 
development and environmental sustainability are in harmony.”
The Government of the Republic of the Marshall Islands endorsed its three-year National Strategic 
Plan (NSP) 2015–2017, in June 2014 that was built around the concept of 1-5-3, capturing the 
importance of one clear, concise objective, five sectors with development objectives and three
years' rolling plan. One of the five sectors is Infrastructure Development, and energy is in this sector, 
along with transportation, water and sanitation, solid and hazardous waste management and 
information communications technology
The energy sector complements the NSP by a review of its 2009 NEP and aligning its Energy Action 
Plan (EAP) to the NSP three-year timeframe. The 2015 NEP monitoring plan has been developed as 
part of this policy, aligning the priorities outcome and goals to the overall vision of the energy sector 
and the 2018 vision.1.2 Energy policy logical process
In order to realize the energy sector vision, the energy policy framework includes the following key 
thematic areas; policy administration and coordination, petroleum sector, electric power sector, 
energy efficiency and conservation sector, transport energy use and renewable energy. There are 8 
broad goals, 4 outcomes and 18 expected outputs or results as shown below.
Thematic/Key 
Result Areas Goals Outcomes
Policy 
administration and 
coordination
Petroleum Sector
To strengthen financial, policy and 
legislative frameworks for the energy sector
Improved enabling frameworks for 
reducing dependence on imported 
fossil fuel
Expected Outputs
The Energy Planning Division continuously developed its capacity and skills set to 
enable it to review and manage the energy policy frameworks
A national energy database is developed and managed (for analysis and policy 
development) and maintained
Coordination and communication on energy issues at national5, regional (within 
Micronesia and wider Pacific) and global levels shall always be strengthened
Decision making regarding the importation and consumption and pricing of 
petroleum products shall be based on reliable data on petroleum imports, sales and 
end-use 
The wholesale and retail prices of petroleum products shall be made equitable for 
urban and rural users through control and regulation 
Safe storage, handling and distribution shall be ensured for all petroleum products
Thematic or Key 
Result Area Goals Outcome
Electric power
To supply 100% of urban households with 
electricity by 2015;
To provide 95% of rural outer atoll 
households with off grid electricity by 2015;
To provide access to modern forms of 
cooking to 90% of all households by 2020
All Marshallese have equitable 6
access to modern energy services
Expected outputs
The management and financial system for outer islands PV electrification regularly 
reviewed and enhanced to ensure sustainability, and make certain the recovery of 
O&M and battery replacement costs, for household and institution systems (e.g. 
health, fisheries, telecom, and school installations)
 
5
Including national, regional and global energy initiatives and projects
6 Equitable considers that all people, women and men and children have equal access to modern energy 
services irrespective of their roles at households, community or in businesses, their locations and social status. A transparent tariff structure shall be established for those receiving full electricity 
supplies that covers the real costs of each island system, with a lifeline tariff that 
genuinely benefits low-income consumers without adversely affecting MEC income 
Initiatives on provision of access to clean and efficient fuels and appliances shall 
ensure the incorporation of interventions that promotes sustainable livelihoods, 
health and safety and environmental protection
Thematic or Key 
Result Areas
Goals Outcome
Energy efficiency 
and conservation
Transport and 
energy use
To make households and businesses 50% 
more energy efficient and government 
buildings 75% more energy efficient by 
2020;
To achieve a 20% efficiency improvement in 
transport sector fuel use by 2020;
To reduce supply side energy losses from 
MEC by 20% by 2017
Smarter uses of energy in households, 
businesses, government and 
transport sector and power utilities
Expected outputs
The reduction of MEC supply-side losses by 20% in 2017, consistent with sound 
technical and financial criteria should be developed and assessed
The number of efficient electric appliances imported into the country through 
appropriate fiscal incentives for, businesses, households and government sectors 
increased
The energy use consumption is monitored and improved through energy auditing 
and demand side management
Increased the number of energy efficient vehicles into the country through 
appropriate fiscal incentives for business, private sectors, households and 
government sectors
Government developed a more energy efficient transport network through 
collaborations with various stakeholders and adopting best practices that are 
applicable in the RMI
Thematic or Key 
Result Areas
Goals Outcome
Renewable energy
To provide 20% of power generation 
through indigenous renewable resources by 
2020.
Reliable, sustainable and affordable 
power supply
Expected 
Outputs/Results
Private sector participation in the electric power supply in RMI shall be allowed 
under conditions that are fair to MEC and the supplier (i.e. independent power 
producer’s agreement)
Available energy modelling shall be done to ascertain the technical and economic 
indigenous energy sources where technically practical and economically viable
The technical capacities of government (EPD) and MEC to plan, develop, implement 
and manage renewable energy systems (small and medium-scale rural; large-scale 
urban) shall be continuously updated and enhanced.Economically feasible alternatives to diesel fuel for power generation shall be 
utilized
1.3 Guiding principles
The following guiding principles for implementing this policy are aligned to the principles adopted 
for national, sub-regional, regional and international initiatives, including the SE4All initiative goals,
the regional Framework for Action on Energy Security in the Pacific (FAESP) and Micronesia’s Energy 
Initiative. These six guiding principles need to be embraced in the implementation of this national 
energy policy and energy action plan.
a. Whole-of-energy-sector: The government coordinates and fosters partnerships and cooperation 
between relevant ministries and energy sector institutions, including the Marshalls Energy Company 
and petroleum oil companies, the private sector, and non-governmental and community-based 
organizations. A strong leadership of the Energy Planning Division with an appropriate legal 
mandate should be strengthened to coordinate planning and management of the energy sector. 
There should be a clear, appropriate and effective definition of roles for government, utilities and 
the private sector in the planning and management of the energy sector. Comprehensive energy 
planning should be undertaken, with energy treated as an integrated sector into all development 
sectors including poverty alleviation, health, education and financial and economic planning. 
Simultaneously, energy planning should be strongly coordinated with other infrastructure plans that 
are intensive in the use of energy, such as water and sewerage services, schools, hospitals and 
health clinics, and commercial and industrial development. 
b. Financial sustainability: The following principles should be considered in assessing the financing 
strategy.
 Transparency: effort should be made to calculate the opportunity costs associated with 
fiscal incentives. The roles of the private sector should be recognized and avenues for 
private sector participation be defined under a clear and transparent regulatory framework.
 Consistency: clear criteria should be set for each incentive and they should be available to all 
who satisfy the criteria.
 Accountability: the government should report regularly to the legislature and the public on 
implementation of this national energy policy and its energy action plan. 
 Leadership: the government should continue to show leadership in adopting energy 
efficiency and facilitating the sharing of data and information on the energy sector, but it 
should also package and promote as part of its investment policy the types of renewable 
energy and energy efficiency projects it plans to consider, as opposed to waiting for ad hoc 
proposals.
 Time-bound and budgeted: government investments and initiatives on energy should be 
guided by a realistic, time bound and wholly-budgeted sector plan that leads to measurable, 
tangible outcomes.
c. Environmental and social sustainability: Environmental and social sustainability encompasses 
both minimising local negative social and physical environmental impacts of the energy sector, as well as aligning with global goals with respect to minimising the impact of climate change. The 
initiatives on promoting energy efficient biomass stoves for cooking in rural areas should be 
supported, as they consider the impacts of using biomass for cooking on the health of women and 
children simultaneously saving the environment. 
Emphasis should be placed on the need for environmental, social, cultural and gender analyses in 
energy plans and projects that would capture the productive and strategic uses of electricity, not 
just for lighting, but for linking electricity access to the creation of economic opportunities, jobs, 
delivery of health care, education, telecommunication, access to transport and other vital services.
d. Climate change: The impact of climate change and climate variability in the Marshall Islands is 
evident and energy sector planning and coordination is mindful of the impacts of fossil fuel usage. 
Through the Majuro Declaration for Climate Leadership, the government has declared a 40% 
reduction in Co2 emissions below 2009 levels by 2020 to be implemented through the Joint National 
Action Plan for Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management, the Green Energy 
Micronesia initiative and this 2015 NEP and its energy action plan.
e. Data management and information: The availability, accessibility and quality of data and 
information for all key strategic areas are critical in order to make informed decisions and policy 
interventions. Continued efforts are needed across all sub-sectors for effective and efficient data 
collection and management.
f. Many partners, one team: The guiding principle 'many partners, one team' is used by the 
Framework for Action on Energy Security in the Pacific. It is relevant and significant in the 
implementation of this national energy policy and therefore is adopted as one of its guiding 
principles. The 29 atolls and five islands of the Marshall Islands are scattered, and visiting these 
islands to implement energy projects is expensive and takes a lot of time and effort, so the 'many 
partners, one team' approach is required in meeting the RMI national objective of improving
livelihoods in the outer islands. This approach was used during the 2013 outer islands energy survey,
when the Energy Planning Division (EPD) and the Marshalls Energy Company (MEC) conducted an 
energy survey in three outer islands and included the NGO, KIO Club, in the distribution of energyefficient biomass stoves, as well as the Ministry of Internal Affairs and College of the Marshall Islands 
in conducting water quality testing and training.1.4 Goals, baseline indicators and targets
The 2009 NEP targets or goals are still relevant. However, they are further strengthened in this policy 
by including additional targets, baseline indicators, to make progress on achieving the goals. The 
indicators are provided as a measure of success of the NEP and therefore link to the monitoring and 
evaluation plan provided in Chapter 3.
Indicators
Baseline Targets
2013 2016 2018 2020
Goal 1: To strengthen financial, policy and legislative frameworks for the energy sector
Number of policies including budget and annual 
work-plan developed, reviewed for the energy 
sector
0 3 4 5
Number of Energy Task Force (ETF) meetings held 
annually with participation of government, non -
government and private sectors
0 4 6 8
Number of financing schemes and applications 
approved for renewable energy technologies 
(RETs) and energy-efficient (EE) appliances to 
increase public and private sector participation7
0
5 10 15
Number of endorsed and implemented laws and 
regulations on the energy sector 1 2 4 6
Percentage of verified and processed data sets that 
are available 42% (2014) 50% 60% 80%
Indicators
Baseline Targets
20118 2016 2018 2020
Goal 2: To supply 100% of urban households with electricity by 2015
Percentage of urban households with access to 
grid-connected electricity 85% 100%
Goal 3: To provide 95% of rural outer atoll households with off-grid electricity by 2015
Percentage of outer atoll households’ access to offgrid electricity. This increased to 93% in 2014 75% 95%
Goal 4: To provide access to modern forms of cooking to 90% of all households by 2020
Percentage of rural and urban households with 
modern forms of cooking 66% 90%
Sustainability of energy services: SHS monthly tariff 
collection rate (%) is improved 
{Actual collection/target collection}
66% (2014) 80%
 
7 Refer to Annex 1 for Financial Options
8
Sourced from the 2011 National Census reportIndicators
Baseline Targets
2008 2016 2018 2020
Goal 5: To make households and businesses 50% more energy efficient, and government buildings 75% 
more energy efficient by 2020
Percentage decrease in the average monthly 
electricity consumption of connected households 
158 kWh per 
customer 
(20089)
50%
(79 kWh)
Percentage decrease in the average monthly 
electricity consumption of commercial customers 3,283 kWh
per customer
50%
(1,641.5
kWh)
Percentage decrease in the average monthly 
electricity consumption of government buildings 10,842 kWh
per customer
75%
(8,131.5
kWh)
Indicators
Baseline Targets
2014 2016 2018 2020
Goal 6: To achieve a 20% efficiency improvement in transport sector fuel use by 2020
Percentage increase in fuel-efficient vehicles 
imported (engine size) and car seats (increasing 
load) through adoption of appropriate fiscal 
incentives
0 5% 10% 20%
Improvement in the diesel quality used in 
transport (500 ppm sulphur content) – MEC, 10
ppm (Mobil)
500 ppm 10 ppm 10 ppm
Percentage improvement in the efficiency of fuel 
use in the transportation sector through use of 
public buses and government vehicles
(Data on fuel for land transport to be available)
0 2% 3% 20%
Indicators
Baseline Targets
2010 2016 2018 2020
Goal 7: To reduce supply side energy losses from MEC by 20% in 2017
Combined percentage decrease in power 
generation and distribution losses of the power 
utilities
26.21% 20.97%
Station losses - MEC10 8.45% 11 6.76%
 
9 Customer consumption data sourced from 
http://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/Marshall-Islands.pdf; Customer number data 
sourced from EPPSO.
10 MEC is included only due to lack of data for KAJUR and other outstations in the atoll islands
11 Sourced from the KEMA reports. Note data is specifically for Majuro alone.Technical losses 6.41% 5.128%
Non-technical losses 11.35% 9.08%
Goal 8: To provide 20% of power generation through indigenous renewable resources by 2020
Indicators
Baseline Targets
2012 2016 2018 2020
Share of installed electric power generation 
capacity from indigenous renewable energy. This 
increased to 5% in 2013
3.46%12 20%
Affordability of energy services: 10% decrease in 
the average household energy expenditure load by 
2020
17.6% 
(200213)
15.84%
 
12 Energy Office Estimation
13 2002 HIES report1.5 Rationale for revising the National Energy Policy
1.5.1 National
The 2009 NEP and EAP (2009–2012) were developed and endorsed in 2009 as a result of the 
economic emergency in 2008 that was caused by exorbitant increases in the cost of imported 
petroleum fuel and food items.
Over the last four to five years, many broad goals of the NEP and activities under the EAP have been 
realized and government has taken drastic steps in working towards achieving other targets, such as 
electrification of 95% of rural outer atolls households by 2015. In terms of renewable energy, new 
and emerging technologies have come into play, such as wind and ocean thermal, which need to be 
captured in detail, in addition to the proven technologies such as solar power that is being used 
extensively in the RMI. Various government sectors, such as transport, public works and climate 
change and environment, have also drafted and/or introduced policies that will complement or add 
value to the energy sector.
The government has taken steps to reduce its carbon emissions and shift to low carbon 
development through its commitment to the 2013 Majuro Declaration on Climate Leadership. There 
is an extensive need to strengthen the institutional structure and framework of the energy sector to 
ensure that the energy policy is planned, coordinated and implemented in a consistent, coordinated 
and structured manner. There is also a need to have a reliable energy information and database 
system that will be used extensively in the planning and policy coordination and in ensuring the 
sustainability of the energy sector. There is also a need to put in place a monitoring and evaluation 
mechanism for the energy sector to gauge its development and also to highlight the challenges in 
the energy sector.
1.5.2 Sub-regional
The Green Energy Micronesia (GEM) Initiative of the Northern Pacific was endorsed in 2010 with the 
aim of promoting a clean energy drive for the three Micronesian islands: Palau, Marshall Islands, and 
the Federated States of Micronesia. The goal includes a 20% of power generation through renewable 
energy by 2020 and general improved energy efficiency.
1.5.3 Regional 
At the regional level, Forum Leaders met in New Zealand in 2011 for the 42nd Pacific Islands Forum 
and recognized the need to have secure access to energy for the sustainable economic development 
of the region. They reaffirmed their commitment to renewable energy and the promotion of energy 
efficiency and they also recognized the value of energy audits, and the development of credible 
whole-of-sector plans and structures to improve energy security, reduce dependence on fossil fuels 
for electricity generation, and improve access to electricity. The Leaders also supported the 
development of effective management of fuel supply, risks, meeting energy efficiency targets, 
expanding existing energy efficiency standards and labeling programs for electrical appliances, and 
facilitating greater private sector participation in the regional energy sector by systematically 
reducing barriers to the uptake of distributed generation. The Leaders also called on development 
partners to assist in the implementation of the activities in the national and regional energy sector 
and strengthen coordination of their financing activities.In September 2013, RMI joined other Forum Island countries in the Majuro Declaration on Climate 
Leadership and stated that:
Pursuant to the Republic of the Marshall Islands 2009 National Energy Policy and Energy Action Plan, 
the 2011 National Climate Change Policy Framework and Joint National Action Plan (for climate 
change adaptation, energy security and disaster risk reduction), and the Green Energy Micronesia 
Initiative:
• A 40% reduction in CO2 emissions below 2009 levels by 2020;
• Electrification of 100% of urban households and 95% of rural outer atoll households by 2015;
• The provision of 20% of energy through indigenous renewable resources by 2020;
• Improved efficiency of energy use in 50% of households and businesses, and 75% of 
government buildings by 2020;
• A 20% efficiency improvement in transportation sector fuel use by 2020;
• Feasibility studies and internationally supported financing plans for innovative ‘gamechanging’ renewable energy and sustainable development opportunities including Majuro 
atoll waste-to-energy and Kwajalein/Ebeye atoll OTEC (Ocean Tidal Energy Conversion)
plants undertaken by 2015
• 40% reduction of CO2 emissions below 2009 levels by 2020, pursuant to the 2009 National
Energy Policy and Energy Action Plan, and with subject to the provision of adequate 
international support. 14
1.5.4 International
At the international level, the General Assembly of the United Nations (UN) in recognising the 
importance of energy for sustainable development designated the year 2014 as the International 
year of Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL). The SE4ALL initiative aims to mobilize urgent global 
action to three complementary objectives to be achieved by 2030:
• Ensure universal access to modern energy services 
• Double the rate of improvement in energy efficiency 
• Double the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix
2014–2024 has been declared the UN’s Decade of SE4ALL. This has presented an opportunity to 
raise awareness about the importance of increasing sustainable access to energy, energy efficiency 
and renewable energy at the local, national, regional and international levels. Energy services have 
profound effects on productivity, health, education, climate change, food and water security, and 
communications services. The post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals will obviously feature a 
goal on sustainable energy. This 2015 NEP is to capture the links to SE4ALL through targets added to 
the 2009 NEP.
RMI is a member of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), which seeks to make an 
impact on the world of renewable energy by maintaining a clear and independent position, providing 
a range of reliable and well-understood services that complement those already offered by the 
renewable energy community and gather existing, but scattered, activities around a central hub. In 
2014, IRENA provided technical assistance to the formulation of the Renewable Readiness 
Assessment, which will also link to this policy targets and activities.
 
14 http://www.majurodeclaration.org/commitmentsFurthermore, RMI is a member of SIDS DOCK. The RMI current project under the SIDS DOCK program 
in the Pacific is Sustaining Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Measures in Micronesia (SREEM) 
with two major components: the MEC Power Plant Performance Improvement and the Energy 
Efficiency Loan Scheme (EELS). The ultimate goal of SIDS Dock is to support the SIDS transition 
towards a low carbon economy through development and deployment of RE resources and 
promotion of greater energy efficiency (EE)
1.6 National energy policy areas
The following key thematic areas from the 2009 NEP are still relevant. However, one of the issues 
discussed during the consultation for this NEP was that the imported petroleum key policy area is to 
focus only on imported petroleum, while the demonstrations and research on biofuel are 
categorised under renewable energy. Thus the thematic area in the 2009 NEP was amended to 
Petroleum instead of Petroleum and alternative liquid fuels. The thematic areas for the 2015 NEP
are:
o energy policy administration and coordination;
o petroleum;
o electric power;
o transport and energy use;
o energy efficiency; and
o renewable energy
For each of the thematic areas, key outputs and strategies were identified and listed. All these 
outputs and strategies lead to the four priority outcomes.
Priority outcomes
o Improved enabling frameworks for reducing dependence on imported fossil fuel
o All Marshallese have access to modern energy services
o Smarter uses of energy in households, businesses, government, transport sector and power 
utilities
o Reliable, sustainable and affordable energy supply
The following chapter provides a brief explanation of the current status of each thematic policy area,
including institutional settings and stakeholders, as well as policy outputs aligning the policy areas to 
the four outcomes of the NEP.
1.6.1 Energy policy administration and coordination
The Energy Planning Division (EPD) under the Ministry of Resources and Development (MRD) was reestablished in 2008 during the energy crisis to formulate a policy that would guide the energy sector 
during the crisis and, in particular, identify actions that put the government into an energy crisis 
when the global price of oil increased to above USD 120 a barrel. Since then the EPD has been the 
focal point for all energy-related activities and initiatives in the Marshall Islands, from managing 
energy projects including ADMIRE – the Actions for the Development of Marshall Islands Renewable 
Energies, the Northern Regional Energy Project (North-REP) and other national energy initiatives. 
Since the endorsement of the 2009 NEP and EAP, the EPD has been responsible for coordinating the 
implementation of the NEP and the five-year EAP. Foremost and one of the priority needs for MRD 
and EPD is to put in place a law that governs the establishment of the EPD and its roles and 
functions.The table below, taken from the 2009 National Energy Policy Framework, is still relevant as it 
summarizes the main stakeholders and their responsibilities for the energy sector within 
government, in particular those responsibilities related to policy. This remains reasonably valid in 
2015, although there was discussion at the first consultation about a Cabinet paper that had been 
submitted for housing the EPD under the Office of the President. If this happens, then the EPD will 
be housed with the Office of Environmental Planning and Policy Coordination and the Economic 
Policy, Planning and Statistics Office. The formation of the national Energy Task Force (ETF) as a key 
advisory body reporting directly to Cabinet was one of the achievements of the past years. However, 
this Energy Task Force and its membership needs a legal mandate to strengthen its powers and 
coordination role, in particular collating information, and coordinating and delineating its role as a 
coordinating body for the energy sector. This is another priority activity under the revised EAP.
Once the ETF is formally recognized, and this can be done through endorsement of this policy and its 
institutional framework, it will have more powers to work with other relevant ministries such as the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, which sets maximum retail margins for some products, including outer 
island petroleum fuels, as well as the Ministry of Finance in the allocation of funds and as the formal 
link to development agencies active in the energy sector, including the Asian Development Bank and 
the World Bank. Other government agencies are of course also involved in energy services, including 
the Attorney General's Office (AG), the Ministry of Public Works (MPW), the Division of Customs, the 
Ministry of Transportation and Communications (MTC) and other relevant stakeholders. However,
for the ETF to have its legal mandate, a proposed energy sector management act (ESMA) should be 
an option that will provide the legal powers and functions of the ETF. The formulation of ESMA is 
included as a priority activity in the revised EAP.
Because energy is an input to all government and private development efforts, there is inevitably a 
range of overlapping, fragmented and sometimes unclear energy sector responsibilities, and these 
responsibilities will change over time. 
Under each policy thematic area, an organization chart showing responsibilities and links among key 
players is provided. Some of these will be ad hoc, some will change as activities are implemented, 
and some may be more-or-less permanent. 
Although energy matters are important to all sectors of the economy and all agencies of 
government, the human resources of RMI are modest; it is important that a review and an 
assessment of all existing legislation be carried out as a first step to determining the extent to which 
a legal framework may be established. This is a priority in the revised strategic action plan.Priority outcome: Improved enabling frameworks for reducing dependence on imported fossil 
fuel
Outputs: 
 The Energy Planning Division continuously developed its capacity and skills set to enable it to 
review and manage the energy policy frameworks
 A national energy database is developed and managed (for analysis and policy development)
and maintained
 Coordination and communication on energy issues at national, regional (within Micronesia and 
wider Pacific) and global levels shall always be strengthened1.6.2 Petroleum 
The Marshall Islands is highly dependent on imported petroleum fuels. It is estimated that about 
92% of energy used in 2011 was from petroleum, biomass remaining significant but declining to 
about 2%, with on-grid and off-grid solar power totalling around 6%. The main petroleum imports 
are gasoline, diesel fuel, dual-purpose kerosene (used as aviation turbine fuel and household 
kerosene), and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). In 2011, the Marshall Islands imported 56 million liters 
of petroleum fuel. The Marshalls Energy Company (MEC) and Mobil are the main importers, with 
MEC having very large storage capacity. Based on information for the years 2007 to 2011, 48% of 
imports were used for transportation and 52% for electricity generation. Kerosene demand for 
households is almost nil with increasing numbers of people using LPG for cooking and solar energy 
for lighting. However, in the outer islands and atolls, there is evidence that biomass is still the 
predominant fuel for cooking.
Despite the lack of price control, fuel prices in Majuro (excluding duties and taxes) are about average 
for Pacific Island countries, while outer islands fuel prices are notably higher.
Petroleum will continue to be the dominant fuel that drives the economy and provides social 
services to the people, in particular the urban areas of Majuro and Ebeye. Environmental 
considerations were a priority when diesel fuel for power generation was changed from 5,000 parts 
per million (ppm) sulphur to 500 ppm sulphur in October 2013. For the transport sector, diesel of 10
ppm sulphur has also been imported to the islands by Mobil.
A lack of regulation/legislation to monitor the cost of petroleum fuel is still a challenge in the 
Marshall Islands, as there is no monitoring of prices in the urban and rural areas. The Retail Price 
Monitoring Act 1992 currently monitors food items but not petroleum. The responsibilities regarding 
petroleum standards and pricing are not as well regulated and there is no legislation that provides 
for safety, handling, storage and distribution of petroleum products in the Marshall Islands. One of 
the major suppliers of petroleum products, Mobil, is responsible for the importation of motor 
gasoline (benzene), dual-purpose kerosene (DPK) for aviation as well as diesel for transport. The 
diagram below shows an appropriate structure in a real-case scenario and one which is most 
appropriate for the monitoring of petroleum standards, handling and pricing. The outputs for the 
petroleum sector are included as part of the energy sector administration and coordination area,
whereby it is the responsibility of the EPD to coordinate with the MIA on the review of the Retail
Price Monitoring Act and also include the licensing of the petroleum suppliers under the proposed 
ESMA.In the arrows showing linkages in this and other graphics, the following conventions have been used:
indicates direction of decisions or authority
indicates direction of influence or interest
Priority outcome: Improved enabling frameworks for reducing dependence on imported fossil fuel
Outputs:
 Decision making regarding the importation and consumption and pricing of petroleum products 
shall be based on reliable data on petroleum imports, sales and end-use 
 The wholesale and retail prices of petroleum products shall be made equitable for urban and 
rural users through control and regulation 
 The safe storage, handling and distribution shall be ensured for all petroleum products
Fuel quality 
and pricing
MPW
MIA
EPD
Fuel storage, 
standards and 
Shipping
RMI
EPA
Fuel Importers 
(including MEC)
Price 
Monitoring 
Board
EPD
Reliable 
database
EPD1.6.3 Electric power
Getting electricity is one of the criteria for ranking the World Bank Group Doing Business and in 
2014, the Marshall Islands was ranked 63 out of 189 economies and the ranking shows a negative 
change for 2015. In 2011, MEC increased accountability and revenue collection through increased 
use of prepaid metering, one of the recommendations put forward in the 2010 KEMA report. The 
report provided an assessment of the power system's total loss of 26.88%, comprising technical and
non-technical losses, unbilled usage such as street lighting and power station losses. The power 
station loss was 8.45%, which is relatively high; a typical station loss is lower than 5%. MEC supplies 
electricity on Majuro, Jaluit and Wotje and expects to eventually provide power to 28 other atolls 
with the operation and maintenance of solar PV home systems. 
In the fiscal year 2011 (October 2010 through September 2011), MEC generated 62,639 MWh of 
electricity, used 4,098,283 US gallons (15,513 689 liters) of fuel for an overall fuel efficiency of 15.24 
kWh/US gal (4.038 kWh/liter). The peak load during that period was 8.75 MW. 
In that same year, MEC installed 2629 standard residential meters and 462 residential pre-paid 
meters. There were 462 commercial meters and 145 government meters. Average household 
electricity consumption was 531 KWh/month, with a tariff rate of USD 0.30 per kWh. In April 2012, 
the tariff rate (lifelines) increased to USD0.43 kWh and this remains the current lifelines tariff rate.
Pre-paid metering was recently introduced and the plan is to convert all residential meters to the 
pre-paid type as soon as possible. It has been reported that the introduction of pre-paid meters has 
positively influenced energy conservation. A subsidised amount – 1000 kWh/month – is provided to 
those persons whose land is used for transmission lines. In 2015, there are more than 600 
households receiving this benefit. 
The second-largest power system in the Marshall Islands is KAJUR on Ebeye. It has an installed 
capacity of 4.8 MW and a peak demand of 2 MW. It has about 1,300 metered customers and 
generates 15.6 GWh of electricity per year, using 4.2 million liters of fuel. The cost of electrical 
energy is heavily subsidised through duty tax imports exemptions and tax rebates given to MEC. 
There is no legislation governing the standards on electrical wiring, licensing of electricians and other 
electrical work outside MEC operations. In 2010, a two-year comprehensive recovery plan was put 
forward by the stakeholders: MEC and Board of Directors, ADB, the World Bank, the Pacific Power 
Association and the RMI EPD.
The goals and objectives of the MEC recovery plan are being considered in the development of this 
policy and action plan. Electricity pricing and monitoring is important if MEC operates in a 
commercial way. However, MEC is a state-owned enterprise and its role (as is being developed 
under the Article of Association) is to provide electrical or energy services to the population. The 
Marshall Islands is the only country in the Pacific that has no electricity act and therefore legal 
mandates and clear responsibilities and functions of the MEC Board and MEC are not mandated 
through the Nitijela (Parliament). 
The outer islands and atolls are mostly electrified through off-grid solar home systems (SHS) under 
various projects since 2006. However, the sustainability of these solar home systems with regard to 
the continuation of maintenance of batteries over the lifespan, as well as replacement at the end of 
the battery life of five years is questionable. Some of the root causes of the non-sustainability of these systems relate to low payment (USD 5.00
per month), which does not cover the actual operation and maintenance cost of USD 28.00 per 
month; limited cash income opportunities in rural households; no proper planning on ownership of 
the SHS; no actual payment of USD 12.00/month given to MEC); no mandated payment or collection 
methods and therefore each atoll depends on the national government to pay for the service. 
However, it should be noted that government has provided MEC with an electricity subsidy over the 
last years for the urban areas. It was estimated that, by the end of 2014, and with the completion of 
the EU/SPC Regional Energy Programme for the Marshall Islands, a total of 3,400 SHSs should be in 
place, with a government subsidy estimated at USD 530,000 per annum to continually maintain,
operate and sustain the SHSs for rural communities. 
The following chart illustrates the various stakeholders in the electric sector, with the need for an 
overarching legislation that governs the sector, including its standards, licensing, and electrical 
standards for MEC, KAJUR and other producers, as well as SHS provisions and maintenance.
The electric power sector outcomes and outputs are summarized as follows for the purposes of 
follow-up actions.
Electricity 
legislation 
and 
regulations 
MRD
MoF
MEC, KAJUR
Jaluit, Kili, 
Wotje
MPW
MEC
Board
PPA, 
ADB, 
MIA Solar WB 
home 
system -
sustainabi
lity 
Donor RE 
projectsPriority outcome: All Marshallese have equitable access to modern energy services
Outputs:
 The management and financial system for outer islands PV electrification regularly reviewed 
and enhanced to ensure sustainability, and make certain the recovery of O&M and battery 
replacement costs, for household and institution systems (e.g. health, fisheries, telecom, and 
school installations)
 A transparent tariff structure established for those receiving full electricity supplies that covers 
the real costs of each island system, with a lifeline tariff that genuinely benefits low-income 
consumers without adversely affecting MEC income
 Initiatives on provision of access to clean and efficient fuels and appliances ensured the 
incorporation of interventions that promotes sustainable livelihoods, health and safety and 
environmental protection
1.6.4 Energy efficiency (Supply and Demand)
Demand side efficiencies can be improved greatly at relatively low cost. To date there have been no 
concentrated efforts to improve demand side management (DSM). There are no data available on 
the savings of electricity since 2009. There has, however, been some effort to reduce government 
spending on energy efficiency. The remaining challenge is finding the investment cost needed to 
replace inefficient air-conditioners and lights in all the ministries and the capitol building in Majuro. 
The government is the major user of energy in the Marshall Islands, accounting for around 6% of its 
total general fund expenditure. This policy continues to reiterate the need for government to 
demonstrate leadership by good energy use stewardship in all its activities. Energy conservation was 
mandated and energy audits were to be undertaken in government departments but this needs 
increased capacity, incentives and a positive attitude towards conservation practices. 
Government departments were to champion good energy use stewardship, with resultant publicity
of good practices and effort. An innovative proposal for the Ministry of Finance to allow 
departments to retain energy cost savings and spend them on other areas is very noteworthy. It 
would be good to improve the prospect for full implementation of this proposal. Plans to improve 
energy efficiency in the government transport fleet by improving maintenance and progressive 
replacement with more energy-efficient vehicle imports and more public transportation requires 
enforcement action in the first place to become effective. The phase-out of inefficient incandescent 
lamps and their replacement with higher efficiency products such as light emitting diodes (LEDS) or 
compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) provides one of the most straightforward and cost-effective ways 
to significantly reduce electricity use and carbon emissions. 
Several measures, such as appliance rating and labeling and favorable import duty rates, to 
encourage the importation of energy-efficient appliances, and special loan programs and training of 
private contractors in energy auditing to allow construction or retrofitting of new or existing homes 
to improve energy efficiency have been introduced, with limited success, but they remain relevant 
for the new planning period. Efforts to change the building code to allow increased energy efficiency 
needs to be fully implemented in the new planning period. This is an area where government and 
the private sector can enhance collaboration to pay huge dividends to the Marshall Islands during 
the new planning period.The 2010 KEMA report analyzed the MEC power system and determined total losses of 26.88% 
consisting of:
 8.45% in power station auxiliaries (station losses) which is relatively high amount of loss; 
typically, station losses are lower than 5%;
 0.67% in street lighting ( which should be accounted for and billed)15
 6.41% in technical losses; and
 11.35% in non-technical losses.
The non-technical and technical losses total 17.76%. The 2011 PPA benchmarking report provided 
indicators, one of which was the transmission losses. The target agreed in 2002 for transmission 
losses for all participating utilities in the benchmarking report is 5%. 
Priority outcome: Smarter uses of energy in households, businesses, government, the transport 
sector and power utilities
Outputs:
 The reduction of MEC supply-side losses by 20% in 2017, consistent with sound technical and 
financial criteria should be developed and assessed
 The number of efficient electric appliances imported into the country through appropriate fiscal 
incentives for, businesses, households and government sectors increased
 The energy use consumption is monitored and improved through energy auditing and demand 
side management

1.6.5 Transport and energy use
The Ministry of Transport and Communication is mandated only to provide policies and standards on 
safety in sea transport, including infrastructure development but there is no mainstreaming of 
energy efficiency and conservation in sea transport. The sustainable transport and the use of 
indigenous energy sources for transport is seemingly considered a very attractive prospect but 
technical, capacity development and social acceptance are still areas to be seriously considered and 
explored given advances in innovation in technologies.
Land, sea and domestic air transport is the largest user of imported fuel in the Marshall Islands. The 
quality of life and the economic survival of outer island residents is tied strongly to the cost of 
transporting goods and people to and from Majuro, Ebeye and other islands. It is especially 
important that the fuel efficiency of sea transport be improved, both through technical means and 
through improved management of the available facilities. In addition there is a need to monitor and 
control the freight costs to the outer islands in a way that is viable and fair to both the service 
provider and the end users.
The goal of the energy policy is to lower the amount of fuel imported for transport by 20% by 2020,
relative to a 2009 baseline. Two types of efforts will assist to meet this goal: (1) reducing energy 
intensity of travel by improving average vehicle fuel efficiency in miles per gallon (mpg) of fuel used; 
(2) reducing the amount of travel (or the need for travel) by improving efficiency of management of 
 
15 In 2009, IUCN assisted MEC to change 800 inefficient mercury vapour streetlights (175 watts) to LED lights, a 
saving of 399,055 kWh per year on street lighting.vehicles through increased average passenger mpg of fuel or, for freight carrying vehicles, increased 
average ton mpg. While the use of alternative fuels may potentially result in fuel cost savings and 
reduced GHG emissions, alternative fuels are not considered to be a true energy efficiency strategy. 
They might deliver significant fuel cost savings for the operator, but an equivalent amount of energy 
(and sometimes more) is often required to complete the same transport task using conventional 
fuel. Thus the substitution of one fuel for another rarely results in energy savings.
16
Some of the improvement can come from better fuel efficiency brought about by improved 
maintenance of the existing vehicle stock. There are private companies that have vehicle testing and 
basic car maintenance facilities; however, there is no enabling environment such as regulation or 
incentive for enforcing standards on fuel efficiency or vehicle worthiness. There is no legislation on 
restrictions of second hand cars, importation of engine sizes and fiscal incentives for importing larger 
vehicles with more seats.
Other initiatives are the use of hybrid cars and electric vehicles, which are considered relevant when 
reducing the fossil fuel consumption for transportation. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has received 
a hybrid car by the European Union for demonstration use and the benefits are yet to be 
documented. 
The testing and maintenance process set in 2009 was mandatory for government vehicles, and 
vehicles owned by government-owned corporations. This action was not, however, kept up or 
monitored; only the Ministry of Education participated and continues to enforce the maintenance of 
its fleet. In addition, the replacing of existing vehicles with more fuel efficient models was a slow 
process and therefore the goal set in 2009 was not met. It was also noted during the first 
consultation that there is an increased number of vehicles on the road. One of the targets that are
included in this policy is to work with Ministry of Finance and Customs Division to monitor and 
restrict the importation of certain engine sizes and to create incentives for importing larger vehicles 
(eight or more seats) for public transportation around Majuro.
One of the ongoing challenges in improving efficiency in the land transport sector is the lack of a 
regulatory body that could establish policies and enforce legislation related to promoting fuel 
efficient vehicles. The Ministry of Transport and Communication is mandated only to provide policies 
and standards on safety in sea transport, including infrastructure development, but there is no 
mainstreaming of energy efficiency and conservation in sea transport. The sustainable transport and 
the use of indigenous energy sources for transport is seemingly considered a very attractive 
prospect but technical, capacity development and social acceptance are still grey areas. 
Priority outcome: Smarter uses of energy in households, businesses, government, the transport 
sector and power utilities
Outputs:
 Increased the number of energy efficient vehicles into the country through appropriate fiscal 
incentives for business, private sectors, households and government sectors.
 Government developed a more energy efficient transport network through collaborations with 
various stakeholders and adopting best practices that are applicable in the RMI
 
16 Rare Consulting (2011) Fuel for Thought – Identifying potential energy efficiency opportunities in the 
Australian road and rail sectors.1.6.6 Renewable energy
Renewable energy is the most long-term alternative to imported petroleum products for electricity 
production in the Marshall Islands; solar photovoltaic systems are considered one of the most 
appropriate technology for electricity production from renewable energy, and the country has made 
considerable progress in improving energy production (electrification) using solar energy, mainly in 
the remote and outer islands and atolls. The use of renewable energy sources is a priority for the 
government, with its strong commitment to mitigate climate change effects, and also as a way of 
showing that a small island developing state is gravely concerned about the increase and impact of 
greenhouse gas emissions produced globally. In 2012, the ADMIRE project provided funding support 
for the installation of wind monitoring masts in two atolls; Wotje and Jaluits, to collect information 
on the potential for wind energy in these atolls. The island's first wind turbine was installed in April 
2011 by a private firm, Moana Marine LLC. Capacity currently stands at 10 kW. Wind speeds for the 
island have been recorded in the past by the USA, with averages in the region of 6–7 m/s throughout
the islands.
The EDF 9 funding support through the Renewable Energy Programme (REP-5) implemented from 
2008 to 2012 installed 420 SHSs of 200 Wp in various island communities and six stand-alone PV 
systems, each in six primary schools with a system range from 6–13 kWp, thus a contribution of solar 
PV energy of around 141 kWp. The contribution of the EU/SPC Northern Pacific Regional Energy 
Project (North-REP) has in total installed 1,500 stand-alone SHSs (300 kWp) in the islands and it is 
expected that the project will be completed by 2015. It is likely that electrification programs using 
solar PV will continue in the future with EU funding. The sustainability of these systems is a 
continued challenge; there is a discussion amongst the key stakeholders, including MRD, MEC, MIA
and communities to develop a more sustainable program, where the true costs of maintenance are 
included. The responsibility for maintenance and collection of the maintenance fee of USD 5.00 a 
month (a subsidised rate) is currently with MEC.
Ocean energy has long term potential. Technologies to harness ocean energy have been 
commercialized and more efficient technologies are being developed. Technical assistance is 
required for conducting a feasibility study, including social and economic viability. During the 
consultation for the formulation of this 2015 NEP, it was suggested that proper reporting on the 
feasibility study should be presented to the decision makers, in particular to the government. The 
wave energy and OTEC are two renewable energy technologies not yet well progressed in the 
region. 
Biomass energy has some potential as well. A proposed project for small-scale mill systems in the 
outer islands is currently on hold. MEC also plans to refit the Majuro Station One, Engine #3 to utilize
biofuels. The Global Sustainable Energy Islands Initiative has conducted a feasibility study on the 
uptake of coconut/copra biofuels as a source of energy for the Marshall Islands. The Tobolar copra 
mill is retailing a 50/50 blend of filtered coconut oil and diesel, below the price of regular diesel. 
Priority outcome: A reliable, sustainable and affordable energy supply
Outputs:
 Private sector participation in the electric power supply in RMI shall be allowed under conditions that are fair to MEC and the supplier (i.e. independent power producer’s 
agreement)
 Available energy modelling developed to ascertain the technical and economic 
indigenous energy sources where technically practical and economically viable
 The technical capacity of government (EPD) and MEC to plan, develop, implement and 
manage renewable energy systems (small and medium-scale rural; large-scale urban) shall 
be continuously updated and enhanced.
 Economically feasible alternatives to diesel fuel for power generation shall be utilized2.0 Linking the policy outcomes, expected outputs to the strategies
The strategies laid out in this chapter provide the links between the policy outcomes, expected
outputs to the planned activities. The strategies are ideas that are then linked to the committed plan 
of action that have been identified to achieve the key priority outcomes, goals and vision. These 
strategies are provided for each of the policy outputs under the six thematic areas – energy policy 
administration and coordination, petroleum, electric power, transport and energy use, energy 
efficiency, and renewable energy. The planned activities or action plan for the three years, 2015 –
2019 is included as part of the policy and attached as Annex 1.
The strategic links to the action plans, when they are effectively implemented, should achieve the 
four policy outcomes;
• improved enabling frameworks for reducing dependence on imported fossil fuel
• all Marshallese have equitable access to modern energy services
• smarter uses of energy in households, businesses, government, the transport sector, and
power utilities
• reliable, sustainable and affordable energy supply
The links of the policy output and the strategies to the policy outcomes is provided in the tables 
below.
Outcome 1 - Improved enabling frameworks for reducing dependence on imported fossil fuel
Expected Output 1: The Energy Planning Division developed its capacity and skills set to 
enable it to review and manage the energy legislations and policy frameworks
Strategy 1.1 A new energy law, (Energy Sector Management Act) will be considered as 
appropriate to clarify powers and responsibilities within government for 
energy
Strategy 1.2 Annual work plan developed for MRD’s Energy Planning Division, with clear 
objectives, priorities and timeframe, to be reviewed quarterly
Strategy 1.3
Informal training of EPD staff through attachments, RE/EE training and 
possible diploma or degree level training in energy
Expected Output 2: A national energy database is developed, managed (for analysis and 
policy development) and maintained
Strategy 2.1 EPD coordinates energy database development, production and regular 
revision with relevant stakeholders
Expected Output 3: Coordination and communication on energy issues at national, regional 
(within Micronesia and wider Pacific) and global levels shall always be strengthened
Strategy 3.1 The Marshall Islands to engage effectively with national, regional and 
global stakeholders, including energy service providers, private sectors, 
non-government organizations and community-based organizations and 
vulnerable groups to promote energy initiatives 
Strategy 3.2 MRD participation in the budget reform process, including advocacy of 
performance-based budgeting within the government, with energy criteria 
as performance measures for each government ministry and agencyStrategy 3.3 EPD introduces a communications plan using multiple media and having 
targeted messaging to address particular interests of local stakeholder and 
international development partners
Expected Output 4 Decision making regarding the importation and consumption and pricing 
of petroleum products based on reliable data on petroleum imports, sales and end-use
Strategy 4.1 Develop a petroleum act with provision of licensing as well as supply 
of petroleum data and reports
Expected Output 5 The wholesale and retail prices of petroleum products shall be made 
equitable for urban and rural users through control and regulation 
Strategy 5.1 Conduct an independent study of petroleum pricing on Majuro and 
outer atolls to determine benefits and costs and a proper pricing 
mechanism 
Expected Output 6: The safe storage, handling and distribution shall be ensured for all 
petroleum products
Strategy 2.3.1 Establish and maintain a system for inspection and certification of 
storage, handling and safety procedures, and licensing of petroleum 
storage and distribution facilities
Outcome 3 - All Marshallese have equitable access to modern energy services
Expected Output 7: The management and financial system for outer islands PV electrification 
regularly reviewed and enhanced to ensure sustainability, and make certain that recovery of 
O&M and battery replacement costs, for household and institutional systems (e.g. health, 
fisheries, telecoms, and school installations)
Strategy 7.1 Conduct a comparison of two sustainability models currently in use –
through selling of handicrafts and through the local government funds.
Expected Output 8: A transparent tariff structure established for those receiving full 
electricity supplies that covers the real costs of each island system, with a lifeline tariff that 
genuinely benefits low-income consumers without adversely affecting MEC income
Strategy 8.1 Establish an effective and sustainable plan to address tariff collection and 
SHS maintenance
Strategy 8.2 Assessment of costs and benefits to the government subsidy to MEC17 as 
part of government's efforts to rationalise payments to landowners
Expected Output 9: Initiatives on provision of access to clean and efficient fuels and 
appliances ensured the incorporation of interventions that promotes sustainable livelihoods, 
health and safety and environmental protection 
Strategy 9.1 Promote cleaner fuels and efficient cooking technologies to improve health 
and environmental protection, particularly the women and children
 
17 MEC is one of the SOE under the Ministry of Public Works portfolioOutcome 4 - Smarter uses of energy in households, businesses, government, the transport sector 
and power utilities
Expected Output 10 The reduction of MEC supply-side losses by 20% in 2017, consistent 
with sound technical and financial criteria should be developed and assessed
Strategy 10.1 Effective implementation of the RMI Sustainable Renewable Energy and 
Energy Efficiency Measures in Micronesia including RMI18
Expected Output 11 The number of efficient electric appliances imported into the country
through appropriate fiscal incentives for business, private households and government 
sectors increased
Strategy 11.1 Effective implementation of the SIDS DOCK project titled Energy 
Efficiency Loan Schemes (EELS) 19
Strategy 11.2 Revise taxation system to encourage the import of energy efficient air 
conditioners/major household appliances and introduce mandatory 
standards and labeling system
Strategy 11.3 Develop energy efficiency standards for new buildings and renovations 
including homes, businesses and government premises, with financing on 
subsidized terms for designs and construction/renovation meeting the 
standards
Expected Output 12 The energy use consumption is monitored and improved through 
energy auditing and demand side management
Strategy 12.1
Carry out energy audits on the remaining government facilities, business 
communities and households and implementation of recommended 
energy efficient measures
Expected Output .13: Increased the number of energy efficient vehicles into the country 
through appropriate fiscal incentives for business, private sectors, households and 
government 
Strategy 13.1 Establish guidelines for the maintenance of government vehicles with 
adequate budget allocation
Strategy 13.2 Promote, increase awareness and create incentives (in the private 
sector) on efficient mode of transport, e.g. bicycles, sail boats, fuel 
efficient taxis
Expected Output 14 Government developed a more energy efficient transport network 
through collaborations with various stakeholders and adopting best practices that are 
applicable in the RMI
Strategy 14.1
Investigate the practicality of retrofits to reduce fuel use in sea transport, 
e.g. more efficient propellers, sail-assist technologies, and other alternate 
energy sources
Outcome 4 - A reliable, sustainable and affordable energy supply
Expected Output 15 Private sector participation in the electric power supply in RMI shall be 
allowed under conditions that are fair to MEC and the supplier (i.e. independent power 
producer’s agreement)
 
18 RMI SREEM (Sustaining Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Measures in Micronesia) Project includes 
energy efficiency at MEC power plants
19 The project includes activities to establish the energy efficiency loan schemes (EELS), to be completed by 
April 2015Strategy 15.1
Develop appropriate legislation and regulations with clearly-defined 
authority, obligations and responsibilities for electric power supply in 
Majuro and throughout the Marshall Islands
Strategy 15.2 Quantify reduction in the national energy import bill for power generation
Expected Output 16 Available energy modelling developed to ascertain the technical and 
economic indigenous energy sources where technically practical and economically viable
Strategy 16.1
Determine the indigenous energy resources that are available for 
development through feasibility studies 
Strategy 16.2
Expand RE electrification for off-grid areas 
Strategy 16.3
Expand the grid-connected RE capacity in Majuro, Kwajalein, Jaluit and 
Wotje
Expected Output 17 The technical capacity of government (EPD) and MEC to plan, develop, 
implement and manage renewable energy systems (small and medium-scale rural; largescale urban) shall be continuously updated and enhanced
Strategy 17.1 Increase awareness and provide training to public and private sectors on 
appropriate renewable energy systems
Strategy 17.2 Develop policy regimes including incentives and a marketing plan to 
increase private sector involvement and facilitate introduction of 
renewable energy systems
Expected Output 18 Economically feasible alternatives to diesel fuel for power generation 
shall be utilized
Strategy 18.1 Conduct an independent study of the viability of alternatives to diesel fuel 
for power generation where economically sound (e.g. coconut oil, LNG, 
RE). Implementation of recommended viable alternatives3.0 Monitoring and evaluation
This section represents a plan to guide the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the energy efforts 
and initiatives within the Marshall Islands over the life span of this national energy policy. It has been 
developed in conjunction with the EPD and other relevant departments, authorities, utilities and 
partners. The M&E plan has been developed in alignment with the RMI Strategic Development Plan 
objectives and the national energy policy outcomes, goals and policy outputs. 
Principles of the M&E plan
1. It should be useful
2. It should be simple
3. It will strengthen government’s ability to track its progress and assess effectiveness and 
efficiency
4. It provides a sound basis for purposes – evidence and contestability
5. It enhances transparency and accountability
3.1 Monitoring
The EPD will be the main coordinating entity for this M&E plan. It will work alongside relevant 
government agencies, statistics units and the national utility to collect data and undertake 
monitoring for the M&E plan. For the purpose of this plan, monitoring is used to describe an ongoing 
process of collecting routine data. 
A monitoring logical framework for this national plan is provided in Annex 2. It focuses on tracking 
the key outcome indicators outlined above.
It is recommended that an annual monitoring report be developed, summarising the key activities 
undertaken during the year, as well as an analysis with recommendations based on progress against 
the M&E log frame to assist with forward planning, decision making on priorities, resource allocation 
and fundraising. This report should include an analysis of the extent to which the implementation of 
activities has contributed to the achievement of outcomes, which planned results were achieved, 
and some narrative on whether the planned activities were appropriate. The indicators and their 
means of verification, at the appropriate level in the log frame analysis, should be referred to.
3.2 Evaluation
An external evaluation will be undertaken at the mid-term juncture (2017) of the NEP to assess 
progress and outcomes of the energy efforts and to assist with any refinements to the EAP. A final 
evaluation should be undertaken at the end of the NEP lifespan (2020). This should also summarize
the 'lessons learned' and should include information on the major challenges to implementation of 
the NEP and EAP, and the response to those challenges. The evaluations will be undertaken, looking 
at key measures of effectiveness, efficiency, relevance and sustainability. It should also have a 
special reference to gender and the extent to which gender has been integrated into energy 
initiatives and activities.The Energy Sector Action Plan provides guidance on implementing related activities to achieving the outcomes and 
goals set in the NEP. There are six key policy areas or thematic actions that the activities are aligned to
 Policy Administration and Coordination
 Petroleum 
 Electric Power
 Transport and Energy Use
 Energy Efficiency and
 Renewable Energy
All of the activities that were not fully implemented in the 2009 EAP and considered important are included in the 
2016 EAP. It is anticipated that the EAP to be monitored and evaluated annually through a log frame matrix which is 
developed as part of this policy and to be used for the monitoring of the EAP.
The EAP is revised to a three years strategic plan and with specific years for each activity. Each action plan includes:
 Policy Outputs as defined in the NEP
 Strategies that links the NEP to the Action Plan
 Activities under each strategy
 Organization responsible for each activities
 Support or participating organizations for implementing the activities
 Activity priority and year : the priority and the importance of each activity to progress towards the desired 
objectives and these are ranked as 1 as high therefore needs to be implemented in the first year of 
endorsing the plan
 Estimated budget and potential sources based on available information. This is expected to be change on a 
yearly basis when new information and projects are implemented.
The aim of the action plan is to allow the relevant stakeholders to work together to achieve the vision of the plan. 
The plans intend to include all activities related to the energy sector development so and that the development is 
coordinated through one agency and plan. Guiding principles as noted in the NEP should be considered when 
implementing the plan; these are adopting the whole of energy sector approach, the many partners one team 
approach, financial, social and environmental sustainability, gender, data management and information and climate 
change. The Action Plan sets out activities for a three years period and that are required to contribute to the policy 
outcomes and policy goal set out for the energy sector. The action plan also includes the leading agency and 
supporting or participating stakeholders required to implement the activities. It is noted that most of the activities 
are to be implemented and coordinated by the Energy Planning Division, in particular on the coordination of 
activities. This action plan is aligned to the National Energy Policy Outcomes identified in the policy framework;
1. Improving enabling frameworks for reducing dependency on imported fossil fuel
2. Ensure all Marshallese have access to modern energy services
3. Smarter uses of energy in households, businesses, government and transport sector, and
4. Reliable, sustainable and affordable energy supply
Each action plan includes:
 Policy Outcome
 Policy Goals linking to the Outcome Activities under each strategy
 Rankings is based on the Indicative Ranking Matrix see table 18
 Organization responsible for each activities
 Support or participating organizations for implementing the activities
 Activity priority : the priority and the importance of each activity to progress towards the desired objectives 
and these are classified as high therefore needs to be implemented in the first year of endorsing the plan
 Estimated budget and potential sources based on available information. This is expected to be change on a 
two year basis when new information and projects are implemented.
The activities were prioritized in accordance with the ranking matrix see below - Operationalization of the EAP
The aim of the action plan is to allow the relevant stakeholders to work together to achieve the vision of the national 
energy policy. The strategic and action plans intend to include all activities related to the energy sector 
development so and that the development is coordinated through one agency and plan. Cross cutting issues as 
defined in the 2016 NEP should be considered when implementing the action plan. The guiding principles are whole 
of energy sector, financial sustainability, environmental and social sustainability, climate change, data management 
and information and many partners one team.
Operationalization of the EAP 
Local ownership and responsibility for the EAP are important sustainability criteria for any Plan. It was very 
encouraging that a number of activities in the existing EAP were earmarked to be implemented using local financial 
resources. This is planned to be the case in the new EAP. Increased effort is being made in the revised EAP to confirm 
donor funding for activities in Plan to reduce slippage during implementation. This will also enhance public 
confidence in the Plan. . Additionally, a ranking criterion will be used to prioritize the activities into high, low and 
medium categories. To enhance transparency the ranking matrix below is proposed for used to rank projects in the 
new EAP. 
Table 1: Indicative Ranking Matrix
Criteria Weight (%)
Up to
Ease of implementation: proposal prepared and donor identified 15
Consistent with international obligations 10
Has revenue generation or employment creation potentials 15
Significant reduce energy imports in short run 15
Has to be implement before another activity can commence 15
Positive environmental impacts 10
Positive impact on women and poor communities 10
Meeting NEP outcomes 10
Total 100
The matrix was used to rank the activities as follows: activities with scores of 100-75% are ranked priority 1; those 
scoring 74 to 60%, priority 2 and those scoring 59-50% are ranked as priority 3. 
The implementation of EAP was predicated on actions by state and non-state actors at the levels of the household, 
community and private sector investor (local and/or foreign). 
It was not possible to obtain information on major users of energy in the private sector. In terms of the private g gppy
would be to quantify savings and costs associated with private sector activities as part of the revised EAP.
The private sector was to play a leading role in introducing renewable energy. Changes to energy legislation, fiscal 
incentives, data collection and feasibility studies were to be undertaken to contribute to an enabling environment to 
attract private sector investments in the renewable energy sectors. Limited progress and mixed results were made in
this area. As part of the new EAP a national energy model will be developed to forecast the level of energy to be 
supplied by renewable energy and quantify the level of required investment to meet the targets. As part of the 
revised EAP GRMI will also consider developing a strategy to proactively market these opportunities available to the 
private sector in the energy sector. This will be included as part of the national inward investment strategy/Plan. 
Otherwise the required investment might not materialize and the GRMI would be in a weak position, having to react 
to ad hoc proposals from investors, which very often are speculative and not viable.
Of equal importance to creating an enabling environment for private sector involvement in the energy sector are 
developments in the continuation of the public sector reform programs discussed earlier. This will give prospective 
investors confidence and reduce uncertainty concerning the overall sustainability of RMI over the long term, when 
compact grants end in 2023. There is an increasingly competitive international business environment in which to 
attract investment. RMI would have some challenges in this area as it is ranked 114th by the World Bank, out of 189 
countries in terms of doing business in 2014. In a few areas which are very important for attracting foreign investor 
or establishing a small business out of 189 countries RMI ranked as follows: starting a business, 56; enforcing 
contracts, 61; getting credit, 86; obtaining a construction permit, 32 and registering property, 189. In terms of 
developing a strategy to generally expand the private sector it would be advantageous for RMI to consider the issues 
highlighted by the World Bank doing business report. 
At the household level, behavioral change is necessary to adopt energy conservation and energy efficiency practices. 
This would not only contribute to household energy cost savings, which could be diverted to other priority 
expenditure, it would also contribute to reduction of the national energy import bill and the national expenditure on 
energy subsidies. A number of education and awareness programs throughout the education system and using pubic 
media and social media commenced, more collaboration with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Community 
Development Division in the current plan to facilitated action at the household level, These will be consolidated in 
the revised EAP. In addition a progressive tariff regime, which allowed the rate of import duties on energy efficient 
appliance and vehicles, was proposed in the 2009 EAP and recorded mixed results. Likewise various home financing 
loan programs were proposed, and achieved similar result. These efforts would be consolidated in the revised EAP. 
More effort would be made to increase education and awareness of these programs. As part of these effort will be 
to project savings from household, as this should increase interest in participating in these programs.THEMATIC AREA 1: ENERGY POLICY PLANNING AND COORDINATION
Expected Output/Result 1: The Energy Planning Division developed its capacity and skills set to enable it to review and manage the energy legislations and policy 
frameworks
Strategy 1.1: A new energy law (Energy Sector Management Act) will be considered as appropriate to clarify powers and responsibilities within government for energy 
(1st priority)
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential
Source
Amount
(USD)
1.1.1 Formulate an Energy Sector Management Act20 that provides for 
the management of the energy sector in the RMI including:
a) Petroleum supply, safety, storage, transport, distribution and 
pricing
b) RMI electricity utilities and their activities -
c) Land, sea and domestic air transport
d) Access to appropriate sites for renewable energy development and 
energy distribution 
e) Fiscal incentives (imports and taxations) and regulations relating to 
fuels, renewable energy components, electric appliances, vehicles, 
boats, large pumps and other equipment that are major energy 
providers and users on the national scale.
MRD
AG, MOF,
MEC,KAJUR, EPA, 
MIA, 
EPPSO,OEPPC, 
MTC, Ports 
Authority, MISC,
Private-Sector,
AMI
1 2016 World Bank 
TA, SPC
Petroleum 
Advisory TA
85,000
1.1.2 Based on above activity, review, prepare amendments, 
regulations and bylaws to clearly delineate responsibilities and 
structures for energy supply, distribution and their management
MRD Same as above 1 2016 Q1
1.1.3 Formally established the ETF membership, roles and functions 
and reporting mechanism through Cabinet. Members to include the 
primary energy sector stakeholders, MEC, MIA, MPW, MRD, EPPSO & 
OEPPC including private sector and civil society rep.
MRD ETF members 1 2016 Q1 Internal 3,000
 frameworks
Strategy 1.1: A new energy law (Energy Sector Management Act) will be considered as appropriate to clarify powers and responsibilities within government for energy 
(1st priority)
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential
Source
Amount
(USD)
a) First step is to prepare clear terms of reference for the ETF to 
include coordination of energy related efforts and improving 
energy efficiency within government 
Sub-total Strategy 1.1 88,000
Strategy 1.2: Annual work plan developed for MRD’s EPD with clear objectives, priorities and timeframe including a communication strategy to be reviewed quarterly
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
source
Budget
(USD)
1.2.1 Approval of national energy policy and strategic action plan 
providing a guideline to the energy sector planning MRD ETF 3 2016 Q2 Internal 3,000
1.2.2 Develop MRD EPD Annual Work Plan, based on the NEP and 
EAP, projects activities with clear objectives. If necessary, review and 
amend Action Plan according to resources available.
MRD ETF 1 2016 Q1
Internal TA
SPC
5,000
Sub-total Strategy 1.2 8,000
Strategy 1.3 Informal training of Energy Planning Division staff through attachments, RE/EE training, and possible diploma or degree level training in energy
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source Budget (USD)
1.3.1 Determine the human resources needed to effectively 
implement the revised legislation, regulations and bylaws. MRD
MEC/KAJUR
ETF, PSC
MOF, MIA
1 2016 Q1
ADMIRE,
Internal 
Budget (TA)
10,000
132 Develop a capacity building program with costs where neededMRD as above 1 2016 Q3 Internal10000Sub-total Strategy 1.3 20,000
Expected Output/Result 2: A national energy database is developed and managed (for analysis and policy development) and maintained
Strategy 2.1:EPD coordinates energy database development, production and regular revision with relevant stakeholders
Planned Activity
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source Budget (USD)
2.1.1 EPD to recruit a database officer to collate data and develop 
energy statistics yearbooks and to be trained on technical, gender and 
social aspects of energy. 
MRD EPPSO, MOF, SPC 2 ongoing Internal 10,000
2.1.2 Enforce the regulation and through licensing to require all 
petroleum suppliers and retailers to provide quarterly reports to MRD 
and EPPSO on volumes of fuel imported as well as fuel consumption by 
sector – transport, fisheries, aviation, households/residential
MRD AG, MEC, Fuel 
importers,
2 2016 Q2 SPC 3,000
2.1.3 Maintain an up-to-date active registry of opportunities for donor 
support through projects channeled to MRD-EPD
MRD EPD, MOFA 2 2016 Q1 SPC - TA 5,000
Sub-total Strategy 2.1 18,000
Expected Output/Result 3: Coordination and communication on energy issues at national, regional (within Micronesia and wider Pacific) and global levels shall 
always be strengthened
Strategy 3.1 The Marshall Islands to engage effectively with national, regional and global stakeholders including energy service providers, private sectors, nongovernment organizations and community based organizations and vulnerable groups to promote energy initiatives
3.1.1 Develop calendar events at national level with MIA –mayor, 
women, youth, disabled and other gender groups and work together 
to promoting energy initiatives (EE awareness and RE services)
MRD MIA, SPC 3 2016 Q2 Internal 2,000
3.1.2 EPD to work in close collaboration with the OEPPC in 
mainstreaming of climate change activities, particularly support for 
appropriate and practical RE/EE, capacity building for environmental 
sustainability and economic opportunities and climate financing
MRD OEPPC 2 2016 Q3
Project 
partners 
/GIZ, IUCN, 
SPC, SPREP, 
IRENA
2,000
Subtotal Strategy 31 4000Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source
Budget
(USD)
3.2.1 EPD to submit annual budget relating to policy implementation 
with energy indicators as performance measures
MRD MOF, MIA, SPC 1 2016 Q1 SPC 5,000
Sub-total Strategy 3.2 5,000
Strategy 3.3 EPD introduces a communications plan using multiple medias and having targeted messaging to address particular interests of local stakeholder and 
international development partners
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source Budget (USD)
3.3.1 EPD develops energy messages through different media 
targeting different gender groups, women, men, youth and school 
children
MRD
MIA,
SPC
2 2016 Q1 SPC 10,000
Sub-total Strategy 3.3 10,000
TOTAL POLICY ADMINISTRATION AND COORDINATION ACTION PLAN 149,000THEMATIC AREA: PETROLEUM SECTOR
Expected Output/Result 4: Decision making regarding the importation, consumption and pricing of petroleum products based on reliable data on petroleum 
imports, sales and end-use
Strategy 4.1 Develop Petroleum Sector Act with provision of licensing as well as supply of petroleum data and reports
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking
Time Frame 
for 
initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating or 
Supporting
Potential 
Source
Budget 
(USD)
4.1.1 Develop a Petroleum Act regulating the storage and handling of 
petroleum including rules for transporting and storing and licensing 
regime, sharing of data and information on a quarterly basis to MRD & 
EPPSO). This is in addition to Customs reporting requirements) on 
volumes of each type of fuel imported and sold.
MRD with AG
MOF,
MEC,
Fuel Importers
2 2016 -2017
Internal,
TA/SPC 55,000
4.1.2 Provide information quarterly to SPC quarterly regional fuel price 
monitor that will assist with national fuel monitoring pricing. MRD with MIA
MOF,
Fuel importers
3 2016 - 2019 TA/SPC 3,000
4.1.3 Implement the MEC-Petroleum Reform Programme (PRP) activities;
Management and Operational, Procedural and process and Physical MEC MRD 3 2016 - 2019 5,380,000
Sub-total Strategy 4.1 5,633,000
Expected Output/Result 5: The wholesale and retail prices of petroleum products shall be made equitable for urban and rural users through control and regulation
Strategy 5.1 Conduct an independent study of petroleum pricing on Majuro and outer atolls to determine benefits and costs and a proper pricing mechanism
Planned Activities
Organization(s) Responsible Ranking
Time Frame 
for Initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source
Budget
(USD) 
5.1.1 Develop a pricing template appropriate for RMI to monitor the fuel 
prices to be later regulated by legislation or other means MRD
MIA
AG
1 2016- 2017
SPC/TA,
Internal
5,000
5.1.2 Arrange an independent study to evaluate gasoline, diesel fuel, 
kerosene and the benefits and costs of a mechanism to establish 
MRD SPC 2 2016 Q3 SPC/TA 20,000p
5.1.3 Develop expertise with EPD and MEC as appropriate to tender, 
negotiate and monitor petroleum supply contracts through 
consultations
MRD
MIA,
MEC
2 2016 Q3 SPC/TA 10,000
Sub-total Strategy 5.1 35,000
Expected Output/Result 6: The safe storage, handling and distribution shall be ensured for all petroleum products
Strategy 6.1 Establish and maintain a system for inspection and certification of storage, handling and safety procedures and licensing of petroleum storage and 
distribution facilities
Planned Activities
Organization(s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for Initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source
Budget 
(USD)
6.1.1 Recruit staff dedicated to implementation of the proposed 
Petroleum Act – inspection and licensing of petroleum storage and 
handling
MRD,
PSC
MEC,
MIA
1
2016- 2019
WB, SPC 10,000
6.1.2 Through proper trainings, develop standards/guidelines for 
inspection and certification of storage, handling and safety procedures 
and licensing of petroleum storage and distribution facilities 
MRD
MEC, KAJUR
MIA, MOF,EPA
1 SPC, WB 5,000
6.1.3 Obtain professional advice on the quality and suitability of fuels 
imported into RMI and any bio-fuels produced locally. Develop standards 
if required.
MRD
MEC, EPA,
Toboloar
2 SPC/TA 5,000
6.1.4 To develop a concept on how to monitor the high sea fuel 
bunkering MRD
MEC
AG
2 2016 Q1 SPC/TA 5,000
Sub-total Strategy 6.1 25,000
TOTAL PETROLEUM ACTION PLAN 6,008,000Energy Action Plan 2016 2019
KEY THEMATIC AREA: ELECTRIC POWER
Expected Output/Result 7: The management and financial system for outer islands PV electrification regularly reviewed and enhanced to ensure sustainability, and 
make certain that recovery of O&M and battery replacement costs, for household and institutional systems (e.g. health, fisheries, telecoms, and school installations)
Strategy 7.1: Conduct a comparison of two sustainability models currently in use – through selling of handicrafts and through the local government funds
Planned Activities
Organization(s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source
Budget
(USD)
7.1.1 Marshall Islands Major Association (MIMA) in partnership with EPD to 
review and highlight pros and cons of the two models and develop a 
solution/establish partnerships with relevant agencies
MRD
MIA, MEC,
MIMRA
Tobolar, 
WUTMI
3 2016 Q2 Internal 5,000
7.1.2 Introduce Green tax for sustaining SHS to contribute to reducing use 
of petroleum products thus promoting a green and clean economy
MRD
OEPPC
MEC, EPD 2 2016 Q3 Internal 1,000
7.1.3 Develop a plan on the maintenance and operations of all SHS to 
develop proposals for replacement of batteries when required EPD MEC 1 2016 Q1
Internal,
North REP
2,000
Sub-total Strategy 7.1 8,000
Expected Output/Result 8: A transparent tariff structure established for those receiving full electricity supplies that cover the real costs at each island system, with a 
lifeline tariff that genuinely benefits low-income consumers without adversely affecting MEC income
Strategy 8.1 Establish an effective and sustainable plan to address tariff collection and SHS maintenance
Planned Activities
Organization(s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source
Budget 
(USD)
8.1.1 Improving collection of monthly usages taking into consideration the 
limited cash opportunities in the outer and rural households. An assessment 
of real costs of rural PV electrification was done through North REP.
MRD MEC, MIA 1 2016 Q1 Internal 2,000
8.1.2 Maintain collaborations with MIA and women’s group organization to 
effectively adopt a plan for sustainability of the solar home systems MRD MIA, MEC, 
WUTMI 1 2016 Q1 Internal 2,000Planned Activities
Organization(s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
source
Budget 
(USD)
8.2.1 Develop a transparent policy that clearly defines the benefits of the 
1,000kWh per month electricity allowance for landowners and government. MRD MEC, MIA 2 2016 Q1 MEC 2,000
8.2.2 Implement a cash power meter systems in all MEC customers 
including government, businesses and households MEC, KAJUR MRD 1 ongoing
Japan, 
Australia, 
DOI,
ADB
500,000
Sub-total Strategy 8.2 502,000
Expected Output/Result 9: Initiatives on provision of access to clean and efficient fuels and appliances ensured the incorporation of interventions that promotes 
sustainable livelihoods, health and safety and environmental protection
Strategy 9.1: Promote cleaner fuels and efficient cooking technologies to improve health and environmental protection particularly the women and children
Planned Activities
Organization(s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source
Budget 
(USD)
9.1.1 Promotes and seek support to distribute energy efficient biomass stove 
and LPG use for cooking22.
EPD KIO 1 ongoing
USA,GEFUNDP,
SPC
154,500
Sub-total Strategy 9.1 154,500
TOTAL ELECTRIC POWER ACTION PLAN 668,500
 
21 MEC is one of the SOE under the Ministry of Public Works portfolio
22 Two types of energy efficient stoves have been distributed to outer islands and atolls by KIO. The first 900 was purchased from StoveTech through the USA funding, the second patch 960 KEY THEMATIC AREA: ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION
Expected Output/Result 10: The reduction of MEC supply-side losses by 20% in 2017, consistent with sound technical and financial criteria should be developed and 
assessed
Strategy 10.1:Effective implementation of the RMI Sustainable Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Measures in Micronesia including RMI
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking
Time 
Frame for 
initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source Budget (USD)
10.1.1 Preparation for the power plant testing (Majuro Power Stations 
1& 2)
MEC
MRD, UNDP, 
SPREP
1 2016 Q1
SIDSDOCK,
SPREPPIGGAREP+
2,000
10.1.2 Conduct of power plant testing to establish the actual energy 
utilization performance of the generating units
MEC
MRD, UNDP, 
SPREP
1 2016 Q1 94,500
10.1.3 Analysis and interpretation of the performance testing of each 
power generation unit
10.1.4 Documentation of the results, findings and evaluation of the 
energy utilization performance of each power generation unit in the 
Majuro Power Plant (1 &2)
10.1.5 Identification of EE improvements in the power plant operations 
and in each power generation unit (no cost or housekeeping measures; 
low to medium cost measures; capital intensive)
MEC
MRD, UNDP, 
SPREP
1 2016 Q1 4,000
10.1.6 Power generation technical expert recruited to design an EE 
Improvement measures with implementation cost
MEC
MRD, UNDP, 
SPREP
2 2016 Q2 73,000
10.1.7 Development of a computerized load distribution and dispatch 
system MEC
MRD, UNDP, 
SPREP
2 2016 Q2 8,000
10.1.8 Implementation of the load distribution and dispatch 
optimization systemPlants MEC
MRD, UNDP, 
SPREP
1 2016 Q2 8,000
10.1.10 Conduct of capacity development on EE power plant 
operations, power plant testing and load optimization for MEC Power 
Plants technical and operations personnel
Sub-total Strategy 10.1 189,500
Expected Output/Result 11: The number of efficient electric appliances imported into the country through appropriate fiscal incentives for business, private sectors, 
households and government sectors increased
Strategy 11.1 Effective implementation of the SIDS DOCK project titled Energy Efficiency Loan Schemes (EELS) 23
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame for 
initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source Budget (USD)
11.1.1 Review of existing financing schemes in RMI and 
literature on financial mechanisms for EE housing projects and 
EE appliance/equipment loan programs MIDB
MRD
Sub contract 1 2014 Q4 - 2016
same as 
above
5,000
11.1.2 Design an appropriate financing scheme and capacity 
building 9,000
11.1.3 Launch of EELS 10,000
Sub-total Strategy 11.1 24,000
Strategy 11.2 Revise taxation system to encourage the import of energy efficient air-conditioners / major household appliances & introduce mandatory standards and 
labeling system
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame for 
initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source Budget (USD)
11.2.1 Review an existing act to adopt an appliance and labeling 
standard applicable to the RMI MRD EPPSO, SPC 2 2015 Q4 - 2016 SPC 5,000
 based on local and region experiences)
retailers
Sub-total Strategy 11.2 8,000
Strategy 11.3: Develop energy efficiency standards for new buildings and renovations including homes, businesses and government premises, with financing on subsidized 
terms for designs and construction/renovation meeting the standards
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking
Time 
Frame for 
initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating or 
Supporting
Potential Source Budget (USD)
11.3.1 Implement recommendation from research on energy 
codes and standards for buildings based on code from Palau
MRD MPW, MIDB
USDA, Hawaii 
DBEDT
1 2016
ADMIRE
Internal
5,000
11.3.2 Re-form a building codes task force and engage a 
consultant to prepare draft energy codes/guidelines for new 
building construction and building renovation appropriate to 
the type of building construction used in RMI
MRD
DPW, Private 
contractors,
MIA, MALGOV
1 2016
ADMIRE
UNDP
Internal
50,000
11.3.3 Implement and enforce new energy 
code/standards/guidelines for construction and renovation of 
buildings
MRD 1 2016
WB
EIB (MIDB)
EC
5,000
Sub-total Strategy 11.3 60,000
Expected Output/Result 12: The energy use consumption monitored and improved through energy auditing and demand side management
Strategy 12.1 Carry out energy audits on remaining government facilities, business communities and households and implementation of recommended energy efficient 
measures
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame for 
initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating or 
Supporting
Potential 
Source Budget (USD)and implement retrofits in at least five homes 
General Public,
Media
Denmark 
(PIGARREP 
plus), Japan, 
ADB, GEF
12.1.2 Carry out energy audits and efficiency improvements 
within government, households and businesses 
MRD MPW, MEC, 
KAJUR 2 2016 - 2017 200,000
12.1.3 Based on results of energy audits, develop and 
implement a program to improve energy efficiency in 25% of 
all Majuro and Ebeye homes
MRD As above plus 
RMI banks 1 2016 - 2019 800,000
12.1.4 Evaluate and refine programs and continue to engage 
public in energy conservation and efficiency education 
programs
MRD Task Force, 
DOE,Media 1 2016 - 2019 300,000
12.1.5 Support the ongoing activities in delivering of energy 
audits, capacity and awareness raising on demonstrations of 
good practice
MRD/MPW All government 
agencies 1 2016- 2019 100,000
Sub-total Strategy 12.1 1,500,000
TOTAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN 1,781,500GO06 09
THEMATIC AREA: TRANSPORT AND ENERGY USE
Expected Output/Result 13: Increased the number of energy efficient vehicles into the country through appropriate fiscal incentives for business, private sectors, 
households and government
Strategy 13.1: Establish guidelines for the maintenance of the Government vehicle with adequate budget allocation
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source Budget (USD)
13.1.1 Review current legislation and develop a regulation or policy 
for mandating vehicle maintenance and engine size for government 
vehicles – do a comparative study to that of other pacific countries in 
the North.
MPW
MRD , OEPPC
1 2016 Q3 Internal 25,000
13.1.2 Provide Training of government personnel in the testing and 
repair process for government and private sector. MPW OEPPC, MRD 2 2016 Internal 5,000
13.1.3 Incorporate maintenance expenses in the National budget 
process
MOF MPW, MRD 2 2016 – 2019 Internal 2,000
13.1.4 Introduce a regulatory instrument for spot-checks on vehicle 
emissions with penalties for emissions above a specified level OEPPC
MRD, MPW
3 2016 Q4
Internal/
SPC TA
3,000
13.1.5 Develop standards on energy efficient vehicles and mandating 
all government vehicles comply with the standards and develop 
monitoring mechanisms
MPW OEPPC, MRD 1 2016 SPC TA 3,000
13.1.6 Develop a policy that government made availability public 
transport for government workers (passenger seat of more than 12 
people)
MPW MRC 3 2016 Internal 10,000
Sub-total Strategy 13.1 48,000Strategy 13.2 Promote, increase awareness and create incentives (in the private sector) on efficient mode of transport e.g. bicycles, sail boat, fuel efficient taxis, small 
engine sizes
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting 
agencies
Potential 
Source Budget (USD)
13.2.1 Assess options to discourage the importation of vehicles that 
have larger engines through revise Import Duties Act and provide 
incentives for smaller engines or increased seat capacity
MRD
MPW,
MOF/Customs 1 2016 Q2 Internal 10,000
13.2.2 Undertake a study of an efficient public transport systems in 
Pacific islands, with similar traffic patterns for implementation MPW
Customs, 
MTC,
EPD
2 2016 Q2 Internal 15,000
13.2.3 Study the feasibility of LPG, hybrid and electric (powered by 
renewable electricity vehicles, including buses MOF EPD 1 2016 Q3 Internal 20,000
13.2.4 Demonstrate the fuel savings on the hybrid car used by the
Ministry of Finance OEPPC MRD/EPD 1 2016 Q1 Internal 5,000
Sub-total Strategy 13.2 50,000
Expected Output/Result 14: Government developed a more energy efficient transport network through collaborations with various stakeholders and adopting best 
practices that are applicable in the RMI
Strategy 14.1 Investigate the practicality of retrofits to reduce fuel use in sea transport, e.g. more efficient propellers, sail-assist technologies, and other alternate energy 
sources
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential 
Source Budget (USD)
1411 Study the possibility that all diesel powered government MRD MOF2 2016 2019 Internal 50000py 
14.1.2 MRD coordinates with MTC on standards/codes on fuel 
efficient vessels with possible regulated under the Domestic Water 
Craft Act
MRD
MTC
MOF
MIA
EPA
1 2016
ADB/WB
TASPC/EDD 
10,000
14.1.3 If feasibility study is technically feasible (above activity) the 
consultant would prepare a project that can encourage diesels for 
replacement of existing gasoline engines through favorable term 
financing and incentives.
MTC MRD 1 2016 TASPC/EDD 20,000
14.1.4 Develop programs to encourage the use of wind 
supplementation for intra-atoll transport and lagoon fishing MIA
WAM, MRD, 
OEPPC, MTC, 
MIMRA,
WUTMI
1 2016- 2019 Internal 20,000
Sub-Total Strategy 14.1 100,000
TOTAL TRANSPORT AND ENERGY USE 198,000ENERGY ACTION PLAN 2016 2019
KEY THEMATIC AREA: RENEWABLE ENERGY
Expected Output/Result 15: Private sector participation in the electric power supply in RMI shall be allowed under conditions that are fair to MEC and the supplier (i.e. 
independent power producer’s agreement)
Strategy 15.1: Develop appropriate legislation and regulations with clearly-defined authority, obligations and responsibilities for electric power supply in Majuro and 
throughout the RMI
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting Potential Source Budget (USD)
15.1.1 Develop the Electricity Act, that clearly define the 
powers of the MEC and other utilities, obligations, 
constitution and roles of the Board and responsibilities for 
electric power supply in Majuro and throughout the RMI 
Cabinet ,
MEC Board
MOF,
MPW,
MRD
1 2016 Q1
Possibly WB as 
follow up to 
proposed 2009 
study *
85,000
15.1.2 Development of technical guidelines for grid 
connected self-generation through renewable energy 
sources, and feed-in tariffs to be established. This guidelines 
are to be adopted through the proposed Electricity Act
MEC Board
MRD,
ETF
1 2016 Q1
IRENA,
JICA,
PPA
20,000
15.1.3 Consider the recommendations on the MEC and 
utilities tariff review conducted through North REP project 
and to be regulated through the ESMA and the proposed 
Electricity Act
MRD with MEC
MOF,
Business 
Community
2 2016 Q3
SPC,
WB (follow-up to 
study)
5,000
Sub-total Strategy 15.1 110,000
Strategy 15.2 Quantify reduction in the national energy import bill for power generation
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting Potential Source Budget (USD)
1521 Piddd dlid MEC MRDSPC 1 2016 2019 Il 9000Expected Output/Result 16: Available energy modelling developed to ascertain the technical and economic indigenous energy sources where technically practical and 
economically viable
Strategy 16.1 Determine the indigenous energy resources that are available for development through feasibility studies 
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential Source Budget (USD)
16.1.1 Establish and adopt the guidelines for on grid 
connection including appropriate policy measures such as 
feed in tariffs and power purchase agreements
MRD, MEC
MPW, Chamber 
of Commerce, 
SPC, PPA
2 2016 Q2
EC
ADMIRE
PPA/IRENA
25,000
16.1.2 Adopt the above guidelines into policies; the policies 
will include the designs and appropriate feed in tariffs, power 
purchase agreement, etc.
MRD Same as above 2 2016 Q4
DOI; NREL
Possibly EC TCF 
EC; UNDP
15,000
16.1.3 Complete the Renewable Readiness Assessment MRD MEC 3 2016 Q1 EC, IRENA 20,000
16.1.4 Create awareness and incentives for private and local 
households to participate in the on grid connections
MEC,MIDB MRD 1 2016 Q 2 EC, ICDF 2,500
Sub-Total Strategy 16.1 62,500
Strategy 16.2 Expand solar electrification for off-grid areas 
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential Source Budget (USD)
16.2.1 Rehabilitation of SHS (change batteries)
MRD MEC, EPA, MAWC 1 2016 - 2017 Taiwan, EC 1,000,000
16.2.2 Develop environmentally sound disposal plan for 
batteries, solar panels, etc.
EPA,
MAWC
MRD, MEC, MIA 2 2016 Q2 Taiwan, ADMIRE 5,000the EELS – Energy efficiency Loan Scheme
, , ,
Sub-total Strategy 16.2 1,015,000
Strategy 16.3 Expand the grid connected RE capacity in Majuro, Kwajalein, Jaluit and Wotje
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting
Potential Source Budget (USD)
16.3.1 A solar PV Grid Stability Study MRD MEC 1 ongoing JICA 350,000
16.3.2 Consider implementation of the proposed additional 
500 kWp of grid connected RE systems for Majuro schools and 
government offices based on the feasibility study conducted 
by JICA
MRD
MEC,
MPW,
MOE
3 2016 Q1 JICA 5,000,000
16.3.3 Project proposals submitted to UAE funding for 
additional 500kWp for grid connected solar at MEC MRD
MEC, MPW,
MOE
3 2016 Q1 UAE 5,000,000
16.3.4 Undertake a roof tops and parking areas assessments 
to establish locations for solar installations
MRD MEC 3 2016 Q 2 IRENA 5,000
Sub-total Strategy 16.3 10,355,000
Expected Output/Result 17: The technical capacity of government (EPD) and MEC to plan, develop, implement and manage renewable energy systems (small and
medium-scale rural; large-scale urban) continuously updated and enhanced
Strategy 17.1 Increase awareness and provide training to public and private sector on appropriate renewable energy system
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting Potential Source Budget (USD)
17.1.1 Replacement of electric water heaters with solar 
water heaters in existing buildings and use of solar water 
heaters for new buildings. MEC/MWSC MRD 3 2016 EU 50,000systems
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting Potential Source Budget (USD)
17.2.2 Develop policies and payment methods (feed-intariffs) for private generation using solar energy sources MRD MEC 1 2016 WB/TA 10,000
Sub-total Strategy 17.2 10,000
Expected Output/Result 18 Economically feasible alternatives to diesel fuel for power generation shall be utilized
Strategy 18.1: Conduct an independent study of the viability of alternatives to diesel fuel for power generation where economically sound (e.g. coconut oil, LNG, gridconnected solar). Implementation of recommended viable alternatives
Planned Activities
Organization (s) Responsible
Ranking Time Frame 
for initiation
Planned Budget
Coordinating 
agency
Participating 
or Supporting Potential Source Budget (USD)
18.1.1 Seek funding for proposal on continue assessment of 
the 10% biodiesel use for power generation including MRD
MIA,
Tobolar, MEC
2 2016 Q1
UNDP, French,
Taiwan
20,000
Sub-total Strategy 18.1 20,000
TOTAL RENEWABLE ENERGY ACTION PLAN 11,631,500Annex 2: Monitoring Plan
INTERVENTION LOGIC INDICATORS AND TARGETS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
GOAL
TO STRENGHTEN FINANCIAL, POLICY AND LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORKS FOR THE ENERGY SECTOR
OUTCOMES
Improved enabling frameworks for 
reducing dependence on imported fossil 
fuel
Number of energy sector plans developed and reviewed24. 
Target is 5 planning documents produced in 2020
 Reports on review of 
national energy policy, 
annual work plans
 National Interest in 
formulating plans is high 
Number of ETF meetings held annually with participation of 
government, non -government and private sectors. Target is 
8 ETF meetings held annually in 2020
 ETF meeting minutes
 Interest in energy issues is high 
and stakeholders contribute 
effectively to the meetings
 Proper records and 
dissemination of minutes
Number of financing schemes/loans and applications 
approved for renewable energy technologies (RETs) and 
energy-efficient (EE) appliances. Target is 100 loan 
applications by 2020
 Bank records on funds 
disbursed and applications
 Implementing agencies and 
stakeholder’s genuine 
willingness to cooperate to 
implement the SREEM project
 Interest from all people is high 
in changing to energy efficient 
appliances
Number of endorsed and implemented laws and regulations 
on the energy sector increased. Target is 4 energy 
legislations/regulation by 2020
 Legislative frameworks
 Stock take reports updates
 Energy security indicators
 Political willingness is high
Percentage of verified and processed data sets increased. 
Target is 80% of required data set is readily available by 2020
 Data sets, energy security 
indicators
 Funding support for database 
officer post is available 
 Data providers cooperates
EXPECTED OUTPUTS/RESULTS
1. The Energy Planning Division 
developed its capacity and skills set to 
enable it to review and manage the energy 
legislations and policy frameworks
 A report with findings of legislation, regulations or 
bylaws that now have or may have in the future an effect 
on consistent and effective energy management.
 Completion of draft legislation as noted by the review 
and recommendations submitted to MRD
 Participation is expanded in the ETF and cabinet 
endorsed TOR for the ETF
 National legislative 
framework
 National policy frameworks
 Training reports 
 National interest in energy 
issues is high
 Regional and international 
support for training and policy 
and legislative formulation 
continues 
 perform the tasks required under the new legislation, 
regulations and bylaws and positions filled
2. A national energy database is 
developed and managed (for analysis and 
policy development) and maintained
 Database officer is recruited
 Energy data collection and updates on energy security 
indicators
 Information on donor funded projects and costs are 
readily available
 Legislation 
 Energy data set 
 Energy security indicators
 Project matrix records
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
3. Coordination and communication 
on energy issues at national, regional 
(within Micronesia and wider Pacific) and 
global levels shall always be strengthened
 Number of activities that EPD is engaged with MIA on 
awareness on energy efficiency and conservation
 Climate change policies integrate energy initiatives 
relating to mitigation to cc
 NEP budget are included in the annual budget 
submission to implement the energy action plan
 A Communication plans developed for EPD
 Majuro Declaration on 
climate initiative progress 
report
 Government budgets
 Trip reports 
 Availability of human and 
financial resources
 Supportive government in 
energy budget
4. Decision making regarding the 
importation, consumption and pricing of 
petroleum products based on reliable data 
on petroleum imports, sales and end-use
 A Petroleum Act developed and adopted
 Regulation on data sharing developed
 Templates and training on data reporting delivered
 Data on the Marshall Islands fuel prices is reported 
monthly and included as part of the SPC Monitoring Price
 Energy security day improves
 SPC Price Monitoring 
 MEC Benchmarking report
 Legislative framework
 Pacific Energiser
 Energy Security Indicators
 Political support
 Availability of financial support
5. The wholesale and retail prices of 
petroleum products shall be made 
equitable for urban and rural users through 
control and regulation
 Pricing template available 
 Completion of independent study evaluating the fuel 
prices and establish maximum wholesale and retail price 
margins
 Number of people trained on petroleum tendering, 
monitor of petroleum supply and contracts
 Pricing templates
 Energy Study and reports
 Training reports 
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
 SPC Petroleum Advisory 
support
 Availability of data and 
information
6. The safe storage, handling and 
distribution shall be ensured for all 
petroleum products
 Petroleum officer recruited 
 Adoption of the environmental standards and regulation 
under the proposed Petroleum Act
 Templates developed and used for assessing the quality 
of fuels imported or produced locally;
 Production and enforcement of any standards 
developed
 Legislative and regulatory 
frameworks
 Energy Reports
 Recruitment report
 Availability of financial and 
human resourcesINTERVENTION LOGIC INDICATORS AND TARGETS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS AND ASSUMPTION
GOAL
TO SUPPLY 100% OF URBAN HOUSEHOLDS WITH ELECTRICITY BY 2015
TO PROVIDE 95% OF RURAL OUTER ATOLL HOUSEHOLDS WITH OFF GRID ELECTRICITY BY 2015
TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO MODERN FORMS OF COOKING TO 90% OF ALL HOUSEHOLDS BY 2020
OUTCOME
Ensure all Marshallese have access to 
modern energy services
Percentage of urban households access to grid connected 
electricity- Target is 100% by 2015
 MEC maintenance reports
 MEC financial records
 MEC customer records
 Willingness of households to 
pay for electricity bills
Percentage of outer atoll households with access to off-grid 
electricity. Target is 95% by 2015
 MEC SHS financial and 
maintenance records
 WUTMI records on payment 
of SHS
 Household’s willingness to pay 
for monthly usage
 Political support for 
maintenance of SHS
 Women group support for 
payment of SHS
Sustainability of energy services: SHS monthly tariff collection 
rate (%) is improved {Actual collection/Target collection}.
Target is 80% collection rate by 2015
 MEC financial records  Availability of financial and 
resources
Percentage of rural and urban households with modern 
forms of cooking Target is 90% by 2015
 KIO Field trip – dissemination 
reports
 Project progress report
 Commitment of KIO
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
Improvement in the diesel quality used in 
transportation (500 ppm) MEC, 10 ppm (Mobil) Target 
is increased to 10ppm by 2017
 Petroleum imports database 
through customs and EPPSO 
 Petroleum suppliers 
 Support of petroleum suppliers
 MEC willingness to changes 
 Availability of financial 
resources
EXPECTED OUTPUTS/RESULTS
7. The management and 
financial system for outer island PV 
electrification regularly reviewed and 
enhanced to ensure sustainability and 
make certain the recovery of O&M and 
 MOA signed between MEC & MIA (local government) 
and WUTMI
 Green tax paper developed and submitted to Cabinet for 
approval and implement with funding collected for 
sustaining SHS in outer islands
 Long, Medium and short term plan with investments 
developed and submitted to government or future 
 Cabinet papers
 EPU reports 
 Consultant reports
 North REP Existing plan
 Training reports
 Support and interest of 
stakeholders is high
 National support and 
willingness to consult with 
relevant stakeholders(g, , , 
school installations)
 Transfer of SHS plan in place ( North REP Project Exit 
Strategy)
8. A transparent tariff structure 
established for those receiving full 
electricity supplies that cover the real 
costs at each island system, with a 
lifeline tariff that genuinely benefits 
low-income consumers without 
adversely affecting MEC income
 An approved and acceptable model for payment of SHS is 
put in place which can be different to each atoll/island 
situation and also for public institutions (schools and 
health centres) using the recommendations from the 
study
 A policy paper that defines the benefits of the 1000kwh 
is developed and presented to MEC Board 
 Increased number of MEC customers with prepaid 
meters
 Energy reports and policies
 MEC data 
 MEC financial records
 MEC annual report
 MEC website
 Project matrix
 MIMA’s support and interest in 
maintaining SHS is high
 MEC’s Board support and 
willingness to changes to the 
policy for landowners benefits
 Availability of financial 
resources
9. Initiatives on provision of 
access to clean and efficient fuels and 
appliances ensured the incorporation 
of interventions that promotes 
sustainable livelihoods, health and
safety and environmental protection
Funding support obtained for purchase of energy efficient 
biomass stove
 Project Proposals
 Trip reports 
 Energy security indicators
 Financial and human resources
 KIO’s interest is high
INTERVENTION LOGIC INDICATOR AND TARGETS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS AND ASSUMPTION
GOAL
TO MAKE HOUSEHOLDS AND BUSINESSES 50% MORE ENERGY EFFICIENT AND GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS 75% MORE ENERGY EFFICIENT BY 2020
TO ACHIEVE A 20% EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENT IN TRANSPORT SECTOR FUEL USE BY 2020
TO REDUCE SUPPLY SIDE ENERGY LOSSES FROM MEC BY 20% BY 2017
OUTCOME
Smarter uses of energy in households, 
business, government and transport 
sector
20% decrease in the average monthly electricity 
consumption of connected households target is 79kWh 
per customer by 2020
 MEC consumer records  Availability of data
20% decrease in the average monthly electricity consumption 
of commercial customers. Target is 1641 kWh per customer 
by 2020
 MEC consumer records  Availability of data
20% decrease in the average monthly electricity consumption 
of government buildings Target is 8131kWh per customer by 
2020
 MEC records on 
 Government’s electricity bill
 Availability of datapppy 
 Regional and international 
technical support 
20% improvement in the efficiency of fuel use in the 
transportation sector (Data on fuel end use for land and 
sea transport should be collated) by 2020
 Petroleum suppliers 
Database – annual reports
 Availability of data
 Political support to adoption of 
policies
 Regional and international 
technical support
20.97 combined percentage decrease in power 
generation, and distribution losses of the power utilities 
by 2017
 MEC – KEMA report 
 MEC power utility 
performance report; SIDS 
DOCK project progress 
reports, PPA reports
 Availability of data
 Regional and international 
technical support
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
Station losses at MEC improves to 6.76% in 2017
Technical losses improves to 5.12% in 2017
Non-technical losses improves to 9.08% in 2017
EXPECTED OUTPUTS/RESULTS
10. The reduction of MEC supply-side 
losses by 20% in 2017, consistent with 
sound technical and financial criteria 
should be developed and assessed
 Mechanical and electrical systems data and 
specifications available
 Actual energy utilization performance of the generating 
units conducted and made available
 Measured and calculated operating parameters 
compared with standards
 Number of EE improvements measures with costings 
available
 An impact analyses of the load distribution and dispatch 
optimization system
 Number of MEC power plants operators trained
 MEC Benchmarking reports
 MEC financial reports
 Energy Security Indicators 
 PIGGAREP plus progress 
reports
 MEC Annual reports
 Availability of data 
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
11. The number of efficient electric 
appliances imported into the country 
through appropriate fiscal incentives for 
business, private sectors, households and 
government sectors increased
 A report on existing financing mechanisms on EE for 
housing and appliance and equipment
 An appropriate financing scheme is designed with 
awareness and training
 Number of applications approved for EE home loans and 
appliances
 Efficiency labeling system used/ adopted for imported 
appliances
 Number of different types of air-conditioners, 
 Customs Data
 Retailers records
 Energy Reports and 
Assessments 
 National support and interest
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
 Regional and international 
support is available Relative change (improvement) in percentage of 
appliances sold that are energy efficient
 A report on energy codes and standards for buildings 
based on code from Palau available
 Draft energy code/standards/guidelines for construction 
and renovation of buildings available
 Percentage of buildings constructed and renovated that 
meet the energy efficiency codes/standards/guidelines
12. The energy use consumption 
monitored and improved through energy 
auditing and demand side management
 Training completed and at least five homes renovated 
with improved energy efficiency practices
 Number of household and business audit completed
 Number of house adopting energy efficiency 
improvements
 Number of programs and special releases and new paper 
supplement 
 Participation of media and retailers in energy related 
event organised by EPU
 Number of Energy audits completed ( all government 
buildings)
 MEC records 
 Energy Audits reports 
 National support and interest 
is high
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
13. Increased number of energy 
efficient vehicles into the county through 
appropriate fiscal incentives for business, 
private sector, households and 
government
 A comparative study of type of registered vehicles that 
in FSM and Palau. A review report is available and with 
recommendations
 Number of vehicles per month tested and scheduled for 
maintenance
 Maintenance expenses became part of the national 
budget
 A regulation for spot check on vehicle emission with 
fines available
 Customs Act reviewed to include fiscal incentives on 
imports of fuel efficient vehicles
 A proposal on the costs and benefit of having public 
transport for government workers for Majuro
 Fuel efficient vehicles and standards are available
 Reports on fuel savings using hybrid car is available and 
scaled up
 Energy Data sets
 Energy Reports
 Legislative framework
 Plant and Vehicle Units 
recordscollaborations with various stakeholders
recommendations
 Feasibility study report available on trialling of using 
biofuel to replace existing diesel engine powered 
outboards
 Energy Security Indicators
support is available
 Coconut producer’s interest is 
high
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
INTERVENTION LOGIC INDICATORS AND TARGETS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS AND ASSUMPTIONS
GOAL
TO PROVIDE 20% OF POWER GENERATION THROUGH INDIGENOUS RENEWABLE RESOURCES BY 2020
OUTCOME
Reliable, sustainable and affordable 
energy supply
Share of installed power generation capacity from indigenous 
renewable energy target is 20% by 2020
 North REP Progress Report
 Annual Energy sector Review 
 Energy Security Indicators
 MEC generation and 
transmission reports
 MEC annual reports
 HIES report
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
Affordability of energy services: percentage decrease in the 
average household energy expenditure load Target is 
15.84% by 2020
 Availability of reliable data
EXPECTED OUTPUTS AND RESULTS
15. Private sector participation in the 
electric power supply in the RMI shall be 
allowed under conditions that are fair to 
MEC and the supplier (i.e. independent 
power producers' agreement)
 Electricity Act drafted in 2015 and adopted in 2016
 Practical/Technical guidelines for grid connected 
renewable energy sources produced & adopted as policy 
guidelines
 An appropriate new tariff system developed and put into 
operation
 Energy security indicator updated
 Increased in MEC profits 
 Legislative framework
 MEC website
 Energy security indicator
 MEC financial reports
 MEC annual report
 Political, financial and human 
resources available
16. Available energy modelling done 
to ascertain the technical and economic 
indigenous energy sources where 
technically practical and economically 
viable
 Wind map produced. Estimate of kWh per kW of turbine 
provided by consulting firm. Specifications of appropriate 
turbine type received.
 Percentage of the one year data collection period during 
which the data are actually collected and logged (Goal 
98%)
 Number of outer islands SHS have new batteries
 Schools selected by MOE for electrification receive 
sufficient solar capacity for the operation of the intended 
programs
 Increased solar on grid proposals and installations 
 Energy assessments report
 Survey reports
 Energy security indicators 
 Outer island trip reports
 Project proposals
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
 National and political support develop, implement and manage 
renewable energy systems (small and 
medium-scale rural; large scale urban) 
continuously updated and enhanced
 Net metering policy in place MEC financial reports
 MEC website
 Availability of financial and 
human resources
18. Economically feasible alternatives 
to diesel fuel (biofuel and LNG) for power 
generation shall be utilized
 Number of project proposals developed and submitted 
to donors on biofuel use for power generation
Project proposals 
Project progress reports 
National and regional support
Availability of financial and human 
resourcesAnnex 3: Organizations and people consulted 
Government
Office of the Attorney General
Nitijela (Parliament) – Legal Counsel
Marshall Islands Department of Public Safety
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Internal Affairs
Ministry of Resources and Development
Division of Trade and Investment
Energy Planning Division
Ministry of Transportation and Communications
Office of Commerce and Investment
Economic Planning, Policy and Statistics Office
Office of Environmental Planning and Policy Coordination
Public enterprises and state-owned companies
Environmental Protection Authority
Majuro Atoll Waste Company
Marshall Islands Journal
Marshall Islands Mayor Association
Marshall Islands Visitors Authority
Marshalls Energy Company
Okinawa Enetech (JICA Project)
RMI Ports Authority 
Tobolar
University of the South Pacific
College of the Marshall Islands
Local government and civil society
AilInglapalp Atoll Local Government
Church Youth Representative – Rita Village
Council Women Representative – Laura Village
KIO Club 
Women United Together Marshall Islands