File Name: MLI-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Mali
Country Code: MLI
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 3 to 6 February 2020
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2024
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
20 December 2019
Original: English
1922278X (E) 271219
First regular session 2020
3 to 6 February 2020, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Mali (2020-2024)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Mali (2020-2024) 9I. Programme rationale
1. Mali, a landlocked country in the Sahel, continues to face significant challenges marked 
by growing fragility and multifaceted crises. This fragility results from deficits of resilience to 
shocks, lack of governance and low levels of public and private investments. The presence and 
activism of several armed groups due to the weak capacity of the country to control its vast 
underpopulated areas have resulted in the expansion of the crisis and the loss of thousands of 
lives1in recent years. Despite the presence of international forces2and the establishment of the 
Group of Five for the Sahel, violent extremism and radicalization continue to have a devastating 
effect on people's lives and livelihoods.
2. Four years after the signing of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in 2015, the 
country continues to face security challenges with the emergence of new threats to overall peace 
and stability.
3 The insecurity from the jihadist invasion that started in the northern regions has 
spread to the centre of the country with the advent of violent extremism. The deterioration of 
the security situation is exacerbated by rising intercommunity tensions. Insecurity have led to 
low State presence in the impacted regions and limited access to public services, with resultant 
deterioration in the rule of law and negative implications for coping capacities and livelihood 
options of the population, especially women and youth.
3. Governance deficits are noted in several core government functions. Corruption and illicit 
wealth accumulation persist. Weaknesses in the justice system have impacted both public 
confidence in the judiciary and the deterioration in the rule of law, which is negatively 
impacting human rights.
4 Access to judiciary services by vulnerable people, particularly
women, remains a challenge. Prisons are overcrowded and conditions in detention centres
remain poor. The presidential election in July 2018 had 24 candidates and a low voter 
participation rate of 42.7 percent in the first round and 34.42 percent in the second round. Of 
the 871 polling stations that did not open due to insecurity or inaccessibility, 444 were located 
in the regions of Mopti, Segou and Timbuktu. With the decentralization decree of 2018, the 
Government is accelerating transfers to local governments and communes, with budgetary
allocations increasing from 24.4 percent in 2017 to 25.3 percent in 2018.
4. Persistent insecurity and political uncertainties coupled with a decline in agricultural 
production have affected economic growth, which decreased from 5.3 percent in 2016 to 5
percent in 2018 and an estimated 4.9 percent in 2019. Economic growth remains non-inclusive 
since it is neither job-creating nor sufficiently broad-based to reduce poverty and inequality.
The economy is characterized by lack of diversification and competitiveness, dominated in 
2018 by the primary sector (32 percent of gross domestic product (GDP)), mainly cotton, and 
tertiary sectors (40 percent of GDP) such as telecommunications. Mali was ranked 123 of 137 
countries for competitiveness by the World Business Forum for 2017-2018. The business 
environment is not favourable for the development of the private sector due to the many barriers 
to investments.
5. The poverty rate has remained stagnant since 2009. After falling 12 points from 55.6
percent to 43.7 percent between 2001 and 2009, it rose to 47.3 percent in 2015, due to the high 
annual population growth rate of 3.6 percent5and the negative impact of the protracted security 
crisis on employment and inequality. It declined slightly to 43.6 percent in 2018 due to 
improved agricultural production in the last two years. Poverty in Mali is predominantly rural
 
1 UNDP, Journey to Extremism in Africa: Drivers, Incentives and the Tipping Point for Recruitment, New York, 2017. 
2 The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), established by Security Council resolution 2100 
(2013), Operation Barkhane (France) and the European Union military mission contribute to the training of the Malian Armed Forces.
3 Ministry of National Reconciliation and National Cohesion and European Union: Etude cartographique des conflits dans les régions du Centre 
et du Nord du Mali; Le contexte sécuritaire au Nord et Centre du Mali: Les jeux d’acteurs à l’horizon 2019, Août 2018. 
4 The Ibrahim Index of African Governance ranked Mali 28 of 54 countries for a value of 50.1
5
INSTATEêtMdlit PtèdMé(EMOP)2018with a rate of 53.6 percent in rural areas. The Multidimensional Poverty Index,
6 which expresses 
poverty in terms of deprivation in education, health and living conditions,
7
is 39.8 percent
nationally.
6. The lack of economic opportunities, combined with the lack of justice, insecurity and 
widespread corruption, is a determining factor in radicalization. Young people8are vulnerable 
to violent extremism9 because of the high incidence of unemployment. With a growth rate of 
3.6 percent, the population is young; 60 percent are under 40 and 39 percent are aged 15-40. 
Among this population of working age, more than 46 percent are unemployed. 
7. Women remain marginalized and underrepresented in the socioeconomic and political 
fabric of the society. They have limited economic opportunities, access to resources and 
services and voice in decision-making. Women’s representation in appointed positions remains 
low.
10 They account for 27 percent of parliamentarians and 26 percent of total presidential 
appointments. In 2018, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission 
in Mali (MINUSMA) and the Gender-Based Violence Information Management System (led 
by the United Nations Population Fund) reported respectively 22 (16 in 2017) and 116 (43 in 
2018) victims of conflict-related sexual violence.
8. Mali is characterized by vulnerability to climate change and strong anthropogenic pressure 
on natural resources that threatens the ecosystem and the resilience of the people. Two thirds 
of the country, the arid and semi-arid areas in the north, are subject to chronic drought because 
of the effects of climate change and a negative impact on biodiversity. Human activities most 
damaging to biodiversity are land clearing, logging, bush fires, uncontrolled use of chemical 
fertilizers and pesticides and poor gold panning and fishing practices. Competition for limited 
resources has increased the population’s vulnerability to climate change and conflicts. The
persistence of drought and the frequency of conflicts have increased migration, particularly in 
the central regions. Forests, which provide people with goods and services along with 93
percent of energy needs, are disappearing at the rate of 100,000 hectares annually with negative 
impact on biodiversity. Floods are relatively recurrent in Mali; 65 flood cases were observed in 
2017, causing considerable damage. People are also affected by the degradation of the quality 
of their living environment by urbanization, waste and environmental pollution. 
9. The 2015-2019 country programme produced significant results and transformational 
changes in development management, governance and environmental protection. The work of 
UNDP has strengthened leadership and national ownership of the process of steering and 
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The implementation of the road
map produced at the end of the mainstreaming, acceleration and policy support (“MAPS”)
mission has made it possible to strengthen the coordination mechanism for the Sustainable 
Development Goals and to make Malians aware of the importance of the Goals on their living 
conditions. In addition to supporting the organization of free and transparent presidential and 
legislative elections, UNDP helped to improve respect for human rights through the massive 
reduction of prison overcrowding and the rehabilitation of infrastructures, particularly in postconflict areas. With regard to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
and the Paris Climate Agreement, UNDP work led to the finalization of the third national 
communication and the articulation of the country’s nationally determined contribution.
10. The new country programme builds on lessons learned and recommendations from the 
various evaluations of the ongoing programme, including the midterm programme evaluation 
and the independent country programme evaluation. These evaluations revealed: (a) dispersal 
and fragmentation of the programme both thematically and geographically, which reduces the 
impact and prevents adequate monitoring of interventions; (b) weak synergies in the 
implementation of the various segments of the programme; (c) lack of control of the underlying 
 
6
INSTAT, Multidimensional Poverty in Mali in 2016, November 2017. 
7 UNDP, Global Multidimensional Poverty Index 2018 
8 Ministry of Youth and Sports (2012), Framework Policy for Youth Development and action plan
9 causes of conflicts, resulting in poor results on intra-community dialogue and a low contribution 
to peace and social cohesion; (d) lack of a sustainability-based approach because of high 
ambition vis-à-vis limited means; (e) low consideration of risk mitigation measures; and (f) 
difficulties for UNDP to play a central role in the relationships with United Nations agencies 
and other technical and financial partners, as well as low exploitation of the synergies between 
its mandate and that of MINUSMA.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
11. Taking into account the new security situation and the multifaceted challenges in 
governance, UNDP will mobilize and harness partnerships to play an integrator role across the
policy programme front, the Sustainable Development Goals and the nationally-determined 
contribution with improved coherence between the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), the United Nations Integrated Strategic Framework and 
the country programme. This will also include tailored area-specific approaches such as 
strengthening stabilization and the humanitarian-development nexus in the central regions. 
UNDP will strengthen its collaboration with MINUSMA, United Nations agencies, donors, the 
private sector and other development stakeholders on the Sustainable Development Goals, the 
Paris Agreement and the Government’s Strategic Framework for Economic Recovery and 
Sustainable Development, (Cadre Stratégique pour la Relance Économique et le 
Développement Durable (CREDD)), 2019-2023 to address the complex development 
challenges facing Mali.
12. In terms of the national policy framework, in 2018 the Government finalized the CREDD, 
which explicitly integrates the Sustainable Development Goals, as the implementation tool for 
its new long-term vision "Mali 2040". Mali presented its voluntary national report to the highlevel forum on sustainable development in July 2018. With UNDP support, the Government 
successfully hosted the Sustainable Development Goal Campaign in May 2018 to sensitize and 
mobilize the population on the 2030 Agenda.
13. The country programme, developed in consultation with the Government, United Nations
agencies, donors, the private sector and civil society, integrates the objectives of the 2030 
Agenda and African Union Agenda 2063 and is completely aligned with national priorities set 
out in the CREDD. It will be implemented as part of joint interventions planned in the 
UNSDCF (2020-2024). These are: (a) effective and accountable governance for a peaceful, fair 
and inclusive society; (b) inclusive growth, resilience and environmental sustainability; and (c) 
basic social services and social protection. The programme will be implemented in line with 
the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, notably through effective implementation of signature 
solutions to develop national and local capacities in development management.
14. UNDP will adopt an intervention strategy that takes into account the socioeconomic, 
political and security context of the country and will better target thematic and geographic 
challenges to make interventions more effective and results more sustainable. This strategy will 
target youth and women in priority areas and will focus on: (a) stabilization, resilience to shocks
and social cohesion in the centre of the country; (b) improved application of the humanitariansecurity-development nexus in the north, and; (c) national programmes such as the National 
Social Emergencies Programme aimed at resilience and the reduction of poverty at regional 
level.
15. The new programme aims to contribute to the emergence of a peaceful and resilient Malian 
society where citizens regain confidence in their institutions, live in an environment of peace
with a fair justice system, are resilient to crises and enjoy the fruits of inclusive growth. The 
theory of change underlying the programmatic offer is that: (a) if the essential functions of the 
State are restored and associated services accessible to all, then violent extremism and 
intercommunity conflicts will be greatly reduced and the citizens of Mali will regain confidence 
in their institutions and live sustainably in a peaceful and safe environment; (b) if the of private sector investments, and entrepreneurship develops, particularly for young people and 
women, then economic growth will be inclusive, create jobs and reduce poverty and 
inequalities; and (c) if disaster prevention and response mechanisms are functioning, 
environmental standards are applied in natural resource management and biodiversity 
protection, and intelligent production systems are adopted, then Malian citizens will be resilient 
to conflict and climate change. These three programmatic offers are interdependent and will be 
implemented in an integrated manner to ensure effectiveness and efficiency. For example, 
having strong institutions will support an enabling environment for the private sector which 
will improve investments and create sustainable jobs, moving people away from dependence 
on fragile natural resources for their livelihoods. This will also reduce the number of people 
affected by climate change. Application of environmental standards and response mechanisms 
could be achieved through stronger institutions. Integration of the three programmatic offers 
will be achieved through local area-based planning, avoiding siloed projects in different regions 
of the country.
Priority 1. Inclusive governance and peacebuilding
16. Initiatives under this priority contribute to Sustainable Development Goals 5, 10, 11 and16 
and will implement signature solutions 2, 3 and 6. They aim to restore the authority of the State 
and key core government functions through the effective return of the administration to the 
north and the centre of the country. They will also contribute to the inclusion of populations,
especially women and youth, in decision-making processes and the promotion of their wellbeing through access to related basic services. UNDP will support institutional reforms aimed 
at strengthening the rule of law through fair access to justice and the fight against corruption. It 
will focus on the fight against impunity by strengthening the overall justice system and the 
protection of human rights, including the mitigation of the risks of discriminatory practices and 
the holistic treatment of gender-based violence cases.
17. UNDP will support mechanisms to improve the decentralization process through effective 
redeployment of the administration, transfer of powers to local authorities and implementation 
of budgetary transfer measures provided for in the law for communities. Support for the 
organization of national, legislative, municipal and local elections will remain a priority. UNDP 
will facilitate the establishment at local level of an enabling environment for proper private 
sector engagement, investment and mobilization of diaspora investors.
18. To fight against violent extremism and radicalization, UNDP will strengthen community 
and cross-border stabilization and security mechanisms, taking into account conflict dynamics 
in the Sahel. UNDP will contribute to the implementation of the National Strategy on the 
Prevention and Combating of Violent Extremism and Terrorism, the United Nations Integrated 
Strategy for the Sahel and reinforcement of the transborder initiative for the stabilization of the
Liptako-Gourma region.
11
19. The proposed programme will be part of the new paradigm of the 2030 Agenda and the 
Addis Ababa Action Agenda for effective governance systems through strengthening of the 
national domestic revenue mobilization agenda, and the integration of public and private actors 
towards achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. Interventions will be undertaken
in partnership with key national institutions and international partners such as the Governments 
of Germany, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden. With the Global Focal 
Point for the Rule of Law, UNDP will play its integrating role to advance rule of law, security 
and human rights. Partnerships with MINUSMA will be strengthened on security issues, with 
United Nations agencies on local governance and decentralization, and with key multilateral 
partners such as the World Bank, European Union and African Union.
Priority 2. Inclusive growth and promotion of the private sector
20. Initiatives under this priority contribute to Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 10, 
13, 15 and signature solutions 1, 3 and 5. They aim to support economic structural transformation to generate inclusive economic growth that creates jobs and reduces poverty. 
Partnerships with ministerial departments and public institutions will be strengthened around 
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Goals. There will be closer collaboration with 
the private sector and youth organizations around the development of entrepreneurship. 
Collaboration will be reinforced with technical and financial partners for the development of 
the private sector and with bilateral partners for operationalizing the country accelerator lab.
21. UNDP will strategically accompany the Government in developing capacities for planning, 
budgeting and monitoring public policies. The new programme will support the strengthening 
of the national statistics system by enhancing the capacities of National Statistics Institute 
(Institut national de la statistique (INSTAT)) and the national structures in charge of the of the 
Sustainable Development Goals and the nationally determined contribution.
22. UNDP will support the Government in establishing and operationalizing inclusive 
frameworks for dialogue and development cooperation towards a policy environment 
conducive for the emergence of an economy that builds on all levers of sustainable 
development. It will help to strengthen incentives for mobilizing and redirecting private sector 
investment in the renewable energy and climate-smart agriculture sectors, de-risking 
investment and financing the Goals in general.
23. Since the Malian economy is characterized by a strong dependence on the primary sector, 
it is crucial for the country to promote economic structural transformation and address 
inequality. UNDP will support the development of public-private partnerships aimed at 
diversifying the economy through the development of value chains and the promotion of small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). The development of SMEs in sectors with high potential 
for investors in general, with a focus on job creation for young people and women, would likely
trigger a virtuous circle of growth.
Priority 3. Environmental sustainability and resilience to the negative effects of climate 
change
24. Initiatives under this priority are aligned with Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 5, 10, 
12, 13 and 15 and signature solutions 1, 3, 4 and 5. They aim to develop stakeholders’ capacities 
for the prevention and sustainable management of natural resources in reducing conflicts related 
to access and sustainable usage. Partnerships with ministerial departments and public 
institutions (Environment and Sustainable Development Agency) will be strengthened with 
particular emphasis on the private sector and the implementation of the Sustainable 
Development Goals and the nationally determined contribution. Collaboration with technical 
and financial partners and with bilateral partners on sustainable development will be continued.
25. In a context of the country's vulnerability to climate change and the strong pressure on 
natural resources that threatens both the ecosystem and living conditions, the new programme 
will contribute to: (a) developing the resilience capacities of various actors including for risk 
prevention and adaptation to climate change; (b) improving capacities for sustainable and 
decentralized management of natural resources, conflict prevention and pollution control; and 
(c) improving access to clean and sustainable energy to generate income through innovative 
energy and financing.
26. The new programme will focus on developing the prevention and adaptation capacities of 
environmental actors. These include: (a) improving the early warning system; (b) strengthening 
knowledge on land use; (c) risk financing and establishment of insurance systems; (d) 
reinforcing knowledge on reducing emissions (implementation of the nationally determined 
contribution); and (e) mastering risk-reduction budgeting.
27. UNDP will support capacity development for stakeholders for natural resources 
management through the adoption of best practices in: (a) biodiversity protection; (b) ecosystem 
restoration; (c) reducing pressure on natural resources through access to renewable energies; 
and (d) crisis management. Emphasis will be placed on the application of international 
standards and the adoption of climatesmart interventionsIII. Programme and risk management
28. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in 
the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control 
framework. In accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/9, all direct costs associated 
with project implementation will be charged to the concerned projects.
29. In line with the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action and 
the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation, the country programme will be 
implemented at the national level and appropriate implementation modalities will be used at the 
project level. To strengthen implementation, UNDP will use macro- and microassessment tools 
to assess partners’ capacities and provide appropriate support. To manage financial risks, the 
programme will use the harmonized approach to cash transfers in coordination with other 
United Nations agencies. 
30. Taking full advantage of United Nations reform, UNDP will play an integrator role within 
the United Nations Country Team by establishing a multi-stakeholder platform to provide 
integrated solutions to the multifaceted challenges facing Mali. In its role of promoting 
knowledge products, UNDP will operationalize the accelerator lab in Mali with the aim of 
exploring, mapping and experimenting local initiatives and scaling up innovative results. It 
will mobilize South-South and triangular cooperation to leverage regional and global 
knowledge and solutions.
31. UNDP will assist the Government in developing its capacity for public finance 
management and expand partnerships with the private sector by investing in innovative 
solutions and establishing integrated national financing frameworks, budgeting and fiscal and 
debt instruments aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals.
32. Mali runs the risk of a serious deterioration of the security situation in the centre of the 
country if intra-community tensions intensify and spread to other localities. The programme 
could be affected by difficulties in reaching the populations, especially since UNDP aims to 
strengthen its presence in the north and central regions. As the programme cycle falls between 
two presidential terms, the last two years of implementation could be affected by political 
tensions. Finally, there is a real risk of rising religious conservatism. 
33. Mitigating these security risks requires strengthening collaboration with MINUSMA, other 
United Nations agencies and development partners; establishing innovative implementation 
arrangements with civil society and non-governmental organization to access difficult sites; 
strengthening monitoring systems; and improving community-centric approaches and the
peace-humanitarian-development nexus.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
34. UNDP will pay special attention to the monitoring and evaluation of the programme by 
using global and national data sources, as well as traditional and innovative monitoring 
methods. A monitoring and evaluation framework will be developed, and evaluations will be 
conducted in accordance with an evaluation plan in three levels: (a) at the government level, 
annual reviews will be conducted to assess the achievement of the programme. In addition, biannual follow-up meetings with national counterparts, implementing partners and other 
stakeholders will be organized; (b) at the United Nations country team level, regular joint 
monitoring missions with other United Nations agencies and donors will be conducted to ensure 
that programme activities are implemented as per design; and (c) at the local level, field visits will be organized for information and data collection on the programme’s results and impact on 
populations’ lives.
35. The programme indicators are aligned with the National Development Plan, the UNSDCF 
and the Strategic Plan Integrated Results and Resources Framework (IRRF) . To ensure the 
effective implementation of the monitoring and evaluation plan, at least 5 per cent of the country 
programme budget will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation activities. Lessons learned 
from implementation will be documented and utilized to improve the quality of ongoing and 
future interventions. UNDP will conduct a midterm review evaluation, for which findings and 
lessons learned will be used for the review of the programme for the remaining years of 
implementation. In collaboration with the United Nations agencies, joint evaluations such as 
the final evaluation of the UNSDCF 2020-2024 will be conducted. 
36. Corporate quality assurance standards will serve to strengthen linkages with the 
Sustainable Development Goals. The country office will build the capacities of national staff 
and partners in the implementation of UNDP social and environmental standards and 
accountability mechanisms. Support will be given to INSTAT to ensure the availability of 
reliable, quality disaggregated data.
37. UNDP will implement its gender equality strategy, advance the gender equality initiative, 
and invest at least 15 per-cent of the budget in gender-sensitive interventions. The gender 
marker will be used to control the expenditures and improve planning. 
38. In terms of communication, the programme will focus on: (a) the visibility of UNDP 
actions; (b) advocacy and resource mobilization; and (c) dissemination of knowledge and 
information based on accountability and transparencyAnnex. Results and resources framework for Mali (2020-2024)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Consolidation of democracy and improvement of governance
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 
By 2024, people live in a State governed by rule of law, an environment of peace and accountability through strong public institutions, media and civil society 
exercising their roles and responsibilities for effective and inclusive governance
By 2024, people are resilient to conflict, live reconciled and in harmony in an environment of peace, secured and respectful of human rights and positive cultural 
traditions
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
UNSDCF outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s)
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs (including 
indicators, baselines targets)
Major partners / 
partnerships
Frameworks
Indicative resources by 
outcome ($)
Indicator 1.1:
Proportion of population 
satisfied with their last 
experience with public 
services
Baseline: 47% (2018)
Target: 50%
Indicator 1.2: Ibrahim 
Index of African 
Governance score on 
rule of law
Baseline: 49.7 (2017)
Target: 60
Indicator 1.3: Voter 
turnout disaggregated by 
(a) type and (b) sex
Baseline: First round 
2018 presidential election (a) 42.7% 
(b) 29.9% for women 
Target: (a) 46%; (b) 
35%
Data source: Mali -
Mètre
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: 
Friedrich Ebert Stiftung
Data source: Mo Ibrahim Foundation report
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Mo Ibrahim Foundation report 
2018
Data source: Ministry 
in charge of elections, 
Constitutional Court, independent observers, 
Sahel Alliance
Frequency: cyclic
Responsibility: Ministry in charge of elections, Constitutional 
Court, independent ob
Output 1.1: The most disadvantaged benefit from quality 
public services provided by performing and accountable 
institutions, public structures and local decentralized 
authorities
Indicator 1.1.1: Percentage of decentralized authorities 
supported which organize accountability sessions 
Baseline: 10%
Target: 60%
Data source, frequency: projects reports, annual
Indicator 1.1.2: Number of institutions and CSOs 
strengthened to fight corruption risks
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Data source, frequency: Bureau Du Vérificateur 
Général (BVG) and CSO annual reports, Section des 
Comptes
Output 1.2: Capacities, functions and financing of rule of 
law and national human rights institutions and systems 
strengthened to expand access to justice and combat 
discrimination, with a focus on women, victims of genderbased violence and other marginalized groups
Ministries in charge of 
institutional reform, 
decentralization, 
Foreign Affairs, 
Finance,
Commissariat au 
Développement 
Institutionnel, Agence 
Nationale 
d'Investissement des 
Collectivités 
Territoriales, 
Direction Générale des 
Collectivités 
Territoriales,
Governments of 
Canada, Germany, 
Luxembourg, 
World Bank 
MINUSMA,
UNCDF, CSOs
Regular: 5,020,134
Other: 7,971,235
Regular: 2,805,369
Other: 9,793,639Indicator 1.2.1: Percentage of justice actors with adequate 
technical and operational capacity for quality service delivery (disaggregated by sex)
Baseline: TBD
Target: 50%
Data source, frequency: projects reports, annual
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of CSOs, media with strengthened 
capacities to monitor the implementation of rule of law
Baseline: 4
Target: 20
Data source, frequency: projects reports, annual
Output 1.3: National and local capacities strengthened for 
reintegration, reconciliation, peaceful management of
conflict and prevention of violent extremism 
Indicator 1.3.1: Percentage of community safety and crossborder security cooperation mechanisms put in place that 
are functional 
Baseline: 2 (2019)
Target: 12
Data source, frequency: projects reports, annual
Indicator 1.3.2: Number of community conflict 
management and violent extremism control initiatives 
Baseline: 3 (2018)
Target: 15
Data source, frequency: project reports, annual
Output 1.4: Constitution-making, electoral and 
parliamentary processes and institutions strengthened to 
promote inclusion, transparency and accountability
Indicator 1.4.1: Number of electoral management bodies 
with strengthened capacity to conduct inclusive and credible 
elections 
Baseline: 3
Target: 4
Data source, frequency: project reports, annual
Indicator 1.4.2: Women's participation in elections
Proportion of women in the voter registry 
Ministries of Justice, 
Security, National 
Human Rights 
Commission, 
Mediateur de la 
République
CSOs
Governments of 
Denmark, Germany, 
Japan, Netherlands, 
Sweden, 
MINUSMA, 
Ministries of Religious 
Affairs, Territorial 
Administration, 
National 
Reconciliation, 
Justice, 
Governments of 
Denmark, Sweden, 
Peacebuilding Fund, 
MINUSMA, 
Faith-based 
organizations
Ministries of 
Territorial 
Administration, 
Parliament,
Electoral management 
structures, 
European Union, 
MINUSMA, 
CSOs
Regular: 3,830,384
Other: 8,578,703
Regular: 3,647,346
Other: 22,869,394Baseline: 48.67%
Target: 51.47
Data source, frequency: reports on elections, cyclical
Subtotal, Outcome 1 Regular: 15,303,233
Other: 49,212,971
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Inclusive growth and structural transformation of the economy
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 
By 2024, Malians, including women and youth, are reaping the benefits of inclusive and sustainable growth via a diversified, job-creating and resilient economy
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
Indicator 2.1: 
Proportion of men, 
women of all ages living 
in poverty in all its 
dimensions, by selected 
measures of 
multidimensional 
poverty, disaggregated 
by sex and region (% of 
the population)
Baseline:
(a) Poverty rate: 44.7%
(b) Rural: 51.8%
(c) Households led by a 
male: 46.1%
(d) Households led by a 
female: 25.7%
Target: 
(a) Poverty rate: 35.0%
(b) Rural: 45.0%
(c) Households led by a 
male: 40.0%
(d) Households led by a 
female: 18.0%
Indicator 2.2: Doing 
Business ranking
Baseline: 5350 (ease of 
Data source: Doing 
Business database
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: World 
Bank
Data source: EMOP
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility:
INSTAT
Output 2.1 The national statistics system has strengthened 
capacities to monitor progress towards the targets of the 
CREDD and Sustainable Development Goals, taking into 
account the gender and regional dimensions
Indicator 2.1.1: Percentage of survey and monitoring 
reports incorporating disaggregated data by gender and by 
region
Baseline: 10%
Target: 50%
Data source, frequency: INSTAT reports, UNFPA reports, 
Comités de Planification et Statistique (CPS), annual
Indicator 2.1.2: Existence of data treatment mechanisms 
providing disaggregated data to monitor progress towards 
the Sustainable Development Goals:
Administrative reporting systems
Baseline: 1
Target: 3
Data source, frequency: Human Development 
Observatory/INSTAT/CPS reports, biennial
Output 2.2: National and local institutions have 
strengthened capacity to plan, budget, implement, monitor 
and evaluate policies and strategies for the achievement of 
the Sustainable Development Goals
Indicator 2.2.1: Percentage of ministries with an approved 
gendersensitive plan
INSTAT, Ministries of 
Economy, Foreign 
Affairs,
Environment, 
UNFPA
technical and financial 
partners, 
Civil society
Ministries of 
Economy, 
Decentralization, 
Conseil National du 
Patronat 
CSO
Regular: 3,830,384
Other: 5,720,029
Regular: 3,491,153
Other: 11,440,057doing business) for 
reform in 2019
Target: 56
Indicator 2.3: 
Unemployment rate for 
total population, women 
and youth (% of total 
labour force, ILO model
Baseline:
(a) Total: 9.3
(b) Women: 10.6
(c) Youth: 16.5
Target:
(a) Total: 5
(b) Women: 5
(c) Youth: 8
Baseline: 50% 
Target: 100%
Data source, frequency: finance law/sectoral budget, 
annual
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of national policies and strategies 
evaluated
Baseline: 1
Target: 5
Data source, frequency: CREDD reviews, BVG Direction 
Nationale du Contrôle Financier assessment reports, annual
Output 2.3: Inclusive and enabling environment 
strengthened to expand public-private partnerships, dialogue 
and financing for achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals in line with Integrated National 
Financing Frameworks (INFF) mechanisms 
Indicator 2.3.1: Number of small and medium-sized 
enterprises/industries created per annum
Baseline: 6,500
Target: 10,000
Data source, frequency: API, Conseil National du Patronat
Indicator 2.3.2: Existence of an enabling environment in 
place leveraging additional resources from public and 
private sources for the Sustainable Development Goals
(a) Partnership and investment frameworks
(b) Institutional mechanisms
Baseline: (a) 0; (b) 0
Target: (a) 2; (b) 1
Data source, frequency: Primature, API, Conseil National 
du Patronat, annual
Output 2.4: Vulnerable populations, especially women and 
youth empowered to gain access to financial and nonfinancial assets to build productive capacities and benefit 
from sustainable livelihoods and jobs
Indicator 2.4.1: Number of jobs generated for youth and 
women, through the supported SMEs 
Baseline: 1400
Patronat, Primature, 
Agence pour la 
Promotion des 
Investissements (API)
World Bank
Denmark
Regular: 4,660,769
Other: 13,293,371
Regular: 6,011,538
Other: 25,013,400
Ministries of Youth 
and Women, of Social 
Affairs, of Economy, 
Conseil National du 
PatronatTarget: 2,400
Data source, frequency: project reports, annual
Indicator 2.4.2: Number of people accessing financial and 
non-financial services, disaggregated by target groups:
(a) Financial services
(a1) Poor
(a2) Women
(a3) Youth
(b) Non-financial assets
(b1) Poor
(b2) Women
(b3) Youth
Baseline: (a1) 954,000; (a2) 248,000; (a3) 105,000; 
 (b1) TBD; (b2) TBC; (b3) TBC
Target:(a1) 2,000,000; (a2) 1,000,000; (a3) TBC
 (b1) TBD; (b2) TBD; (b3) TBD
Data source, frequency, Bureau of Control and 
Supervision of Decentralized Financial Systems of Mali, 
Ministry of Economy and Finance, Youth and Women 
Ministry
Subtotal, Outcome 2 Regular: 17,993,844
Other: 55 466 857
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Environmental protection and resilience to climate change
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 
By 2024, communities manage sustainably and equitably natural resources and the environment and are more resilient to the adverse effects of climate change
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Strengthen resilience to shocks and crisis, Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Indicator 3.1:
Percentage of 
renewable energies in 
the energy portfolio
Baseline: 5%
Target: 15%
Data Source Agence de 
l’Environnement pour le 
Développement Durable 
(AEDD), Sahel Alliance
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: AEDD
Data Source: Direction 
Générale de la Protection 
Civile (DGPC)
Frequency: Annual
Output 3.1: National and local actors, including vulnerable 
communities have strengthened technical and operational 
capacities for risks prevention and adaptation to climate 
change 
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of households using climate 
information and early warning systems for agriculture and 
flood risk prevention
Baseline: 45 000
Target: 271 252
Data source, frequency: project reports, annual
Ministries of Environment (AEDD), of Energy, of Finance, of 
Agriculture, of Security and Civil Protection, of private sector.
CSOs, Local governments, Donors
Regular: 6,830,384
Other: 20,013,400Indicator 3.2: 
Number of people per 
100,000 that are covered by early warning 
information through 
local governments or 
through national dissemination mechanisms (disaggregated 
by sex)
Baseline:
(a) Women: 3.03 
(b) Men: 2.97
Target:
(a) Women: 9.90 
(b) Men: 1,01
Responsibility: DGPC
Data Source: DGPC, 
Mali Météo
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: DGPC, 
Mali Météo
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of public and private partnership 
and investment for enabling climate adaptation and 
mitigation
Baseline: 0
Target: 15
Data source, frequency: project reports, annual
Indicator 3.1.3: Number of producers using innovative and 
resilient sustainable land and water management techniques
Baseline: 52,000
Target: 180,000
Data source, frequency: project reports, national reports on 
environment, annual
Output 3.2: Communities enabled to sustainably manage 
natural resources and environment taking into account 
conflict prevention, risk management and pollution control
Indicator 3.2.1: Natural resources that are managed under a 
sustainable use, conservation, access and benefit-sharing 
regime:
Area under sustainable forest management (hectares)
Baseline: 10,634,049 hectares (8.56% of the national 
territory)
Target: 23,047,003 hectares (18.56%)
Data source, frequency: CREDD review, Direction 
Nationale des Eaux et Forêts, annual
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of mechanisms and strategies put 
in place at community level for climate and disaster risk 
management and prevention/management of natural 
resources-based conflict
Baseline: 20 (2018) 
Target: 45
Data source, frequency: project reports, annual
Indicator 3.2.3: Percentage of households with access to 
sanitation services
Baseline: 45%
Target: 65%
Data source, frequency: CREDD/Direction Nationale de 
l'Assainissement et du Contrôle des Pollutions et des 
Nuisances review reports, annually
Ministries of Environment (AEDD), Finance, Agriculture, Security and Civil Protection, Civil Society, 
local governments, 
Donors
Regular: 5,098,231
Other: 24,440,057
Regular: 4,464,308
Other: 24,866,715Output 3.3: Solutions adopted to achieve universal access 
to clean, affordable and sustainable energy and to generate 
income for women and young people through innovative 
technologies and financing
Indicator 3.3.1: Number and proportion of households 
benefiting from clean, affordable and sustainable energy 
access:
 (a) Women-headed
 (b) In rural areas 
 (c) In urban and peri-urban areas
Baseline: (a) TBC, (b) TBC, (c) TBC
Target: (a) TBC, (b) TBC, (c) TBC
Data source, frequency: Agence des Energies 
Renouvelables (AER), annual
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of jobs created in the sector of 
renewable energies for women and youth
Baseline: 2,074 (841 women, 1,233 youth)
Target: 6,222 (2,523 women, 3,699 youth)
Data source, frequency: AER, annual
Ministries of Environment (AEDD), Energy, Finance, Agriculture, Youth and 
women, private sector, 
Civil Society, local 
governments
Subtotal, Outcome 3 Regular: 16,392,923
Other: 69,320,172
Total Regular: 49,690,000
Other: 174,000,000