File Name: MMR-CPD-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Myanmar
Country Code: MMR
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 22 - 26 January 2018
Start Year: 2018
End Year: 2022
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
20 November 2017
Original: English
1720760X (E) 211217
First regular session 2018
22 - 26 January 2018, New York
Item 2 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Myanmar (2018-2022)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale ................................ .................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships ................................ ... 4
III. Programme and risk management ................................ ....... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation ................................ ............. 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Myanmar (2018-2022) 10I. Programme rationale 
1. Myanmar is a lower middle-income least developed country which continues to navigate 
multiple transitions: from conflict to peace, from military/autocratic rule to a democratic civilian 
Government and from a largely closed economy to an open market economy.1 These transitions are 
occurring in a complex development context where: high concentrations of poverty in rural areas 
contrast with accelerated development in urban centres; armed conflict is still occurring in some parts 
of the country; and frequent natural disasters pose an increasing risk. 
2. Myanmar’s development context underscores the interrelationship between peace, governance, 
environment and sustainable development. Achieving lasting peace and the emergence of a union 
based on the principles of democracy and federalism will require an ongoing process of political 
dialogue, leading to future constitutional reform. This will require a long-term trust-building effort 
to resolve fundamental differences between the parties on centre-periphery relationships, especially 
regarding national identity, citizenship and control over natural resources. The UNDP country 
programme will support the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and Sustainable Development Goals
within this framework of addressing the challenges of multiple transitions.
3. The peace process faces challenges in ensuring an inclusive and flexible approach that is 
acceptable to all parties involved in the national dialogue, and the Joint Ceasefire Monitoring 
Committee faces some constraints in fulfilling its mandate to monitor adherence to the 2015 
Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement.2In this regard, it will be important to encourage a broad range of 
stakeholders in the peace process including civil society, youth and women (who have been 
underrepresented in the peace process).
3
4. The new Government is committed to strengthening the country’s democratic institutions by 
promoting accountability and transparency, and improving capacities for service delivery, integrated 
policy planning, coordination and analysis.4 The national Parliament and the state/region 
administrations and parliaments have been operational only since 2011 and are actively pursuing 
capacity-building and institutional strengthening efforts. Despite the first population census in three 
decades and other surveys,5the overall capacity of the national statistical system remains low, 
resulting in a deficit of reliable, disaggregated data for policy development and targeting of services.
6
5. The justice sector faces institutional capacity challenges and is focused on justice reform, 
strengthening the rule of law and improving access to justice for all. The country has ratified several 
international conventions concerning human rights, notably on women, children, persons with 
disabilities and trafficking. A National Human Rights Commission has been established but lacks 
capacity, and there is scope to encourage further convention ratifications and implementation of 
universal periodic review recommendations.7 Women continue to be underrepresented in governance 
institutions across all three branches of government especially at senior levels; and only 84 of over 
17,000 elected ward/village tract administrators are women.
8
 
1 United Nations Country Team (UNCT) Myanmar, Situation Analysis for the United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework (UNDAF) 2018-2022. 
2
International Crisis Group, Myanmar’s Peace Process: Getting to a Political Dialogue, Crisis Group Asia Briefing no 149 
October 2016.
3 Alliance for Gender Inclusion in the Peace Process, Moving from Discrimination to Inclusion: Gender Perspectives on the 
Political Dialogue Themes, February 2017.
4 Phillip Rawkins and Frederick Rawski, Mid-Term Evaluation: Democratic Governance and Rule of Law Portfolio, December
2016.
5 Household Living Conditions Survey, Labour Force Survey, Demographic and Health Survey.
6 World Bank’s statistical capacity indicator data: http://datatopics.worldbank.org/statisticalcapacity/SCIdashboard.aspx
7 UNCT, Situation Analysis for UNDAF 2018-2022.
8 Asian Development Bank, UNDP, UNFPA, UN-Women, Gender Equality and Women’s Rights in Myanmar: A Situation 
Analysis2016DP/DCP/MMR/2
6. The situation in Rakhine State is complex, and the Government established an Advisory 
Commission chaired by former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan in September 2016. 
The commission's mandate was to find lasting solutions to the complex and delicate issues in Rakhine 
State, in accordance with established international standards, thereby helping to improve the lives of 
the members of all communities in Rakhine. The commission recently issued its final report and the 
Government announced the creation of a 15-person committee chaired by the Minister for Social 
Welfare, Relief and Resettlement, to provide suggestions for how to implement the recommendations 
of the Advisory Commission. 
7. Myanmar ranks 145 of 187 countries in the Human Development Index.9 Whilst economic 
growth remains strong, recent increases in foreign investment are concentrated in the extractive 
industry, which has limited job creation potential and poses long-term environmental risks. Regional 
disparities and inequality persists; approximately one quarter of the country’s population is 
considered poor, with the highest concentrations in rural areas, although urban poverty and inequality 
are rising, linked to growing rural-urban migration.10 Natural disasters are leading causes of people 
falling back into poverty.11 Women lag behind men in labour force participation and financial 
inclusion.12 The Government is committed to strengthening its data collection and analytical capacity 
to develop policies for inclusive economic growth, especially as the large youth population creates 
opportunities for a demographic dividend.
8. The effective management of the country’s natural resources is critical for maintaining a strong 
base for sustainable growth and is central to the discussions on peace and federalism, considering 
that much of the country’s mineral wealth is found in areas affected by conflict. Yet deforestation, 
large-scale mining and increasing urbanization threaten the sustainability of this base.13 Improving 
environmental governance will require: mainstreaming environmental, livelihood and conflictsensitive considerations into sectoral development planning; improving capacities for environmental 
regulation and oversight; securing adequate resources for environmental management; and 
mechanisms for greater public participation.14
9. Much of the country’s population and economic activities are concentrated in disaster risk-prone 
coastal areas and central dry zones, which have high levels of poverty and a low capacity to respond.15
Earthquakes pose additional risks with growing urbanization, yet the country’s level of preparedness 
is very low. Women and children in female-headed households are particularly vulnerable to climate 
change and women are far more likely to die in a natural disaster.16 
10. The theory of change suggests that securing a durable peace will require efforts to build effective 
national and subnational institutions to address the immediate needs of all of Myanmar’s 
communities, build the trust necessary to underpin an eventual political settlement that helps resolve
decades of conflict, and prepare institutions for increased decentralization in line with an eventual 
political settlement. In so doing, governance mechanisms must mitigate conflict risks posed by 
inequality, exclusion and vulnerability linked to climate change, disaster risk and natural resources
management. 
11. With the support of United Nations and bilateral partners, UNDP has already established itself 
as a key partner for strengthening core government functions through: enhancing capacities to sustain 
change via establishing policy and strategic plans (national and subnational parliaments, Supreme 
Court); supporting cross-sectoral civil service reforms; and building intergovernmental coordination 
 
9 UNDP, Human Development Report 2016: Human Development for Everyone, New York, 2017.
10 World Bank, Myanmar: A Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2014.
11 UNDP, Stephan Schmitt-Degenhardt, A Regional Perspective on Poverty in Myanmar, August 2013. 
12 Asian Development Bank, Gender Equality and Women’s Rights in Myanmar, 2016 and World Bank Global FINDEX 
Database.
13 Myanmar’s National Adaptation Programme of Action to Climate Change, 2012.
14 UNDP Myanmar, Needs Assessment for Effective Implementation of the Environmental Conservation Law in Myanmar, 2016.
15 UNCT Myanmar, Situation Analysis for UNDAF 2018-2022.
16 http://www
uneporg/asiapacific/against-all-odds-rural-women-myanmar-cope-natural-disasters-and-climate-changecapacity (justice sector, civil service reform, disaster risk reduction, national planning).17 UNDP has 
helped to develop national policies on environment, disaster management/ risk reduction and 
financial inclusion (extending financial services to over 124,000 people, 82 per cent of them women);
initiated support for subnational development planning through the first-ever mapping initiative of 
the local governance situation across the country; and supported 50,000 households in the Dry Zone 
to provide farmers with climate and disaster risk information and adaptation strategies.
18 UNDP has 
strengthened national capacities for research, analysis and generation of high-quality data, including 
preparation of data readiness and baseline studies for the Sustainable Development Goals.
19
12. Within the UNCT context, UNDP has established its niche through leading the development of 
the first-ever UNDAF for Myanmar; co-chairing sector working groups on public administration 
reform and disaster risk reduction; and leading or coordinating United Nations efforts on donor 
coordination and development effectiveness.
13. Moving forward, the comparative advantage of UNDP lies in the partnerships, access and trust 
developed to date to advance reforms that focus on core government functions as essential building 
blocks to enhance government effectiveness, responsiveness and cross-sectoral coherence. The 
midterm evaluations of the local governance and democratic governance and rule of law programmes
identified the strengths of UNDP as: its cross-sectoral presence across all branches of government; 
deployment of embedded staff with core union-level institutions; high-level political support for 
several of the country programme’s principal areas of focus; and a presence at state/regional level
enabling more inclusive state and community engagement, with the potential to link activities to 
national-level policy development. .
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
14. The country programme has benefitted from several rounds of consultations with government, 
development partners and civil society, and is aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021 
UNDAF, 2018-2022 and the following national Sustainable Development Goal priorities:20 (a) 
increasing access to peace and justice, institutional strengthening and combating corruption; (b) 
addressing climate change and building disaster resilience; (c) reducing poverty and inequalities, 
empowering people, increasing women’s employment and financial inclusion; and (d) aligning 
national needs and priorities with improved statistics.
21
15. UNDP will expand its capacity-building support initiated under the previous programme, 
shifting towards more integrated programming and support to United Nations-wide initiatives to 
better address the interlinkages between peacebuilding and social cohesion, governance, environment 
and natural resources management, resilience, urbanization and balanced and inclusive growth. In
line with the principle of leaving no one behind, the new programme will focus on strengthening the 
ability of national counterparts to address the needs of the vulnerable, defined as those exposed to 
conflict/violence, climatic and disaster risks and those marginalized by inadequate economic 
opportunities and poor public service delivery.
16. UNDP will expand the use of area-based approaches to development at subnational level where 
demand for its support is increasing. The target areas will be determined by criteria such as poverty 
levels, inequality, climate vulnerability and other peacebuilding/State building factors. UNDP will 
 
17 See Phillip Rawkins and Frederick Rawski, Democratic Governance and Rule of Law Portfolio – Final Report, December 
2016; and Nicolas Garrigue, et al., Independent Outcome Evaluation: UNDP Local Governance Programme 2013-2016, February 
2017.
18 Independent Mid-Term Evaluation: Myanmar Country Programme Action Plan 2013-2017, September 2015.
19 Ibid.
20 As presented during UNDP-Government consultations on 6 April 2017.
21 See also 2016 Economic Policy of the Union of Myanmar, prioritizing the achievement of peace, national reconciliation and a 
federal democratic union, balanced development across states/regions, strengthening human capital and skills and participatory
development processesDP/DCP/MMR/2
use its network of field offices to support this expansion of subnational programming and where 
appropriate, provide programmatic and operational support to other United Nations agencies, 
particularly in post-conflict/disaster contexts to help communities recover their livelihoods.
17. UNDP will focus primarily on individuals and communities that are "furthest behind", which
may include rural and urban poor, ethnic minorities, women and youth living in conflict-affected and 
disaster-prone areas, and female-headed households.
18. UNDP will promote innovation throughout the country programme and develop partnerships 
with the private sector to support the 2030 Agenda, particularly in the areas of natural resource 
management and disaster risk reduction. UNDP will also provide a platform for South-South 
cooperation (with Association of Southeast Asian Nations and neighbouring countries) and 
engagement with Myanmar’s diaspora community.
Peace and governance: Sustaining peace through national reconciliation and building an 
effective democratic State
19. UNDP will support the peace process and formal peace architecture through technical support 
to the Joint Ceasefire Monitoring Committee with support from the United Nations Peacebuilding 
Fund and the multi-donor Joint Peace Fund. UNDP will also integrate peacebuilding and conflictsensitive approaches across the country programme by strengthening the capacities of ministries, 
state/region parliaments, judicial institutions and communities to adopt conflict-sensitive approaches, 
based on social cohesion principles, to rule of law/access to justice, township and state/region 
planning, service delivery and natural resources management. UNDP will also promote greater 
involvement of women and youth groups in the peace process. 
20. UNDP will use its comparative advantage of trust and access to strengthen core government
functions (Sustainable Development Goal 16) and the chain of decisions and actions that are needed 
to make policies by building capacities to improve coherence between policy formulation and 
legislative drafting processes at national and subnational levels. UNDP will help to strengthen the 
capacity of key partner institutions (Attorney General’s Office, Union Civil Service Board, Ministry 
of Planning and Finance, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and 
Resettlement) for more integrated policy planning and implementation. UNDP work on 
environmental and social safeguards and disaster risk reduction, for example, will provide entry 
points to work across sectors/branches of government to improve cross-sectoral policy planning. To 
improve the civil service’s ability to leverage improved policymaking and coherence into 
development results, UNDP will support Myanmar’s Civil Service Reform Strategic Action Plan, 
promoting meritocracy, integrity and strengthening human resources management. UNDP will also 
stand ready to again provide support to electoral processes, if requested. 
21. Linked to the work on improved policy coherence, UNDP will use its convening role and global 
network to improve national and subnational capacities to mainstream the Sustainable Development 
Goals for development that is more cross-sectoral and sensitive to conflict, disaster risk and gender
dimensions, including donor coordination at both national and subnational levels. Horizontal linkages 
will be strengthened between executive and legislative bodies and with civil society to improve
targeting of policies and services; vertical linkages will be strengthened through developing a 
formula-based model for participatory and inclusive planning and budgeting with improved 
alignment amongst township, state/region and union levels. With the support of donors such as the 
Governments of Switzerland and the United Kingdom, UNDP will expand these models from 2 to 
15 townships in Mon State and Bago Region and promote urban-rural linkages for more balanced 
development. These initiatives will anchor area-based development approaches to provide more 
integrated interventions linked to the development and peacebuilding efforts of other United Nations
agencies. UNDP will coordinate this work with other partners (e.g., Asian Development Bank, World 
Bank), and draw on South-South partnerships within the region to provide relevant experience and 
lessons on localization of the Sustainable Development Goals. 22. To improve oversight and accountability, UNDP will initiate programming to help embed anticorruption measures in public administration reforms. UNDP, in cooperation with the United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime, will support the Anti-Corruption Commission and municipal and 
township institutions to strengthen integrity and accountability, including piloting innovative 
approaches such as mobile technology to solicit feedback on service provision quality and integrity.
23. UNDP will continue strengthening the national Parliament’s institutional capacity to undertake 
its constitutional responsibilities of law-making, oversight and representation through improving the 
capacity of parliamentary oversight committees (particularly on anti-corruption, human rights and 
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals) by undertaking public inquiries and engaging 
with stakeholders and the public. UNDP will enhance Parliament’s administrative capacity to drive 
strategic and change management; and expand its capacity-building support to subnational legislative 
bodies across all states/regions to better manage legislative agendas, conduct inquiries, provide 
oversight and engage with local constituents and civil society. UNDP, together with the United 
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), will work to 
increase the participation of women in parliaments and governance institutions (Goal 5).
24. UNDP will continue technical and advisory support to the Supreme Court and Attorney 
General’s Office to improve justice service delivery rooted in principles of professional integrity, 
non-discrimination and adherence to fair trial standards. Other agencies that exercise quasi-judicial 
authority will also receive support to integrate due process principles into administrative decisionmaking. UNDP, in collaboration with the International Development Law Organization, will 
strengthen coordination among justice sector agencies to increase access to justice, and expand legal 
awareness and training to civil society and law officers through UNDP-established rule of law 
centres. UNDP will initiate capacity-building support to the National Human Rights Commission, 
Attorney General’s Office and civil society to improve Myanmar’s ability to coordinate, monitor and 
report on human rights issues and follow up on universal periodic review recommendations. UNDP, 
in partnership with the United Nations Population Fund, will expand access to justice with a focus 
on supporting legal aid schemes for women and vulnerable persons.
Planet and prosperity: Promoting inclusive, resilient and sustainable development and 
environmental management
25. Linked to its work on integrated planning, policy coherence and Sustainable Development Goal
mainstreaming, UNDP will support more strategic coordination and financing of environment-related 
initiatives (Goals 13, 14, 15, 16) for better value for money by strengthening the capacities of the 
Ministry of Planning and Finance and state/region authorities to ensure that climate, disaster and 
environmental risks are considered in planning and budgeting for government projects across 
different ministries. UNDP will continue to support the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environmental Conservation (MoNREC) to implement the National Environmental Policy Strategy
Framework and Master Plan and mainstream environmental considerations throughout the 
Government. Assistance will be provided to MoNREC and the parliamentary Committee on Natural 
Resource Management and Environmental Conservation to review relevant policies and laws to 
strengthen environmental protection and promote a green economy, including sustainable production,
consumption and use of energy resources (Goals 7, 11, 12, 13). 
26. Technical support will be provided to MoNREC and state/region authorities to assess the 
economic, social and environmental impacts of selected extractive industries. This will include 
building linkages with the private sector to influence sustainable practices, improving access to 
justice to address grievances, supporting civic engagement in monitoring compliance with 
environmental standards and promoting innovative financial mechanisms such as payments for 
ecosystem services as an incentive to local communities for conservation.
27. UNDP will support climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies and actions, consistent 
with the country’s intended nationally determined contribution under international climate 
agreements. DP/DCP/MMR/2
28. With the support of the United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from 
Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries (UN-REDD) and Green Climate 
Fund, UNDP, together with the Food and Agricultural Organizations of the United Nations and 
United Nations Environment Programme, will support the implementation of Myanmar’s National 
REDD+ Strategy (2016-2020) to reduce deforestation and degradation through transformational 
changes in land use and forest management (Goal 13). UNDP will embrace innovative approaches 
in strengthening government mechanisms to access and manage environment and climate financing, 
seeking synergies between public and private investments, including for sustainable energy 
development. UNDP will scale up community-based and ecosystem-based approaches to enhance 
the adaptive capacity and resilience of vulnerable communities, and support innovative approaches 
to providing timely and quality climate risk information and livelihood diversification support to 
farmers (especially female heads of household) in the Dry Zone.
29. Building on the community disaster risk reduction initiatives implemented after Cyclone Nargis 
in 2008 and its support to the development of the Myanmar Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction 
under the leadership of the Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement, UNDP will help 
establish mechanisms linking the Myanmar National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction with 
the National Disaster Management Committee to maximize the coordination and impact of risk 
reduction initiatives across different ministries and help prepare national progress reports under the 
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (Goals 13, 16). UNDP will continue its support for
upgrading and scaling up the application of the Myanmar Disaster Damage and Loss Database and
expand support to damage-and-loss data collection, mapping and vulnerability assessments to track 
disaster and climate risks and help improve flood and weather forecasting and early warning systems.
30. UNDP will support initiatives to enhance the management of targeted protected areas (e.g., Inle 
Lake in Shan) and conservation of ecosystems and wildlife (e.g., in Kachin and Tanintharyi). UNDP 
will focus on promoting community-based natural resource management and conservation, integrated 
land use and participatory protected area management. UNDP will promote innovation such as a 
“ridge-to-reef” approach in Tanintharyi that connects terrestrial, coastal and marine resource 
management.
31. UNDP, together with other United Nations agencies such as the International Labour 
Organization, will help to promote more inclusive economic growth by improving policy coherence
and coordination across the Government in terms of economic policymaking. UNDP will support 
policy units in three pilot ministries (including the Ministry of Planning and Finance) to develop 
evidence-based policies for inclusive growth and employment generation. UNDP will also strengthen 
the capacities of state/region authorities to improve the enabling environment for micro and small 
businesses. This will include training in financial literacy, support for enterprise development and 
access to markets. UNDP, in partnership with the United Nations Capital Development Fund. will 
expand collaboration to support the implementation of the Government’s Financial Inclusion 
Roadmap which will strengthen the policy and regulatory environment supporting financial service 
providers, build the capacity to deliver financial services and leverage new technology to facilitate 
the growth and adoption of innovative digital financial services targeting women and youth. 
III. Programme and risk management
32. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional 
and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’s 
programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework. As per 
Executive Board decision 2013/9, cost definitions and classifications for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.33. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced by 
direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure. Implementation 
modalities (whether national, direct, non-governmental organization or United Nations agency 
implementation) will be determined based on maximizing the speed, efficiency and effectiveness of 
UNDP contributions to development results.
34. The successful implementation of the country programme will depend on managing several 
risks. The first risk is the stalling of the peace process or democratic reforms which may result in 
reduced opportunities for programming related to justice, human rights, subnational governance and
peacebuilding. To mitigate this risk, UNDP will expand the use of its convening role to support 
United Nations-wide efforts to engage partners at national level on the need for sustained progress 
on reforms, while expanding its efforts at subnational level to promote inclusive development 
processes and confidence-building measures, including better donor coordination. 
35. Secondly, expanding its activities related to peacebuilding increases the involvement of UNDP 
in politically sensitive programming, requiring UNDP to maintain its impartiality with all 
stakeholders. In doing so, UNDP will provide dialogue facilitation support for social cohesion and 
trust-building between conflict parties, decision makers and civil society. UNDP will ensure a more 
consistent application of human rights-based approaches to its programming to ensure participation 
of and support to all stakeholders. 
36. Thirdly, the unpredictability of regular resources funding, and the relatively crowded 
development assistance context in Myanmar, may pose challenges in securing the necessary 
resources for the programme. UNDP will benefit from continued support from existing bilateral 
partners, while forging new partnerships with non-traditional partners, the private sector and multidonor and vertical funds. UNDP will explore the possibility to help the Government implement loanfunded programmes from international financial institutions, at both national and subnational levels. 
To do so, UNDP is strengthening its partnerships and innovation capacities including with the private 
sector by investing in staff capacity. The increased emphasis on more integrated programming will 
help to highlight the UNDP value proposition. UNDP will undertake a programme criticality and 
prioritization exercise at the outset of the new programme cycle to establish contingencies for 
different funding scenarios.
37. To better position itself to deliver expanded programming and more coordinated United Nations
support at subnational levels, UNDP is strengthening its field office architecture and will introduce 
interdisciplinary teams and enhance staff capacities for integrated programming, retaining
programmatic and operational flexibility to respond to emerging opportunities. Additional 
investments will be made to strengthen national staff capacities through innovative mentoring 
initiatives.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
38. UNDP will ensure that project monitoring and evaluation frameworks are aligned with 
programme priorities, including strengthening the capacities of implementing partners in data 
collection and usage. The emphasis will be on data disaggregation for monitoring impacts on target 
groups, and the country office will ensure consistent use of the UNDP gender marker to monitor 
expenditure and improve gender-based planning and decision-making. s. At the subnational level, 
UNDP field offices will monitor field activities and provide quality assurance in line with the results 
framework. Indicators will be revised as warranted to ensure consistency with the UNDP Strategic 
Plan, 2018-2021.
39. In collaboration with the Ministry of Planning and Finance and the Central Statistics 
Organization, UNDP will support implementation of the National Strategy for the Development of 
Statistics to improve data quality, and strengthen the capacity of national and subnational authorities 
to generate and use data for improved evidence-based policy development and monitoring of DP/DCP/MMR/2
Sustainable Development Goal implementation. UNDP will lead UNCT efforts to mainstream the 
Goals into Myanmar’s planning and budgeting process at national and subnational levels.
40. To facilitate evidence-based programme design and support United Nations-wide engagement,
a multi-year research agenda will produce policy briefs, discussion papers and periodic reports, 
focused on Sustainable Development Goals and human development themes. Other issues identified 
as part of the research agenda include: gender analyses linked to climate change, the extractives sector 
and disability; analysis of the policymaking process; and planning/budgeting/monitoring linked to 
the Goals.
41. In order to increase the transparency, visibility and impact of its interventions, UNDP will 
intensify efforts to communicate its development results to stakeholders, beneficiaries and partners 
through stories and real-life narratives, using innovative, user-friendly formats and social media tools 
to reach diverse audiences.Annex. Results and resources framework for Myanmar (2018-2022)
 
22 All UNDAF language under discussion and pending government approval
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Increase access to peace, justice, corporate governance, developing managerial and leadership skills, institutional strengthening, anti-bribery and 
corruption
UNDAF22 OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: People in Myanmar live in a more peaceful and inclusive society, governed by more democratic and accountable institutions, and benefit 
from strengthened human rights and rule of law protection
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Citizen expectations for voice, development, the rule of law and accountability are met by stronger systems of democratic governance
UNDAF outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme 
outputs (including indicators, 
baselines targets)
Major partners / partnerships
frameworks
Indicative resources by 
outcome ($)
Proportion of seats held by women in:
(a) national Parliament and (b) local 
governments
Baseline: National Parliament 9.7%; 
Local government 9.5% (2016)
Target: TBD
Conflict related deaths per 100,000 
population
Baseline: 0.16 (2014)
Target: TBD
Union Election Commission
Uppsala Conflict Data Program/Peace 
Research Institute Oslo Armed Conflict 
Dataset
Output 1.1:
Effective public institutions enabled 
to develop and implement evidencebased policies and systems that 
respond to the needs of the people
Indicator 1.1.1: # of government 
development plans, at 
national/subnational levels, including 
townships, formulated with UNDP 
support based on the following 
principles of the 2030 Agenda and the 
Sustainable Development Goals: use of 
data, inclusive participation, crosssectoral coordination
Baseline (2017): Union – 0/0 
Region/State – 0/1
Township – 0/0
Target: Union – 1
 Region/State – 4
 Township – 64
Source: Project reports
Indicator 1.1.2: # of female village 
tract administrators
Baseline (2017): 88
Target: 500
Source: General Administration 
Department, 2021
Baseline (2017): 0
President's/Vice President's 
Office
Union/state and region 
Parliaments
Office of the Supreme Court 
of the Union
Union-level Ministries:
- Home Affairs
- Border Affairs
- State Counsellor Office
- Information
- Planning and Finance
- Social Welfare, Relief and 
Resettlement
- Ethnic Affairs
Union Attorney General's 
Office
Union Civil Service Board
Anti-Corruption Commission
National Reconciliation and 
Peace Centre
General Administration 
Department
State region governments
Township administrations
Myanmar National Human 
Rights Committee
Joint Monitoring Committee
Union Peace Dialogue Joint 
Committee
Ethnic Armed Organizations
Regular $20,788,500
Other $60,345,000DP/DCP/MMR/2
Indicator 1.1.3: Formula-based 
allocation for participatory local 
development planning adopted by 
Government
Baseline (2017): No such formula 
exists
Target: Formula-based allocation 
mechanism operational by 2020.
Source: Project reports
Indicator 1.1.4: # of townships using 
formula-based allocation mechanism in 
participatory planning
Baseline (2017): 2
Target: 15
Source: Project reports
Indicator 1.1.5:% of government bills 
in line with established government 
policy processes
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 75%
Source: Explanatory memorandum
Indicator 1.1.6: # of Goal-related 
operational targets of the National 
Strategy for the Development of 
Statistics (NSDS) under 
implementation with support of UNDP.
Baseline (2017): 2 of 27 operational 
targets of the NSDS
Target: 10
Source: NSDS
Indicator 1.1.7: % women, as 
proportion of deputy directors and 
above.
Baseline (2017): 39%
Target: 50%
Source: Central Statistical 
Organization.
Indicator 1.1.8: % women and men 
civil servants witnessing 
gender/race/ethnic discrimination at 
work.
Myanmar Police Force
World Bank
CSOs
United Nations agencies
Inter-Parliamentary Union
Universities
Bar Association
Rule of Law Centres
International Commission of 
Jurists
Federal Court of Australia
Bilateral agenciesBaseline (2016): Gender 
discrimination: 17% women, 19% men; 
racial discrimination: 15% women, 
16% men
Target: Gender discrimination: 14% 
women, 15% men; racial 
discrimination: 13% women, 13% men
Source: Union Civil Service Board civil 
servant perception survey
Output 1.2:
Institutions at union and subnational 
levels enabled to develop effective 
systems and procedures for 
performing their representative and 
oversight functions
Indicator 1.2.1: Systems for ongoing 
revision of rules ofprocedures in place 
(national and states/regions)
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 7 (Union level + 6 at 
State/Region level)
Source: Terms of reference of 
structures/committees reports
Indicator 1.2.2: % of parliamentary 
committees reports recommendations 
accepted by government (national and states/region levels)
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 60%
Source: Government reports
Indicator 1.2.3: # of proposals adopted 
to mitigate corruption risks
Baseline(2017):0
Target: 10
Source: government media advisories, 
project reports
Indicator 1.2.4: % of men and women 
civil servants feeling recruitment, 
promotions and postings are based on 
connections or bribes.
Baseline(2016):DP/DCP/MMR/2
- 22% (both genders): recruitment 
based on connections 
- 31% (both genders): promotions 
based on social connections
- 27% women, 28% men: postings 
based on connections
- 24% women, 27% men: 
promotions and postings based on 
bribes
Target:
- 20% (both genders): recruitment 
based on connections 
- 25% (both genders): promotions 
based on social connections
- 14% women, 16% men: postings 
based on connections
- 15% (both genders): promotions 
and postings based on bribes
Source: Union Civil Service Board civil 
servant perception survey
Output 1.3:
Mechanisms, institutions and 
capacities strengthened to sustain 
peace and social cohesion
Indicator 1.3.1: # of Nationwide 
Ceasefire Agreement violations 
addressed effectively against 
established criteria (criteria to be 
developed)
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 50
Source: Joint Ceasefire Monitoring 
Committee reports
Indicator 1.3.2: % of trained 
government participants who 
successfully apply the knowledge and 
skills on social cohesion and conflict 
sensitivity gained from training 
initiatives into their work.
Baseline (2017): 0%
Target: 80%
Source: Project reportsOutput 1.4:
People have improved access to 
responsive, inclusive and accountable 
justice services and national human 
rights protection mechanisms, in 
compliance with rule of law and 
international standards 
Indicator 1.4.1: % of UNDP 
monitored trials in compliance with fair 
trial standards in selected areas
Baseline (2018): 0
Target: 25%
Source: Project reports
Indicator 1.4.2: % of survey 
respondents in selected areas who 
describe outcomes of justice sector and 
judicial processes as fair, disaggregated 
by gender.
Baseline (year): 33%
Target: 50%
Source: Consolidated access to justice 
research conducted by UNDP, INGOs 
and domestic CSOs - biannual
Indicator 1.4.3: Extent to which 
National Human Rights Commission 
has the capacity to fulfil human rights 
obligations
Baseline (2017): 1 – Not Adequately
Target: 3 - Partially
Source: Human Rights Index, OHCHR
Indicator 1.4.4: Number of criminal 
case information forms populated by 
justice sector institutions that contain 
data fields related to sexual and gender-
based violence
Baseline (year): None
Target: 5
Source: Prosecutor, police and judicial 
case information formsDP/DCP/MMR/2
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Build disaster resilience and prevent climate change, reforestation, disaster preparedness, disaster risk reduction. Employment creation, productive 
employment, promote decent work, increase youth and women employment, SMEs development and financial inclusion.
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: By 2022, Myanmar becomes more resilient to climate and disaster risk with efficient environmental governance and sustainable use of 
natural resources
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for 
the poor and excluded
Forest area as a proportion of total land 
area
Baseline: Overall forest area 44.0% 
(2015)
Permanent forest estate (PFE) 31% of 
total land area (2015)
Target: Annual rate of increase of PFE 
by 1.67% over 2016-2030);
PFE 40% of total land area by 2030
Proportion of biomass energy generated 
from natural forests (Myanmar Energy 
Master Plan 2015)
Baseline: 71.4% (2002)
Target: 45.8% by 2030
Central Statistics Organization Statistical 
Yearbook / Department of Forest
Ministry of Electricity and Energy/MoNREC 
data
Output 2.1:
Improved disaster and climate risk 
management systems for community 
resilience
Indicator 2.1.1: # of climate 
vulnerable people with access to fresh 
water, resilient agriculture and 
livestock practices and risk information 
(disaggregated by sex)
Baseline (2016): 58,878 with access to 
fresh water 
0 with access to resilient agriculture 
and livestock practices
74,785 with access to risk information 
Target: 100,000 additional people with 
access to fresh water (of which 50 per 
cent women)
75,000 with additional access to 
resilient agriculture and livestock
practices (of which 50 per cent women)
250,000 with additional access to risk 
information (of which 50 per cent 
women)
Source: Project reports, reports to 
vertical funds
Indicator 2.1.2: # of 
national/subnational development and 
key sectoral plans that explicitly 
address disaster and climate risk 
management
Baseline (2017): 1
Target: 5
Source: National/subnational 
development and key sectorial plans
Indicator 2.1.3: # of disaster risk 
reduction frameworks that incorporate 
Union level Ministries:
- Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation
- Transport and 
Communications
- Natural Resources and 
Environmental Conservation
- Commerce
- Planning and Finance
- Social Welfare, Relief and 
Resettlement
Central Bank of Myanmar
Myanmar Economic Bank
Parliament Committee on 
Natural Resources 
Management and 
Environment
State/region governments
Natural Resource Governance 
Institute
Myanmar Development 
Institute
Union of Myanmar 
Federation of Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry
United Nations Global 
Compact Local Network
United Nations agencies
IFIs
Myanmar Centre for 
Responsible Business
Myanmar Responsible 
Business Forum
Myanmar Alliance for 
Transparency and 
Accountability
Universities
CSOs
Bilateral agencies
Regular $15,527,500
Other $75,386,401disaster and climate-induced risk 
management, and which address the 
particular needs of women and other 
vulnerable groups.
Baseline(2017): 3
Target: 6 (cumulative – Disaster 
Management Policy, Disaster Recovery 
Framework, National Earthquake 
Preparedness Plan)
Source: Frameworks
Output 2.2:
Solutions developed at the national 
and subnational levels for sustainable 
management of natural resources 
and ecosystem services as a platform 
for inclusive economic development
Indicator 2.2.1: # hectares of forest 
and protected areas/conservation areas 
increased/protected with UNDP support
Baseline(2015): 0
Target: 2.6 million hectares protected;
304,500hectares expanded
Source: Project report, government 
reports
Indicator 2.2.2: # of park management 
plans developed with UNDP support
Baseline(2017): 0 
Target:3
Source: Project report
Indicator 2.2.3: # of jobs and 
livelihoods created through 
management of natural resources, 
ecosystem services, disaggregated by 
sex
Baseline(2017): 0
Target: 100,000 (50% women)
Source: Project report
Indicator 2.2.4: # of mechanisms for 
stakeholder consultations on natural 
resources and environment.
Baseline(2017):1
Target: 4
Green Climate Fund
Global Environment Facility
REDD+
Adaptation FundDP/DCP/MMR/2
Source: Reports/proceeds of meetings 
of working groups/mechanisms 
Indicator 2.2.5: # of 
townships/district/state/region/sectors 
for which environmental risk 
assessments are conducted and 
recommendations and solutions 
provided to strengthen environmental 
safeguards 
Baseline (year): 0
Target: 5
Source: Project reports Output 2.3:
Evidence-based policies and 
programmes developed to promote 
inclusive economic growth and 
employment creation with particular 
focus on women and vulnerable 
groups 
Indicator 2.3.1: # of policies, plans or 
strategies developed which promote 
inclusive economic growth and/or 
employment creation, in particular for 
women and vulnerable groups
Baseline(2017): 1
Target: 6
Source: Project report
Indicator 2.3.2: # of women and 
vulnerable groups benefiting from 
collaboration with private sector 
entities leading to economic 
empowerment.
Baseline(2017): 0
Target: 50,000
Source: Project report
Indicator 2.3.3: # of women with 
access to improved financial services
Baseline(2017): 150,000
Target: 300,000
Source: Project report
Indicator 2.3.4: % of affected people 
having recovered their livelihoods through UNDP interventions in postconflict/disaster areas having recovered 
employment/livelihoods in selected 
areas
Baseline (2017): 0%
Target: 30%
Source: Project report