File Name: MNE-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Montenegro
Country Code: MNE
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August – 1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
5 July 2022
Original: English
2210512X (E) 210722 
Second regular session 2022
29 August – 1 September 2022, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Montenegro (2023-2027)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Montenegro (2023-2027).................................................. 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Montenegro is an upper-middle-income country seeking to join the European Union (EU). 
The accession process is the key driver of its development and serves as an accelerator of the 
Sustainable Development Goals (the Goals). The country has 620,000 inhabitants, with a 
Human Development Index value of 0.829 in 2019, putting it in the very high human 
development category.1
2. Over the last decade, Montenegro has enjoyed strong economic growth due to increased 
investments, consumption and expansion of its tourism sector, which depends on natural 
resources. While poverty levels have steadily declined, to 14.5 per cent in 2019,
2
the recent 
global rise in food and commodity prices and the COVID-19 crisis have exposed structural 
vulnerabilities in the economy. Poverty has increased during the past two years and is not 
expected to fall to pre-COVID-19 levels until after 2023. UNDP estimates the COVID-19 crisis 
has erased six years of human development progress3and expanded the number of vulnerable 
people. These ‘new poor’ rely on the informal sector for employment and/or are not covered by 
social protection mechanisms.
3. The crisis has also intensified economic and social exclusion. Increasing incidents of hate 
speech, misogyny and homophobia in public discourse pose a threat to social cohesion. Women 
suffer from patriarchal social norms and gender-based violence, and they are more likely to be 
employed in the low-wage and informal sectors affected by the crisis. Their opportunities to 
earn income are limited by their responsibilities for unpaid domestic work. The Gender Equality 
Index stands at a value of 55, below the EU average of 67.4.4
4. The economic potential of youth is significant, but they are under-employed5and have
limited civic engagement.6 The Roma and Egyptian minorities and people with disabilities are 
at risk of exclusion from education and services, as well as material deprivation resulting from 
their low participation in formal employment. This has been further exacerbated by the 
economic downturn and COVID-19. People with disabilities and elderly people endure
additional hardships and exclusion owing to insufficient servicing and inadequate social 
assistance targeting. Girls and women with disabilities continue to be at higher risk of genderbased violence and discrimination.
5. The economy experienced double-digit growth in 2021, and future growth prospects appear 
positive.
7 However, government priorities reflect the need to improve competitiveness, regional 
connectivity and a green economy, with the goal of ‘smart’, sustainable and inclusive growth 
that will contribute to the quality of life of all citizens.
8,9
6. The country has made a strong commitment to improve environmental management, 
improve resilience and adaptation, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 35 per cent 
by 2030, thus bringing it closer to the EU level. Progress in these areas will need to be paired 
with structural economic transformation to put the country on a more resilient growth path with 
sustainable public finance. This will allow Montenegro to invest further in human development 
and address persistent inequalities and social vulnerabilities. Important drivers of social 
cohesion will be increased public trust linked with more meaningful citizen participation in 
1 http://hdr.undp.org/en/home.
2 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/900381634670558017/pdf/Greening-the-Recovery.pdf.
3 https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2020_nhdr_montenegro.pdf.
4 https://montenegro.un.org/en/124464-un-common-country-analysis-montenegro-2021. 
5 http://www.monstat.org/eng/page.php?id=1615&pageid=22.
6 https://www.wfd.org/sites/default/files/2022-04/Youth%20perceptions%20and%20attitudes%20towards%20politics%20in%20MNE.pdf.
7 https://www.imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/CR/2022/English/1MNEEA2022001.ashx
8 https://www.gov.me/dokumenta/7c683907-59a9-41e8-8a1f-72fded711eac.
9 https://www
govme/dokumenta/ed5fc7c4-56d9-46ec-8ed8-b38186b87332decision-making processes and more positive citizen perceptions of equal treatment under the 
law. 
7. Responding to national priorities, the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) 2023–2027 was developed as a joint commitment by the 
United Nations country team to accelerate progress towards achievement of the 2030 agenda 
and EU accession. The planned contributions aim to be flexible and responsive to the 
government’s national development priorities and COVID-19 recovery strategies. They will be 
implemented through multi-agency strategies in pursuit of the UNSDCF outcomes to (a) 
promote inclusive green growth and protect natural resources, (b) increase social inclusion, and 
(c) develop more trusted, accountable and gender-responsive institutions. 
8. UNDP’s contribution to the UNSDCF will build on its comparative advantages and unique 
value proposition, including operational flexibility and innovation.
10 Prior evaluations have 
recommended that UNDP continue to build on its engagement in democratic governance and 
capacity building, including in the security sector, social inclusion and environmental 
protection. At the same time they have suggested that UNDP strengthen its focus on gender 
equality and women’s empowerment, particularly in its environment and climate change 
programming.11 UNDP will anchor the country team’s integrated development approach at 
central and local levels, working to achieve results at scale and pursuing whole-of-system 
transformation based on a human rights approach that aims to leave no one behind. 
9. In alignment with the UNDP Strategic Plan 2022–2025, the following result enablers
represent UNDP’s comparative advantages in strengthening national capacities in areas that
other United Nations entities can leverage to deliver UNSDCF results:
(a) Digitalization: Based on its long-standing support in governance and digitalization, UNDP 
will support digital transformation in the social, economic and governmental spheres. 
UNDP will expand digital capacities and facilitate the co-creation, with partners, of 
solutions with strong accountability frameworks. These will lead to digitally connected 
institutions, both public and private. In turn this will help to deliver people-centred, 
effective and safe services to citizens, accelerate the green and digital transition, and enable 
an inclusive Fourth Industrial Revolution. Supporting the creation of effective, socially
responsive digital ecosystems with greater innovation capabilities and connectivity will 
create entry points for technical United Nations agencies — as well as the private sector, 
non-governmental organizations and international financial institutions — to drive deeper 
transformation within sectors. This could include, for example, a digital highway for 
seamless data flows, supporting the development of new electronic services in an 
increasingly digital society.
(b) Innovation: UNDP will work with other United Nations organizations and external
partners to create a national innovation policy. It will have an investment framework to 
spur achievement of the Goals in a systemic manner. This national framework will: (a) 
become a backbone for attracting private sector investment to increase economic 
productivity; (b) lay the foundation for accelerating economic diversification through new 
digital, creative and high-value-added sectors, with greater participation by women; and 
(c) become a platform for engaging stakeholders through the recently established 
Innovation Council and Innovation Fund. The goal is to develop capabilities for agile 
policy responses, joint creation of innovative service solutions and people-centred design. 
(c) Development financing: UNDP will anchor efforts by the United Nations system to 
strengthen capacities for reform of public finance management at national and local levels. 
The objective is to increase accountability, efficiency and effectiveness in managing public 
resources. UNDP will help mobilize, allocate and redirect financing flows by (a) creating
an enabling environment for the development of the digital finance/financial technology
10 https://erc.undp.org/evaluation/evaluations/detail/12957.
11 Ibidindustry in Montenegro; (b) accelerating climate action by increasing the flow of public 
and private investment, especially gender-responsive investment, in climate action to 
achieve the ambitions of the Paris Agreement and the Goals; and (c) encouraging the 
growth of innovative businesses, especially those led by women.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
10. The design of this country programme benefited from consultations held to prepare the 
UNSDCF and shape UNDP’s interventions. The programme is aligned with the government’s 
medium-term plan, programme for EU accession and national strategy for sustainable 
development. It also conforms with UNDP regional priorities and contributes to three of the 
UNSDCF’s four outcomes.
11. The vision for the country programme as designed with national counterparts focuses on 
reducing multidimensional and income poverty, accelerating progress towards a resourceefficient and sustainable economy, increasing respect for human rights and social justice, and 
inclusion of the most vulnerable people by 2027.
12. UNDP will work to realize this vision by leveraging its support across the United Nations 
system through the enablers discussed above. The goal is to deliver four signature solutions 
crucial to its substantive contribution to the UNSDCF:
(a) Governance: UNDP has a well-established role in Montenegro contributing to 
improvements in institutional capacity, transparency, efficiency and accountability. This is
especially true in implementing gender-responsive public administration, public finance 
management and support for e-governance.12 To strengthen institutional abilities to address 
complexities, recover from shocks and gain the public’s trust, UNDP will support the 
transformation of institutions based on adaptable, effective and open governance principles 
at national and local levels and in the justice sector. This will be done through (a) 
investments in strengthening public sector capabilities; (b) support for inclusive and 
gender-responsive advances in digital governance; (c) active involvement of the public, 
men and women alike, in identifying and resolving challenges; and (d) innovation in the 
public sector through application of digital and financial technologies.
(b) Poverty and inequality: UNDP has helped develop fit-for-purpose, integrated information 
systems and increased the country’s capacity for social service delivery, which have been 
vital in transforming the social protection system into one that is more responsive to equity 
considerations.13 UNDP will work with other United Nations entities to further develop the 
social welfare system for the twenty-first century. The aim is to improve service delivery 
by increasing participation by the most vulnerable people, such as marginalized women 
and men, survivors of gender-based violence, youth, people with disabilities and elderly
people. This will involve identifying their needs in order to influence budget planning and
access to quality services, income-generation prospects (including in the digital economy)
and social inclusion. Developing models linked to national policies will aid scaling up these 
efforts. 
(c) Environment: UNDP has supported Montenegro to meet its reporting requirements to 
international treaty bodies on environment/climate change and increasing and 
implementing its national climate pledges. This positions UNDP well as a partner for 
deeper institutional capacity development. UNDP has successfully piloted a number of 
innovative initiatives to reduce the country’s carbon footprint in the tourism and transport 
sectors. This suggests that UNDP can better leverage its comparative advantage by
addressing environment/climate change and economic growth under one consolidated 
portfolio. UNDP will pilot and scale up initiatives to protect nature, promote sustainable 
12 Ibid.
13 Ibiduse of resources and encourage green growth. At the same time it will strengthen resilience 
to climate-driven disasters and the institutional capacities needed to prepare and implement 
development strategies that reduce emissions, are resilient to climate change and accelerate
sustainable development. Special attention will be given to advocacy to increase the 
participation of women in designing the country’s climate mitigation and adaptation 
responses. This requires more efforts to understand and address gender gaps in responding
to climate change and evolving green labour market opportunities, while protecting 
vulnerable groups to ensure a gender-just transition. 
(d) Gender equality: UNDP will work with United Nations and other partners across all 
outcomes to design interventions that accelerate women’s participation in shaping society. 
These include (a) promoting women’s leadership and participation in decision-making in 
the public and private sectors, (b) transforming the public and private sectors to deliver for 
gender equality, (c) accelerating women’s entrepreneurship, (d) advocating for recognition 
of unpaid care work in the country’s financial system and decreasing its burden on women,
and (e) closing the gender gap in digitalization, science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics education and in the green transition. UNDP will intensify its contribution to 
eliminating gender-based violence, including by advocating for adequate financing of civil 
society providers of services to survivors of gender-based violence and increasing the 
efficiency of the judiciary to ensure accountability.
13. These four signature solutions will provide the framework for UNDP’s work in support of 
the following three UNSDCF outcome areas:
Inclusive green growth and stewardship of natural resources
14. To increase environmental considerations in economic growth strategies in the transition 
towards a green economy, UNDP will focus on ‘greening’ key economic sectors through more 
integrated strategies, policies and financing frameworks. UNDP will continue to support the 
government in fulfilling its requirements under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change and the Paris Agreement, thus creating conditions for an evidence-based 
transition to a green economy. This will increase the economy’s resilience and make recovery 
more sustainable, and allow for alignment of public and private sector investments that 
decouple natural resource use from economic growth. This work complements other 
development partners’ initiatives, including GIZ support to the development of the national 
energy and climate plan, EU plans to pursue a low-carbon development strategy and Natura 
2000.
14
15. UNDP will work with the government to protect, manage and increase the value of natural 
assets by supporting informed policy and regulatory choices that minimize environmental harm
and incorporate incentives for environmentally positive decisions. UNDP’s work on green 
financing mechanisms will include policy advice on creating market-based conditions and 
incentives that contribute to improving renewable energy access and efficiency. This will help 
to reduce energy poverty and contribute to strategies for reducing air pollution and greenhouse 
gas emissions, especially in the transport sector. This work complements the European Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development’s Green Economy Financing Facility in the Western 
Balkans, which on-lends to the residential sector for energy efficiency and renewable energy 
projects.
16. The pathway to a regulatory environment that encourages green and sustainable growth 
also calls for removing barriers to competitiveness and creating incentives to embrace Fourth 
Industrial Revolution concepts, knowledge and skills. This will identify ways to improve the 
business environment; develop new opportunities in greening economic sectors, such as in the 
circular economy, including in waste management/recycling, creative industries and cultural 
heritage valorization; and drive competitiveness through digitalization. It will also spur more 
entrepreneurial activities, especially led by women, in the formal sector.
14 Natura 2000 is a network of nature protection areas in the EU
https://eceuropaeu/environment/nature/natura2000/17. UNDP will also develop pilot initiatives to generate evidence for economic empowerment 
strategies, with particular attention to women and girls. This will be combined with technology
skills training to support a smoother school-to-work transition and greater participation in the 
COVID-19 economic recovery. UNDP will support a science and technology park linked to the 
higher education system, complementing the World Bank’s support for higher education 
institutions to develop solutions for COVID-19 response and recovery.
18. As a means of creating financing mechanism to spur the green economy, UNDP will 
support the national innovation fund, which will help to build capacities of small and medium 
size enterprises to embrace innovation and green solutions. In addition, UNDP will help 
develop a strategic framework for the circular economy to complement EU priorities15 and
circular economy initiatives of international financial institutions16,17 in the Western Balkan 
region.
Human development and social inclusion 
19. The key to more rights-based, inclusive social assistance and better designed and targeted 
social transfer programmes lies in effective design and implementation, with greater civic input 
and more integrated data systems. UNDP will promote a systems-based approach to social 
reforms through institutionally coordinated support to data systems, legislative and capacitybuilding initiatives. UNDP will continue its long-standing engagement in this area, particularly 
in policy planning/modelling and development of a legislative framework, jointly with the 
United Nations Children’s Fund, in support of government plans to invest in further social 
sector reforms. 
20. In parallel, UNDP will continue to build capacities of social protection institutions to
improve servicing of beneficiaries, and better design and implementation of ‘activation’ and 
skills development programmes to engage them in work and society and enable the transition 
to employment. This will improve social, employment and health services through the 
application of new tools. For women — who are under-represented in the labour force, earn 
less than men and are far more likely to be employed in the informal sector — it will help open 
avenues to upward mobility, increasing their activation, employment and generation of income. 
This will also provide skills training to improve young people’s employability.
21. Another cornerstone of the programme will be to regulate the status, servicing and 
accessibility of social and employment programmes for people with disabilities. UNDP will 
support the country in defining the criteria for determination of disability, thus enabling a 
transition to a more just model in line with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities. This work will take a holistic approach to align information technology/data 
systems, legislation, regulations and financing needs, thus addressing stigma, exclusion and 
inaccessibility of adequate services.18 In collaboration with other United Nations entities, 
UNDP will explore possibilities for accelerating the transition from social assistance to social 
economy. 
22. Given the wide scope of work in social protection, health and employment, UNDP will 
pursue a collaboration with the EU, World Bank and other United Nations organizations on 
particular sectoral issues. Gender analysis will be embedded in social reforms, awareness 
raising for gender equality will be increased, and the legal framework to address gender-based 
violence will be strengthened and services expanded. To increase the relevance of reforms, 
UNDP will collaborate with service-oriented civil society organizations that are working with 
the most vulnerable groups. 
15 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/strategy/circular-economy-action-plan_en.
16 https://www.ebrd.com/news/2021/ebrd-launches-first-circulareconomy-programme.html.
17 https://www.eib.org/attachments/publications/eib_in_western_balkans_2021_en.pdf.
18 https://montenegro
unorg/en/124464-un-common-country-analysis-montenegro-2021Trusted, accountable, people-centred and gender-responsive institutions
23. UNDP’s contribution will be central to exploiting the expertise across the United Nations 
system to provide comprehensive and integrated support to public administration reform, digital 
transformation and social cohesion. Much of this work will contribute to results in the other 
two priority areas. It is expected that broader reforms to improve development planning and 
capacities through innovative and increasingly digital systems will complement work by other 
United Nations entities.
24. UNDP will support public administration reform to design services that are more peoplecentred, gender responsive, adaptable and efficient. The primary focus will be on improving 
inclusive local and national strategic planning, participatory results-based management, and 
better monitoring and evaluation, with data and evidence at the centre of decision-making on 
policies. UNDP will support the government in pursuing financial technology solutions to
improve the transparency and efficiency of public finance management. The work will be 
closely coordinated with initiatives implemented by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development through its initiative supporting improved governance and 
management and the Regional School for Public Administration. UNDP’s work on public 
financial management through development of national capacity for ‘foresight’ techniques to 
anticipate emerging issues and trends, as well as accounting standards and revenue 
management, will complement the World Bank’s efforts to improve the sustainability and 
resilience of public finances.
25. In order to increase trust within institutions and across social groups and communities, 
UNDP will focus on measures to strengthen integrity and anti-corruption efforts in all three 
branches of government, while also promoting meaningful civic dialogue. To increase social
cohesion through forging trust among communities, and between people and institutions, 
UNDP will work with stakeholders to address hate speech, primarily against women, and 
divisive narratives. This will complement the Council of Europe’s regional initiative on 
inclusion of the Roma and Egyptian minority and on access to local services. UNDP will 
facilitate regional initiatives promoting women’s empowerment and prevention of hate speech, 
collaboration on transitional justice, gender equality in the defense sector and youth dialogues, 
and improving control of small arms and light weapons.
26. As a further trust-building initiative UNDP will help to improve the efficiency of the 
judicial sector, especially to process cases of gender-based violence and hate speech. UNDP 
will also participate in developing standards for mainstreaming gender equality in public 
administration, media and public discourse. Through this work UNDP will contribute to 
removing barriers to women’s participation in leadership at all levels of decision-making and 
in public life.
27. Underpinning all of this work will be UNDP’s comprehensive support to the inclusive 
digital transformation of Montenegro’s public administration in collaboration with other United 
Nations entities. Capitalizing on the lessons learned in transforming delivery of public services 
during COVID-19, new digital strategies and services will be implemented across the public 
administration. They will be deepened in particular sectors, such as social protection, health, 
judiciary and education. The newly developed digital solutions coupled with improved 
capacities for management of information technology will help to build resilience against future 
shocks. UNDP will also support the government in developing gender-responsive digital 
governance policies and advise on personal data protection and human rights.
III. Programme and risk management
28. The programme will be governed by a joint government-United Nations steering 
committee, co-chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the resident coordinator. It will 
undertake annual reviews of the UNSDCF, including of the contributions by the UNDP country 
programme, in coordination with relevant ministries, municipalities and other stakeholders. The steering committee will make any necessary programme adjustments, especially in response to 
external shocks and/or changes in national policies or priorities. 
29. UNDP will continue to use a portfolio approach to ensure coherence of the programme. 
UNDP will facilitate global and regional exchanges of lessons learned for Montenegro’s benefit 
and will share good practices and experiences from Montenegro. Partners in these exchanges 
will include Western Balkan countries/economies and those that recently joined the EU; lessons 
from other countries will be shared through South-South and triangular cooperation. Making 
use of recent changes to corporate policies, UNDP will streamline recruitment and procurement 
to obtain timely support on policy advocacy and innovative initiatives and in response to any 
shocks.
30. The main risks pertain to (a) the degree to which programme interventions can be scaled 
up and sustained, (b) the possibility that fiscal pressures from the COVID-19 recovery may 
crowd out investments needed to maintain and scale up next-generation systems and (c) whether 
the civil service has the capacity to adopt and drive long-term system improvements. These 
risks will be mitigated by preparing scalability and sustainability strategies and through 
monitoring by project boards and the joint steering committee. 
31. The practice of government allocation of seed funding to initiate programme support, 
especially in new areas, proved productive during the last country programme. This attracted
additional partner resources and allowed for scaling up of innovative ideas and policy 
recommendations. 
32. UNDP will manage the risk of limited financing partners by pursuing funding opportunities 
in collaboration with national counterparts, while ensuring a balance among three sources of 
non-core funds: government cost-sharing, vertical funds and EU pre-accession instruments. 
Bilateral funding is expected to diminish even further as the country progresses towards
accession. This is the reason for the new focus on developing the capacities of national 
institutions and funds and sustaining the flow of funds.
33. This country programme document outlines UNDP’s contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in 
the organization’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control 
Framework.
34. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. Modalities for implementation will be agreed on with the authorities and will be 
selected depending on need. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in 
coordination with other United Nations entities to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the relevant
projects.
35. The country office will continue to use the UNDP Gender Marker to ensure that a minimum 
of 15 per cent of the programme budget is invested in gender-specific initiatives. UNDP will 
ensure the programme meets UNDP’s social and environmental standards and that risks 
stemming from programmatic interventions in sensitive areas — such as the security sector and
hate speech — will be assessed and minimized. In addition, disability determination reform will 
be undertaken in line with the principles of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
36. UNDP will make sure that monitoring and evaluation frameworks are aligned with national 
strategies and UNSDCF priorities, and include measures to review and strengthen the capacities of national partners in data collection and usage, especially with respect to the Goals. UNDP 
will support institutions to make use of digital technologies to deliver effective services, which 
will make monitoring and assurance more inclusive and will support real-time decision-making.
37. Montenegro has identified around 100 priority Sustainable Development Goals indicators, 
aligned with the monitoring priorities of the European Union Agency for Statistics. However, 
national data systems are not yet fully disaggregating data. Where data gaps exist, UNDP will 
help the national statistical office to develop data collection methods, especially to support 
collection of gender statistics in support of gender equality priorities. Consistent with 
recommendations of the independent country programme evaluation of 2021, the emphasis will 
be on data disaggregation for monitoring impacts on target groups, prioritizing women, youth 
and people with disabilities. 
38. Outcome-level results groups for the UNSDCF will be used to monitor progress under the 
country programme. The COVID-19 response generated valuable lessons on making use of
networks with communities to assess their needs. The results groups will prepare multi-year 
work plans for each outcome in consultation with national partners, especially those civil 
society organizations best placed to engage with target groups. The results groups will monitor 
outputs and their contributions to achievement of country programme outcomes, the UNSDCF 
and national development objectives. 
39. To support the United Nations effort to broaden the debate on the national development 
agenda and the Goals, a multi-year research agenda will produce policy briefs, simulations, 
discussion papers and surveys. UNDP will increasingly use data modelling tools, real-time 
information systems, qualitative surveys and other data-generation mechanisms. Evaluations 
will engage all key stakeholders to support continuous learning and adjustment of programme 
design and implementation.P/DCP/MNE/3
10/15 22-10512
Annex. Results and resources framework for Montenegro (2023-2027)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Inclusive economic development and environmental sustainability
Sustainable Development Goals 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME involving UNDP: Outcome 1: By 2027, all people, especially vulnerable people, benefit from improved management and state of natural 
resources and increasingly innovative, competitive, gender-responsive and inclusive economic development that is climate resilient and low carbon
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1: Structural transformation is accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions
UNSDCF OUTCOME 
INDICATORS, BASELINES, 
TARGETS
DATA SOURCE, 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIP
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME ($)
1.Greenhouse gas emissions: Total 
greenhouse gas emissions expressed 
as gigagram carbon dioxide 
equivalent 
Baseline (2019): 3,623 
Target (2027): 3,597 
2.Area of landscapes under improved 
management to benefit biodiversity, 
in hectares
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2027): 80,000
3.Global innovation index score
Baseline (2021): 35.4 
Target (2027): >47
4.Share of electricity produced from 
renewable sources in total net 
electricity consumption annually
Baseline (2020): 62% 
Target (2027): >64%
5.Gender Equality Index score, 
dimensions: money, time, work 
Baseline (2019): Total: 55
Money: 59.7, Time: 52.7
Work: 65.2
Target (2027): Total: >62
Money: >67, Time: >60
Work: >72
1. Government
2. Government
3. World Intellectual 
Property 
Organization
4. MONSTAT
5. MONSTAT
Frequency: Annually
Output 1.1: Policy and regulatory environment and 
financing mechanisms developed to enable mitigation and 
adaptation actions in support of green and inclusive 
transformation.
Indicators:
1.1.1. Number of mitigation and adaptation measures 
recommended and financing mechanismsin place to improve 
key sectoral policies: 
Baseline measures (2021): 18
Target measures (2026): 30
Source/frequency: Government, UNDP/every other year
Baseline financing mechanism (2021): 0 
Target financing mechanism (2026): 7
Source/frequency: Government/annually
1.1.2. Number of measures to promote gender equality included 
in the nationally determined contributions (NDC) and national 
adaptation plan (NAP)
Baseline (2021): 14 (NDC, 14; NAP, 0)
Target (2026): 30 (NDC, 18; NAP, 12)
Source/frequency: Government, UNDP/annually
Output 1.2: Policies and financial mechanisms developed to 
protect, value and sustainably manage natural resources
Indicators:
1.2.1. National spatial planning policy incorporating 
biodiversity measures is in place
Baseline (2021): No
Target (2026): Yes 
Source/frequency: Government/annually 
Ministries
International organizations
Civil society organizations
United Nations entities
Eco Fund
Investment Development Fund
National parks of Montenegro 
Municipalities
Environment Protection Agency 
National Council for Sustainable 
Development
Business sector
Chamber of Economy
Innovation Fund
Science and technology park
Regular
250,000
Other 
19,000,000
TOTAL:
19,250,000DP/DCP/MNE/3
2-10512 11/15
1.2.2. Amount of co-financing leveraged to protect, value and 
sustainably manage country’s natural resources
Baseline (2021): $0
Target (2027): $32 million
Source/frequency: UNDP/annually
1.2.3. Number of people benefiting from UNDP interventions 
to protect, value and sustainably manage country’s natural 
resources (male/female)
Baseline (2021): Male, 0; female, 0
Target (2027): Male, 23,000; female, 27,000 
Source/frequency: Government, UNDP/annually
Output 1.3: Innovation capabilities increased and financing 
mechanisms developed to expand policy options for 
structural transformation of economy 
Indicators:
1.3.1. Number of innovative and green financial mechanisms 
available at national/subnational level (innovative/green)
Baseline (2021): 2 (Innovative, 1; green, 1)
Target (2027): 10 (Innovative, 5; green, 5)
Source/frequency: UNDP/annually
1.3.2. Number of innovative and scalable solutions adopted by 
programme partners
Baseline (2021): 2
Target (2027): 12
Source/frequency: UNDP/annually
Output 1.4: Policy framework and capacities of public and 
private actors in place to increase women’s 
entrepreneurship and labour market competitiveness 
Indicators:
1.4.1. Number of policies/legal reforms initiated to support 
women’s employment, entrepreneurship and financial access
Baseline (2022): 2
Target (2027): 4
Source/frequency: Government/annuallyP/DCP/MNE/3
12/15 22-10512
1.4.2. Number of public and private actors who initiate processes 
to improve women’s leadership, economic empowerment and 
gender mainstreaming 
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2027): 10
Source/frequency: Government/annually
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Human capital development, reducing vulnerability, social inclusion
Sustainable Development Goals: 1, 5, 8, 10
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 2: By 2027, all people, especially vulnerable people, increasingly benefit from an equitable, genderresponsive and universally accessible social and child protection system and quality services, including labour market activation, skills and capabilities 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: OUTCOME 2: Leaving no one behind, a rights-based approach centred on human agency and human development
1.Proportion of people at risk of 
poverty disaggregated by sex and age 
Baseline (2020): Total, 22.6%
Male, 23%; female, 22%
Target (2027): Total, 21.4%
Male, 21.8%; female, 21%
2.Proportion of people with severe 
material deprivation, disaggregated 
by sex 
Baseline (2020): Total: 13.5%
Male: 13.1%
Female: 14.0%
Target (2027): Total: 12.5%
Male: 12.1%
Female: 13.0%
3.Activity rate as proportion of 
population (aged 15+), disaggregated 
by sex 
Baseline (2020): Total: 53.3%
Male: 60.6%
Female: 46.4%
Target (2027):
Total: > 63%
Male: > 70%
Female: > 56% 
1. MONSTAT 
2. MONSTAT
3. MONSTAT
Frequency: Annually
Output 2.1: Social protection institutions and systems 
enabled to address vulnerabilities, exclusion and gender 
inequalities 
Indicators:
2.1.1. New legal framework for reformed disability assessment 
system adopted and in force 
Baseline (2022): No
Target (2024): Yes 
Source/frequency: Official gazette/annually
2.1.2. Number of disability assessment applications processed 
(male/female) 
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2027): 10,000 (male, 4,500; female, 5,500)
Source/frequency: Government/annually
Output 2.2: Vulnerable populations benefit from welltargeted, quality social protection and income-generation 
programmes
Indicators:
2.2.1. Number of youth (ages 15-29) obtaining employment 
with UNDP support (male/female) 
Baseline (2021): 85 (male, 22; female, 63) 
Target (2027): 400 (male, 150; female, 250) 
Source/frequency: UNDP/annually
2.2.2. Number of vulnerable people activated with UNDP 
support (male/female)
Baseline (2022): 100 (45/55)
Target (2027): 1,000 (male, 450; female, 550)
Source/frequency: UNDP/annually
Relevant ministries 
Local government 
Employment agencies
International organizations
Civil society organizations
United Nations entities
Regular
250,000
Other:
9,750,000
TOTAL:
10,000,000DP/DCP/MNE/3
2-10512 13/15
2.2.3. Number of new licenses issued for social services 
Baseline (2021): 60
Target (2027): 70 
Source/frequency: Government/annually
Output 2.3: Multisectoral institutional response is
strengthened to eliminate all forms of violence and 
discrimination against women/girls in public/private 
spheres
Indicators:
2.3.1. Number of specialized services to address gender-based 
violence by type of civil society organizations 
Baseline (2022): 
Victim-oriented: 7 
Perpetrator-oriented: 0 
Target (2027): 
Victim-oriented: 10
Perpetrator-oriented: 2
Source/frequency: UNDP/annually
2.3.2. Percentage of national action plan measures completed, 
with UNDP support, to implement Istanbul Convention 
Baseline (2022): 10%
Target (2027): 50%
Source/frequency: Government/annually 
2.3.3. Number of protection measures for victims of violence 
taken by court (misdemeanour/criminal courts) 
Baseline (2022): 360 (Misdemeanour, 340; criminal, 20)
Target (2027): 600 (Misdemeanour, 520; criminal, 80)
Source/frequency: Court reports/annually 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Social cohesion, people-centred governance, rule of law and human rights
Sustainable Development Goals: 5, 10, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 4: By 2027, all people, especially vulnerable people, benefit from improved social 
cohesion, increased realization of human rights and rule of law, and accountable, gender-responsive institutions
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: OUTCOME 3: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk
1.Proportion of seats held by women in 
national and local parliaments and 
governments 
 
Baseline (2020): 
National parliament: 27.2% 
1. National Parliament 
Inter-parliamentary 
Union
Output 3.1: Open and accountable national/subnational 
institutions strengthened to promote transparency, gender 
mainstreaming and rule of law
Indicators: 
Relevant ministries
National and subnational institutions
International organizations
Civil society organizations
United Nations entities
Regular
250,000
Other 
5,500,000P/DCP/MNE/3
14/15 22-10512
Local parliaments: 31.8 % 
Mayors: 8.33% 
National government: 33% 
Target (2027): 
National parliament: 40% 
Local parliaments: 40% 
Mayors: 15%
National government: 40%
2.Balkan Barometer survey
a) Level of tolerance and respect for 
differences: 
 Baseline (2021): 34% satisfied 
 Target (2027): >36% satisfied
b) Trust in institutions: 
 Baseline (2021)
i) Trust in Parliament: 44% 
ii) Trust in government: 46%
iii) Trust in courts and judiciary: 
35% 
 Target (2027): 
i) Trust in Parliament: >46% 
ii) Trust in government: >48% 
iii) Trust in courts and judiciary: 
>37% 
3.World Bank Worldwide Governance
Indicators score
 Baseline (2020):
a) Government effectiveness 
index: 53.37 
b) Voice and accountability 
index: 48.79
c) Rule of law index: 55.29
Target (2027):
a) Government effectiveness 
index: >55
b) Voice and accountability 
index: >49
c) Rule of law index: >57 
4.Corruption perception index score
 Baseline (2021): 46/100 
 Target (2027): >63.7/100
2. Regional Cooperation 
Council Balkan 
Barometer
3. World Bank
4. Transparency 
International 
Frequency: all annually
3.1.1. Number of institutions supported by UNDP with 
measures in place to mainstream gender in the internal and 
external aspects of their work
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2027): 3
Source/frequency: UNDP/annually 
3.1.2. Number of transitional justice cases handled in 
Montenegro supported through regional cooperation 
(coordination, expertise and data) facilitated by UNDP
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2027): 2
Source/frequency: European Commission/annually
3.1.3. Number of institutions that publish data in open format
Baseline (2022): 18 
Target (2027): 35 
Source/frequency: data.gov.me/annually
3.1.4. Extent to which institutions supported by UNDP have put 
in place:
19
a) Evidence-based policy planning 
Baseline (2021): 2 
Target (2027): 4 
b) Programme-based budgeting
Baseline (2021): 1 
Target (2027): 3 
c) Efficient local government systems of funding civil 
society organizations
Baseline (2021): 2
Target (2026): 4
Source/frequency: UNDP/annually
Output 3.2: Capacities for merit-based and people-centred 
governance system at national/local level and judiciary 
strengthened to deliver services in an effective, efficient, 
inclusive manner. 
Indicators:
3.2.1. Number of new public, private and judicial institutions 
leveraging digital technologies to deliver effective services 
(national/subnational level)
National baseline (2022): 0
National target (2026): 15
Subnational baseline (2022): 0
Subnational target: (2026): 10
Source/frequency: UNDP/annual
TOTAL:
5,750,000
19 Note: Rating scale: 0 = Not in place
1 = work started2 = work in progress3 = work almost complete4 = in placeDP/DCP/MNE/3
2-10512 15/15
3.2.2. Proportion of civil servants who have been promoted or 
rewarded based on their performance appraisal
Baseline 2020: 0
Target 2027: 10%
Source/frequency: Government/annually 
3.2.3. Proportion of citizens who are fully acquainted with the 
use of public administration e-services (male/female)
Baseline (2021): 8.1% (male, 4.2%; female, 3.9%)
Target (2027): 10% (male, 5.1%; female, 4.9%)
Source: UNDP (2021-2023), government (2024-2027)
Frequency: annually
Output 3.3: Mechanisms for public engagement expanded 
to create safe and secure civic space for dialogue and 
building trust. 
Indicators:
3.3.1. Number of people taking part in multi-stakeholder 
platforms to promote civic space and dialogue, address hate 
speech and divisive narratives (male/female)
Baseline (2022): 6,995 (male, 3,193; female, 3,802)
Target (2027): 13,600 (male, 6,300; female, 7,300)
Source/frequency: UNDP/annually
3.3.2. Number of civil society groups representing women, 
including those with disabilities, consulted in the design and 
implementation of public sector initiatives 
Baseline (2021): 9 
Target (2027): 23
Source/frequency: UNDP/annually
Output 3.4: Legal framework improved to enable increased 
women’s leadership and participation, in all their diversity, 
in public spheres 
Indicators:
3.4.1. Quota for less-represented gender in draft electoral law 
Baseline (2021): 30%
Target (2027): 40%
Source/frequency: Draft electoral law/annually
3.4.2. Proportion of women in leadership positions in public 
administration
Baseline (2021): 10%
Target (2027): 50% 
Source/frequency: Government/annually