File Name: MNG-NREP-2016-EN
Year: 2016
Country Name: Mongolia
Country Code: MNG
Category: NREP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2016
Start Year: 2016
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

© IRENA 2016
Unless otherwise stated, this publication and material herein are the property of the International Renewable 
Energy Agency (IRENA) and are subject to copyright by IRENA.
Material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that all 
such material is clearly attributed to IRENA and bears a notation of copyright (© IRENA) with the year of copyright.
Material contained in this publication attributed to third parties may be subject to third-party copyright and 
separate terms of use and restrictions, including restrictions in relation to any commercial use.
About IRENA 
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that supports 
countries in their transition to a sustainable energy future, and serves as the principal platform for international 
cooperation, a centre of excellence, and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge 
on renewable energy. IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable 
energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable 
development, energy access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity.
Acknowledgements
IRENA and the Mongolian Ministry of Energy are grateful for the contributions of numerous energy specialists and 
experts in the preparation of this study. This report benefited greatly from their review and insightful comments. 
Special thanks are due to Purevjav Tovuudorj, director-general, and Guntsamba Enkhtaivan, deputy director, at 
the Ministry of Energy’s Strategic Policy and Planning Department; Myagmar Angarag, head of the Renewable 
Energy Division at the Ministry of Energy‘s Policy Implementation and Regulation Department; Chimid-Ochir 
Munkhzul from the Green Development Policy and Strategic Planning Department, at the Ministry of Environment, 
Green Development and Tourism; Namjil Enebish, professor at the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, 
National University of Mongolia; Chadraa Batbayar, researcher, Mongolian Academy of Sciences; Ovgor Bavuudorj, 
researcher, Mongolian University of Science and Technology; Byamba Jigjid, president, Mongolian Society for an 
Asian Super Grid; Demchigjav Chimeddorj, executive director, Thermal Power Plant-3 (state-owned joint-stock 
company, Mongolia); Tsevegjav Unurmaa, consultant engineer and head of the Power Systems Analysis and 
Planning Department, National Dispatching Center for Power Systems; Tamir Khishigt, project director, Newcom 
LLC of Mongolia; Jargal Dorjpurev, senior energy and environment consultant; Purev Baatar, hydropower expert.
Authors: Yong Chen, Gürbüz Gönül and Makhbal Tumenjargal
For further information or to provide feedback: publications@irena.org
Disclaimer
This publication and the material herein are provided “as-is”, for informational purposes.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the material featured in this publication. Neither IRENA 
nor any of its officials, agents, data or other, third-party content providers or licensors provides any warranty, including as to the accuracy, 
completeness, or fitness for a particular purpose or use of such material, or regarding the non-infringement of third-party rights, and they 
accept no responsibility or liability with regard to the use of this publication and the material therein.
The material contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA, nor is it an endorsement of any project, 
product or service provider. The designations employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply the expression of any opinion on 
the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region, country, territory, city or area, or their authorities, or concerning the delimitation of 
frontiers or boundaries.MONGOLIA
RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENTWe are pleased to announce the release of this Renewables Readiness Assessment as a policy 
document for the Ministry of Energy of Mongolia, prepared in co-operation with the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). 
The State Policy on the Energy Sector, approved by parliament and published in 2015, determined 
short- and mid-term development scenarios and set an ambitious goal of increasing the 
contribution of renewable energy to the country’s total installed power-generation capacity to 
20% in 2023 and 30% in 2030. 
To achieve these goals, the existing laws on energy and renewables have been amended, 
while parliament has recently approved the new Law of Mongolia on Energy Conservation 
and Efficiency. This new legislation enables Mongolia to provide energy security and reliability, 
improve energy efficiency, pursue public-private partnerships and create a market-oriented 
framework for the sector. 
Mongolia’s Gobi Desert is enormously rich with solar and wind resources. Additionally, the 
country’s considerable hydropower, geothermal and biomass resources can be exploited for 
greater energy supply. 
The opportunities to create value from such vast, naturally available, renewable resources are 
numerous, particularly with modern capture and distribution technologies. For a country like 
Mongolia, with its wide geographic expanse and low population density, advanced renewable 
energy technologies are essential to accelerate economic growth, support development and 
ensure future prosperity.
FOREWORD
from the
Minister of EnergyWe have set key goals to utilise the Gobi Desert’s vast resources:
• Construction of a large-capacity renewable energy complex, aiming to export power to northeastern Asian countries;
• Co-operation with neighbouring countries to implement the renewable energy complex; 
• Establishing a mutually beneficial long-term agreement for imports and exports of power 
between neighbours; 
• Strengthening our co-operation with international organisations and donor countries;
• Attracting investment. 
We are fully committed and are working gladly to achieve these goals. 
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to IRENA for accepting the proposal of the 
Government of Mongolia to jointly develop this assessment of our country’s readiness for 
accelerated renewable energy deployment. Having set out to develop renewables as a leading 
sector in Mongolia’s economy, we greatly appreciate the assistance provided by IRENA and the 
contributions of experts and scholars in developing this important policy document. 
H.E. Zorigt Dashzeveg
Minister of Energy, MongoliaMongolia has firmly underlined its commitment to green growth and a sustainable energy future, 
particularly in support of international efforts to address climate change. With abundant solar, 
wind and hydropower resources, the country possesses the renewable assets to adapt to changing 
realities, such as increased constraints on carbon emissions, and to replace its business-as-usual 
approach with a sustainable development paradigm.
The country’s Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA), undertaken in co-operation with IRENA, 
has identified key actions to unlock or accelerate renewable energy deployment. It is the result 
of a process that brings together different national and international stakeholders for a series of 
country-led consultations, with IRENA providing technical support and expertise. 
Since 2011, more than 20 countries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America and the Caribbean, 
as well as the Asia-Pacific region, have undertaken the RRA process, which generates knowledge 
of best practices and supports international co-operation around the accelerated deployment of 
renewable energy technologies. Mongolia, a strong supporter of IRENA’s mission, is one of those 
countries. 
As technology costs fall and the demand for renewables continues to grow, Mongolia can make 
increased use of its highly varied potential in the sector, including solar, wind, and large and small 
hydropower, as well as geothermal and biomass resources. All of these can help to ensure a reliable, 
affordable supply of energy, which would in turn help address growing energy demand and support 
economic growth. Exports of clean, renewable-based electricity offer the prospect of sustainable 
revenue for the country, and Mongolia has taken the initiative to promote regional cooperation that 
can make this a reality.
FOREWORD
from the IRENA 
Director-GeneralThe country’s amended renewable energy law and its state energy-sector policy provide the 
right foundations to attract stable investment. Revised renewable energy targets would increase 
the contribution of renewables to 20% of total installed power-generation capacity by 2023 and 
30% by 2030. These have sent a clear, positive signal of Mongolia’s ambition to the international 
community, as well as to investors and developers. Still, more can be done to ensure a successful 
energy transition. 
With the adoption of the Paris Agreement at COP 21, as well as the Sustainable Development 
Goals by the United Nations General Assembly, the imperative of a transition to sustainable energy 
systems will continue to grow, and along with it the momentum driving the scale-up of renewables.
I sincerely hope the present study provides further encouragement for accelerated deployment. 
IRENA stands ready to provide continuing support, both in implementing the actions identified and 
in the country’s broader pursuit of a sustainable energy future.
This study has benefited from the strong support of Mongolia’s Ministry of Energy. Other 
governmental agencies have also participated actively, and their insights are greatly appreciated. 
In addition, various stakeholders within the country have provided enthusiastic and serious 
engagement, without which the process could not have delivered the desired results. I would like 
to express my appreciation to all participants and encourage them to continue their valuable work.
Adnan Z. Amin
Director-General, IRENACONTENTS
FIGURES IX
TABLES IX
BOXES IX
ABBREVIATIONS XI
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY XIII
INTRODUCTION 01
1.1 Country background 01
1.2 Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) 03
ENERGY CONTEXT 07
2.1 Energy situation 07
2.2 Electric power system 10
2.3 Rural electrification 12
2.4 Domestic electricity markets 14
2.5 Power trading and exchange 14
2.6 Key energy institutions and stakeholders 16
RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT IN MONGOLIA 19
3.1 Renewable energy resources and exploitation 21
3.2 Government commitments 27
KEY CHALLENGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS 33
4.1 Core elements of the enabling environment 33
• Challenges 33
• Recommendations 34
• Action 1: Investigate the potential of a renewable energy 
quota system 34
• Action 2: Allocate financial resources for renewable energy 
promotion in the annual government budget 35
4.2 Grid assessment for integration of variable renewables 35
• Challenge 35
• Action 3: Conduct a power-system status 
assessment and a study on grid integration 35
4.3 Institutional and human capacities 36
• Challenges 36
• Recommendations 36
• Action 4: Establish a national research, development and 
training facility for renewable energy development 37
• Challenges 38
• Recommendations 39
• Action 5: Enhance National Dispatching Center capacity 39
4.4 Developing cross-border grid infrastructure to export
renewable electricity 40
• Challenges 40
• Recommendations 40
• Action 6: Form a consortium to conduct a feasibility study 41
CONCLUDING REMARKS 43
01
02
03
04
05FIGURES
Figure 1. Mongolia’s annual economic growth rate, 1991-2014 02
Figure 2. Mongolian electricity production 08
Figure 3. Mongolian heat production, 2000-2013 08
Figure 4. Electricity consumption by sector 09
Figure 5. Future power demand in Mongolia 09
Figure 6. Energy systems of Mongolia 10
Figure 7. Installed electricity generating capacity by source 10
Figure 8. Breakdown of Mongolia’s power supply in 2014 11
Figure 9. Structure of Mongolia’s Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) 16
Figure 10. Map of wind energy resource of Mongolia 20
Figure 11. Wind energy resource in the Gobi Desert region of Mongolia 22
Figure 12. Solar energy resource in the Gobi Desert region of Mongolia 23
Figure 13. Geographical distribution of annual total precipitation of Mongolia 25
Figure 14. Geothermal energy resource of Mongolia 27
TABLES
Table 1. Generating facilities in the Central Energy System 11
Table 2. Breakdown of good-to-excellent wind resource potential at 30 metres high 20
Table 3. Mongolian solar resource (estimates) 22
Table 4. Solar PV systems (off-grid and grid-connected mini-grids) in Mongolia 24
Table 5. Solar-wind hybrid systems in Mongolia 24
Table 6. Ranges of FiTs for renewable energy power sources in Mongolia (USD/kWh) 29
BOXES
Box 1. Rural Electrification Programme 13ABBREVIATIONS
ADB Asian Development Bank
ASG Asian Super Grid
CDM Clean Development Mechanism
CES Central Energy System (Mongolia)
CHP combined heat and power
ERC Energy Regulatory Commission (Mongolia)
FiTs feed-in tariffs
GDP gross domestic product
GHG greenhouse gases
GW gigawatt
GWh gigawatt-hour
HVDC high-voltage direct current
IMF International Monetary Fund
INDC Intended Nationally Determined Contribution
IPP independent power producer
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency
km kilometres
kV kilovolt
kW kilowatt
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MEGD Ministry of Environment and Green Development
MEGDT Ministry of Environment, Green Development and Tourism
MoE Ministry of Energy
MW megawatt
ųg/m3
 micrograms per cubic metre
NAMAs Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions
NDC National Dispatching Center (Mongolia’s grid operator)
NREC National Renewable Energy Center (Mongolia)
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory (US)
PPA power purchase agreement
PPP public-private partnership
PV photovoltaic
RRA Renewables Readiness Assessment
SHS solar home system
TPES total primary energy supply
TW terawatt
TWh terawatt-hour
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USD United States dollar
Wp Watt-peakEXECUTIVE 
SUMMARYMongolia is a resource-rich country, with an abundance not of only coal, but 
also of renewables, such as solar, wind and hydropower resources. For several 
decades, coal has been the primary energy source fuelling Mongolia’s rapid 
economic growth. However, this has come with environmental costs, particularly 
in urban centres and mining regions. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has listed the capital, Ulaanbaatar, as one 
of the five most polluted cities in the world, while the World Bank has been 
engaged in projects and studies to reduce the human health damage from the 
city’s worsening air pollution. Changing global realities present an additional 
challenge, with carbon emissions expected to become increasingly constrained 
in the international effort against global warming. 
In addressing these challenges, the Government of Mongolia has demonstrated a 
strong political commitment to green development, plotting the transition to an 
energy future based on higher shares of renewables for the country and wider 
region. Mongolia has declared a two-phase renewable energy goal, aiming to 
increase renewables from 7% of installed power-generation capacity to 20% by 
2023, and to further increase this to 30% by 2030. 
The Ministry of Environment and Green Development (MEGD), established as a 
core ministry in 2012, has been working closely with the Ministry of Energy (MoE) 
to exploit the country’s enormous renewable energy resources. The 52 megawatt 
(MW) Salkhit wind farm that commenced operation in July 2013 was a significant 
milestone, marking the development of Mongolia’s first utility-scale non-hydro 
renewable energy facility. Growing numbers of wind and solar projects are in the 
pipeline in response to the renewable energy targets set by the government. serves around 3 million people. In comparison, the 
country’s total renewable energy potential has been 
estimated at 2.6 terawatts (TW),1 a potentially huge 
resource base. Combined electricity output from 
Mongolia’s wind and solar resources could reach 
15 000 terawatt-hours (TWh) per year,2 enough to 
meet the total electricity demand of neighbouring 
China in 2030.3
The President of Mongolia, Tsakhia Elbegdorj, has 
formed the Gobitec initiative to create a regionally 
integrated power grid across northeast Asia. The 
initiative is researching solar and wind energy 
potential in sparsely populated Gobi Desert areas, 
with a view to producing power exports to China and 
other countries. In support of this goal, the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs has set out, with strong engagement 
from the MoE, to strengthen co-operation with 
neighbours. The government has also recognised the 
importance of developing an enabling environment 
with clear and achievable targets. To achieve the 
president’s vision, the country also needs the right 
set of legal, regulatory and policy frameworks, along 
with the necessary technical capacities for regional 
renewable energy deployment. 
In parallel, Mongolia has stepped up efforts to 
improve the conditions for domestic development 
and deployment of renewables. The Renewable 
Energy Law, passed in 2007, has provided a 
fundamental legal basis to regulate the generation 
and supply of renewable power. Amid changing 
circumstances, parliament amended the law in June 
2015. The improved legislation should strengthen 
public-private partnerships and create a marketoriented framework for the energy sector.
Innovative processes, including a joint credit 
mechanism, have been proposed to promote 
climate-friendly energy technologies. The State 
Policy on the Energy Sector provides strategic 
guidance to transform Mongolia into a renewable 
electricity exporter within two decades. By then, 
neighbouring countries should be able to receive 
Mongolian power through high-voltage direct 
current (HVDC) transmission lines. Domestic supply, 
meanwhile, will benefit from enhanced national grid 
networks, equipped with information technology 
systems for smart transmission, management, 
control, and monitoring. 
To fully capitalise on these opportunities, key 
challenges must be precisely identified and 
addressed. With that aim, Mongolia embarked 
on Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) 
consultations in co-operation with the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). The resulting 
discussions highlighted the challenges Mongolia 
faces with its renewable energy growth goals, and 
also produced viable recommendations to help 
overcome those challenges. 
Core elements of the enabling 
environment
Nearly a decade after Mongolia’s Renewable Energy 
Law was introduced, effective implementation 
remains a challenge, hampering the creation of the 
necessary enabling conditions for renewable energy 
investment and development. For instance, feed-in 
tariffs (FiTs) put into effect under the Renewable 
Energy Law have faced two main obstacles: 
• Limited duration of FiTs. The original law 
stipulated FiTs for 10 years, which deterred investors 
from entering power purchase agreement (PPAs) 
for longer periods. Long-term price guarantees 
can reduce the risk associated with renewable 
energy investments, making bank loans easier to 
obtain. But the price-guarantee period needs to be 
long enough – an issue addressed in the June 2015 
amendment to the law. 
• Currency risk. The law makes FiTs payable in 
US dollars, which encourages foreign investors. 
However, this effectively passes the currencyexchange risk onto the government. When the 
Mongolian currency depreciates, as it has done 
dramatically against the US dollar in recent years, 
the government comes under financial pressure. 
Delays in activating the Renewable Energy Fund 
have added to the strain. The fund was created by 
the Renewable Energy Law to cover incremental 
costs associated with renewable power generation. 
1 According to calculations by Mongolia’s National Renewable
Energy Centre (NREC) based on data from the US National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) 2 C
iif llid (2 550 TWh)dinvestors wary about future engagement. The recent 
amendment includes a “support tariff” to address 
this issue; how effectively remains to be seen. 
The feasibility of applying a renewable energy 
quota system in Mongolia should be studied. Such 
a system would create a market that enables the 
development of renewables, thereby helping to 
meet targets. Quotas can be cost-effective as a 
policy scheme, as they maintain a market-oriented 
approach. More importantly, they can incentivise 
coal-fired power plants to embrace renewable 
generators as an added revenue source. Domestic 
renewable energy development, in turn, will help 
prepare the country for a regional electricity market. 
Renewable electricity certificates could provide an 
added revenue stream when a cross-border power 
grid is established with China.
If funds from the centralised government budget 
are needed to maintain support policies, the 
government can explore a variety of options for 
long-term soft loans and technical assistance. 
For instance, a public-private partnership could 
attract grants and loans from international financial 
institutions and donor countries, along with private 
financing. The Renewable Energy Fund could be 
augmented by air pollution taxes, mining revenues, 
fossil-fuel taxes, or a portion of electricity tariffs.
Grid assessment for the integration of 
variable renewables
Following two years of operation of the first wind 
farm in the Central Energy System, grid operators 
challenges. However, scaling up deployment for the 
future would require a comprehensive assessment 
of the power grid infrastructure, from which a 
strategy of how to deal with the increase of variable 
renewable sources when flexibility is constrained, 
can be developed. 
The focus of the recommended study can 
be extended from centralised wind farms to 
distributed generation, including small-scale 
roof-top and utility-scale solar photovoltaic (PV) 
farms in place of substations. For this, power 
flow and stability analyses are needed for both 
engineering and energy planning purposes to 
provide a better understanding of how connecting 
variable renewable sources affects the grid in an 
aggregative manner. The analytical results would 
help grid operators predict the grid response to 
solar and wind generation inputs at various points 
and different penetration levels, and also help 
energy system planners develop an integrated plan 
for adding variable renewable-based generation 
capacity and grid expansion or enhancement. The 
study would be also useful for grid integration of 
variable renewable and assist grid operators, namely 
the NDC in Mongolia’s case, in identifying the right 
controlling programs and operational skills to better 
match renewable electricity produced from variable 
renewable energy sources with demand load and 
dispatchable generators. 
Institutional and human capacity
To scale up renewables in Mongolia, officials
in governmental energy authorities, practitioners, 
Solar PV array in rural Mongolia 
Photo: Enebish, N.them will need updated knowledge and information 
on renewable energy development, including the 
latest technological advances, cost reduction, 
innovative policy and regulatory schemes, and 
emerging challenges in project implementation. 
In recent years, the need has grown to enhance the 
technical and co-ordination capacities of energy 
sector institutions in Mongolia, particularly to 
address the emerging issues arising from renewable 
energy integration. This much-needed capacity 
enhancement would help the MoE, along with other 
governmental authorities, grasp the root causes of 
the challenges in renewable energy development. 
This, in turn, would help prevent future problems 
through enhanced strategic energy planning. 
The capacity of the National Renewable Energy 
Center (NREC) needs to be reviewed against this 
backdrop. Following such a review, specific capacity 
enhancement programmes could help NREC work 
more closely with the MoE and provide advisory 
services to the government in co-operation with 
other entities in the energy sector.
The National Dispatch Center (NDC), Mongolia’s 
grid operator, also needs capacity enhancement for 
variable renewables to be prioritised over coal-based 
electricity. At present, power from variable renewables 
faces grid-access challenges. For both technical and 
economic reasons, such power is curtailed whenever 
loads are low. Thermal plant operators strive to 
avoid dialling their steam generators back too far, as 
such situations result in operational inefficiency and 
financial losses. As newer, more efficient combined 
heat and power (CHP) plants gradually come on line, 
they can provide conventional base-load power with 
the required adjustments for the impact of variable 
renewables. 
The NDC will have to accommodate the growth of 
variable renewable sources. To do so, it needs the 
operational capacity to manage large-scale variable 
renewables on the grid. Further ahead, the creation 
of a capacity market or a regulating/ancillary service 
could compensate for economic losses when CHPs 
operate under reduced loads. Developing Crossborder Grid Infrastructure to Export Renewable 
Electricity Amid rising demand for cleaner energy 
sources in China and other countries in the northern 
Asian region, Mongolia sees the opportunity to 
become a regional renewable energy exporter. 
The notion of exporting renewable power from the 
Gobi Desert through the Asian Super Grid (ASG) is attracting increasing interest from investors and 
developers. The grid would connect Mongolia, 
Russia, China, the Republic of Korea (South Korea) 
and Japan. 
The size of the Gobi Desert and high upfront costs 
entail considerable technical and political and socioeconomic challenges beyond the ASG’s preliminary 
phase. All implications must be carefully studied 
for the potential of the super grid to be realised. 
This would involve detailed resource assessments, 
as well as studies to determine optimal land uses, 
grid conditions and locations for dispatch centres. 
A feasibility study involving all five ASG nations is 
recommended to help their governments understand 
the costs and long-term benefits of the plan. The 
hope is that governments would then more willingly 
collaborate in regional super-grid development. 
More specifically, a consortium of the five countries, 
with support from each national government, should 
be formed to conduct a comprehensive feasibility 
study. Such a study should also involve regional 
and international organisations. An international 
platform could provide greater legal certainty 
for participating countries, investors and other 
stakeholders; allow for better alignment of national 
renewable energy targets; create and maintain 
harmonised trade and transit rules for electricity; 
and improve the overall regional investment climate. 
To mitigate investment risks, the process could 
start with smaller projects, which could be 
aligned around the Gobitec/ASG vision after the 
comprehensive feasibility study. Such projects 
could start at the national level and later evolve 
into bilateral and multilateral projects. In parallel, 
ministerial meetings among ASG countries would 
enable consensus-building and harmonisation on 
technology standards and regulations. 
Looking ahead
The vision of developing Mongolia into a 
regional clean energy exporter is plausible, albeit 
challenging. The present study, based on the 
country’s RRA consultations, indicates that the 
renewable energy targets set by the government 
are attainable. However, issues pertaining to the 
accelerated deployment of renewables must be 
considered from a systematic, regional perspective. 
The proposed regional super grid offers a promising 
market for Mongolia’s potentially large renewable 
energy output.INTRODUCTION1.1 Country Background
Mongolia is a vast, resource-rich country with a lower-middle-income economy.4
It is a landlocked country in east and central Asia, situated between China and 
Russia. The total land area is 1 566 500 km2, equivalent to one tenth of the land 
area of the United States of America, although the population is as small as
3 million (National Statistical Office (NSO), 2015). This makes Mongolia one of the 
most sparsely populated nations in the world. 
The past decade and a half has seen steady economic growth in Mongolia, with 
a remarkable surge in more recent years. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth 
peaked at 17.5% in 2011, as shown in Figure 1, attributable largely to production 
at the Oyu Tolgoi copper and gold mine. The year 2014 saw a slowdown in 
economic growth to 7.8%, from 12.8% the previous year, and a sharp 74% dip in 
foreign direct investment, while the inflation rate surged to 13% (World Bank, n.d., 
“Mongolia”). Regardless of these fluctuations, Mongolia’s mining sector remains 
the largest contributor to economic growth. In 2014, mining contributed nearly 
35% of GDP and 80% of the total exports5 of mineral products.
The downward trend was expected to continue through 2015 and into 2016, as 
estimated by the Asian Development Bank (ADB, 2015) in Asian Development 
Outlook 2015. The first quarter of 2015 saw only a 4.4% year-to-year growth, 
according to the World Bank’s Mongolia Monthly Economic Brief (Lee, Shiilegmaa, 
Batsuuri, 2015). The second phase of the Oyu Tolgoi copper and gold mining 
project, worth USD 5.4 billion, began moving forward following negotiations in May 
2015 that brought two years of deadlock to an end. The economy, consequently, 
was expected to benefit from increased monetary flow from foreign investors. 
01Figure 1. Mongolia’s annual economic growth 
rate, 1991-2014
This is also in alignment with the government’s 
development strategy, i.e. increasing living standards 
in line with higher fiscal revenues derived from the 
export sales of coal, copper, gold, molybdenum, 
fluorspar and zinc. 
However, to further capitalise on its mineral 
endowments, the country must invest heavily in its 
energy infrastructure in the coming years to ensure 
that it has the power for its mineral production 
activities and to meet growing demands for energy 
services from other sectors. This includes the 
residential sector, which is increasing its share of 
energy consumption due to the growing population 
and increased use of electricity per capita.
The sheer pace of economic development in 
the country has led to significant environmental 
challenges, particularly in large cities and mining 
regions, due in large part to combustion of coal. 
Coal is abundant in Mongolia and accounts for more 
than 90% of the total primary energy supply. 
The major urban centres are the capital Ulaanbaatar, 
and the industrial cities of Erdenet and Darkhan. 
The population of Ulaanbaatar has doubled since 
the beginning of the 1990s to around 1 250 000 
citizens (NSO, Mongolia). Whilst the city centre 
boasts office towers, hotels and low-rise apartment 
buildings, around 60% (World Bank, 2009) of the 
inhabitants of Ulaanbaatar live in more rural ger6
districts surrounding the city, without access to 
centralised heating and basic services. Winter 
air pollution has become a notorious problem in 
Ulaanbaatar. Three major sources of pollution come 
from the peri-urban ger residents who use coalfired stoves for heating, the coal-fuelled combined 
heat and power (CHP) plants located within the city 
running at full production, and the growing number 
of vehicles on the roads.
The concerns over degradation of the local 
environmental quality are growing in Mongolia. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) listed 
Ulaanbaatar as one of the five most polluted 
cities in the world. Fine particulates in the air have 
reached as high as 750 micrograms per cubic metre
(ųg/m3
) in the winter season while the annual 
average ranges from 136 to 141 ųg/m3, which is 
significantly higher than the WHO guideline level of 
10 ųg/m3 (Guttikunda, et al., 2013). These air pollution 
levels are estimated to cause human health damage 
corresponding to 18.8% of the GDP in Ulaanbaatar 
and 8.8% in Mongolia in 2008, according to a World 
Bank report (2011). To address the local air pollution 
issue, the Law Decreasing the Capital City Air 
Pollution was drafted by the president of Mongolia, 
and endorsed by parliament. This was followed by 
the establishment of the National Committee on 
Decreasing the Capital City Air Pollution, which had 
operated directly under the Prime Minister’s Office 
to enforce the law until early 2015, when it was 
affected by government budgetary cuts. 
Globally, the increased use of coal was identified as 
one of the main contributors to the rapid increase 
in greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions, according 
to a recent report from the International Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC). The global scientific 
community has strongly advised policy makers to 
shift from fossil fuels to renewable-based energy 
supply in order to keep global temperature rises 
below 2°C – a level deemed safe for global climate. 
The IPCC report called for large-scale transition in 
energy systems towards “decarbonisation”. 
In response to this reality, Mongolia has realised 
that reliance on coal for energy over the coming 
decades is less optimal, particularly given the global 
call for actions to cut GHG emissions. The 2014 Asia
Source: The World Bank. 
*2014 data was estimated by the World Bank and IMF.carbon pollution in the world, stake out a joint plan 
to curb their carbon emissions, signalling a change of 
direction in global climate talks. Given the significant 
role fossil fuels play in Mongolia’s current energy mix, 
the country has an urgent need to diversify its fuel 
portfolio by increasing its share of renewable sources, 
as presented in the Intended Nationally Determined 
Contribution (INDC) that Mongolia submitted to 
the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) on 24 September 2015.
Already, the adverse impacts of changing global 
climatic patterns have been felt across Mongolia. Due 
largely to its fragile ecological systems, Mongolia 
is actually very sensitive to the climate change. 
One third of the population still relies on traditional 
economic sectors such as agriculture and pastoral 
animal husbandry and follows a nomadic way of life. 
The nomadic herder communities are vulnerable to 
the extreme weathers that often result in economic 
loss (MENT, 2009). One case in point is the severe 
2009-2010 winter loss of 9.7 million cattle, or 22% of 
total livestock in Mongolia, which in turn doubled the 
price of meat while dragging GDP growth in 2009 
down to only 1.6% (Michigan State University (2013). 
Mongolia is at a crossroads on its energy journey. 
The Green Growth Strategy calls for balancing 
short-term economic growth gain against longterm green development goals. In 2012, the Ministry 
of Environment and Green Development (MEGD) 
was established as a core ministry under the new 
government regime, making Mongolia one of 
the first nations to set up such a forward-looking 
ministerial agency. The MEGD and the Ministry of 
Energy (MoE) play a key a role in shaping the green 
development strategy for Mongolia. In 2014, the 
Green Development Policy was approved by the 
43rd resolution of the Parliament of Mongolia. 
Thus far Mongolia has strived to adopt 
renewable energy technologies in 
harmony with local needs. More than 
100 000 nomadic herders today use small solar 
photovoltaic (PV) systems to power their satellite 
communications as they graze their animals during 
the summer. Small hydropower schemes are also 
in operation throughout the country. In 2013, the 
first 52 megawatt (MW) wind farm commenced 
is further potential to develop large hydropower 
schemes, and enormous potential for solar and wind 
power development. The President of Mongolia, 
Mr. Tsakhia Elbegdorj, has set up an initiative, 
known as Gobitec, to research how the country’s 
solar and wind energy potential in the sparsely 
populated Gobi Desert region can be exploited. 
The president envisions the country’s development 
into a renewable energy exporter to northern Asia 
through the Asian Super Grid (ASG), thus turning 
the country’s abundant resources into assets to 
fuel its economic growth. Renewables currently 
contribute only a 2.2% share of total electricity 
consumption, while their installed capacity accounts 
for 7% of national power generation. Discussions 
are underway on how to effectively harness the 
country’s huge renewable energy potential. 
How much renewables contribute to Mongolia’s 
efforts to ‘de-carbonise’ its future energy mix 
depends upon several key factors: resources; 
the costs and applicability of renewable energy 
technologies; grid infrastructure; legislative 
and policy frameworks; and regional energy 
cooperation. Against this backdrop, the MoE of 
Mongolia, in collaboration with the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), has launched 
a project aimed at conduct a comprehensive 
analysis of the presence, or lack thereof, of enabling 
conditions for the development of renewables 
in Mongolia. To achieve this goal, a Renewables 
Readiness Assessment (RRA) has been undertaken 
in accordance with a methodology developed by 
IRENA. The key findings from this study have shown 
the extent to which renewable sources can be 
scaled up domestically as well as at a regional level. 
1.2 Renewables Readiness
Assessment (RRA)
IRENA’s RRA is designed to define a detailed list 
of criteria considered necessary for the on-going 
operation of existing renewable energy facilities 
and for further renewable energy development. 
Applying this framework to individual countries 
provides a comprehensive analysis of the 
presence or absence of enabling conditions for the 
development of renewables. Crucially, this analysis 
needs to take into account how the renewables The RRA comprises a process and methodology 
that includes completing a set of templates and 
a final report. It is also designed to be conducted 
by national governments, thereby allowing them 
to obtain a comprehensive overview of the 
conditions for renewable energy from their own 
national perspective. Under the RRA, all processes 
and documentation are led by the country and 
derive inputs from discussions with stakeholders
facilitated by the country focal point, with the 
assistance of IRENA and other development 
partners.
The RRA facilitates a co-ordinated approach and the 
setting of priorities that can facilitate discussions 
with bilateral and multilateral co-operation 
agencies, financial institutions and the private 
sector regarding the implementation of actions and 
initiatives emerging from the RRA. IRENA can also 
facilitate implementation of the follow-up actions, 
where necessary, after the specific request from the 
country or regional entity.
An overall objective of this project is to highlight 
the key results that can help in formulating 
Mongolia’s renewable energy development 
action plan, mobilising all resources necessary 
to carry out the actions identified and flagging 
the potential issues that need to be further
addressed. 
More specifically, the RRA aims to:
• Identify the critical and emerging issues 
associated with, and arising from, the 
development of Mongolia’s energy sector in 
general and the utilisation of renewable energy 
resources in particular.
• Put forth a portfolio of articulated actionable 
initiatives that can capitalise on the opportunities 
revealed through the examination of Mongolia’s 
energy sector and the extensive discussions 
with multiple stakeholders in terms of how to 
turn potential of resources into energy sources.
• Outline the follow-up activities to ensure the 
actions identified are actionable in the near- and 
mid-term timeframe.
Lastly, this report serves to document the process 
of applying the RRA methodology to Mongolia. It 
includes reviewing the energy sector in relation to 
the development of renewable energy sources in the 
country, describing how the RRA workshop in Mongolia 
contributes to the development of an action plan to 
scale up the deployment of renewable energy sources 
in Mongolia, and articulating the actions identified into 
a structured portfolio. This not only ensures synergies, 
but more significantly facilitates harmonisation among 
the stakeholders involved to help deliver Mongolia’s 
goals on green growth development.ENERGY
CONTEXT 02
Mongolia is endowed with abundant natural energy resources, mostly in the 
form of coal and renewables such as wind, solar and hydropower. In the past, the 
country has heavily relied on coal for power and heat production. With the new 
strategic vision of establishing sustainable development opportunities, Mongolia 
has formulated a green development policy chartering the path to wean the 
country off coal.
In recent years, Mongolia’s energy industry has embraced greater shares of 
renewable sources. The Salkhit wind farm (52 MW) has been in operation since 
2013 and another wind farm project in Sainshand, which also aims to supply 
52 MW of electricity generation capacity will be expected to start in 2016 and 
commissioned in the middle of 2017. In addition, a feasibility and environmental 
impact assessment for the Egiin Hydropower Power Plant, with 315 MW capacity, 
has been completed and will commence construction in 2016. These projects 
present only part of the government efforts to reach Mongolia’s targets of 
increasing renewable power-generation capacity to 20% of installed capacity by 
2023 and to 30% by 2030. 
2.1 Energy Situation
Given large coal reserves, estimated at 173 billion tonnes, Mongolia’s primary 
source for energy has been coal, with the rest made up by hydropower, oil, 
biomass and imported electricity from Russia. 
Electricity production rose between 2000 and 2013, as indicated in Figure 2, 
due largely to the rapid growth of demand. In addition, electricity imports from 
Russia increased dramatically to 1 195.5 gigawatt-hours (GWh) in 2013, compared 
to only 366 GWh recorded in 2012. This reflects importance of electricity imports Heat supply over the long and cold winter period is 
essential for every Mongolian. Despite this fact, the 
country’s heating infrastructure is out of date and there 
is huge room for efficiency improvement. From 2000-
2013, heating demand was growing and was being 
met by two sources, i.e. CHP systems and commercial 
heat plants. Both are fuelled by coal and have their 
own advantages and disadvantages. The discussion 
around which pathway Mongolia should take for its 
future heat production has been on-going.In terms of 
electricity consumption, as shown in Figure 4 below, 
the sector breakdown of energy consumption indicates 
that industry is the biggest consumer of electricity in 
Mongolia, followed by household users. The high level 
Figure 2. Mongolian electricity production, 2000-2013
Figure 3. Mongolian heat production, 2000-2013
Source: Mongolian Statistical Information Service (n.d.) 
Source: Mongolian Statistical Information Service
Additionally, since 2010, consumption of imported 
oil, used mainly by the transport sector, has been 
increasing commensurate to the growing number of 
vehicles being used in Mongolia.
Future power demand is expected to increase 
despite the less aggressive growth rates expected 
in the years to come. Mining sector development is 
expected to remain the driving force for a future 
upsurge in energy demand. The Government of 
Mongolia estimates that 500-600 MW will be added 
to existing demand by 2020, corresponding to an 
average annual growth rate of 3.5%, as illustrated 
in Figure 5. This is largely driven by: a) the open7 D
lf hOTli id bhd ldiiihldhldbl
Figure 4. Electricity consumption by sector
Figure 5. Future power demand in Mongolia
Source: Ministry of Energy, 2014
Source: Proposed Energy Master Plan Draft of ADB (2013)
due undergo capacity expansion that will result in 
increased electricity demand to 300 MW and above 
as early as 2017,7
 b) the operation of underground 
mining at the Tavan Tolgoi coal mine, which will see 
demand rising to 300 MW by 2018.
The main power generation projects being built for 
the Central Energy System and South Gobi are as 
follows (World Bank 2008): 
• Thermal Power Plant #5 (TPP#5), Ulaanbaatar:
A CHP plant to be built in 300 MW units. 
• Tavan Tolgoi Thermal Power Plant: An aircooled mine-mouth sub-critical plant to be built 
in 300 MW units and fuelled from the Tavan 
Tolgoi coal mine. 
• Oyu Tolgoi Thermal Power Plant: An air-cooled 
sub-critical plant to be built in 150 MW units and 
fuelled from the Tavan Tolgoi coal mine. 
Other projects currently in the planning stage 
in the same areas include Shivee Ovoo Thermal 
Power Plant (TTP) and the Baganuur Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) plant. These 
are primarily export-oriented projects. Besides 
such coal-powered thermal power plants, several 
renewable energy projects now in planning, 
including the Shuren, Egiin and Orkhon hydropower 
plants (HPPs) as well as new wind and solar farms.
2.2 Electric Power System
The Mongolian electric power system consists of 
the four independently operating electricity grids 
including the Central Energy System, which is the 
main grid providing more than 90% of the national 
electricity supply, the Eastern Energy System, the 
Western Energy System and the Altai-Uliastai 
Energy System, as shown in Figure 6, in addition 
to an isolated CHP system in the south Gobi region. 
Given the country’s large geographic area and 
small population, the grids can cover only the 
major load centres such as big cities and industrial 
areas. Currently, 329 Mongolian soum (districts) 
and almost 326 settlements are connected to the 
grid, contributing to the 98% electricity access rate, 
while five soum are supplied through renewable 
energy sources.
As of June 2015, the total installed capacity of 
Mongolia is estimated at 1 082 MW according to 
the Energy Sector Development Policy 2015-2030. 
Figure 6. Energy Systems of Mongolia 
Source: Mongolian Ministry of Energy
from coal-fired thermal power plants, accounting 
for 85% of the total. Most of these plants were built 
from 1960 to 1980 and would likely be retired in the 
coming years. The Energy Regulatory Commission 
has granted licences for construction of facilities to 
produce more than 1 500 MW, including five wind 
farms with total installed capacity of 502.4 MW. 
In late 2014, a concession agreement for a new 
plant, CHP5 (450 MW), was signed. New electricity 
generation initiatives have witnessed a departure 
from the older state-owned paradigm, with private 
sector ownership welcomed, as in the case of the 
Salkhit Wind Farm. 
Figure 7. Installed electricity generating 
capacity by sourceIn 2014, the peak load was 960 MW, accounting 
for 93% of the national total installed capacity. 
The maximum available capacity of importing 
electricity from Russia is about 250 MW. In view of
retirements, if the demand growth outpaces the 
new capacity addition, Mongolia will be facing a
serious shortage of electric power in coming
years.
Table 1. Generating facilities in the Central Energy System
Generator Installed Capacity
(MW)
Available Capacity 
(MW)
Year of 
Commission
Energy Conversion 
Efficiency (%)
CHP2 22 18 1961 20.4
CHP3 190* 155 1968 38
CHP4 703** 575 1983 40.6
Darkhan CHP 48 39 1965 29
Erdenet CHP 28.8 21 1987 41.5
Ukhaa Khudag 
Power Plant 18 18 2011 28
Salkhit Wind Farm 52 52 2013 27.9
* A 50 MW upgrade was made in June 2014. 
** A 120 MW extension was made in December 2014. 
Source: Mongolian Ministry of Energy
According to the Energy Regulatory Commission of 
Mongolia, electricity consumption in 2013 witnessed 
a significant increase by nearly 20% amounting to 
6323 GWh, or in absolute terms, an increment of
1 055 GWh from the 2012 level of 5 268 GWh, including 
308 GWh of imported electricity. For the same year, 
CHPs fuelled by coal contributed to nearly 80% of the 
total electricity supply while about 18% was imported 
from Russia and China, with diesel, hydro and wind 
electricity making up the remaining 2% of the total. 
In 2014, 6788.7 GWh of electricity was produced, 
according to the MoE. The breakdown, shown in Figure 
8, reflects the decline in share of thermal power and 
the continued growth in imported electricity to meet 
the widened supply-demand gap. This was largely 
due to behind-schedule installations of new power 
generating capacity, leading to diminishing reserve 
capacity to supply the increasing peak load demand. 
Of the four independent power systems, the 
Central Energy System is the largest, covering 
consumers in 14 of the 21 first-level administrative 
subdivisions known as aimag in the Khangai, 
Central and South regions. This system 
represents annual electric energy demand of
Figure 8. Breakdown of Mongolia’s
power supply in 2014 (kWh)
as shown in Table 1. The Central Energy System is 
connected to the Russian power grid system through 
a 220 kilovolt (kV) overhead transmission line.
The Western Energy System serves the consumers 
in Uvs, Bayan-Ulgii and Khovd Aimags, with annual 
electricity consumption of 108 GWh and peak demand 
of 30 MW in 2014, recording a dramatic increase from 
2013 due largely to the growing use of floor heating.The Western Energy System has only one generating 
source, i.e. the 12 MW Durgun Hydro Power Plant, 
which was put into operation in 2008. The majority 
of electricity, on average 70%, is imported from 
the Russian Krasnoyarsk energy system at Chadan 
Substation through the 110kV8 transmission line, 
importing electricity operating at the capacity of 
approximately 25 MW. 
The Eastern Energy System covers the area of 
Dornod, Khentii and Sukhbaatar aimags, with 
annual electricity consumption of 112 GWh and peak 
demand of 27 MW. The Dornod Thermal Power Plant 
is the main power source of the eastern energy 
system, with a capacity of 36 MW. The Eastern 
Energy System has a 190 kilometre (km) long
110 kV single circuit line that connects the 110 kV 
substations at the two aimag centres of Choibalsan 
and Baruun Urt.
The Altai-Uliastai Energy System provides electricity to 
Zavkhan and Gobi-Altai aimags with annual electricity 
consumption of 33 million kWh and peak demand 
of 16 MW from 11 MW Taishir Hydro Power Plant and 
diesel power plants at Uliastai and Esunbulag.
Average annual per capita electricity consumption 
reached 2 263 KWh in 2014,9
 representing an increase 
of 18% from the 2013 level – approaching the global 
average of 2 770 kWh. However around one third 
of the total energy consumption in Mongolia can 
be attributed to the Erdenet and Darkhan smelters 
and other energy intensive industries. About 60% 
of Mongolian total households are connected to 
one of the five grids, representing 92% of the total 
grid-connected utility customers. If taking into 
account the local/mini-grids, access to electricity is 
98%.10 This suggests there is much room to grow 
in electricity demand in Mongolia’s domestic sector.
As far as transmission is concerned, there are 
three independent grids in Mongolia. Transmission 
voltages are 220 kV (in the Central Energy System 
and South Gobi only) and 110 kV, while the principal 
medium distribution voltage is 35 kV, which is 
further stepped down to 10 kV or 6 kV. Electricity 
is also imported from China to supply the southern 
border towns and the Oyu Tolgoi mine.
2.3 Rural Electrification 
Mongolia’s high electricity access for such large, 
sparsely populated area is largely attributable to 
the efforts of the government and the World Bank 
over the past decade and a half. A joint programme 
has provided portable solar home systems (SHS) to 
rural families, most of whom still follow the nomadic 
lifestyle, as seen in Box 1. Given the limited capacity 
that SHS can provide, it can only meet the very basic 
energy demand such as lighting, radio and TV. There 
may thus be a need to upgrade the existing SHS, 
which can be operated on a commercial basis, due 
to the supply chain established throughout the rural 
electrification programme, and the dramatic reduction 
in the cost of solar PV systems over the past years. 
Mini-grids powered by purely solar or wind, or as 
hybrid systems, are also used in rural or remote areas. 
Table 4 presents a list of detailed off-grid mini-grids. 
8 The designed capacity is 220 kV, with even higher transmission
capacity. The facility currently operates below under its full capacity. 9 According to the Mongolian Energy Engineers’ Association. 10 According to the latest data from the Mongolian Ministry of 
Energy.Mongolia is rapidly urbanising, leading to the development of settlement centres that are 
mostly connected to the grid network. Out of the estimated population of 3 million, around 
500 000 to 750 000 people still engage in the nomadic lifestyle for part of the year. 
At the beginning of the century, the Government of Mongolia launched the “100 000 Solar Ger 
Program” with the aim of providing rural families, mostly nomadic households, with a set of 
basic mobile solar PV systems, to supply electricity for basic needs such as lighting, powering 
radio and TV. After years of implementation, the government encountered a shortage of funds 
to sustain the programme implementation. At the request of the government, the World Bank 
helped overcome this shortfall, allowing the programme to be continued scaled-up to benefit 
more rural households. 
In 2006, the World Bank approved the Renewable Energy and Rural Electrification Project 
(REAP) whereby resources were made available to subsidise 50% of the solar PV system costs 
for 50 000 households. This model was endorsed by the Government of the Netherlands, with 
additional funding made available to support the cost buy-down scheme. 
More importantly, a system for quality assurance and after-sale was set up to ensure the 
sustainability of the donor-funded project. This has enhanced the confidence of consumers 
and helped herders make an educated choice regarding the purchase, and operation and 
maintenance of their mobile solar PV systems. Additionally, 50 Sales and Service Centres 
have been established across the country, serving as hubs of information sharing, equipment 
provision and after-sale services including warranty. This has helped develop a network 
of equipment and service-providers, which is a critical step towards commercial market 
development in Mongolia. 
This programme was regarded as being highly successful in Mongolia, demonstrating the 
collaborative efforts to scale up rural electrification using small-scale solar PV systems for rural 
and nomadic households. Today, the target of 100 000 households equipped with SHS has 
been exceeded. However, the unit capacity might need to be upgraded, given more domestic 
appliances are used today as a result of improved living standards. 
Box 1: 
Rural Electrification Programme2.4 Domestic Electricity Markets 
In 2001, an electricity market was introduced in the 
form of a bilateral contract (single buyer) market, 
accompanied by a small spot settlement market and 
an auction market. The Central Regional Electricity 
Transmission Network operates as a single buyer, 
purchasing electricity from the five power plants in 
the central region and in the form of imports from 
Russia (International Energy Charter, 2013). The 
network then sells this power to the ten electricity 
distribution companies. Such transactions are 
conducted in an electricity spot market, based on 
differences between scheduled power generation 
and actual, real-time power supply. An auction 
market is also organised among the generators 
based on their offered generation tariff and the 
growth in electricity demand. 
Annual traded electricity amounted to 3 844.4 GWh 
in the single buyer market in 2011, 3.9 GWh in the spot 
market in 2010, and 4.45 GWh in the auction market 
in 2011 (International Energy Charter, 2013). Marketbased electricity trading has not yet succeeded, 
reportedly due to cash collection problems at the 
distribution level and revenue shortfalls experienced 
by the generation company. The market reverted to 
a single-buyer approach, which operates differently 
from a single-buyer market model in the strict sense 
of the term. The National Transmission Company 
(NTC) is not entitled to own the electricity produced 
by generation companies and was not legally 
responsible for paying them. 
The function of the NTC was to allocate the revenue 
collected to the generation companies through the 
zero-balance account that it was managing. The 
system operates essentially as a vertically integrated 
utility, unbundled in practice into distinct business 
units and receive a portion of retail revenues based 
on a pre-approved formula administered by one unit, 
the NTC. FiTs for renewable electricity – maintained 
by the government as a form of subsidy – also 
operating this way until the recent amendment of the 
Mongolian Renewable Energy Law. Subsequently, 
the responsibility of managing the zero-balance 
account was transferred to the National Dispatching 
Center (Mongolia’s grid operator).
for investment via pricing signals, the current market 
model does not perform in a manner to deliver these 
desired outcomes. 
That said, CHPs are technically efficient when 
producing electricity at maximum heat output 
(cogeneration mode). In Mongolia, heat production 
does not take place in the summer, and so the overall 
efficiency of CHP-generated electricity is low. Thus, 
the efficiency of energy supply in Mongolia is not 
only a function of technology or operating practices, 
but also a function of climatic temperature variation 
throughout the year. When a CHP plant produces 
heat, electricity is also produced as a ‘must-run’ byproduct, with the ratio of heat to electricity as large 
as two for one. This cogenerated electricity must be 
dispatched for the safety of the grid operation. 
Another factor affecting the power market in Mongolia 
is the efficiency of generators. In Ulaanbaatar, Thermal 
Power Plant No 4 has a very large capacity compared 
to the other plants. When a new CHP is established 
in Ulaanbaatar, it will be a modern, highly efficient 
plant and will always be first to be dispatched. As a 
result, the merit order will never be in doubt and the 
maximum efficiency of the electricity system will be 
readily determined by the central dispatchers from 
the turbine efficiency curves of the plants. 
2.5 Power Trading and Exchange
Mongolia has in recent years come to depend more 
and more on Russian energy imports to cover shortterm contingency needs, for instance during peak 
demand. Two interconnectors are under operation 
between Mongolia and Russia. The 250 MW 
interconnectors are designed to provide both load 
following and emergency back-up functions, but in 
recent years, the interconnection has begun to serve 
peak demand as well. The electricity trade contract is 
negotiated every year to set the price and capacity. 
For example, the average price of import in 2013 was 
only USD 77 per MWh, however there are penalties 
associated with breaches of the contracted capacity. 
The expenditure on imported electricity has become a 
financial burden for Mongolia, and will increase if and 
when Russia raises the electricity price as a result of 
low electricity generation from the hydropower power 
plants in the Angar River with water supplied by the Russia has invited Mongolia to create an electricity 
‘pool’ market that would clearly be more favourable 
to Russian exports and cross-border plant utilisation. 
Meanwhile, increased power imports from Russia 
have the potential to reduce Mongolia’s carbon 
footprint if the energy is provided from Russian 
hydropower plants. A decision on this matter may 
come down to an evaluation of the financial terms 
of these options. 
Electricity to supply Mongolia’s southern border 
towns and the Oyu Tolgoi mine is also imported 
from China at prices of around USD 110 per MWh.11
In recent years proposals have been made to export 
coal-fired power to China. One proposal involved 
a coal-fired power plant of 3 600 MW with a highvoltage direct current (HVDC) power line extending 
from the Shivee Ovoo coal field to Beijing. This 
proposal is reported to have failed due to the 
value added tax that is applied to power imported 
into China. Recently, it has been reported that the 
proposal is under consideration once again. At the 
same time, the government has been promoting 
the idea of exporting large-scale wind and solar 
energy to China. 
To promote power trading between Mongolia and 
neighbouring countries, the ASG initiative has 
been proposed to connect locations of high energy 
demand with regions in the Gobi Desert that have 
tremendous solar and wind energy potential. The 
Gobi Desert is a suitable place for the construction 
of both solar and wind power plants, with 300 days 
of sunshine per year, high level of wind resources, 
low moisture and low temperatures. According to 
the International Energy Agency (IEA) Photovoltaic 
Power Systems (PVPS) Task 8 study, energy 
production in the Gobi Desert is more efficient 
than renewable energy production in other desert 
areas. The theoretical potential of solar energy of 
the Gobi Desert is enormous. According to the Task 
8 study about 40% of the Gobi Desert is suitable 
for construction of very large-scale solar power 
generation projects. 
According to findings by the National Renewable 
Energy Center (NREC) using data from the US 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), 
Mongolia’s wind energy potential amounts to at 
least 1.1 terawatts (TW), while solar potential is 
about 1.5 TW (Stackhouse and Whitlock, 2009). 
The country’s total renewable energy of Mongolia, 
including wind and solar resources, could be as 
high as 2.6 TW. Wind energy density averages
7 MW/km2, while solar energy density averages
66 MW/km2. It has been suggested that a northeast 
Asian electricity market might develop based on 
economic and environmental benefits. The Gobitec 
concept is therefore proposed to connect locations 
of high energy demand with the Gobi Desert 
region that has large renewable energy potential. 
The energy produced is meant to be delivered 
through power corridors, including the planned 
ASG connecting Russia, Mongolia, China, South 
Korea and Japan. The regional electricity markets in 
Europe and the Greater Mekong sub-region provide 
precedent for such cross-border trade schemes.
The Gobitec project will provide economic and 
social benefits to the northeast Asian region. The 
participating countries will benefit from increased 
energy security and cost advantage with access 
to low-cost renewable-based electricity from 
the Gobi Desert. For Mongolia in particular, the 
project will diversify the local economy, create job 
opportunities, alleviate poverty and reduce carbon 
dioxide emissions and air pollution in the country. 
The concept of a northeast Asian power grid has 
been under discussion for more than a decade. 
Due to high economic growth, northeast Asia has 
been one of the fastest growing energy markets 
in recent years. This trend is expected to persist in 
the foreseeable future, with a higher rate of energy 
consumption than in other parts of the world. 
Therefore, the energy supply infrastructure in the 
northeast Asian sub-region must evolve in response 
to emerging issues such as increasing demand, 
resource availability, environmental concerns, 
changing technologies and the need for regulatory 
reform, and sector restructuring.
Energy co-operation across the region is key 
for enhancing the security of energy supply. To 
maximise the benefit from regional energy cooperation, a high level political forum needs to be established in order for all the countries to be 
actively engaged in developing a regional power 
infrastructure. Energy infrastructure integration 
among northeast Asian countries is intended to 
lead to the creation of a large market and expansion 
of economic potential for all participating nations 
and may contribute to greater political stability and 
security.
For this reason, the Gobitec initiative and ASG for 
northeast Asia proposal have been initiated. The 
development of the sub-regional HVDC super grid 
network will be one of the key components of the 
Gobitec initiative and super grid proposal.
In March 2013, five-partner organisations signed 
a Memorandum of Understanding to prepare a 
joint regional study entitled “Gobitec and the 
Asian Super Grid for Renewable Energy Sources in 
Northeast Asia”. The organisations are:
• Energy Charter Secretariat;
• Energy Economics Institute of the Republic of 
Korea;
• Ministry of Energy of Mongolia;
• Japan Renewable Energy Foundation; and
• Energy Systems Institute of the Russian 
Federation.
2.6 Key Institutions and Stakeholders 
of the Energy Sector
Currently, responsibilities for renewable energy 
development are shared across three key ministries: 
the MoE, the Ministry for Finance and the Ministry 
of Environment, Green Development and Tourism 
(MEGDT).12 
The Ministry of Finance bears the responsibility for 
strategic planning across multiple sectors and the 
preparation and administration of the state budget. 
This includes encouraging private investment, such 
as public private partnerships, as a means to enhance 
GDP growth.
The MEGDT is responsible for environment 
and green development and is also engaged in 
international dialogue and events related to climate 
change by way of developing government policies 
and strategies on climate change; enforcing legal 
requirements for the protection; conservation and 
appropriate use of natural resources; improving 
Figure 9. Structure of Mongolia’s Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC)
12 In the institutional restructure of 2015, tourism was merged into
the MEGD, creating the Ministry for Finance and the Ministry of 
Environment, Green Development and Tourism. soil, water and forest resource management; 
strengthening environmental monitoring networks; 
conducting necessary research; disseminating 
scientific information about the environment to 
individuals and institutions; and implementing 
climate change projects using internal and external 
funding and coordinate the actions of multiple 
ministries, agencies and organisations. 
The need to meet environmental standards for 
mining and utilisation of energy is addressed by 
the MEGDT, in accordance with the requirements 
of the Environmental Protection Law of Mongolia. 
This deals with the need to avoid adverse ecological 
effects on land, soil, air, water, underground 
resources, mineral wealth, plants, and animals.
The MoE bears the responsibilities for making energy 
policy, energy strategy and planning including 
power generation, power grid development, district 
heating, etc. and designing the publicly-funded 
programmes. The MoE sets policy for coal- and 
renewable-based power generation, covering the 
development, conservation and use of these energy 
resources, and import and export of coal, while 
also approving investment plans for electricity 
transmission and distribution developments. The 
Energy Development Centre (EDC), a government 
entity under MoE, is responsible for overseeing the 
operation of energy sector in accordance with the 
government’s energy policy.
The NREC was created in 2005 under the MoE. With 
the restructuring of the government, the centre 
was changed into a state-owned self-financed 
entity, under the supervision of the State Property 
Committee. This has resulted in a significant loss of 
talent due to the lack of funding attributed to the 
been weakened when it comes to assisting the MoE 
with the operation of renewable energy activities in 
accordance with the government’s energy policy, in 
conducting studies on renewable energy resources 
and utilisation and in introducing new renewable 
energy technologies to Mongolia with research on 
necessary adaptation to local contexts. 
The Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) is 
an independent regulatory authority that was 
established by the 2001 Energy Law. According to 
the Energy Law, the ERC shall have the full power 
to issue operational licences to energy companies 
involved in the generation, transmission and 
distribution of electrical power; monitor compliance 
with license conditions; resolve disputes between 
agencies and customers; and review and approve the 
tariff of licensees. The ERC is directly accountable 
to the government (as represented by the cabinet).
Figure 9 shows the organisational structure of the 
ERC. The commission has a managing director, Legal 
& Administration Department, Licensing Division, and 
Price & Tariff Division. The Licensing Division is in charge 
of licensing issues, including monitoring issues relating 
to licensee’s technical activities, monitoring of electricity 
markets, and dealing with rules and regulations related 
to technical and technological issues. The Price & Tariff 
Division is in charge of devising tariff methodology 
and rules, reviewing tariff proposals, and monitoring 
financial and economic aspects of the licensee. 
There are two main public universities where 
Bachelor’s, Master’s, and Doctorate degrees in 
Renewable Energy can be obtained: the National 
University of Mongolia, School of Applied Physics 
and Engineering; and the University of Science 
and Technology of Mongolia, School of Power 
Small hydropower plant, capacity 375 kW, Zavkhan province, Tosontsengel soum
Photo: Batbayar, Ts.RENEWABLE 
ENERGY 
DEVELOPMENT IN 
MONGOLIA03
Only a negligible portion of Mongolia’s enormous renewable energy potential 
has been exploited. To date, solar and wind deployment has been largely limited 
to off-grid applications, mainly for nomadic herders or isolated mini-grids. While 
conventional hydropower has been in use for decades, the first grid-connected 
wind farm, with installed generating capacity of 52 MW, started operation in
July 2013. 
With the growing demand for electricity domestically and regionally, coupled 
with dramatic cost reduction of renewable energy systems, there have emerged 
great opportunities for wind and solar PV applications in Mongolia. The Mongolian 
government has recently set targets in its Green Development Policy to increase 
the share of renewable energy in the total installed power generation capacity, 
with a view to reaching 20% by 202013 and 30% by 2030. The targets are deemed 
ambitious in relative terms, yet insignificant when measured in absolute terms, 
given the 2.6 TW renewable energy potential and the limited size of the domestic 
energy market.
However, the Mongolian government has actively explored possibilities to 
develop a regional integrated power market in northeast Asia, through which it 
can export wind and solar electricity to other countries. As estimated by the US 
NREL and Mongolian NREC, the combined electricity production output from 
wind and solar could reach as much as 15 000 TWh per year, which is enough 
to meet the Chinese total electricity demand in 2030 (Energy Research Institute 
National Development and Reform Commission, 2015).14
13 It was revised to 20% by 2023 in the State Policy on Energy adopted by the parliament in June 2015. 14 Estimated at 12 100 TWh by National Renewable Energy Centre of China. Figure 10. Map of wind energy resource of Mongolia
Source: US National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2001
Table 2. Breakdown of good-to-excellent wind resource potential at 30 metres high
Wind power 
density at 
30 metres
Wind speed 
(metres/second)* Total area (km2)
Installed 
generating 
capacity (MW)
Total electricity 
output (TWh/year)
300-400 6.4-7.1 130 665 905 500 1 975.5
400-600 7.1-8.1 27 165 188 300 511.0
600-800 8.1-8.9 2 669 18 500 60.2
800-1 000 8.9-9.6 142 1 000 3.4
Total 160 641 1 113 300 2 550.13.1 Renewable Energy Resources and 
Exploitation
Wind
The wind energy resource atlas of Mongolia 
produced by the NREL in 2001 is still viewed as 
the most authoritative estimate of wind energy 
potential. Mongolia has since been identified as a 
potential major wind power producer with goodto-excellent15 wind resource potential at 30 metres 
high, estimated at more than 1.1 TW of installed 
generating capacity, distributed largely in the 
southern and eastern regions as shown in Figure 10, 
generating at least annual 2 550 TWh of electricity16
– equivalent to about half of the Chinese total 
electricity consumption in 2014. 
As shown in Table 2, if the 142 km2 area with the 
highest wind potential can be fully developed, it can 
deliver more electric power than Mongolia’s total 
electricity demand. Notably, the estimation was 
made 14 years ago, when the predominant wind 
turbine had 500 kW capacity and was mounted 
at a height of 40 metres. At present, the turbine 
size used for utility scale has tripled, and the typical 
hub height is about 100 metres. This suggests 
that greater capacity installed in the same areas 
would generate more electricity compared to the 
estimated 2 550 TWh from NREL in 2001.
If taking into account the moderate wind resource 
(at 30 metres), the above estimated total installed 
capacity would quadruple, while both outputs 
and windy areas triple. The moderate areas are 
generally good enough for rural electrification with 
small wind turbines. In some parts of the moderate 
areas, wind resource is good enough even for utility 
scale wind farms, given the categorisation is based 
on averaged wind speed. For instance, the country’s 
first utility-scale wind farm – the Salkhit Wind Farm 
(52 MW17), was built in a wind-raked ridge about
72 km southwest of Ulaanbaatar, which falls in 
a moderate wind resource region, although this 
particular location area has been found to have 
excellent wind resource. 
Following the commissioning of the first Power 
Purchase Agreement (PPA)-based Independent 
by international investors, Mongolia has launched 
the construction plan for the Sainshand Wind Farm 
project with a total capacity of 52 MW. Expected 
to be completed by the end of 2016, the Sainshand 
Wind Farm project located in the south-eastern subregion, is projected to produce a total of 190 GWh 
of electricity every year. In addition to the gridconnected wind farms, there are also off-grid villagescale small wind power systems with an aggregated 
installed capacity of 1 040 kW (Table 4). 
Thirteen aimag have more than 20 000 megawatts 
of wind potential, nine aimag have more than 
50 000 megawatts of wind potential, and the 
Omnogobi aimag alone has 300 000 megawatts of 
wind potential. Regardless, Mongolia can hardly find 
a sufficient amount of demand to justify investment 
to capitalise on this potential, even if grid stability 
does not cause an issue. For off-grid wind turbines 
installed in rural areas, the prospects are fairly good. 
An estimated 4 000 such wind systems have been 
installed for the nomadic population. 
On the other hand, wind maps have clearly shown 
that the south-eastern sub-region, i.e. part of the 
Gobi Desert that shares a border with China, has the 
best wind resources, with a significant area of wind 
speeds higher than 9.0 metres/second at 80 metre 
high, as shown in Figure 11. This suggests wind power 
exportation is a promising option if the infrastructure 
can be developed to support the power trade with 
its neighbouring country, or countries, in case the 
interconnected grid is expanded to other countries. 
Towards this end, the Oyu Tolgoi wind power 
project in Khanbogd soum, Umnugovi province, was 
proposed in 2010 by Clean Energy LLC19 for potential 
exportation of wind-generated electricity to China 
through an interconnected grid. It would have an 
installed capacity of 250 MW.
15 Wind power density is more than 300 W/m2
. 16 Under the assumptions of turbine size of 500 kW, turbine 
spacing of 10D by 5D and 6.9 MW/km2. 17 Equivalent to 5% of the Central Energy System grid’s total 
installed capacity. 18 IPP to sell electricity to the grid at the agreed price stipulated in
a PPA. In Mongolia, it will guarantee 0.095 USD/kWh for 
power purchase from the wind project investor for the lifetime 
of the project. 19 The Clean Energy Company was founded in December 2004 
to develop wind power projects in Mongolia. It has built the first 
wind farm in Salkhit near Ulaanbaatar. The company announced 
that it was planning to develop four more wind farms in Mongolia Figure 11. Wind energy resource in the Gobi Desert region of Mongolia
Global Atlas for Renewable Energy, IRENA, 2015
Solar photovoltaics and thermal energy
On average, Mongolia has 270-300 sunny days 
annually and an estimated 2250-3300 hours 
of daylight in a typical year. This indicates that 
the availability of solar radiation in Mongolia is 
fairly reliable. With average daily solar energy 
at the range of 3.4-5.4 kWh/m2 in a total area of
23461 km2, Mongolia can yield 4774 TWh of solar 
electricity per year, as shown in Table 3. With an 
estimated average solar electricity generation 
potential of 5.4kWh/m2/ day, in an area of
5542 km2, NREL calculations rank the Gobi Desert as 
the third highest on the list of the world’s deserts with 
high solar electricity generation potential, as shown 
in Figure 12. The Gobi Desert sub-region that shares 
a border with China is also the site of an overlap 
between this excellent solar energy resource and an 
excellent wind resource, making this area a priority as 
far as renewable electricity exportation is concerned.
Table 3. Mongolian solar resource (estimates)
Solar radiation
(kWh/m2/day)
Land area
(km2)
Total solar resource
(TWh/year)
3.4 5 269 654
3.8 3 924 544
4.1 4 210 630
4.5 4 515 742
5.4 5 542 1 092Figure 12. Solar energy resource of the Gobi Desert region of Mongolia
Source: NREL (U.S) and National Renewable Energy Centre of Mongolia
The total currently installed solar PV power generating 
capacity has been estimated at 6 000 kW. As shown 
in Table 4, there are seven off-grid village-scale solar 
PV power systems with a total installed capacity of 
1 000 kW and two grid-connected systems with the 
capacity of 500 kW. Since 2002, under the Renewable 
Energy and Rural Electricity Access Project assisted 
by the World Bank and other donors, more than
100 000 solar home systems have been provided 
for about half a million people – 70% of the nomadic 
population. The aggregated generating capacity of 
these systems is about 5 000 kW.Table 4. Solar PV systems (off-grid and grid-connected mini-grids) in Mongolia
Solar PV system Location Scale (kW) Comments
Off-grid
Noyon Solar System Noyon soum, 
Umnugovi province 200
When Noyon soum was connected to the 
grid, the solar PV system was moved to the 
centre of Khatanbulag soum in Domogovi 
province.
Tsetseg Solar System Tsetseg soum, Khovd 
province 100
When Tsetseg soum was connected to the 
grid, the solar PV system was moved to the 
centre of Altai soum in Govi-Altai province
Bugat Solar System Bugat soum, 
Govi-Altai province 140 in operation
Altai Solar System Altai soum, 
Govi-Altai province 200 in operation
Bayantooroi Solar PV 
System
Bayantooroi bagh, 
Tsogt soum, 
Govi-Altai province
100 in operation
Durvuljin Solar PV 
System
Durvuljin soum, 
Zavkhan province 150 in operation
Urgamai Solar PV 
System
Urgamai soum, 
Zavkhan province 150 in operation
Sub-total 1 040
Grid-connected
Chinggis Khan Airport Solar PV System Chinggis Khan 
Airport, Ulaanbaatar 443 In operation
Jargalant Solar 
PV System
Jargalant soum, 
Khovd province 50 In operation 
Sub-total 493
Total 1 533 kW
Source: Energy Sector Statistics, published by the Energy Regulatory Commission of Mongolia, 2013
In addition to solar PV systems, there are six solar-wind hybrid generation systems with a total installed 
generating capacity of 870 kW, as presented in Table 5. Unfortunately, only the Tseel System is still in operation.
Table 5. Solar-wind hybrid systems in Mongolia
System location Total capacity in kW
(PV/wind breakdown) Operational status
Tseel, Gobi-Altai Aimag 150 (30/120) Yes
Manlai, Umnugobi Aimag 150 (30/120) No
Shinejinst, Bayankhongor Aimag 150 (30/120) No
Bayan-Undur, Bayankhongor Aimag 150 (30/120) No
Bayantsagaan, Bayankhongor Aimag 150 (30/120) NoCentralised heating from solar energy is one of 
the solutions to provide cleaner, more sustainable 
heating services in government buildings, 
kindergartens, schools, hospitals, individual houses 
in soum centres and districts. Central solar heating 
provides heating and hot water based on the sun’s 
energy. Water is heated centrally with arrays of 
solar thermal collectors and distributed via districtheating pipe networks. Compared to smaller, 
household-level solar heating, central solar heating 
offers better price-performance ratios, reflecting 
lower installation prices, higher thermal efficiency 
and less maintenance (Solarus, n.d.). Given the 
extensive availability of land, many places in 
Mongolia would be suitable for the establishment of 
large-scale central solar heating systems. However, 
the use of solar heating has not progressed, 
except for tourist camps and private houses with 
individually-installed solar water heaters. 
Another application of solar thermal energy is 
Concentrated Solar Power (CSP), which uses 
mirrors to focus sunlight to either vertical pipes 
(parabolic troughs) or to a single point tank (solar 
tower), in which heat transfer fluid, typically water 
or oil, is heated and used to evaporate steam for 
ordinary thermal power processes. CSP is typically 
used for utility-scale applications and can generate 
heat for electrical production using steam turbines. 
If a CSP plant is equipped with a sufficient amount 
of energy storage, it can help meet the base-load 
demand. Solar irradiation in southern Mongolia is 
sufficient for CSP based on the fact that CSP projects 
have been implemented under similar irradiation 
levels in Spain. More importantly, Mongolia has
270-330 clear days, which is an important indicator 
for CSP applications, as it requires direct sunlight. 
However, operating CSP plants in the winter season 
is challenging for Mongolia due to its low seasonal 
temperatures, which might put high requirements 
on heat transfer fluid, which has to remain unfrozen 
to avoid catastrophic damage to the CSP system. 
Hydropower
In general, annual precipitation is low and its 
distribution varies in time and space with a digressive 
pattern from north to south and from east to west, as 
illustrated in Figure 13. Combined with the mountainous 
topography in the north, rivers are most extensively 
developed in that region. Precipitation is seasonal and 
it is higher in summer, with rainfall filling up rivers and 
streams to their fullest in a year. There is generally 
much less rainfall in autumn. In winter, all rivers, lakes 
and streams are frozen, while the impact on power
generation varies. 
Figure 13. Geographical distribution of annual total precipitation of MongoliaIn comparison with the realistic potential of
1 200 MW to 3 800 MW from the 2013 Water 
Management Report, published by the MEGD, the 
aggregated installed generating capacity of only 
28 MW from 13 hydropower stations is extremely 
modest. Out of the 13 hydropower stations, only 
nine are in operation, including the two largest 
ones: Durgun with 12 MW and Taishir with 11 MW. 
This indicates that much of the identified potential 
has yet to be utilised. To develop these untapped 
resources, a so-called “Hydropower Master Plan” 
has been developed by a Turkish company called 
ZTM and was now under review by the MoE.
There is a recent move towards developing large 
hydropower in Mongolia. The planned 220 MW 
Egiin Hydroelectric Power Generation project, 
located on the Eg River, which is a tributary of the 
Selenga River close to the Central Energy System, 
has recently been scaled-up to 315 MW with annual 
generation of 606 GWh. The project has passed 
the preliminary feasibility study and environment 
impact assessment. Russia, which shares the transboundary Selenge River, has expressed concerns 
over the plan.
The Mongolian government has decided to proceed 
with Egiin Hydroelectric Power Generation project in 
2016, having already begun the construction of roads, 
bridges and a high voltage transmission line. The 
planned Shuren hydropower schemes, including a
240 MW facility on the Selenge, faces a similar 
challenge that has to be addressed before the 
project can move forward. The feasibility study 
for the proposed hydropower project on the Hovd 
River in the western area has been completed and 
is under government review. 
In addition, the facility’s applications are intended 
to extend the hydropower scheme into pumped 
storage, which can facilitate the integration of solar 
and/wind farms into the power system by enhancing 
the flexibility required, if geographic conditions 
allow. Private companies are increasingly interested 
in developing pumped storage projects. For instance, 
the Tuul-Songino Water Resources Complex project 
proposed by a private company is to install 100 MW 
pumped storage capacity used as a regulating power 
for daily load consumption and potentially also for 
variable renewable energy sources. 
However, the viability of pumped storage schemes 
would be negatively impacted if any of the planned large 
hydropower projects constructed play the role of power 
regulator as a pumped storage station plays. Therefore, 
its long-term economic viability must be scrutinised. 
Geothermal
Given Mongolia is on a consolidated tectonic plate, 
theoretically it can hardly have a high degree of 
geothermal resources. But, without comprehensive 
geothermal resource surveys, this resource has yet 
to be fully explored and developed. 
So far, 43 small hot springs in Khangai, Khentii, 
Khuvsgul, Mongolian Altai Mountains, the DornodDarigangiin Steppe and the Orhon-Selenge 
region have been explored, as illustrated in Figure 
14. Despite the fact that the techno-economic 
analysis on those spots is lacking, small-scale noncommercial applications have been applied, such as 
for bathing, health resorts (balneology) and a small 
amount for heating greenhouses and buildings.
However, a pre-feasibility study by Icelandic 
consultants concluded that geothermal energy 
in hot springs with the surface temperature of 
more than 80 degrees centigrade (°C) might 
be economically developed to supply heat to 
Tsetserleg and other towns in the Arkhanghai 
area, but so far geothermal utilisation is not widely 
developed. Some preliminary studies estimate 
that the cumulative flows of usable heat (>35°C) 
from hot springs at aimag levels, are between 1 to 
15 megawatt-thermal (MWth). The impact of this 
resource to Mongolia’s overall energy supply may 
therefore remain limited and very local.Figure 14. Geothermal energy resource of Mongolia
Source: US National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Renewable Energy Corporation of Mongolia
Bioenergy
Mongolians livestock herders have long used dried 
cow dung and khurzun20 for fuel (Sarangerel, n.d.). 
The tradition continues, particularly in regions 
with little or no forest. Additionally, some 1 million 
hectares of unused arable land is reportedly suitable 
for production of biodiesel (Sarangerel, n.d.).
In the realm of biofuels, little has been done, although 
the Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA) 
reportedly conducted research into Mongolian 
biofuel potential as early as 1993. According to some 
assessments, Mongolia could develop biofuel by 
growing corn in wheat fields that were abandoned when 
the Russians departed the country. While Mongolia 
imports almost 100% of its oil products, the opportunity 
to develop biodiesel deserves further study.
3.2 Government Commitments 
Green Development Policy
In June 2014, the Green Development Policy 
was approved through the 43rd resolution of the 
development. It not only elaborates the challenges 
that Mongolia has to address by embracing the 
strategy, but also identifies the opportunities 
embedded in such a transition. 
More importantly, the policy calls for a “reduction 
of greenhouse gas emissions in the energy sector 
through increased energy efficiency by 20% by 
2030, ensuring the share of renewable energy in 
total energy production to 20% and 30% by 2020 
and 2030, respectively, and by renewing energy and 
industrial sector technologies, reducing wasteful 
consumption and losses and through optimisation 
of pricing policies.” (3.1.1). 
Under 4.2 Criteria and Expected Results, the policy lists 
the target share of renewable energy in total installed 
capacity of energy production to be 20% in 202021 and 
30% in 2030. One should note that by issuing this policy 
and the specific action plan, the government went into 
installed capacity-based target setting.
20 Khurzun is the hardened dung and urine of sheep and goats, 
with the average energy density of 12 500-14 600 kilojoules/State Energy Sector Policy
The Government of Mongolia recognises the 
significance of green growth in its long-term economic 
strategies for the country. With abundant potential, 
yet limited applications of renewables to date, the 
government has set renewable targets for the years 
2023 and 2030 in the State Energy Sector Policy. This 
new piece of policy aims to transform Mongolia into 
an energy exporter underpinned by advanced and 
environmentally friendly energy technologies that can 
be adopted on a competitive market regime. To realise 
this strategic vision, specific objectives and goals were 
developed, followed by a strategy for implementation 
in two stages: 2015-2023 and 2024-2030. Proposals 
call for the policy to be updated every 10 years.
A two-fold increase of installed capacity is expected 
to be achieved in the first stage, and as a result, 
10% reserve capacity can be built providing greater 
flexibility to integrate more renewable energy 
sources in the power system. In addition, the 
electricity tariff structure will be modified to increase 
the economic attractiveness for private investors 
and/or IPPs as well as to ensure that the operation 
of existing energy companies is economically viable. 
The government aims to achieve 100% energy access 
by this stage, indicating more stand-alone household 
renewable-based electricity generation systems 
to be used by nomadic herders, while at the same 
time, high capacity transmission infrastructure will 
be developed in co-operation with other countries. 
In stage two, the focus lies on energy exportation 
and scale-up of renewable energy deployment. Two 
targets were set, i.e. reserve capacity of a minimum 
of 20% and renewable share of total installed 
generating capacity of 30%. By then, Mongolia 
shall be able to export electricity to neighbouring 
countries through HVDC electric power transmission 
lines while domestically enhancing the national 
grid network with information technologies for 
smart transmission, management, control, and 
monitoring. At the distribution level, the operation 
will be on a competitive market-based scheme for 
establishing an electricity retail market segment. 
Mongolia’s Renewable Energy Law 
the 2005 National Renewable Energy Programme 
targets, the law was launched to specify duties 
and rights of entities generating and transmitting 
energy produced from renewable sources, and the 
main provisions of power purchase/sale agreements 
to be concluded between them.
The purpose of this law is to regulate the generation 
and supply of energy based on renewable sources, 
and is applicable to legal entities generating and 
delivering heat and electricity. More specifically, 
the law defined roles, rights and privileges of 
participants in construction of renewable energy 
power sources, issuing of special licenses, defining 
tariffs and power purchase agreement negotiations.
In addition, the law specifies the powers of state 
authorities with regards to renewable energy:
• The state parliament shall define state policies 
on renewable energy and make decisions on 
construction of power generating facilities to be 
financed from the state budget;
• The cabinet shall ensure implementation of 
the law and define soum where consumers 
are eligible for power supply from stand-alone 
renewable sources;
• The state administrative authority in charge of 
energy is empowered to develop state policies on 
renewable energy, to carry out feasibility studies, 
to draft standards on operation, safety and 
maintenance of the renewable energy equipment, 
to develop and approve rules and procedures on 
implementation of the Renewable Energy Law;
• Governors of aimags, the capital city of 
Ulaanbaatar, soum and districts, are authorised 
to include renewable energy facilities in land 
development plans, and to allocate land plots 
for construction of the said facilities; and
• The Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) shall 
review tariff applications of generation license 
holders, and approve a template for agreements 
between generation and transmission 
companies.
Any entity intending to generate energy from 22 Article 11 of the Renewable Energy Law established feed-intariffs for wind, hydro, and solar sources both on and off the grid.
Table 6. Ranges of FiTs for renewable energy power sources in Mongolia (USD/kWh)
Hydropower Wind Solar
Up to 500 kW 500 – 2 000 kW 2 000 – 5 000 kW
Grid-connected 0.045-0.06 0.045-0.07 0.045-0.08 0.08-0.095 0.15-0.18
Off-grid 0.08-0.10 0.05-0.06 0.045-0.08 0.10-0.15 0.20-0.30
Source: Renewable Energy Law of Mongolia, 2007
law also specifies duties and rights of entities 
generating and transmitting energy produced from 
renewable sources, and the main provisions of 
power purchase/sale agreements to be concluded 
between them.
Tariff differences between energy produced by 
renewable and conventional sources are required to 
be included in tariffs of other licensees connected to 
the grid, i.e. a cross-subsidy mechanism encourages 
renewable-based power generation.
The law stipulates the establishment of a special 
Renewable Energy Fund, from which 50% is meant 
to be financed by collections from state and local 
property entities and from institutions through 
selling of certified emission reduction units in 
compliance with the Kyoto Protocol. In practice, the 
main sources of funds are provided by the CHPs. 
However, the fund has a zero balance because 
the financial difficulties of the CHP plants have 
precluded them from contributing to the fund as 
required by the Renewable Energy Law. 
As one of the instruments that the law brought 
into the regulatory regime, FiTs22 were introduced 
to create an enabling environment for the private 
sector to actively engage itself with the development 
of renewable energy markets. They were also 
intended to attract investments in renewable energy 
project development under seven special licenses 
issued, for a total installed generating capacity of
534.2 MW. A PPA was also developed and used as a 
legally binding document between the state-owned 
Central Regional Electricity Transmission Network and 
any private renewable energy developers or electricity 
producers, to make sure the electricity generated from 
renewable sources is sold at favourable prices. 
The ERC of Mongolia, as a power sector regulator, 
is obliged to give the green light to any signed 
PPA that is based on FiTs, whose tariff structure 
supports a specific source of renewable energy can 
be seen in Table 6. 
However, existing electricity prices are still distorted 
due to coal power subsidies. Additionally, the legal 
framework, particularly to ensure the priority of 
dispatching renewables, is missing and institutional 
capacity to deal with the large-scale on-grid variable 
renewables, is weak. The Renewable Energy Law 
sets specific ranges of FiTs for energy generated 
from renewable sources and for its delivery to 
utility. The ERC has regulations for geothermal and 
biomass electricity generation; however, they are 
not as clearly defined as other renewable sources. 
In the law, it stipulates that USD shall be used to 
pay FiTs in favour of private investments flowing in 
to the renewable energy market. This has been well 
received, as it does indeed significantly reduce the 
currency exchange risks to which foreign investors 
are exposed. However, it has also been recognised 
that the financial pressure on the government has 
been mounting as a consequence of the weakened 
Mongolian currency. Since 2013, there has been serious discussions 
in Mongolia with respect to how to address the 
emerging issues arising from the implementation 
of the Mongolian Renewable Energy Law over the 
past eight years and improve the overall enabling 
environment. As a result, amendments to the law 
were crafted and the amended law was passed 
in parliament in June 2015, in hope of enhancing 
investor confidence in Mongolia’s renewable sector. 
The key elements in the amendments include: 
• A support tariff. This will be set by the Energy 
Regulatory Authority and is intended to pay the 
premium that was supposed to be covered by 
the Renewable Energy Fund, as designed by the 
Renewable Energy Law. 
• A renewable power mandate for the MoE. The 
ministry should prepare and approve grid code 
and regulatory requirements for connection 
and transmission of electricity from renewable 
sources. This will help integrate renewables into 
distribution system. The MoE is also to prepare 
and enforce standards for renewable energy 
equipment, operation and maintaence. 
• Three new mandates for the Energy Regulatory 
Authority. These include: a) approving a model 
agreement for use between generators and 
transmitters and monitoring the implementation 
of such agreements; b) setting the amount of a 
support tariff for consumers; and c) estimating 
energy tariffs after the expiration of a power 
purchase agreement.23
• Guidelines for PPAs. A clause added through 
an amendment to the Renewable Energy Law 
addresses the issue of lack of maximum limit on 
the number of years of commitment on the part 
of the government upon entering into a PPA with 
a renewable power generators. It stipulates that 
“the power purchase agreement validity term 
should be set in accordance with investment 
payback period”. 
The legal framework for ensuring dispatch priority 
of renewables is still missing – an issue causing 
curtailments in the power output from the first wind 
farm installed near Ulaanbaatar. 
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and 
Joint Crediting Mechanism (JCM)
In 2002, the Government of Mongolia established 
the National Committee on Climate Change, which 
was chaired by the Minister of Nature & Environment 
with high-level representation from the several 
relevant ministries. The committee has three 
working groups, including one on public-private 
partnerships, a Clean Development Mechanism 
(CDM), and a working group on energy efficiency. 
Assisting with project development, approval, and 
implementation of CDM initiatives, the designated 
national authorities within the CDM included the 
Ministry for Nature and Environment, Ministry 
of Fuel & Energy, Ministry of Industry and Trade, 
Ministry of Finance and Economics, various scientific 
organisations, NGOs, and the private sector. CDM 
projects can fall into five categories including heat 
efficiency, renewable energy, technology transfer, 
greening or reforestation, and environmental 
pollution. In 2012, five out of a total of nine CDM 
projects, or 71%, constituted renewable energy 
programmes while two or 29% constituted energy 
efficiency (Dagvadorj, 2012). Registered under the 
CDM, two hydropower projects including those in 
Tashir and Durgun, are estimated to reduce emissions 
by 30000 tonnes of carbon dioxide annually.
Japan initiated the Joint Crediting Mechanism (JCM) 
as a tool to complement CDM under the UNFCCC, 
with the aim of facilitating widespread applications 
of low-carbon technologies, and ultimately reduce 
emissions of greenhouse gases. Implementation 
in Mongolia has been focused on high-tech lowcarbon technologies that can be applied by the 
private sector in 13 identified sectors. Japan will 
cover 50% of the project costs and in return will 
take the carbon reduction credits generated from 
the subsidised projects till 2020. 
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions 
(NAMAs)
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) 
are nationally determined policies and actions that 
reduce GHG emissions below the business-as-usual 
scenario. With support from developed countries, provide a practical framework for promotion of 
sustainable development by selecting mitigation 
actions that reduce vulnerability to climate change 
while also supporting the achievement of national 
development goals. 
In 2010, Mongolia submitted its NAMAs to the 
UNFCCC Secretariat. For the energy sector, 
Mongolia has set the objective of increasing 
renewable energy options in supply through 
NAMAs such as installation of large-scale PV 
systems in the Gobi Desert region, placement of
100-150 kW wind turbine generators in provincial 
centres in the southern part, and encouragement 
for the development of small- and medium-sized 
hydro power plants.
Mongolia is preparing to operationalise NAMAs 
in Mongolia with a list of potential projects being 
identified in energy intensive sectors such as 
cement and construction. Energy-efficient lamp 
bulb substitution is also one focused area. 
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 
(INDC)
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions 
(INDCs) are designed to complement existing 
schemes, such as CDMs and NAMAs, following the 
principle that each participating country should 
choose actions in accordance with its own capacity 
and interest. Such contributions are intended to 
reduce GHG emissions and can also enhance a 
country’s capacity to adapt in the changing climate. 
By 1 October 2015, the pledges received amounted 
to 119 INDCs, representing 86% of global GHG 
emissions. 
Mongolia has submitted an INDC (UNFCCC, 2015), 
which underlines the country’s political commitment 
to join global efforts to keep the increase of mean 
surface temperatures within a limit of 2°C, or even 
1.5°C, by the end of this century. The proposed 
actions on renewable energy include the targets set 
in state policy on energy (Parliament resolution No. 
63, 2015), which is in line with green development 
policy approved in 2014. 
More specifically, to achieve the targets, an 
and 145 MW solar PV power generation capacities, 
would be added, which would require investment of 
USD 2 500 million, according to the analysis based 
on IEAP (Long-range Energy Alternative Planning) 
model and IPCC cost data. 
Strategies for Development of Green Energy 
Systems in Mongolia
In 2012, the Government of Mongolia announced 
that green development would be the new economic 
development strategy of the country. To facilitate 
this, the government established the MEGD. The 
Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI) is assisting 
Mongolia in developing and implementing a national 
green growth plan within the transport and energy 
sectors. The Strategies for Development of Green 
Energy Systems in Mongolia project was completed 
in early 2014 by the GGGI in collaboration with the 
Mongolian government, Stockholm Environment 
Institute, and the United States. 
With the objective of promoting the development 
of green energy systems in Mongolia, the project 
developed a quantitative computer model for 
determining Mongolia’s potential energy future 
and GHG emissions through 2035. The model was 
used to generate predictions for Mongolia’s energy 
and GHG in four different scenarios. The reference 
scenario provided a case for continued use of coalbased energy systems and predicted an estimated 
fourfold growth in annual GHG emissions along with 
a 200% increase in energy consumption by 2035. 
On the opposite end of the spectrum, the Visionary 
Shift in Energy Exports Scenario developed based 
on Long-Range Energy Assessment Planning 
(LEAP) model results provided a case for 
widespread incorporation of extensive wind and 
solar power generators in line with the country’s 
strategic vision, which is to transform Mongolia into 
a key net green energy exporter in the region. To 
achieve this ultimate goal, exporting coal should 
be replaced by renewable electricity. This scenario 
becomes increasingly plausible, as China is moving 
towards curbing its emissions and combat local/
regional pollution caused by coal burning. The 
bilateral exportation of electricity is expected to be 
extended to the regional level – the core concept of KEY CHALLENGES AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS 04
Through the RRA process, participants identified challenges hampering the 
development of renewable energy sources in Mongolia and subsequently helped 
to formulate recommendations to address those challenges. The present chapter 
outlines those key challenges and recommendations.
4.1 Core Elements of the Enabling Environment
To tap Mongolia’s vast renewable energy resources, the government has set ambitious 
targets for development of the sector. With existing policies, as well as extensive 
discussions among policymakers about further green growth development, Mongolia 
appears to be on the right track to accelerate the development of renewables.
However, scale-up has yet to take off. Projects prepared or planned by private 
investors and developers still encounter challenges. Yet enthusiasm in the private 
sector remains high for Mongolian renewable energy development. Energy experts 
estimate that about 450-500 MW of wind and solar PV generating capacity could 
be installed comparatively easily, if certain uncertainties about current investment 
were removed, and if national and local renewable energy policies would be 
implemented in a co-ordinated and consistent way. 
Challenges
The Renewable Energy Law has not been strictly enforced. With the 
introduction of the Renewable Energy Law in 2007, FiTs for various renewable 
energy technologies were established. Incentives from the FiT programme 
have prompted the initiation of several solar and wind farm projects by private 
companies. However, room for improvement has been identified after years of 
operation following passage of the law. For example, two major issues related which was resolved in the amendment of the law 
passed in June 2015.
Another relevant issue is the currency used for FiTs. 
In the law, it stipulates that FiTs shall be paid in US 
dollars, which favours foreign investors by eliminating 
their currency exchange risk. The government was 
originally intended to encourage foreign investments 
in renewable energy projects in Mongolia. This 
has been well received by foreign investors and 
developers, and should be sustained. However, when 
the Mongolian currency depreciated against the dollar 
dramatically in previous years, the financial pressure 
on the government to pay the investors in dollars for 
renewable electricity began to mount. 
At present, a major issue is the insufficient financing 
for renewable energy projects by the government 
through the Renewable Energy Fund, which 
was created by law but remains on paper until 
now. Without a replenishable source to cover the 
incremental cost and the mounting pressure on 
governmental fiscal budget, future investments in, 
and expansion of, renewable energy applications in 
Mongolia may be discouraged. 
General recommendations
Long-term price guarantees, provided through either 
law or PPA, could reduce the risks associated with 
investment in renewables, especially in the absence 
of sufficiently developed financial markets and 
products for risk hedging. If adequately supported 
by independent and accountable institutions, 
reliable and transparent policy formulation, 
this could serve as an effective mechanism for 
facilitating project developers or investors to gain 
access to bank loans on favourable terms. 
In addition to the long-term price guarantee, the 
government needs to allocate sufficient funds to 
establish a well-designed and managed fund that 
ensures foreseeability, transparency and fairness. 
Along with budget allocation, the government 
would also need to take necessary measures to 
raise and secure funds by ensuring the existence of 
adequate support policy for the long-term use of 
soft loans and making special requests for technical 
assistance and grants from international financial 
ACTION 1: Investigate the potential of 
a renewable energy quota system 
The feasibility of applying a quota system in 
Mongolia should be studied. Such a system 
would enable the creation of a market 
fostering renewable power generation and 
facilitate the achievement of the renewable 
energy targets set by the government. A 
system with tradable quotas, also known 
as the Renewable Portfolio Standard or 
tradable green certificates, assigns quota 
obligations for power grid enterprises, largescale power-invested enterprises and local 
governments, whereby a certain percentage 
of their electricity must be generated from 
renewables, either directly or by purchasing 
renewable electricity credits.
The quota system has to be carefully designed, 
managed and adapted in order to become a 
cost-effective policy scheme. One of the main 
benefits of this scheme is the fact that price 
discovery can be partially market-based and 
technology neutrality can ensure least-cost 
choices by investors. 
Among governmental support tools, quotas 
apply the most market-based approach. The 
ability to trade certificates also allows for 
regional approaches across borders, providing 
the potential for further cost reductions. 
Extra costs associated with some renewable 
investments are often passed on to electricity 
consumers, eliminating any obligation for the 
government to pay, or for suppliers and/or 
investors to accumulate debt.
Quotas can be a strategic move in preparing 
the country for a regional renewable electricity 
market, assuming the cross-border power 
grid infrastructure can be developed with 
neighbouring China, where a similar scheme 
is under way. A regional market for tradable 
renewable electricity certificates would 
provide an additional stream of revenue to 
Mongolia. 4.2 Grid Assessment for the 
Integration of Variable Renewables
Challenges
Lack of knowledge about current grid status raises 
grid-stability concerns. The Central Energy System 
grid has been dominated by coal-fired power plants. 
With Mongolia’s first wind farm in operation for 
nearly two years, the grid operators have gained 
some experience in dealing with variable renewable 
sources and have also encountered some challenges. 
What worries Mongolian energy experts and grid 
operators is what could happen if more variable 
renewable energy is put on-line, and how to deal 
with the flexibility constraints that could ensue. 
ACTION 2: Allocate financial resources 
for renewable energy promotion in the 
annual government budget
The annual centralised budget of the 
government must include funds to maintain 
support policies such as soft loans and 
technical assistance. Developing a publicprivate partnership can help raise grants 
from international financial institutions, donor 
countries and private investors. Income tax 
rebates and credits for renewable energy 
projects, in particular import tax reductions 
for imported components and parts for 
renewable energy equipment may further 
encourage investment and accelerate the 
deployment of renewables. The budget for 
securing the Renewable Energy Fund could 
be stocked from a portion of the revenue from 
taxes on air pollution or fossil fuels, mining 
revenues, or electricity tariffs.
ACTION 3: Conduct a power-system 
status assessment and a study on grid 
integration 
A survey was conducted before the first wind 
farm project was initiated, yielding the rather 
conservative result of about 10% variable 
System could take on. At the other end of 
spectrum, some experts estimated that the 
Central Energy System can accommodate 
more than 150 MW each of wind and solar 
PV, representing about 30% of the current 
total installed capacity. 
From an energy planning perspective, there 
is a need to conduct a power-system status 
assessment to better understand which part 
of the grid can connect variable renewables 
without causing grid stability issues. The focus 
can be extended from centralised wind farms 
to distributed generation including both smallscale roof-top and utility-scale solar PV farms 
in place of substations. Power flow and stability 
analyses are needed, so as to provide a better 
understanding of how connecting variable 
renewable sources affects the grid. This would 
ensure such small-scale systems are safely 
accommodated, if and when Mongolia opens 
up its generation business to distribution 
companies by allowing them to install solar/
wind systems within their service areas. 
This analysis can help grid operators predict 
the grid response to solar or wind generation 
inputs at various points and different 
penetration levels. Computer modelling will 
help the grid operator, namely the NDC, 
establish the criteria that installations must 
meet before being allowed to connect. 
However, computer models can address only 
part of the concern. The current state of the 
infrastructure and the quality of service, 
therefore, are important to asses. This 
avoids adding present network operational 
problems to the issues associated with 
integrating variable renewables. 
The following should be included: 
• Diagnostics of present infrastructure 
including generation, transmission and 
distribution networks.
• Grid assessment studies providing 
definitions of key unknowns:
o hosting capacity (at system and understanding of the root causes of the issues they 
encounter, and mobilise necessary resources to not 
only address them but also prevent occurrence of 
future challenges through strategic energy planning. 
However, public funding cuts imposed by the 
government for research, development, and 
demonstration of renewable technologies, as well 
as for resource assessment, has weakened the 
capacities of energy institutions in Mongolia. 
There are, however, young graduates who are 
trying to enter the Mongolian renewables sector. 
There are two public universities where Bachelor’s, 
Master’s and Doctorate degrees in Renewable 
Energy can be obtained: the Mongolian University 
of Science and Technology, Power Engineering 
School; and the National University of Mongolia, 
School of Applied Physics and Engineering. 
Currently, more than 60 students graduate from 
public and private universities in Mongolia with 
a specialisation in the field of renewables every 
year. In addition, there are renewable energy 
specialisations in private schools, with 30-40 
students trained per year. However, only a minority 
of the new graduates manage to find renewable 
energy-related jobs, mainly due to lack of the 
practical experience that employers require from 
applicants. Skills of technicians, competence of 
skilled employees, and the economic ability of 
institutions are often insufficient with respect to 
project implementation (GTZ report, 2009). 
General recommendations
Government support to fund training, research 
and development, demonstration of technologies 
and resource assessments will play a critical role in 
determining whether renewable energy continues 
gain market share and can eventually become 
competitive with fossil-fuel technologies. This is 
especially true in the case of Mongolia, where there 
is an abundant supply of coal. 
Therefore, to ensure that the institutional and 
human capacity for renewable energy development 
in the country can be sustained, the capacity of the 
NREC of Mongolia ought to be reviewed against this 
backdrop. With that, specific capacity enhancement 
4.3 Institutional and Human 
Capacities
As the use of renewable sources rises, equipping 
officials in governmental energy authorities, 
practitioners, researchers, university graduates, 
politicians, political advisers with updated knowledge 
on subjects such as cost reduction, technological 
advancement, subsidy issues, policy schemes and 
potential environmental concerns, has increasingly 
become important. This requires enhancement of the 
institutional and human capacities of the Mongolian 
renewable energy sector. 
Challenges
The country needs fully functional institutions for 
renewable energy. Although renewable energy 
is not a completely new sector in Mongolia, only 
a few skilled employees are able to undertake 
both management and planning functions and to 
perform financial analyses. Over the past years, it 
has been evident that there is a growing need to 
enhance the technical and co-ordination capacities 
of energy sector institutions in Mongolia to address 
the emerging issues arising from the increasing 
deployment and integration of renewables into 
the energy system. This much-needed capacity 
enhancement would also help the MoE as well as 
o expansion requirements and network 
operational measures;
o PV/renewable energy deployment 
plans, in line with current hosting 
capacity and recommended 
measures;
o technical interconnection requirements 
(at rooftop and system level).
• Recommendations on technical 
interconnection requirements to support 
grid operation. 
The results could also help policy makers 
develop suitable policy schemes to support 
the integration of variable renewables into 
the power system. the MoE by focusing on providing advisory services 
to the government through effective co-ordination 
and co-operation with other energy sector entities.
Moreover, there is an urgent need for the country 
to devise key strategies for capacity building 
and growth of its renewable energy sector. The 
strategies should address evolving needs of the 
sector in the short-term (1-2 years) and mediumterm (3-5 years), and at different levels, namely 
regarding institutional and human capacities.
ACTION 4: Establish a national 
research, development and training 
facility for renewable energy 
development 
A strong national renewable energy facility, 
integrating research, development and 
training services, can play a pivotal role in 
accelerating the scaling up of renewables in 
the country in the present and future context, 
when more large-scale renewable energy 
systems are installed. For example, there is 
going to be a growing need to understand 
the behaviour of variable renewable sources 
on the grid, and if and when curtailment 
becomes inevitable, a third-party assessment 
will be necessary. The proposed facility would 
have an important role to play in resolving 
such disputable issues. 
Such a facility can be built on the basis of 
the existing NREC,24 based on the results 
from the review of the NREC’s capacity and 
functionality. The best approach needs to 
be determined for the establishment of the 
new facility. One possible way is to make 
it part of the current NREC with necessary 
restructuring and reorganisation. A key 
element is that such a facility can be part of 
the governmental system, partially owned 
by the government, and therefore can be 
eligible to access the government budget to 
provide financial support for research and 
development activities, which is important for 
24 Formerly the Renewable Energy Corporation, formed 
a country with a harsh natural environment 
to which renewable energy technologies will 
have to adapt. 
The proposed facility is recommended to 
develop a geographic information system 
(GIS)-based renewable energy resource 
database. This would be publicly available, 
transparent, and updated on a regular basis, 
in high resolution, with time series pertaining 
to energy consumption, demand, and supply 
trends of the country. Such a database 
could be useful in potentially modelling 
and simulating the operation of Mongolian 
power supply with added renewable energy 
capacities, which would enhance the capacity 
to forecast trends for the variable nature of 
renewables, thereby facilitating planning and 
investment. The facility could also be well 
positioned to provide advisory services on 
energy and grid planning to governmental 
agencies. 
In addition, the facility can serve as an 
interface between Mongolia and the rest 
of the world when it comes to knowledge 
exchange, collaboration and establishment 
of technical standards and quality assurance 
procedures for renewables in Mongolia. 
Lastly, given the limited know-how on 
the technical aspects of operation and 
maintenance for renewable energy systems 
in rural areas, the facility should create one 
unit focused on rural electrification and other 
energy services that the rural or nomadic 
population may need. 
The annual, centralised government budget 
must allocate sufficient funding for research, 
development, and innovation of renewables. 
For instance, adequate funding has to be 
allocated for the establishment and operation 
of laboratories at national universities 
dedicated to research, development and the 
promotion of renewable energy technologies. 
If the government decides to proceed with 
this, potential opportunities ought to be addition to being dominated by coal-fired power 
plants that are not designed with great flexibility. 
By largely the same token, the NDC functioning as 
a grid operator has limited capacity to engage in 
power regulation from the control room due to the 
constraints that some power plants/CHPs have in 
adjusting their production to load variations about 
two years ago.
When the first utility-scale wind farm in Mongolia 
came on-line in 2013, the NDC had to deal with 
greater challenges; especially during the night, 
when energy demand was low while wind electricity 
generation was high. The NDC has chosen to give 
priority of dispatch to the electricity generated by 
thermal power plants and put curtailment on wind, 
due to the technical and economic constraints that 
coal-fired steam generators in the thermal power 
plants might encounter.
On the technical front, CHP steam turbines are able 
to respond in seconds to load dropping by having 
pressure reduction valves engaged. However, 
if and when the load remains too low and the 
steam generators at the thermal power plants are 
suppressed to the minimal level under which the 
steam generators can operate, a decision has to be 
made regarding further operation. The prevailing 
rule is to avoid shutting down the steam generators, 
as they are not technologically designed for startstop operation, and therefore will have a shorter 
lifetime than designed/desired.
Challenges
The country lacks adequate institutional capacity 
and a dispatch priority mechanism for renewable 
energy. The Mongolian energy system in general, 
and the Central Energy System in particular, is 
highly complex in terms of significantly varied loads 
over the period of a day as well as seasonally, in 
such renewables-focused laboratories and 
the proposed research facility. 
Looking forward, functions such as advisory 
services for investors can eventually be 
operated on a commercial basis while services 
such as drafting energy policies for the MoE 
can remain as part of the mandates given 
to the NREC. Thus, the centre can act as the 
branch of the ministry to provide technical 
advisory services to other ministries and also 
co-ordinate with other energy institutions 
such as the NDC on various renewablesrelated issues. However, support from the 
government as well as the donor community 
is necessary, particularly in the initial phases 
of establishing the proposed research facility. 
The team can be set up with the help of 
IRENA and other contributors. From an economic perspective, shutting down and 
re-starting a steam generator/boiler is prohibitively 
costly. The high costs associated with the shutdownrestart are additional to the revenue loss caused by 
the reduced amount of electricity produced from 
thermal power plants compared to what would 
otherwise be the case. Lastly, if the curtailment is 
not applied while the Mongolian power grid cannot 
take it, another option is to export it to Russia at 
nearly zero value. In this case, Mongolia could even 
face Russian penalties, as the country is required 
to submit its import/export schedule in advance. In 
case of any deviation from the schedule, a penalty 
is imposed. 
Having said that, as the newer CHPs are gradually 
put on line, there is a good opportunity for the 
conventional base-load power plants to follow the 
load and adapt to the impacts of variable renewable 
electricity. As far as the grid operators are 
concerned, there is a need for the NDC to overcome 
the increasing technical difficulties presented by 
variable renewable sources and receive dispatch 
training that can help guarantee priority of access 
to renewable power. 
In addition, thermal power plants lack incentives to 
make efforts to adapt the new load profiles, taking 
into account variable wind power outputs. 
General recommendation
With a growing share of variable renewable 
sources in the grid, new techniques and tools for 
grid operators to deal with the variation have been 
developed. This has provided potential solutions for 
the grid to take in high shares of variable renewables 
without jeopardising grid stability. The Mongolian 
dispatch centres should keep abreast of the best 
available practices and tools and also be involved 
grid stability studies, if any. 
First of all, the grid operator, i.e. Mongolia’s NDC, 
needs to overcome the increasing technical 
difficulties presented by variable renewable 
sources. To enable the NDC to do so, there is a need 
to enhance the operational capacity of the dispatch 
centre to deal with large-scale on-grid variable 
renewables to ensure priority of access to renewable 
ACTION 5: Enhance National 
Dispatching Center capacity
There is a need to enhance the capacity of the 
dispatch centre to deal with large-scale ongrid variable renewables and ensure priority 
of access to renewable sources. This has to be 
improved in both physical and regulatory terms. 
Improving power grid infrastructure
Physically, the Mongolian power system 
needs spinning reserves to make the grid 
more flexible as a means to address the 
variability of renewable power outputs. A 
more advanced control system is needed to 
regulate outputs from power plants directly 
from the control room of the dispatch centre. 
If this is done well, the present load issue 
can be less problematic in future, although 
it does have adverse impacts on the financial 
and technical performance of the wind farm 
at the moment. 
Defining clear operational rules
Current dispatching regulations need to 
be revised and analysed after taking into 
consideration the significant fluctuations in 
renewable power output that could impede 
a low-cost daily supply-load balance. Based 
on that, the operational rules for dispatch 
orders should be clearly defined in favour 
of maximising the injection of electricity 
from renewable sources into the grid under 
the condition that grid stability is not 
compromised. 
Integrating a wind forecasting programme 
into NDC operations
The NDC needs to know which units, including 
compensate the economic loss that would occur 
when CHPs have to operate under reduced load 
because of high outputs from variable renewable 
electricity generation facilities. 4.4 Developing Cross-border Grid 
Infrastructure to Export Renewable 
Electricity 
The Mongolian power system is in great transition 
with the increased use of renewable-based systems 
to replace coal-fired power plants, moving both 
domestically and regionally (albeit at a more 
gradual pace) to maximise the utilisation of its vast 
amount of renewable energy sources, particularly 
in the Gobi Desert region. With the rising demand 
for cleaner energy sources in China and the other 
countries in the northern Asian region rises, 
Mongolia recognises the opportunity to reach its 
strategic goal of becoming an exporter of renewable 
electricity in the region. 
Challenges
A comprehensive feasibility study is needed 
with a focus on techno-economic analysis. The
notion of exporting Mongolian low-cost renewablebased electricity from the Gobi Desert to 
developers. However, due to the large geographical 
extent of the Gobi Desert region, along with the 
projected high upfront costs, the ASG project 
is facing an extraordinary set of technical and 
political challenges that hinder the progress of 
the project beyond its preliminary phase. Serious 
considerations of the technical, political, and socioeconomic requirements, barriers, and implications 
must be carefully studied in order to successfully 
realise the potential of the ASG. These can include 
conducting detailed renewable energy resource 
assessments and determining the optimal land use, 
grid conditions, and location of dispatch centres. 
A few preliminary studies on the issue of grid 
integration in northeast Asia have been completed 
by the Asia Pacific Energy Research Centre 
(APERC), the Korean Electrotechnology Research 
Institute (KERI), the Siberian Energy Institute of 
Russia and the Energy Charter. These reports 
identify the potential benefits and barriers to grid 
interconnection, but do so mainly from a research 
perspective. Initial studies indicate that Gobitec/ASG 
is technically and economically feasible. However, a 
comprehensive feasibility study to present different 
options with detailed techno-economic analysis has 
yet to be conducted, ideally with the involvement of 
the governments of the relevant countries. 
Recommendations
Further progress in Gobitec/ASG strongly depends 
on detailed feasibility studies with close regional 
co-operation in the north eastern Asian region. 
Forming an electricity market in the region requires 
significant effort and negotiations to eliminate 
the physical, trade and regulatory barriers. As the 
countries have different energy targets and policy 
structures, the processes involved may present 
obstacles.
A convincing feasibility study will help the relevant 
nations understand the cost and long-term benefits 
of materialising this idea. With increasing pressure 
on reducing carbon emissions and conventional 
pollution from coal-fired power plants, the need for 
renewable electricity has been growing substantially 
over the past few years. This has been coupled 
with growth in electricity demand. Therefore, the 
coming days, hours and minutes. Therefore, 
to accurately forecast the available wind 
resource is particularly important for the 
grid operator. An advanced wind resource 
forecast software/programme needs to be 
integrated into the NDC operation. 
Enhancing the technical skills of 
operational staff
Training sessions are recommended for grid 
operators on the use of simulation tools to 
facilitate dealing with a greater share of solar 
and wind power in the grid. The capacity of 
dispatch centres can be further enhanced 
with forecasting techniques, such as dayahead or six-hour-ahead forecasting and 
with the introduction of technical standards 
for renewable energy equipment and the 
operational behaviour of renewable power 
plants in the grid code. Appropriate tools 
should be made available and a series of 
training programmes should be carried out. ACTION 6: Form a consortium to 
conduct a feasibility study 
Specifically, a consortium should be formed 
among relevant countries, with support 
from the national governments in those 
countries, to conduct a comprehensive 
feasibility study. Gobitec will be relying 
mostly on large-scale wind and solar energy 
projects within the Gobi Desert region for 
potential energy exports to China, Japan, 
the Republic of Korea, and the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea. Since there is no 
grid infrastructure in the Gobi Desert region, 
the economics and technical requirements 
for the development of the regional grid 
infrastructure need to be considered in the 
feasibility study. Experiences from other 
regional energy initiatives can be leveraged 
and best practices can be applied, depending 
on domestic suitability.
Such a study should involve regional and/
or international organisations where a 
multilateral platform can be provided. Such 
an international platform can help provide 
legal guarantees for participating countries, 
investors and other stakeholders; can help 
in the alignment of their renewable energy 
targets; can provide a joint platform for 
electricity exchange with a harmonised set 
of trade and transit rules; and can improve 
the investment climate. The most important 
objective of the consortium is that cooperation should be structured in such a way 
that facilitates the equal distribution of project 
benefits among all participants, and assesses 
engineering challenges and solutions. 
This means that the national governments 
in these countries should be more actively 
involved, and it should be made clear how 
the feasibility study results would be used, 
especially in mid- to long-term energy 
planning and development. International 
financial institutions, regional financiers 
and national banks will perceive potential 
investments as less risky when those are 
backed or endorsed by a government. 
With international/regional organisation 
participation, the investment risk can 
be reduced by providing a stable and 
transparent legal framework. Agreements 
reached on a multilateral basis are less likely 
to be breached. This setting would, in return, 
encourage engagement of the private sector 
for joint implementation of the ASG initiative, 
which is crucial. The Greater Mekong SubRegional Power Grid Interconnection project 
aided by the ADB may be a model that can 
be used to materialise the Gobitec/ASG 
concept. 
To mitigate the risks, investments can start 
with smaller projects, which can subsequently 
be aligned with the Gobitec/ASG vision 
after the comprehensive feasibility study is 
completed. Such projects could be started 
nationally and then be evolved into bilateral 
and multilateral projects at a later stage. 
In order to ensure that various environmental 
and sustainability aspects are fully considered, 
a Strategic Environment Assessment (SEA) is 
recommended for the Gobitec/ASG project. 
An SEA that works within a structured and 
tiered decision framework will support a more 
efficient decision-making process. Since the 
feasibility study has thus far been conducted 
only at the preliminary level, further research 
is needed to identify the optimal technology 
mix in terms of transmission and generation 
for the ASG. In parallel, ministerial meetings 
would allow for consensus building and 
harmonisation of technology standards for 
regulatory frameworks. The results from these 
meetings need to be shared internally within 
the governments of participating countries. CONCLUDING
REMARKS05
Mongolia is at a crossroad. After a few years of rapid economic growth, the 
increasing concerns over degradation of local environmental quality are 
triggering discussions on how Mongolia can strike a balance between shortterm economic growth and long-term green development goals. In the Green 
Development Policy approved by the Mongolian parliament and the State Energy 
Policy, passed by parliament and published in 2015, renewable energy targets 
have been set; i.e. a 20% reduction of GHG emissions from the energy sector by 
2020 and increasing the share of renewables in energy production to 20% by 
2023, and 30% by 2030. 
With these strategic policy proposals in mind, there has been a call to review 
and amend the Renewable Energy Law to push for further development of 
renewables in Mongolia. Proposed changes were made by the MoE and a further 
study proposal was made by MEGD in collaboration with the UNFCCC. 
The study found that reaching the targets and developing Mongolia into a regional 
clean energy producer and exporter are possible, but challenging. There is a need 
to look at the issues from a systems perspective. Although renewables are not 
new to Mongolia, handling the scaling up of renewable energy applications is 
new to the country’s grid operators and energy planners. In the past, renewables 
have been small-scale such as solar home systems. 
Institutional and human capacities should be improved first. Without the relevant 
renewable energy professionals possessing state-of-art knowledge, Mongolia 
would have difficulty realising its ambitious strategic goal of becoming the regional 
clean energy provider. In order to promote further deployment of renewables 
in the country, the NREC ought to be strengthened through restructuring and 
reorganisation. A national state-owned research and development (R&D) and policy and legal framework design, technological 
and technical development and adaptation. It can 
also provide hands-on experience to graduates, 
aiding in the development of important human 
capital. Additionally, the training facility could offer 
Mongolia’s dispatch centres training sessions on how 
to deal with grid-connected variable renewables.
Physical power system enhancement is critical for 
grid integration of renewable power generators. 
Without the power grid infrastructure assessment, 
it would be difficult to know how much and where 
variable renewables can be accommodated by 
the grid. In general, the Mongolian system needs 
to increase its flexibility. But how much depends 
on grid status, as improvements cost money. Grid 
assessments focusing on grid stability should be 
conducted. Based on their results, distributed 
generation systems can be installed to stabilise the 
grid. This will also help set up a legal regulatory 
framework for roof-top (net metering) units, 
integration code, and technical standards, and 
support the provision of financial and economic 
incentives. 
Mongolia has much more renewable energy potential 
than is required by its domestic consumers, which 
is why a regional market should be examined. With 
the demand of clean energy from neighbouring 
countries such as China, Mongolia is well positioned 
to provide renewable electricity through a jointly 
built regional grid infrastructure.However, further 
feasibility studies need to be done, with the 
involvement and support of the relevant countries 
and collaboration from regional and international 
organisations. A joint force is needed to set such 
a huge initiative into motion. Gobitec and ASG 
implementation will require high-level government 
commitment and intergovernmental negotiations, 
first to eliminate physical, trade and regulatory 
barriers, and further to ensure the creation of a 
viable electricity market in the region. A highlevel intergovernmental agreement would be an 
important first step towards meeting the goals of 
the ASG to build a regional electricity network for 
northeast Asia, which can support the increased 
share of renewables. 
Lastly, since there are many people still living in 
rural areas across Mongolia, a significant portion of 
which are likely remain there in the coming years as 
they follow the lifestyle of nomadic herders, rural 
electricity remains an important need in Mongolia. 
Upscaling solar home systems from the existing 
standard 50 W to 500 W or more is a likely next 
step. Configuring mini-grids with solar and wind for 
community and productive use is also critical. Minigrids should be launched in rural areas and can be 
used for small and medium enterprises as well as 
agricultural operations. The total capacity of minigrids can be shared among the users, thus leading 
to lower cost per user compared to the SHS model.
All in all, given Mongolia’s huge renewable energy 
sources and its strategic vision for green growth, 
the development of renewables would be a highly 
strategic move for the country. With current market 
and development barriers removed, the potential 
of renewables can be unlocked and provide vast 
benefits to the country and wider region. REFERENCES
ADB (2013), The Mongolian National Masterplan for Energy Sector Development, developed by the Mongolian 
Ministry of Energy with technical assistance provided by the Asian Development Bank.
ADB (2015), Mongolia’s Economy to Grow Less in 2015, Weighed Down by Macroeconomic Imbalances. www.adb.org/
news/mongolia-s-economy-grow-less-2015-weighed-down-macroeconomic-imbalances, (accessed on 20 February 2016).
Allen, R. W., et al. (2013), “An Assessment of Air Pollution and its Attributable Mortality in Ulaanbaatar, 
Mongolia”, Air Quality, Atmosphere & Health, No 6, pp. 137-150.
APCTT UNESCAP (2008), Mongolia: Renewable Energy Report, Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of 
Technology – United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, recap.apctt.org/download.
php?p=Admin/Country/Report/8.pdf.
Bloomberg New Energy Finance (2013), Mongolia: A Hungry Wolf Joins Asia’s Energy Tigers, Renewable 
Energy-Research Note.
Dagvadorj, D. (2012), “Mongolia’s Perspective on Green Development”, Green Growth Development Paths for a 
Better Future, joint OECD-GGGI workshop, 22 November, Paris.
Energy Research Institute National Development and Reform Commission (2015), China 2050 High Renewable 
Energy Penetration Scenario and Roadmap Study; Executive Summary, www.efchina.org/Attachments/Report/
report-20150420/China-2050-High-Renewable-Energy-Penetration-Scenario-and-Roadmap-Study-Executive-Summary.pdf. 
GTZ (2009), Regional Reports on Renewable Energies 30 Country Analyses on Potentials and Markets in: West 
Africa (17) East Africa (5) Central Asia (8), Energy-policy Framework Papers, Section »Energy and Transport«, 
www.ecreee.org/sites/default/files/event-att/gtz_re_in_developing_countries.pdf?.
Guttikunda, S.K., et al. (2013), “Particulate pollution in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.” Air Quality, Atmosphere & 
Health, No 6, pp. 589-601.
IMF (2013), “World Economic Outlook 2013”, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C., www.imf.org/
external/pubs/ft/weo/2013/02/pdf/text.pdf.
International Energy Charter (2013), “In-depth review of the investment climate and market structure in the 
energy sector of Mongolia”, www.energycharter.org/what-we-do/investment/investment-climate-and-market-structure/
investment-in-mongolia-2013/. 
Lee, T., A. Shiilegmaa and D. Batsuuri(2015), Mongolia Monthly Economic Brief (June 2015), Washington, D.C., 
World Bank Group, http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/07/24829475/mongolia-monthly-economic-briefjune-2015, (accessed on 20 February 2016).
MENT (2009), Mongolia: Assessment Report on Climate Change 2009, Ministry of Environment, Nature and 
Tourism of Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar, September 2009, www.unep.org/B9087AD0-BEB4-4BBF-8D8D-9C616B22C938/
FinalDownload/DownloadId-EB19BD22EF73CF3164BFE87F0CCA2E34/B9087AD0-BEB4-4BBF-8D8D-9C616B22C938/pdf/
MARCC2009_BOOK.pdf.Minchener, A. (2013), “Energy Issues for Mongolia”, International Energy Agency Clean Coal Centre. CCC/215 
ISBN 978-92-9029-535-8.
Mongolian Statistical Information Service (n.d.), Statistical Information, www.1212.mn/en/, (accessed on 20 
February 2016).
NSO (2015), National Statistical Office of Mongolia, www.en.nso.mn/index.php, (accessed 19 November, 2015).
Sarangerel, P., (n.d.), The Potential for Bioenergy Development in Mongolia, Ministry of Fuel & Energy, Mongolia.
Solarus (n.d.), Inclusive Systems, www.solarus.se/system-inclusive/
Stackhouse P.W. and C. H. Whitlock (2009), Surface meteorology and Solar Energy (SSE) release 6.0 
Methodology, NASA SSE 6.0, Earth Science Enterprise Program, National Aeronautic and Space Administration 
(NASA), Langley.
State Great Hural of Mongolia (2012), “Resolution by the (Parliament) of Mongolia: Millennium Development 
Goal-based Comprehensive National Strategy of Mongolia”, (translation version), (12 February 2008), http://
mofa.gov.mn/coordination/images/stories/resource_docs/nds_approved_eng.pdf.
UNDP (2012), “The Asia-Pacific Human Development Report 2012, United Nations Development Programme 
www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/hdr/asia-pacific-human-development-report-2012/.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) (2009), Mongolia: Assessment Report on Climate Change 
2009, Ministry of Environment, Nature and Tourism of Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar, September, www.unep.org/pdf/
MARCC2009_BOOK.pdf.
UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) (2015), Intended Nationally Determined 
Contribution (INDC) Submission by Mongolia to the Ad-Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform for 
Enhanced Action (ADP), www4.unfccc.int/submissions/INDC/Published%20Documents/Mongolia/1/150924_INDCs%20
of%20Mongolia.pdf.
World Bank (n.d.), Access to electricity (% of population), Data,http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.
ZS?order=wbapi_data_value_2012+wbapi_data_value+wbapi_data_value-first&sort=desc, (accessed 18 September 2015).
World Bank (2011), Air Quality Analysis of Ulaanbaatar: Improving Air Quality to Reduce Health Impacts, 
Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2011/12/15580103/air-quality-analysisulaanbaatar-improving-air-quality-reduce-health-impacts-vol-1-2.
World Bank (n.d.), Mongolia, Data, www.worldbank.org/en/country/mongolia, (accessed 18 September 2015).
World Bank (2009), Mongolia: Heating in Poor, Peri-urban Ger Areas of Ulaanbaatar, World Bank, Washington, 
D.C., http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2009/10/16370838/mongolia-heating-poor-peri-urban-ger-areasulaanbaatar.
World Bank (2008), Mongolia: Power Sector Development and South Gobi Development,
Draft Report, Economic Consulting Associates, http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMONGOLIA/Resources/ECA_
Report_on_Power_and_South_Gobi_development_ENG.pdf.
World Economic Forum (2013), World Economic Forum Strategic Dialogue on the Future of Mongolia, www3.