File Name: MNG-NEP-2015-EN
Year: 2015
Country Name: Mongolia
Country Code: MNG
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2015
Start Year: 2015
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

RESOLUTION OF STATE IKH HURAL OF MONGOLIA 
JUNE 19, 2015
# 63
ON ADOPTION OF STATE POLICY ON ENERGY
Based on section 4.4 article 4 of Energy law and section 43.1 article 43 of Law on State Ikh 
Hural of Mongolia The State Ikh Hural RESOLUTES:
1. Adopt “State Policy on Energy” by the Annex.
2. To obligate Government of Mongolia /Ch.Saihanbileg/ to implement “State policy on 
Energy:
1/ To prepare and adopt “Mid term program on implementation of State Policy on 
Energy” within 2015, and organize implementation. 
2/ To perform monitoring and evaluation on implementation of “State policy on 
energy” and present results to the State Ikh Hural every second year. 
3. Due to adoption of this resolution to annul “National renewable energy program” adopted 
by State Ikh Hural resolution #32 dated on 9th June 2005 and “Adoption of Unified 
Energy System” adopted by State Ikh Hural resolution #10 dated on 31st Junuary, 2007.
Speaker of the State Ikh Hural Z.EnkhboldAnnex to State Ikh Hural 
resolution #63 of 2015
STATE POLICY ON ENERGY
/2015-2030/
One. General Provisions
1.1.Energy sector is development priority economic base sector which forms state security, 
social and economic development foundation. 
1.2.The main objective of the state policy on energy is to supply continuously increasing energy 
demand, provide secure energy supply and become energy exporting country. 
1.3.This document shall act as base document for planning activties in energy sector such as 
development planning, primary energy source stoking, fuel stocking, eletrocity and heat 
generation, eletricity and heat supply, increase overall energy system efficiency, form public 
private partnership in energy sector, transoform into free market scheme, legal environment, 
advance energy sector management and organizational frame, build human capacity.
1.4. The current situation in the energy sector, challenges 
1.4.1 Mongolia as country with reach primary energy sources actively perfoming exploration 
and exploitation search activties of coal, oil, solar and wind energy reserves.
1.4.3 In country wide 85% of total installed capacity is coal burning CHPs plants, 5% is 
wind, 7% diesel generators, 2% is hydro power plants, and 0.62% is small renewable energy 
sources with less than 5MW installed capcity. The 80% of total electric energy is porduced 
locally and 20% is impoted from abroad.
1.4.4 Due to lack of timely implementation of planned project on introduction of new major 
power source in the energy sector of Mongolia the reserves of installed capacity is rapidly 
diminishing. The lack of reserves to cover increasing peak load demand and maintain system 
dynamic stability is exists. The import electric energy reached 20% of total energy consumption 
of Mongolia.
1.4.5 Electrical and thermal energy sales prices are have been set lower than the actual costs 
which lead to difficulties in independent financing of operation and maintenance , technical and 
technological innovation at the appropriate level . The energy sector only in 2014 faced a loss of 
68 billion MNT.
1.4.6 The low electric energy tariffs and fully undeveloped regulatory environment resulted 
negative effect on attracting private investment on the development of new large scale projects in 
the sector.
1.4.7 Almost all technical equipment of Ulaanbaatar, Darkhan, Erdenet, and Dornod power 
plants in operation were installed or put in operation in period between 1960 to 1980ies.
1.4.8 At the country scale the power plant internal energy use is reached 14.4%, energy 
transmission and distribution system losses reached 13.7%, which is almost two times of similar index in developed countries. Therefore there is need to develop and implement policy on 
increase of productivity, decrease of internal use of thermal power plants, increase efficiency and 
energy conservation at energy consumers level. 
Two. The vision, priorities and main principles of energy sector development policy
2.1. The vision of the development policy is to become electric energy exporting country with 
efficient, economic, and environmentally friendly technology based on private sector, 
competitive market scheme while supporting economic growth, sustainable development, and
energy safety and reliablity of the country.
2.2. The following priorities of energy sector development policy is identified based on current 
achievments, conditions, challenges of energy sector development of Mongolia and global 
energy sector development priorities: 
2.2.1 Reliability and safety of energy supply;
2.2.2 Efficiency, productivity;
2.2.3 Environmental sustainability and green development.
2.3. The following main principles are applied in setting of the strategic objectives and goals
on energy sector development policy:
2.3.1. ensure country’s reliable energy supply and energy security; 
2.3.2. ensure sustainable economic development;
2.3.3. build favorable condition on increase population life standard;
2.3.4. be environmentally friendly;
2.3.5. be efficient and economic;
2.3.6. be rational for science and knowledge based.
Three. Objectives and goals of state policy on energy
3.1. Based on the potential and challenges facing energy sector of Mongolia the State Policy on 
Energy sets following strategic objectives:
In the scope of energy reliability and security:
3.1.1. Ensure energy safety and supply reliability;
3.1.2. Develop mutually beneficial cooperation with regional countries;
3.1.3. Develop human resource and form human capacity in the energy sector.
In the scope of increase of efficiency and productivity:
3.1.4. Transform energy sector into private based competitive market scheme; 
3.1.5. Introduce and implement policy for support of implementation of innovative and 
advanced technology.In the scope of environmental sustainability and green development:
3.1.6. Reduce negative impact on environment; reduce of greenhouse gas emission; and 
increase of production of energy by renewable energy sources.
3.2. Following goals are set in state policy on energy:
3.2.1. In the first strategic goal or in the energy supply reliability and energy security
scope:
3.2.1.1. Create safety resources for primary energy, fuel;
3.2.1.2. Create capacity reserve to fully cover domestic energy demand;
3.2.1.3. Create regulating power source to maintain stable operation of energy 
system and to meet power demand fluctuation;
3.2.1.4. Increase heat power access and quality in cities and villages, and develop 
heat supply infrastructure;
3.2.1.5. Interconnect independent energy systems by high voltage transmission 
lines to build unified energy system;
3.2.1.6. Increase reliability and constant operation of electric, heat transmission 
and distribution systems to increase quality of energy supplied to the consumers. 
3.2.2. In the second strategic goal or in the energy cooperation development in the region
scope:
3.2.2.1 Reach mutually beneficial agreement with neighboring countries on long 
term energy import and export and develop energy cooperation;
3.2.2.2. Actively participate and develop cooperation within international and 
regional organizations on energy cooperation;
3.2.2.3. Cooperate with regional countries on the promotion of Gobitec initiative 
on electric energy export to Northeast Asian countries from large scale renewable energy 
power sources build on abundant solar and wind resources of Gobi region of Mongolia;
3.2.2.4. Strengthen cooperation in energy sector with international financial 
organizations, donor countries, and attract investment. 
3.2.3. In the third strategic goal or in the human resource development and capacity
building scope:
3.2.4. In the forth strategic goal or in the transformation of private based 
competitive market scheme of energy sector scope:3.2.4.1. Form tariff structure based on actual cost and profit level and maintain 
sector sustainable financing; 
3.2.4.2 Build conditions for sustainable energy sector investment, increase private 
sector participation;
3.2.4.3 Build legal environment favorable for competitive market based scheme. 
3.2.5. In the fifth strategic goal or in adoption of innovation and advanced technology 
promotion of efficiency increase and energy conservation policy scope:
3.2.5.1. Adopt smart digital system for monitor, control and management of 
energy production, transmission and distribution;
3.2.5.2. Adopt innovation, new advanced technology in the energy sector;
3.2.5.3. Reduce losses in energy production, transmission and distribution 
systems;
3.2.5.4. Build national legal environment for energy conservations regulation, 
develop consumer side management;
3.2.5.5. Adopt full scale metering on energy consumption at national level.
3.2.6. In the sixth strategic goal or in the decrease of negative environment impact, 
reduction of greenhouse gas emission and energy production increase by renewable energy 
scope:
3.2.6.1. Develop institutional capacity to perform detailed resource assessment of 
Mongolian renewable energy resources (solar, wind, hydro, geothermal, biomass and 
etc.) build national renewable energy resource database and perform research and 
development in field of renewable energy;
3.2.6.2. Increase share of renewable energy in national energy capacity to 20% by 
2020, 30% by 2030;
3.2.6.3. Build favorable legal, tax environment to increase investment in 
renewable energy, create financial mechanism to support energy production by renewable 
energy;
3.2.6.4. Support use of solar energy, wind energy, biomass, liquid pressed gas, 
fuel geothermal energy, fuel cell and other new energy sources for energy supply of 
remote users in baga centers and isolated settlings;
3.2.6.5. Decrease negative environmental effect for energy production, 
transmission and distribution;
3.2.6.6. Improve environmental impact monitoring.Four. Policy implementation stages, management, organization, monitoring and evaluation 
criteria, outcomes
4.1. The state policy on energy shall be implemented in following two stages:
Fist stage /2015-2023/: stage for creation of primary energy reserves, energy capacity 
reserves, building base for renewable energy development, elaboration of energy sector 
normative documentation framework, adoption of euro standards and improvement of legal 
environment.
4.1.1. In this stage the Mongolian energy sector installed capacity will be increased two 
times, will start application of highly efficient equipment’s, will be formed at least 10% 
hydro power and at least 10% capacity reserves in total energy system capacity to build base 
for future renewable energy development. The tariff structure will be optimized to ensure 
economically independent energy sector development.
4.1.1.1. The Ulaanbaatar city CHP#5, Tavantolgoi CHP, Baganuur CHP shall be 
constructed;
4.1.1.2. The energy export purpose high capacity CHP and very high voltage DC 
line construction project shall be started:
4.1.1.3. The load controlling Egiin hydro power plant should be constructed;
4.1.1.4. A thermal power plant in western region, a hydro power plant at Khovd 
river and a Dornod CHP in eastern region shall be constructed;
4.1.1.5. The Baganuur-Choir, Ulaanbaatar –Mandalgobi, Baganuur-Ulaanbaatar, 
Baganuur-Undurkhaan-Choibalsan, Choir-Sainshand, Mandalgobi-Arvaikheer, DurgunUliastai-Ulaanbaatar high volateg overhead transmission lines shall be constructed;
4.1.1.6. The energy tariff shall be indexed, the energy sector shall be operated by 
the regulated competitive market scheme and the energy sector shall be operated financially 
independently;
4.1.1.7. The energy transmission facility shall be in state property and energy 
distribution, supply shall be privatized though gradual transformed to open public stoke 
companies, state support mechanism on financing of privatized energy facilityes for technical 
and technological upgrade, extension.4.1.1.8. The function domestic energy research and development institutions shall 
be sustained, the quality and standards of energy sector human capacity training, re-training 
shall be reached level of the developed countries;
4.1.1.9. The introduction of integrated automation, control and monitoring system 
for energy production, transmission, distribution and supply activities shall be started.
Second stage /2024-2030/: Energy export and renewable energy development stage.
4.1.2. In the second stage: the energy security reserve of Mongolia will be increased not 
less than 20 percent, the share of renewable energy sources in total installed capacity will reach 
30%. Will be built complex unified energy system based on high capacity smart transmission, 
management, control, monitoring and information system between regions. The distribution 
system will be fully privatized and energy sector will operate on competitive market based 
scheme. Will be started energy export based on very high voltage direct current power 
transmission interconnection.
4.1.2.1. The unified energy system covering entire Mongolia shall be put in place;
4.1.2.2. High capacity hydro power plant at Selenge river, in total 300MW 
installed capacity wind and solar power plants, and export purpose high capacity thermal power 
plant and transmission lines shall be constructed;
4.1.2.3. Energy quality, reliability, and constant supply shall be reached level of 
developed countries; 
4.1.2.4. Mongolia shall become one of major players in energy trade in North East 
Asia;
4.1.2.5. The national research institution on innovation and high technology shall 
be put in place;
4.1.2.6. The private sector shall dominate in total installed capacity;
4.1.2.7. The integrated smart network of automation, control and monitoring 
system for energy production, transmission, distribution and supply activities shall be put in 
place.
4.2. The evaluation indicators of state energy sector policy are defined based on 2013 index 
as follows:Indicators
2013
base
First stage 
by 2023
Second stage 
by
2030
Reserve electrical installed capacity -10% 10 % ≤ 20 % ≤
Reserve heat installed capacity for big cities 3% 10 % ≤ 15 % ≤
Profit margin for electrical tariff for Central 
energy system -16.22% 0 % 5 %
Internal use of thermal power plants 14.4 % 11.2 % 9.14 %
Electrical transmission, distribution loss
/Oyotolgoi import is not included /
13.7 % 10.8% 7.8 %
Share of renewable energy installed 
capacity in domestic electrical installed 
capacity
7.62% 20% 30%
Greenhouse gas emission per 1Gkal energy 
production
0.52 tones
СО2
equivalent
0.49 tones
СО2
equivalent
0.47 tones
СО2
equivalent
Reduction of building heat loss 0% 20% 40%
New technologies in energy sector High pressure
Sub critical 
pressure 
technology
Natural gas 
technology
High capacity 
energy 
storage 
technology, 
hydro 
reserved plant
Super 
critical, ultra 
super critical 
pressure 
technology
Hydrogen 
technology
Solar thermal 
power plant 
Five. Implementation of state energy sector policy and its financing sources
5.1. The activities of state energy sector policy will be defined by med term National 
energy sector program and will be reflected and implemented by the Action plan of Government 
of Mongolia, annual state economic and social development frame.5.2. As the energy production, supply play defining role in state security, while building 
base for economic and social development, have strategic priority development needs the 
Government shall prioritize investment and project implementation financing. 
5.3. The following financing sources will applied in implementation of the State energy 
sector policy: 
5.3.1. state private sector cooperation, national and international investment;
5.3.2. financing from stock market;
5.3.3. state budget financing, investment programs;
5.3.4. cooperation with international financing organizations;
5.3.5. loans;
5.3.6. other sources.
________oOo_______ 
 