File Name: MNG-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Mongolia
Country Code: MNG
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August–1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
27 June 2022
Original: English
2210278X (E) 200722
Second regular session 2022
29 August–1 September 2022, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Mongolia (2023–2027)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Mongolia (2023–2027) .............................................................. 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework
1. Mongolia is a landlocked country characterized by unique ecosystems and landscapes, with 
many traditional nomadic pastoralist communities. It ranks in the high human development 
category, with a Human Development Index value of 0.737 (2019).
1 The country, with 3.3 
million people,2 has a high unemployment rate of 7.4 per cent (2021), and unemployment is
concentrated in the 15-34 age group.
3 The country’s population density is very low. 
2. Mongolia’s rural population has urbanized rapidly — the urban population expanded from 
52 per cent in 1990 to 69 per cent in 2020.
4 The country’s economic transition has been
accompanied by changing demographics and shifting development patterns. Almost a quarter 
of its gross domestic product (GDP) is based on extractives, mainly coal and minerals, as of 
2019.
5
3. The government’s long-term development policy, Vision 2050, calls for the country to 
become “a leading Asian country in terms of its social development, economic growth and its 
citizens’ quality of life.”
6 Vision 2050 also reflects the country’s human rights commitments
and provides a framework to implement inclusive programmes to address its complex 
development challenges. 
4. Mongolia has achieved substantial economic growth, largely fuelled by foreign investment 
in the extractives industry. Gross national income per capita increased by 134.5 per cent 
between 1990 and 2019.7 The cost has been fewer job opportunities and low value addition in 
non-mining sectors, making the country vulnerable to shocks. High levels of debt pose risks 
to its financial sustainability. Though poverty has fallen and living conditions have improved 
due to investments in health, education and social protection, structural inequality persists,
and poverty, at 28.4 per cent, remains the highest in the region.
8, 9 Governance challenges
include lack of (a) institutional capacities for effective public administration; (b) evidenceinformed policies; planning and budgeting to address the needs of vulnerable people;
(c) accountability; and (d) coordinated policymaking. These challenges hinder progress 
towards achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (the Goals).
5. Though Mongolia made significant strides towards sustainable development prior to 
COVID-19, the pandemic led to a 5.3 per cent economic contraction, diminishing livelihoods 
and well-being. In 2020, the budget deficit increased to 12 per cent of GDP, with public debt 
estimated to exceed 80 per cent of GDP.
10 The pandemic exacerbated challenges, particularly 
for vulnerable people: children, women and girls, persons with disability, youth, ethnic 
minorities, residents of ger areas,
11 informal workers, victims of trafficking, and stranded and 
unregistered migrants.
12 Parliament approved the country’s New Recovery Policy on 
30 December 2021 as a medium-term programme to implement Vision 2050 and reduce the 
1 UNDP, ‘Briefing note for countries on the 2020 Human Development Report: Mongolia, https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/CountryProfiles/MNG.pdf.
2 Economist Intelligence Unit, https://country.eiu.com/article.aspx?articleid=1481835331&Country=Mongolia&topic=Summary&subtopic=Basic+data.
3 NSO, ‘Registered unemployed, February 2021’, https://1212.mn/BookLibraryDownload.ashx?url=1_Registered_unemployed_2021.02_en.pdf&ln=En.
4 https://www.1212.mn/tables.aspx?TBL_ID=DT_NSO_0300_027V1
5 The World Bank, ‘Mines and minds’ infographic, https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/infographic/2020/10/30/mines-and-minds.
6 Government of Mongolia, 2020, ‘Vision 2050: Long-term Development Policy of Mongolia’.
7 UNDP, ‘Briefing note for countries on the 2020 Human Development Report: Mongolia,’ https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/CountryProfiles/MNG.pdf.
8 United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 2021, ‘Inequality of Opportunity: Who are those left behind?’ Mongolia 
policy paper. https://www.unescap.org/sites/default/d8files/2021-04/LNOB_in_Mongolia_0.pdf. 
9
International Monetary Fund, November 2021, IMF staff country reports, ‘Mongolia: Article IV Consultation’,
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2021/11/29/Mongolia-2021-Article-IV-Consultation-Press-Release-Staff-Report-and-Statement-by-the510086.
10 United Nations Mongolia, 2021, ‘Common country analysis’. 
11 Ger areas are outlying areas of the capital, Ulaanbaatar, and other urban areas where internal migrants settle. 
12 United Nations Mongolia
2021‘Common country analysis’pandemics harm to the economy, improve infrastructure and increase labour productivity.
It includes measures to boost industrialization, decrease the country’s vulnerabilities due to 
being landlocked, raise GDP and enhance livelihood opportunities.
6. Mongolia has a Gender Inequality Index of 0.322, ranking 71 out of 162 countries. A 
greater proportion of women (91.5 per cent) than men (86.1 per cent) have at least a secondary 
education.14 Women are engaged in the public sector, the economy and politics, but they are 
insufficiently represented at decision-making levels, for example, holding only 17.3 per cent
of seats in Parliament. Over half of ever-partnered women, 57.9 per cent, have experienced 
physical, sexual, emotional or economic violence and/or controlling behaviours.
15 In addition, 
women’s low rate of participation in politics and the labour force underscores the need to 
facilitate opportunities for leadership at decision-making levels, promote women’s access to 
economic resources, and leverage their knowledge and abilities to contribute to sustainable 
development in the political, economic, environmental and social spheres.
7. Climate change is a key challenge to sustainable development in Mongolia. The projected 
increase in the frequency and severity of climate-related natural disasters (dzuds, which are
extreme winter storms with heavy snowfall, along with droughts, floods and sand and dust 
storms) have harmful effects on agriculture, livestock, water and land resources, infrastructure 
development, health and well-being. While the government has announced ambitious carbon 
emission targets, fossil fuel subsidies continue to drive over-consumption of coal,
discouraging investment in renewable energy and green development. 
8. Air and water pollution, especially in urban areas, hampers public health.
16 The number of 
livestock has tripled since the 1990s, when Mongolia embarked on a market economy. As a 
result, rangeland carrying capacity has been vastly exceeded, leading to severe overgrazing 
and land degradation. As rangeland and natural resources management practices underpin the 
livelihoods of rural communities and herders, a transformational shift in livestock 
management is needed. This requires strengthening institutional and legal capacities and 
developing sustainable, nature-based solutions aligned with Mongolia’s nomadic herder 
tradition.
9. UNDP has provided strategic support to the government over more than four decades, 
including recently on COVID-19 response and recovery. UNDP’s rapid socioeconomic 
assessment of the impacts of COVID-19 on vulnerable groups and value chains (June 2020) 
was among the first such studies in the country and region, and its findings were integrated 
into the United Nations Mongolia Socio-Economic Response Plan. In partnership with the 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the National Committee on Gender Equality (NCGE), 
UNDP conducted a pandemic impact assessment on women and girls (March 2021). In 
partnership with the National Statistics Organization (NSO), UNDP reported on COVID-19 
impact on consumption, poverty and inequality using big data. Through inter-agency 
collaboration with other United Nations entities, UNDP continues to support the government 
on a longer term sustainable, inclusive and resilient COVID-19 recovery.
10. The 2020 independent country programme review17 recommended greater focus on
brokering knowledge and technical leadership, specifically in the realm of socioeconomic 
analysis; deepening the governance programme; consolidating work on the environmentpoverty nexus; and capitalizing on significant opportunities for a ‘green recovery’ from 
COVID-19. It encouraged seeking and facilitating integrated solutions across projects and 
programmes and diversifying partnerships, with particular focus on civil society. These 
13 Labour productivity refers to output per worker and is closely linked to the country’s economic performance. In Mongolia labour productivity has been 
very low and declined over the 2012-2015 period, and then recovered slightly. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/---ilobeijing/documents/publication/wcms_673936.pdf
14 UNDP, ‘Briefing note for countries on the 2020 Human Development Report: Mongolia’, https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/CountryProfiles/MNG.pdf
15 Government of Mongolia, 2018, ‘National study on gender-based violence in Mongolia’.
16 United Nations Mongolia, 2021, ‘Common country analysis’. 
17 UNDP, July 2020, ‘Mongolia: Independent country programme review–Terms of reference’, 
https://ercundporg/evaluation/documents/download/18816/recommendations have been adopted in the new country programme by developing a portfolio 
approach that mainstreams governance for a ‘just’ transition, while advancing sustainable 
development and strengthening civil society engagement.
11. UNDP’s contribution to the strategic vision of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) is underpinned by its role as a thought
leader, convenor and integrator. This is complemented by its solid partnership with 
government institutions, civil society and communities, and its use of evidence-based 
policymaking and capacity for planning, implementation and monitoring. Together these
facilitate inclusive efforts to achieve the 2030 agenda while also responding to national 
priorities. 
12. In supporting United Nations system-wide efforts in Mongolia, led by the resident 
coordinator, UNDP will facilitate solutions to the country’s complex development challenges 
while strengthening thematic partnerships with other United Nations entities. Aligned with the 
UNSDCF’s strategic priorities — human development and well-being; green, inclusive and 
sustainable growth; and people-centred governance, rule of law and human rights — UNDP 
will add value in the areas of livelihoods development, climate resilience, biodiversity 
conservation, promotion of gender equality and strengthening of inclusive and accountable 
governance. This will help to accelerate achievement of the Goals, while fostering an approach 
that engages all of government and society. 
13. UNDP will continue to draw on its global policy network and South-South and triangular 
cooperation opportunities. It will also make use of innovation expertise through its accelerator 
lab network to introduce more experimentation, adapt programming and accelerate learning. 
This will strengthen programming and partnerships and increase the potential for mobilizing 
resources.
14. In line with the UNSDCF’s theory of change, the country programme theory of change is 
built on the premise that if sustainable and diversified livelihoods are in place, and if a lowcarbon, climate-resilient economy is promoted, and if mechanisms and capacities for riskinformed climate adaptation are strengthened, and if capacities for conservation and
sustainable use of natural ecosystems are enhanced, and if inclusive and accountable, genderresponsive governance mechanisms are in place, then people in Mongolia will benefit from 
shared prosperity characterized by inclusive, resilient and sustainable development and a 
healthy and safe environment. This will allow them to thrive in a cohesive society based on 
the rule of law and realization of human rights. 
 II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
15. Firmly anchored in the government’s development aspirations and priorities this country 
programme is an integral part of the UNSDCF. It is aligned to the UNDP Strategic Plan 2022–
2025 and is informed by inclusive consultations with stakeholders including the government, 
development partners, donors, civil society, vulnerable groups, the private sector and other 
United Nations entities. The focus is on expanding the capabilities of Mongolians to make 
sustainable and equitable choices for a just transition, especially benefiting vulnerable people. 
It builds on achievements of the previous country programme, progress on the 
Socio-Economic Response Plan, lessons learned from COVID-19 response and a thorough 
common country analysis, and draws on recommendations from the independent country 
programme review.
16. Based on the principle of national ownership, UNDP will support government and citizen 
efforts to accelerate achievement of the Goals, leveraging the signature solutions and enablers 
in UNDP’s Strategic Plan. It will also work towards the three directions of change: structural 
transformation, leave no one behind and build resilience to respond to uncertainty and risks.
Multidimensional initiatives will be consolidated into two portfolios, one addressing inclusive 
and green development, and the other a just and accountable transition. 17. UNDPs role as an integrator of the Goals will underpin the portfolios, while gender 
equality, innovation, digital transformation and development financing will serve as enablers.
As part of the United Nations country team, UNDP will provide evidence, tools, 
methodologies, policy expertise, technical leadership and innovative solutions to accelerate 
the achievement of UNSDCF outcomes. Three programme priorities have been identified for 
UNDP interventions.
Programme priority 1: Diversified, inclusive and green economic transition 
(UNSDCF outcome 2)
• Strengthening capacities for sustainable livelihoods and employment 
18. UNDP will support the government at national and subnational levels in line with Vision
2050 to help diversify the economy and contribute to an inclusive, green transition. Eco-value 
chain development will be promoted in provinces with specific needs. Green business 
capacity-building support will be provided to small firms and entrepreneurs, along with
employment skills for youth, persons with disability and women. Goals budgeting will help 
improve the enabling environment for fiscal discipline and employment generation. Support 
for Goals financing through an integrated national financing framework will provide an 
enabling environment for a just and green transition.
19. Partnerships with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and 
the International Labour Organization will be leveraged to create livelihood opportunities,
building on UNDP’s work on value chains. Partnerships with the Mongolian Employers’ 
Federation, Confederation of Mongolian Trade Unions and Decent Work for Youth Network
will support the Ministry of Labour and Social Protection (MLSP), Ministry of Finance and 
other entities in the employment and labour sectors. While contributing to the government’s 
policy on livestock management, UNDP will bring together the government, herder
communities, non-governmental organizations and the private sector, including international 
fashion brands, for green development solutions. This will take place by integrating climate 
risks, vulnerability assessments and sustainability requirements in the value chains of 
livestock products.
• Promoting a low-carbon, climate-resilient economy
20. UNDP will contribute to strengthening the financing architecture of the Goals by 
operationalizing the integrated national financing framework and innovative financing
opportunities. UNDP will promote responsible investment in the public and private sectors 
that complies with global environmental, social and governance standards and is gender
responsive. UNDP will promote sustainable infrastructure development, with a focus on 
climate change adaptation and a low-carbon and net-zero-emissions economy, creating 
employment opportunities and reducing dependence on the extractive industry. The private
sector will be supported to leverage access to sustainable financing, including instruments 
such as green loans and bonds, complementing interventions under outcome 3 of the country 
programme. 
21. UNDP will work with the public and private sectors on investor mapping and financing 
for the Goals. It will also build on leadership by the private sector to catalyse growth in
responsible, inclusive and green businesses. In this work, UNDP will partner with the 
Mongolian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Ministry of Digital Development and 
Communication, and Ministry of Economy and Development (MED). Ongoing support to the 
measurement, reporting and verification scheme for climate mitigation actions in the 
construction and road transportation sectors will continue, in partnership with the Ministry of 
Road and Transportation Development and the Ministry of Construction and Urban 
Development. Programme priority 2: Risk-informed climate adaptation and sustainable management 
of natural ecosystems (UNSDCF outcome 3)
• Strengthening mechanisms and capacities for risk-informed climate adaptation
22. UNDP will continue to promote nature-based adaptation solutions and support the 
government with digital technology and equipment to develop longer term climate change 
models and more accurate early warning systems. At the same time, it will prioritize
investment in the river basin management and livestock husbandry sectors to develop water 
and land use plans for better risk-informed decision-making at the national level and in 
selected provinces. UNDP will help to expand the knowledge and skills of women and men 
in herder groups and cooperatives to improve livestock management, build resilience to 
climate risk and supply sustainably sourced livestock products. A traceability system for such 
products (cashmere, meat, dairy, leather) will be improved, including by adding incentives to 
engage herder producers throughout programme implementation. This will help to improve 
climate mitigation actions in the agriculture and livestock sectors as pledged under Mongolia’s 
nationally determined contributions to cut emissions. 
23. While promoting public-private partnerships, UNDP will work alongside other United 
Nations entities to help develop partnerships among professional associations, research 
entities, non-governmental organizations, cooperatives, herder organizations and international 
organizations, and to identify public-private-community partnerships for sustainably sourced,
climate-resilient livestock products. Key partners will be the Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism (MET), Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry (MoFALI), and the Agency
of Land Administration and Management, Geodesy and Cartography. Based on its Goals 
integrator role, UNDP will work with FAO and ADB to improve economic incentives for 
climate adaptation measures at national and local levels and enhance the co-benefits of 
adaptation activities in agriculture and land usage.
• Strengthening mechanisms for sustainable and inclusive management of natural 
ecosystems
24. UNDP will help to advance ecosystems and biodiversity contributing to Vision 2050’s 
green development priorities, through (a) integrated land use planning, to ensure that use of 
land and natural resources is oriented to optimize production without harming ecosystem 
services or degrading biodiversity; (b) making production practices more environmentally 
appropriate in the animal husbandry, arable farming and infrastructure development sectors; 
(c) offering technical support to line ministries and subnational governments to enhance 
regulatory and legislative frameworks on access to benefit-sharing of genetic resources; and 
(d) developing innovative financing solutions (such as debt-for-nature swaps, biodiversity 
funds) and other area-based conservation measures. 
25. To contribute to an inclusive and green COVID-19 recovery, UNDP will invest in 
systemic changes and dialogues among diverse stakeholders. It will also put nature at the heart 
of development to accelerate climate action and achieve progress towards the Goals and the 
Post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework targets. UNDP’s collaboration with ministries and 
specialized government agencies, FAO and other stakeholders will contribute to achieving 
national priorities on sustainable forest management and ecosystem restoration. Interventions 
will address diversification of livelihood options for communities and herders to improve 
production practices.
Programme priority 3: Women’s empowerment, inclusive and accountable governance, 
and progress towards achievement of the Goals (UNSDCF outcome 4)
• Addressing structural barriers in advancing women’s leadership and 
participation 
26. UNDP will support efforts to build the capacities of institutions, as well as women and 
men themselves, to increase the number of women elected to leadership positions at national 
and local levels. These efforts will also be aimed at strengthening the legal environment for womens representation at decision-making levels, raise public awareness on gender equality,
break down stereotypes and strengthen mechanisms to help women become decision-makers. 
27. Support will be provided to civil society organizations and the media to enhance their role 
in addressing the country’s gender equality challenges and advancing the participation of 
women in politics, the economy and society. UNDP will partner closely with government 
entities, especially the NCGE, to support implementation of the national action plan on gender 
equality. In addition, it will collaborate with Parliament and the United Nations Population 
Fund, which also works to combat violence against women.
• Strengthening institutional capacities for transparency, accountability and 
accessibility
28. UNDP will help Parliament and the government to improve transparency and 
accountability and reduce corruption through an approach to inclusive governance based in 
human rights, benefiting women and men equally. This will be done by building capacities 
and strengthening laws, policies and mechanisms that encourage citizen participation and trust 
in public institutions. To do so UNDP will build on its support to civil service reform and 
technical support to the National Human Rights Commission. Partnerships with the private 
sector will help to ensure that practices are in line with human rights and environmental 
standards. The media will be engaged for advocacy on government transparency and 
accountability, encouraging government responsiveness to the needs of the most vulnerable
people. Capacities of civil society groups will be enhanced to increase their participation in 
policymaking processes.
29. To advance localization and achievement of the Goals in Mongolia, UNDP will further 
develop integrated approaches to innovation and learning, policy and programming, data and 
analytics, and sustainable financing. UNDP will continue to help the government to apply 
innovation and learning for systems-based planning, policymaking, programming and 
budgeting, thus strengthening accountability by improving budget transparency, citizen 
participation and oversight, use of digital solutions and increasing digital literacy among the 
most vulnerable people. In line with the government’s commitments, this approach will 
promote use of advanced data analytics and innovative financing; adoption of a balanced, 
inclusive, sustainable, forward-looking approach to development (beyond growth); and 
measurement of Goals targets using disaggregated indicators and metrics. 
30. To deliver the programme and ensure results are sustainable, UNDP will partner with 
government entities, civil society, development actors, donors and the private sector. 
Collaboration will be strengthened with international financial institutions including the 
World Bank, ADB and International Monetary Fund. UNDP will continue to work with the 
Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the Global Environment Facility and expand its partnerships
with the European Union (EU) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, and with Germany, Japan and South Korea. 
31. South-South and triangular cooperation will be facilitated through technical assistance and 
sharing of knowledge and experience, including through cooperation with China through the 
South-South Cooperation Assistance Fund. UNDP will also pursue sharing of solutions among 
countries through the accelerator lab network and engagement of volunteers with support of
UN Volunteers. Ongoing efforts to engage with non-traditional partners will be strengthened, 
particularly to expand the governance portfolio, as suggested in the independent country 
programme review, while exploring alternative and sustainable financing mechanisms. Also,
in line with review recommendations, and capitalizing on UNDP’s partnership with 
international financial institutions and other partners, UNDP will continue to conduct
socioeconomic analysis to capture the aspects of a sustainable and inclusive future needed to
reach those left furthest behind.III. Programme and risk management 
32. This country programme outlines UNDP’s planned contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed 
in the organization’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control 
Framework.
33. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme. The harmonized approach to 
cash transfers will be used in collaboration with other United Nations agencies to manage 
financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development 
effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
34. The country programme theory of change identified risks to successful programme 
delivery, including: (a) a worsening debt situation; (b) economic instability, which would
increase the risks to achievement of gender equality and human rights; (c) impacts of climate 
change such as increasing dzuds and other hazards, compromising long-term development 
objectives; and (d) frequent changes of focal points among government counterparts. Other 
risks include limited donor funding, competition for human and financial resources, capacity 
shortfalls among implementing partners to manage the funds allocated to them, and the impact 
of COVID-19 response measures on national finances, limiting the government’s ability to 
achieve the Goals.
35. UNDP will use improved risk identification and mitigation tools throughout the 
programme cycle in line with its social and environmental standards (including addressing 
grievance mechanisms at programme level) and accountability mechanisms, while pursuing a 
robust pipeline of projects. Risk mitigation and management arrangements will be built into 
the programme as per UNDP’s enterprise risk management policy. Assurance activities 
including micro-assessments, spot checks and audits will be conducted in line with the 
harmonized approach to cash transfers. 
36. Systems thinking will be applied to ensure a relevant, holistic approach to complex 
problems, using foresight and horizon-scanning to sense emerging trends and anticipate 
possible requests for support from the government. Frequent analysis of the political economy 
and operating context will inform any modifications in the planned programme, including 
scaling down in case of limited donor funding or leveraging opportunities to scale impact.
36. To mitigate the risks outlined above, UNDP will develop a country programme risk log, 
which will be closely monitored, evaluated and updated. To lessen the impact of potential 
risks, UNDP will continue to support (a) the operationalization of the integrated national 
financing framework, including innovative finance and the government’s planning and 
budgeting function, involving women and other vulnerable groups; (b) the ethics councils, 
which UNDP helped establish, to strengthen due process in civil service appointments; and
(c) targeted climate adaptation measures to build up dzud resilience. 
37. UNDP will further address risks by (a) accessing its network of experts offering technical 
advice and developing innovative solutions to emerging challenges; (b) diversifying resource 
mobilization through renewed and emerging partnerships; (c) mobilizing domestic financing 
as a catalyst to attract more resources from development partners; (d) increasing private sector 
engagement; and (e) ensuring that business processes are efficient and cost-effective.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
38. A protocol for results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) will be established at 
project and portfolio level during programme implementation, in compliance with corporate 
requirements including United Nations Evaluation Group norms and standards. In alignment
with the UNSDCF, UNDP will use national data sources for reporting on results, emphasizingcollection of high-quality data disaggregated by province, ethnicity, age, gender and disability. 
UNDP will support efforts to strengthen national statistical systems for regular, disaggregated 
data collection while reinforcing results-based management processes. Building on the joint 
work initiated with the cabinet secretariat for development of the Government Action 
Programme 2020–2024, M&E capacity will be strengthened, and work will continue with the 
NSO on big data applications. 
39. UNDP will synchronize its reporting to the UNSDCF cycle and ensure that M&E activities 
are aligned with the guiding principles of gender equality, human rights and leaving no one 
behind. Digital tools and mobile applications will be used for monitoring, to allow for more 
evidence-based, real-time decision-making and anticipatory action. UNDP will seek to engage 
regularly with the government, vulnerable groups and other relevant stakeholders through 
consultations, to ensure the programme remains relevant to their needs. 
40. The country programme evaluation plan will follow Independent Evaluation Office
guidelines. Recommendations and lessons learned from evaluations, assessments and reviews 
will strengthen dialogue with partners and inform programme implementation and course 
corrections as needed. At least 3 per cent of the budget will be allocated to M&E and 
communication of results and at least 15 per cent to gender-specific interventions across the 
programme. All active and new projects will have gender markers, and some will significantly 
contribute to gender integration and parity. The UNDP Mongolia gender equality strategy is 
being implemented as a building block for the Gender Seal process already initiated. A 
communication plan will be developed with actions aligned with the country programme to 
demonstrate UNDP’s thought leadership in sustainable development.Annex. Results and resources framework for Mongolia (2023–2027)
18 Sustainable Development Goals’ nationalized target
calculated considering the current trajectory
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2050 Goal 2 (human development), Goal 3 (quality of life), Goal 6 (green development); and Sustainable Development Goals 1, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 17 
UNDP OUTCOME 1 (UNSDCF OUTCOME 2): By 2027, the Mongolian economy is more diversified, innovative, productive, inclusive, green and geographically balanced, enabling decent livelihoods, especially for 
women and youth, building twenty-first century skills and promoting low-carbon development
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development
UNSDCF OUTCOME 
INDICATORS, BASELINES, 
TARGETS
DATA SOURCE/
MEANS OF 
VERIFCATION
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS MAJOR PARTNERS 
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME ($)
2.1 Renewable energy share in total 
energy consumption (Goal 7.2.1)
Baseline: 3.4% (2018)
Target:12% (2027)
2.2 Annual growth rate of real GDP 
per employed person (Goal 8.2.1)
Baseline: 6.3% (2020)
Target: 4.2%18
2.3 Unemployment rate, by location, 
sex, age and disability status (Goal 
8.5.2)
Baseline: 7% (2020)
By sex: Female, 6.7%; male, 7.3%
By location: Urban, 8%; rural, 4.6%
By age group: 15-24, 17.9%; 25-64, 
5.9%
By disability status:
With disability, 7%
Without disability, 7.2%
Target: Lower than the baseline
2.4 Manufacturing value added as a 
proportion of GDP (Goal 9.2.1)
Baseline: 10.8% (2019)
Target: 19%
2.5 Research and development 
expenditure as a proportion of GDP 
(Goal 9.5.1)
MET/Goals dashboard
NSO/Goals dashboard
NSO/Goals dashboard
NSO/Goals dashboard
NSO/Goals dashboard
Output 1.1: Public institutions strengthened for an enabling policy environment, 
enhancing employability and sustainable, diversified sources of livelihoods across the 
country
Indicator 1.1.1: Number of national institutions with strengthened public administration and 
core government functions for improved service delivery (Focus: institutions involved in 
improving employability and livelihoods) [SPIRRF-2.3.1]
Baseline: 1 (MLSP, 2021) 
Target: 3 (MLSP, MoFALI, GASI) 
Source: EU annual project report 
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.1.2: The extent to which the country has data collection and/or analysis 
mechanisms providing disaggregated data (including gender) to monitor progress towards 
achievement of Sustainable Development Goals: [SPIRRF-1.1.3]
• Conventional data collection methods (e.g., surveys)
• Administrative reporting systems
• Innovative data sources (e.g., big data) 
(Rating scale: 0 = Not in place, 1 = work started, 2 = work in progress, 3 = work almost 
complete, 4 = in place)
Baseline: 1 
Target: 2
Source: NSO, MED 
Frequency: Annual
• Academia
• Climate Change Research and 
Cooperation Centre 
• Confederation of Mongolian 
Trade Unions 
• Decent Work for Youth 
Network 
• EU
• FAO
• General Agency for Specialized 
Inspection 
• International Labour 
Organization
• Local authorities 
• Mongolian Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry
• Ministry of Construction and 
Urban Development
• MED
• MET
• MLSP
• Mongolian Employers’ 
Federation
• Ministry of Road and 
Transportation Development 
• National Audit Office
• NSO
• Private sector
Regular: 
$1,074,000
Other: 
$7,448,461
Output 1.2: Responsible business practices and inclusive and innovative financing 
opportunities promoted, contributing to a sustainable, diversified and low-carbon 
economyBaseline: 0.55% (2020)
Target: 2.5%
Indicator 1.2.1: Extent to which the country has policy measures in place to enable the 
improvement or implementation of nationally determined contributions under the Paris 
Agreement [SPIRRF-1.1.2]. 
(Rating scale: 0 = Not in place, 1 = work started, 2 = work in progress, 3 = work almost 
complete, 4 = in place)
Baseline: 1
Target: 3
Source: Transparency report on Paris Agreement 
Frequency: Biennial
Indicator 1.2.2: Operationalization of an integrated policy/strategy/plan that increases 
ability to adapt to adverse impacts of climate change and fosters climate resilience and low 
greenhouse gas emissions 
(Rating scale: 0 = Not in place, 1 = work started, 2 = work in progress, 3 = work almost 
complete, 4 = In place)
Baseline: 2 
Target: 3
Source: MET
Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Vision 2050 Goal 6 (green development), Goal 9 (regional and local development); Sustainable Development Goals 5, 12, 13, 15, 17
UNDP OUTCOME 2 (UNSDCF OUTCOME 3): By 2027, communities and ecosystems in Mongolia are more resilient to climate change, with improved capacity for evidence-informed and gender-responsive sustainable 
natural resource and environmental management and disaster risk reduction
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk 
3.1 The resilience capacity index of 
communities (Goal 13.2.1)
Baseline: 40.7
Target: 58.7
3.2 Forest area as a proportion of 
total land area (Goal 15.1.1)
Baseline: 7.9% (2019)
Target: 8.7%
3.3 Proportion of important sites for 
terrestrial and freshwater 
biodiversity that are covered by 
protected areas, by ecosystem type 
(Goal 15.1.2)
Baseline: Special areas (17.4%), water 
runoff (44.75%), forest lands (36.8%) 
(2015)
Target: Special areas (27%), water 
runoff (55%), forest lands (48.7%) 
FAO
MET
MET
Output 2.1 Climate adaptation mechanisms and capacities strengthened at national and 
local levels through risk-informed planning and nature-based solutions
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of policy and planning instruments (institutional and regulatory) 
that are strengthened through use of climate information products/services in decisionmaking for climate responsive planning and development.
Baseline: 0
Target: 2 policies/planning instruments 
Source: GCF project annual review and midterm evaluation report
Frequency: Annual and midterm (2024)
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of herder communities adapting and benefiting from resilient 
agricultural and livestock practices (disaggregated by direct/indirect beneficiaries [herders], 
vulnerability, age and gender of community members)
Baseline: 0
Target: 40 herder groups disaggregated by gender 
Source: Annual project reviews (GCF, ENSURE projects), midterm evaluation report
Frequency: Annual and midterm (2024)
• Academia
• ADB
• Agency of Land Administration 
and Management, Geodesy and 
Cartography
• FAO
• Forest groups 
• GCF
• Global Environment Facility
• Herders’ association 
• MED
• MET 
• MoFALI
• National Agency for
Meteorology and 
Environmental Monitoring 
• NGOs/community 
organizations 
Other: 
$27,856,6853.4 Proportion of land that is 
degraded over total land area (Goal 
15.3.1)
Baseline: Total: 76.96% (2020)
Target: Total: 75%
Information and 
Research Institute of 
Meteorology, Hydrology 
and Environment
Indicator 2.1.3: Coverage and scale of ecosystems with improved resilience to climate 
change (hectares) [SPIRRF-4.1.2(iii)].
Baseline: 0
Target: 36.44 million hectares (14 watersheds)
Source: Annual project reviews, project implementation reviews, thematic evaluations, 
midterm reports (GCF, ENSURE projects)
Frequency: Annual
• Pasture user Groups
Output 2.2: Institutions, communities and regulatory frameworks strengthened for 
sustainable, inclusive management of natural resources while improving livelihoods 
and biodiversity
Indicator 2.2.1: Area of terrestrial protected areas created or under improved management 
practices[SPIRRF-4.1.2(i)] 
Baseline: 21% of total land
Target: 23% 
Source: MET, UNDP
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.2.2: Area of forest and forest land restored [SPIRRF-4.1.2(vi)]
Baseline: 12.3 million hectares (total forest area)
Target: 2,500 hectare increase
Source: Forest agency report, annual project reviews (GCF, ENSURE projects)
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.2.3: Number of innovative sustainable financing mechanisms for biodiversity 
and nature-based solutions funded by public and/or private resources (SPIRRF-4.2.1)
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annual19 Supplementary to indicator 4
2 in the UNSCDF
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Vision 2050 Goal 5 (Governance); Sustainable Development Goals 5, 16, 17
UNDP OUTCOME 3 (UNSDCF OUTCOME 4): By 2027, making and implementation of policies are more gender-responsive, participatory, coherent, evidence-informed and aligned with the Goals; governance 
institutions at all levels are transparent and accountable; and people, especially marginalized groups, have access to justice and rule of law for full realization of human rights
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions
4.1 Proportion of population who 
believe decision-making is inclusive 
and responsive (Goal 16.7.2)
Baseline: 57.1% (2019)
Target: 65.8%
4.2 Proportion of population who 
personally felt discriminated against 
or harassed in the previous 12 
months, based on a type of 
discrimination prohibited under 
international human rights law, by 
type of rights (Goal 16.b.1a) 
Baseline: 17.7% (2019)
Target: Lower than baseline
percentage
Proportion of population reporting 
having personally felt discriminated 
against or harassed in the previous 
12 months, based on a type of 
discrimination prohibited under 
international human rights law19
(Goal 16.b.14.2a)
Baseline: 4.5% (2019)
Target: Higher than baseline
percentage
4.3 Rule of law index 
Baseline: 45.67 (rank); -0.26 (value)
(2020)
Target: Higher than baseline
4.4 Proportion of seats held by 
women in (a) Parliament and (b) 
local governments
Baseline: (a) 17%; (b) 27% (2020)
NSO
NSO
NSO
World Bank governance 
indicators
NSO, National 
Development Agency
Output 3.1 Capacities strengthened and structural barriers addressed for women’s 
leadership and participation in politics and public sector
Indicator 3.1.1: Proportion of seats held by women in (a) Parliament; (b) local governments 
[SPIRRF-1.4 and 6.2].
Baseline: (a) 17% (2020); (b) 27% (2020)
Target: (a) 30% (2024); (b) 35% (2024)
Source: NSO, GEC
Frequency: 2024 (every 4 years) 
Indicator 3.1.2: Extent to which the country has measures in place to advance women´s 
leadership and equal participation in decision-making in (a) public institutions and (b) 
elected positions including in Parliament [SPIRRF-6.2.1]
(Rating scale: 0 = not in place, 1 = work started, 2 = work in progress, 3 = work almost 
complete, 4 = in place)
Baseline: 1
Target: 3
Source: Gender project annual review
Frequency: Annual
• Academia 
• Agency of Family, Child and 
Youth Development 
• EU
• General Election Commission
• Korean International 
Cooperation Agency 
• Local authorities
• Ministry of Digital 
Development and 
Communication
• MED
• Media
• MLSP
• MOF
• NCGE community 
organizations 
• National Human Rights 
Commission
• NSO
• Parliament 
• Political parties
• Private sector
• United Nations Population Fund
• Voter Education Centre
• Women’s Leadership Network
Regular: 
$1,074,000
Other: 
$13,324,746
Output 3.2: Capacities of public institutions on results-based, integrated national 
planning and budgeting, and business practices strengthened for greater transparency 
and accountability
Indicator 3.2.1: Extent to which development plans and budgets integrating intergovernmentally agreed frameworks are in place across all of government [SPIRRF-1.1.1]:
• Agenda 2030 
• Paris Agreement
(Rating scale: 0 = not integrated, 1 = integration started, 2 = integration in progress, 3 = 
integration almost complete, 4 = integrated)
Baseline: 1
Target: 3 
Source: MED, voluntary national reviews, reports under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change 
Frequency: BiennialTarget: (a) 24.6%; (b) 37.4% (2024) Indicator 3.2.2: Number of policies and regulatory and institutional frameworks developed 
and adopted by public and private actors to align public and private finance with Goals
[SPIRRF-E.3.2]: 
Baseline: 0 (regulatory framework); 0 (policy), 0 (institutional framework) 
Target: 3 (1 regulatory framework, 1 policy and 1 institutional framework)
Source: MED, MOF
Frequency: Biennial
Indicator 3.2.3: Extent to which the country’s institutions, systems or stakeholders have
capacities to support the fulfilment of nationally and internationally ratified human rights 
obligations [SPIRRF-2.2.1 (c)]: 
• Private sector, including publicly owned companies 
(Rating scale: 0 = not in place, 1 = low capacity, 2 = capacity neither low nor high, 3 = 
high capacity, 4 = very high capacity)
Baseline: 2
Target: 3
Source: National Human Rights Commission
Frequency: Biennial
TOTAL 
Regular: $2,148,000
 Other: $48,629,892
Total: $50,777,892