File Name: MOZ-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Mozambique
Country Code: MOZ
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 January to 4 February 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
8 December 2021
Original: English
2118466X (E) 141221
First regular session 2022
31 January to 4 February 2022, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Mozambique 
(2022-2026)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ............ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships................................ ................ 3
III. Programme and risk management ................................ ................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation................................ ......................... 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Mozambique (2022-2026) ............................ 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Mozambique faces the compounded effects of complex economic, climatic and securityrelated crises in its path towards the Sustainable Development Goals and the vision set in its 
National Development Strategy. More frequent and severe weather events are already 
impacting on the poorest and most vulnerable populations, with currently over 90,000 people 
internally displaced due to climate-related disasters. Economic growth declined sharply from 
an average of 8 per cent between 2001 and 2016 to 3 per cent between 2016 and 2019. While
attempting to recover from this downturn, and the devastating impact of two tropical cyclones 
in 2019, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic led to a real decline in gross domestic product 
(GDP) by 1.2 per cent in 2020, the first economic contraction in 30 years. Economic growth, 
notably driven by the extractive sector, has not translated into sufficient employment 
opportunities for a rapidly growing population, while a significant share of the population 
continues to live in extreme poverty, with the most recent government estimate putting this 
proportion at 46.1 per cent in 2014-2015. Inequality has also risen, with the Gini coefficient 
increasing from 47 to 54 per cent between 2009 and 2015, according to the National Institute 
of Statistics, a coefficient which is among the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa.
2. The preceding programme cycle witnessed escalating insecurity and violence by non-state 
armed groups in Cabo Delgado Province and ongoing attacks in the central region. By March 
2021, approximately 3.5 million people were affected by conflict, with 3,900 fatalities and over 
750,000 people internally displaced, of which over 500,000 were recorded in 2020 alone.
1
Women and girls are the primary victims of the compounded effects of displacement, violence, 
natural disasters and economic difficulties that COVID-19 has exacerbated. With regional 
asymmetries widening, women, girls and youth in rural areas in the centre and north of the 
country are particularly hit. The demographic and health survey of 2011 showed that 37 per 
cent of women in Mozambique had experienced sexual or physical violence; Mozambique 
ranked 138 out of 160 countries in the 2017 gender inequality index. Women comprise most of 
the unskilled workforce, especially in subsistence agriculture, and they represent more than 59 
per cent of informal workers.
2 The heightened risks placed on women and girls through largescale displacement, insecurity and climate shocks will require additional engagement at the 
policy and community level. 
3. The National Development Strategy, 2015-2035, envisages a “prosperous, competitive, 
sustainable, secure and inclusive” Mozambique with a policy mix that is expected to create 
improved “living conditions and a fair distribution of national income” through “structural 
transformation, expansion and diversification of the economic base”. The Five-Year 
Programme, 2020-2024, of the Government focuses on the maintenance of peace, inclusive and 
sustainable growth, economic and social stability, greater productivity and competitiveness. In 
support of these goals, and progress towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 
the UNSDCF theory of change envisages a country in which “all people equitably participate 
in, and benefit from, sustainable development in a peaceful and resilient Mozambican society, 
underpinned by gender equality” to be achieved:
IF people have access to and utilize high-quality, gender-sensitive and inclusive basic social 
services and protection;
IF the economy is diversified and growth is sustainable and inclusive and generates decent jobs 
and sustainable livelihoods for all people;
IF natural resource management is sustainable, with equitable benefit-sharing, and resilience to 
climate change and disasters is enhanced at all levels;
1 The Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project (ACLED) database (www.acleddata.com). 
2 Word Bank (2017)
Country Partnership FrameworkIF inclusive governance and peace are consolidated and people can fully enjoy their human 
rights.
4. The UNDP contribution to the UNSDCF strategic vision is unpinned by its comparative 
advantage as a convenor and integrator, with strong thought-leadership and on-the-ground
experience in human rights, governance, rule of law, climate change resilience, disaster risk 
reduction and recovery, and women’s and youth empowerment that will enable it to support all 
four strategic priority areas, while playing a key supportive role to the United Nations system , 
especially with regards to coordination, alignment and localization. During the previous 
programme cycle, the country office effectively supported national priorities in the context of
insecurity, climatic shocks and the COVID-19 pandemic, rapidly scaling-up its post-disaster 
and post-conflict capacity to support reconstruction and recovery efforts, introducing an 
integrated humanitarian-development-peace nexus through its support to basic services, 
economic recovery, social cohesion and human rights protection, delivering durable solutions 
to displacement-affected communities. UNDP has leveraged its thought-leadership and 
expertise in environmental, natural resource, disaster risk and climate change management to 
strengthen resilience. Capitalizing on global networks and trust capital, UNDP has used its
knowledge resources to scale best practices, accelerate support to legal and policy reforms, and 
provide decision-makers with robust evidence and digital solutions that underpin the 
development capacity for transformation. Through its ongoing support to decentralization 
reforms, UNDP is contributing to increased accountability and governance, by strengthening 
financial management systems, and increasing civic spaces for participation, particularly of
women and youth. The Accelerator Lab has intensified internal abilities for mapping, testing 
and scaling up innovative, cost-efficient, community-grounded solutions to accelerate 
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals while linking the country’s innovators 
to global and regional networks to benefit from South-South and triangular cooperation 
opportunities.
5. The evaluation of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), 
2017-2021,
3
found delivering-as-one to be consolidated throughout the UNDP programme 
contributing to improved coherence and alignment. Nevertheless, despite its programmatic 
focus on disaster risk reduction, UNDP did not anticipate the scale of the humanitarian crisis
provoked by both extreme weather and violence, aggravated by the socio-economic impacts of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, all of which have put unprecedented strain on government systems 
and service delivery mechanisms. In response, while pursuing its support to digital solutions 
for public services, UNDP launched stabilization interventions in the north of Mozambique, 
working closely with provincial and local authorities and building on the acquired in-country 
experience in post-cyclone reconstruction through the Mozambique Recovery Facility. Based 
on the 2019 evaluation of the preceding country programme document, 2017-2021, the country 
office has consolidated its interventions and partnerships to develop a more coherent 
programmatic approach, operating firmly in the nexus continuum.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
6. UNDP strategic priorities focus on four interrelated pillars where the country office has 
comparative advantage and plays a leadership role, is recognized by the Government and 
aligned to the UNSDCF outcomes:
(a) human development, multi-dimensional poverty, gender equality and public health 
management (outcome 1.1);
(b) inclusive economic recovery and diversification, and sustainable livelihoods 
(outcome 2.1);
3 Office of the United Nations Resident Coordinator
Mozambique“Final evaluation of the UNDAF”March 2021(c) climate resilience and sustainable use of natural resources (outcome 3.1); 
(d) inclusive and decentralized governance, justice and peace and social cohesion 
(outcome 4.1).
7. The interdependent and self-reinforcing nature of these themes is underpinned in the theory 
of change: progress on gender equality is a necessary condition for achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals. Critical opportunities lie in enforcing gender-sensitive legislation and 
empowering women, particularly in rural areas, by strengthening access to services (seriously 
strained by the COVID-19 pandemic) and through economic empowerment, as a prerequisite
to women’s greater participation in decision-making. Sustainable, transparent and equitable 
management of natural resource wealth will support inclusive economic transformation that 
will benefit poor and vulnerable communities. Area-based interventions to strengthen 
community resilience and recovery capacity will reduce vulnerability to climatic hazards, 
conflict and economic shocks, critical to lifting people out of poverty but which requires an 
environment of inclusion, social cohesion and stability to facilitate meaningful participation. 
Therefore, responsive and accountable governance, that consolidates efficiency and 
transparency, builds trust, protects human rights and promotes social cohesion is key to 
reducing conflict and extremism and sustaining peaceful, inclusive development. 
8. The change strategy and priorities are anchored on the principles of human rights, nondiscrimination, leaving no one behind and building forward better. The country programme was 
developed through a consultative process and is well aligned with the priorities of the Five-year 
Programme, 2020-2024, and the three pillars of the country programme’s governance 
component. Moreover, they align with the three development settings of the UNDP Strategic 
Plan, 2022-2025,
4
and its six signature solutions.
9. Building on the independent country programme evaluation, and recognizing the evolving 
needs of the country, programme priorities build on a number of shifts, including: increased 
engagement at community level; sourcing local solutions and delivering integrated communitybased interventions at scale for greater impact. It is targeted at those provinces and districts in 
the north and centre where vulnerability to climatic and environmental threats, as well as
violence and instability, are highest. It proposes sharpened policy and advisory services, built
on evidence-based knowledge resource in areas of peace and economic development; targeted 
and systemic institutional strengthening at local and national levels to ensure inclusive and 
equitable access to public services; and adoption of conflict-sensitive strategies to empower
women and youth as agents for sustainable transformation. 
Addressing multi-dimensional poverty and promoting gender equality and access to services
10. UNDP will provide cutting-edge technical assistance and evidence-based policy advisory 
services to support whole-of-government solutions to inclusive and sustainable human 
development and advance attainment of the 2030 Agenda. An analytical and thought-leadership 
approach to address multidimensional poverty dimensions in the country will strengthen 
government capacity to analyse human and economic development trends and test the adoption 
of localized indicators and Sustainable Development Goals monitoring. A multistakeholder 
approach to revise the national development strategy will be used to advocate for a human 
development and gender-transformative approach and promote sustainable environmental and 
natural resource management, peacebuilding and governance, underpinned by an integrated 
national financing framework.
11. Persistent structural inequalities hinder the empowerment of women, access to services, 
fulfilment of human rights and realization their full potential. One in four women in 
Mozambique have experienced physical or sexual violence and have limited access to 
4
(a) structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive, and digital transitions; (b) no one left behind, centring on equitable access to 
opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development; (c) resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and riskintegrated services. Joint interventions with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality 
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), through the European Union-funded Spotlight 
initiative, will strengthen strategies for prevention and response to, all forms of gender-based 
violence, improve access to integrated health and justice services, and advocate for gender 
sensitive laws, policies, and regulatory frameworks for institutions and services delivery to 
safeguard the rights of women and girls. UNDP will enhance awareness of basic health and 
sexual and reproductive health, HIV/AIDS and rights for women and youth, particularly in 
displacement-affected communities.
12. Building on the positive impact of its partnership with the Ministry of Health (MISAU), 
UNDP will enhance its support for innovative public health governance, strengthening the 
resilience of health systems and infrastructure, particularly during crises, and promoting
equitable access to health services. UNDP will build on its experience to accelerate its wider 
support to post-cyclone and post-conflict reconstruction of public infrastructure for the delivery 
of social services, in close coordination with other United Nations organizations. Beyond health 
and social services, UNDP will respond to the request by the Government to focus on justice 
and security.
Supporting resilient and inclusive economic recovery and diversification, and sustainable 
livelihoods
13. Capitalizing on its leadership in disaster recovery, and in coordination with key national 
partners and United Nations organizations, UNDP will scale up multidimensional and 
innovative approaches to leverage the humanitarian-development-peace nexus as a way to 
strengthen community and economic resilience to disasters and violent conflict, with particular 
attention to women and youth. UNDP will accelerate the implementation of the Mozambique 
Recovery Facility and further expand the facility’s area-based model for post-disaster response 
to simultaneously integrate rights-based interventions that support human development, access 
to basic services, inclusive economic recovery and diversification. On similar grounds, as part 
of its ongoing support in the province of Cabo Delgado, UNDP will develop and implement a 
post-conflict engagement programme, adding to infrastructure and institutional support for 
inclusive economic recovery focusing on women and youth, working with local authorities to 
support effective response and restoring public services. These will be supported and 
documented through innovative community monitoring methodologies tested in other 
countries. A focus on the informal economy and building social capital by enhancing 
knowledge, vocational skills and capacities will support more diverse and sustainable 
livelihoods. Where applicable, UNDP will support small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), 
particularly those led by women, to access digital financial services and exchange technologies.
Strengthening climate resilience and the sustainable use of natural resources
14. UNDP will leverage its thought-leadership in environmental, natural resources, disaster 
risk and climate change management to enhance high-level dialogue with the Government and 
advocate for increased integration of these issues in national plans and budgets, working to fill 
data gaps and supporting whole-of-government approaches promoting stronger multi-sectoral
coordination and policy coherence. Partnering with the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP), and based on the country’s climate finance strategy, UNDP will deliver 
its climate promise by facilitating access to the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the 
Green Climate Fund (GCF) to support implementation of the national Action Plan for Climate 
Change, 2020-2025, and deliver on its nationally determined contribution targets, linking these 
to the Sustainable Development Goals financing strategy. Leveraging support from the GEF
Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF), UNDP will strengthen the capacity of communities 
and district governments to plan for, and adapt to, climate change and increase the resilience of 
vulnerable communities and sustainability of livelihoods. 15. UNDP will test innovative approaches for improving natural resource management and 
promoting green and blue economy by enhancing the technical capacity of national and local 
institutions and communities and by engaging with the private sector, academia and other 
relevant stakeholders. Partnering with the World Health Organization (WHO), UNDP will 
support community health workers to manage disease and improve health services, particularly 
for women and girls in post-disaster recovery contexts. Upscaling and strengthening 
interventions that support biodiversity and diversification of ecosystem services will contribute 
to national plans and targets, enhance inclusive conservation and sustainable resource use, and
promote the financial sustainability of protected areas. Through GEF 6 financing, UNDP will 
strengthen conservation of threatened species through improved enforcement and expansion of 
community conservancies and leverage GEF 8 resources to enhance community livelihoods 
through the sustainable use of natural resources in protected areas.
16. Capitalizing on synergies with the decentralization programme, UNDP will strengthen 
capacities at the local level to develop and implement sustainable, gender-responsive, 
environmentally sound and climate-resilient solutions to natural resource and environmental 
management, through local planning processes that reinforce transparent, participative and 
inclusive decision-making. With the National Institute for Disaster Management (INGD), 
UNDP will strengthen information management systems on environmental degradation, 
climate and disaster risks to fill data gaps and enhance monitoring, evaluation, learning, and 
evidence-based decision-making for risk reduction, mitigation and recovery and mainstream 
gender-sensitive climate and disaster risk information across sectors.
Promoting inclusive governance, justice, human rights, and peace and social cohesion 
(outcome 4.1)
17. Support to rule of law and access to justice will remain a critical component of UNDP 
support, building on a long-standing, strong partnership with the Ministry of Justice. Support 
to the strategic plan of both the justice sector and the Human Rights Commission will continue, 
focusing on improving efficiency and equitable justice outcomes. Support for mobile courts 
and technological innovations will bring justice closer to rural populations. Investing in the 
expansion of legal aid and digital solutions, in addition to revitalizing the networks of 
community tribunals, will enhance justice and human rights outcomes, especially for women, 
girls and vulnerable groups, enable additional support at community level, and reduce the 
number of unsentenced detainees.
18. UNDP support to decentralization reforms is critical for inclusive governance, maintaining 
peace and enhancing social cohesion, and for the equitable management of natural resources.
Empowerment of local authorities and local communities will be the gateway for all 
programmatic interventions at the local level. Leveraging its trusted partner status, UNDP will 
provide upstream policy advice to consolidate the decentralization ‘package’ while
strengthening collaboration and dialogue between institutions, civil society and communities. 
Expanding civic space will enhance participation in local development and promote social 
cohesion. The capacities of newly decentralized institutions will be strengthened to plan for, 
and implement, Sustainable Development Goals-aligned actions that respond to community 
needs, and ensure the effective, efficient, and transparent use of resources to build trust in local 
institutions. A territorial approach will support improved coordination of public policy at the 
local level, strengthen the capacity of elected officials, and improve accountability. Territorial 
diagnoses of vulnerability will strengthen strategic planning, and coordination with the Office 
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) will ensure it is migration 
and displacement-sensitive.
19. In 2024, 154 district governments will be elected for the first time. Local officials will be 
supported to assume their new duties and competencies. UNDP will continue supporting free 
and fair elections and will broaden its approach to make democratic processes more inclusive 
by strengthening the capacity of the media and political parties and enabling citizens –particularly women, youth, elders, people with disabilities, minorities and internally displaced 
persons (IDPs) – to make their voices heard through civic activities and social media platforms, 
creating space for peaceful dialogue. Joint activities with UNICEF to support the United 
Nations Legal Identity Agenda will leverage expertise and expand support to policy, research, 
and system implementation for coordinated approaches to national legal identity systems.
20. Mozambique has been faced with unforeseen violent extremism and instability that risk 
undermining development gains. As national priorities, engagement and investments target the 
resolution of the crisis, UNDP will accompany efforts of reconstruction and stabilization in the 
north of the country. Its engagement, will include a peacebuilding, reconciliation and social 
cohesion line of support, building on both national and community-based interventions. UNDP 
will also support relevant national and provincial authorities on cross-border institutional 
cooperation, inclusive of trade and peace-building dimensions.
21. UNDP will support institutions and populations to address the continuing challenges posed 
by COVID-19 and to build forward better. Support to digitalization and e-governance will 
strengthen data management, transparency and timeliness in public service delivery, 
particularly in the justice sector. 
A new approach to partnerships
22. Non-traditional partnerships and new and innovative financing instruments, such as green 
bonds, will be explored to support sustainable development and ensure greater effectiveness 
and efficiency in the application of funds by maximizing potential synergies. Existing 
partnerships with key government institutions, United Nations organizations and development 
partners will be strengthened. Partnerships with the private sector, multilateral and bilateral 
organizations, (including Global and South-South and triangular partnerships, particularly 
between South African Development Community and Portuguese-speaking African countries), 
and civil society organizations will be explored to promote integrated finance for development.
The country office will develop a catalogue of potential new partners, including in the private 
sector, and tap into the wisdom of grassroots organizations, through the Accelerator Lab, to add 
value to and complement the UNDP technical offer. The development of a communication 
strategy focused on the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals targets will gain 
greater visibility for UNDP and strengthen its leadership in advocacy for inclusive and 
sustainable development. 
III. Programme and risk management
23. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in 
the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control 
framework.
24. A ‘portfolio management’ approach will enhance vertical integration and effective policypractice and fieldwork feedback loops and promote more effective collaboration between teams
and between programme and operations and ensure best use of available resources. 
Implementation of the UNDP corporate data strategy will improve data management by making
data standards a requirement at project level and by introducing checks and balances to 
guarantee fulfilment of ethical and security standards. UNDP aims to become a key player in 
the country’s innovation ecosystem by enhancing collaboration between projects and the 
accelerator lab, increasing engagement and partnerships with key-players at local, regional and 
global level, including South-South and triangular partnerships, enhancing its image as an 
enabler and convener at national and international levels, and positioning itself as a thoughtleader, shaping development debates.25. The country office will work with partners, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
and other government institutions to ensure full involvement of national counterparts in all 
planning, monitoring and evaluation processes. UNDP will support the strengthening of 
ministries’ capacity to improve programme delivery, engage more effectively in regional 
development dialogue, and contribute to the United Nations global development agenda. 
Knowledge management systems will identify best practices, promote synergies, and facilitate 
joint learning with implementing partners and beneficiaries. Projects will be required to engage 
beneficiaries, and particularly women, youth and vulnerable groups, in development solutions, 
monitoring and learning.
26. The country programme is underpinned by a robust resource pipeline, with 70 per cent of 
funds coming from other (non-core) sources that will provide approximately $40 million a year
and are considered sufficient to support all planned interventions. Nevertheless, the programme 
is vulnerable to a variety of risks, including natural and climate-related hazards, including the 
COVID-19 pandemic, internal political tensions, instability and violence, and economic shocks 
that could reduce the resources for both the Government and UNDP. The country office 
monitors political and security developments. A conflict-sensitive approach will be integrated 
into all interventions. Risks will be evaluated through programme monitoring and tracking
tools, and via early warning systems. UNDP will proactively engage with the Government and 
the United Nations country team and the Resident Coordinator to evaluate and address 
emerging issues and anticipate significant changes in development and financial circumstances 
that may require programme and budgetary adjustments. The country office has a positive track 
record of building flexibility into programme design and implementation. Following recent 
cyclones and during the COVID-19 pandemic, UNDP successfully adopted an agile approach, 
leveraged digital solutions, mobilized additional funds and developed new ways of working to 
deliver results. 
27. The country programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, direct execution may be 
applied to enable response to force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be 
used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. 
Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be 
charged to the concerned projects. UNDP takes into consideration the sustainability factors in 
all its programmatic interventions through well-established linkages with national strategies, 
systems and structures.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
28. Outcome, output and performance indicators have been aligned with the results framework 
of the Government Five-year Programme, 2020-2024, the UNSDCF, 2022-2026, the UNDP 
Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, and the Sustainable Development Goals. Support to the Government 
and national priorities will be evidence-based and results-driven, achieved through strengthened 
implementation of effective results-based management approaches and monitoring and 
evaluation systems to inform decision-making, enhance effectiveness, and ensure sustainable 
results. UNDP will promote an inclusive approach to monitoring and evaluation, alongside 
other United Nations organizations and partners through the Monitoring and Evaluation Results 
Group, adopting mixed-method data collection and analysis methods and a human rights-based 
approach. All projects working directly with beneficiaries will implement a data protocol to 
safeguard ethical and compliant data management.
29. UNDP will allocate at least 5 per cent of resources to improving oversight and quality 
assurance, strengthening the digital literacy and monitoring and evaluation capacity of 
implementing partners and the Government, collecting national and subnational data. UNDP 
will also ensure consistent use of the gender marker to track funds devoted to advancing gender 
equality, improving gender-based planning and decision-making. Evaluations will support the 
identification of potential data gaps, notably in the environment sector, and UNDP will work with partner organizations to build capacities for research, data collection and analysis, and 
where necessary, support the realization of the necessary research, surveys or baseline studies
using innovative tools and methodologies.
30. UNDP will promote a learning culture and will strengthen evaluation practices, which was 
identified as weakness in the last programme cycle. Evaluation both at programme and project 
levels will be executed according to an evaluation plan and reviewed annually and when new 
projects are developed. UNDP will enhance policy advice and advocacy activities through a 
systematic approach to knowledge management, involving local communities, target groups 
and partners in monitoring and learning processes. UNDP will enhance its multi-year research 
agenda, based on which it will produce and share reports and discussion papers on topics related 
to the Sustainable Development Goals. Partnerships with academia and research institutions 
will underpin collaborative discussion and debate. UNDP will support open data portals and 
real time data collection tools to strengthen accountability and transparency in the public 
domain.Annex. Results and resources framework for Mozambique (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Five-year Government Plan Priority 1: Develop human capital and social justice.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1.1: By 2026, more people, particularly the most vulnerable and marginalized, have a more equitable access 
to and utilization of quality, inclusive, resilient, gender and shock-responsive social protection and essential social services.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive, and digital transitions.
Cooperation Framework outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, target(s)
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs
(including indicators, baselines targets)
Major partners/partnerships
frameworks
Estimated cost by 
outcome
(United States 
dollars)
1.7. Proportion of ever-partnered 
women and girls aged 15 years and 
older subjected to physical, sexual or 
psychological violence by a current or 
former intimate partner in the 
previous 12 months, by form of 
violence and by age
Baseline (2015): 16% 
Target (2026): 10%
1.1. Proportion of total government 
spending on essential services 
(education, health and social 
protection)
Baseline (2016): 
(a) 17.7% 
(b) 10.02%
(c) 2.00%
Target (2026):
(a) 20%
(b) 15%
(c) 4.5%
Indicator Survey of Immunization
Responsible: WHO, UN-Women,
UNFPA, United Nations Office for 
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), UNDP, 
United Nations Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs (UNDESA)
Frequency: Annual
MEF, General State Account
Responsible: The United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO) (UNICEF, 
WHO, ILO)
Frequency: Annual 
Output 1.1.1. Effective prevention and response to genderbased violence established.
• Indicator 1.1.1.1. Number of gender-sensitive strategies 
operationalized in the public sector.
Baseline (2020): 2 
Target (2026): 6 
Data source: Institutional reports 
Frequency: Annually
• Indicator 1.1.1.2. Percentage of victims of gender-based 
violence who access integrated care services (disaggregated 
by age and location).
Baseline (2020): 3
Target (2026): 10
Data source: MINT
Frequency: Annual
Ministry of Interior (MINT); 
Ministry of Justice, 
Constitutional and Religious 
Affairs (MJCR); Ministry of 
Gender, Children and Social 
Action (MGCAS); justice 
system institutions; Ministry of 
Economy and Finance (MEF); 
National Institute of Statistics
(INE); University Eduardo 
Mondlane; Attorney General's 
Office; civil society 
organizations; think thanks
World Health Organization 
(WHO), UNICEF, UNFPA
Regular: $9,838,929
Other: $47,052,898
Output 1.1.2. Equitable, resilient and sustainable systems 
for health and pandemic preparedness strengthened to 
address communicable and non-communicable diseases.
• Indicator 1.1.2.1. Number of resilient and adequately 
equipped MISAU warehouses with systems that ensure 
equitable access to medical supplies.
Baseline (2020): 1
Target (2024): 2
Data source: MISAU 
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 1.1.2.2. Increase in resilient public health 
laboratory testing capacity in selected provinces.
Baseline: (2020) 1 
Target: (2006) 8
Data source: MISAU 
 Frequency: AnnualDP/DCP/MOZ/4
Output 1.1.3. Whole-of-government approaches that 
provide solutions to Mozambique’s main human 
development challenges strengthened.
● Indicator 1.1.3.1. Number of whole-of-government policy 
processes supported at:
(a) national level
Baseline: (2021): 0
Target (2026): 2
(b) subnational level
Baseline: (2021): 0
Target (2026): 5
Data source: Results-oriented annual report World Bank
Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PQG Priority 2: Boost economic growth, productivity and job generation.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 2.1: By 2026, more people, particularly women and youths, participate in benefit from a more diversified, 
inclusive, and sustainable economic growth based on increased production, productivity, and greater value-added chains.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 3: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk.
1.2. Average income of small-scale 
food producers, by sex
Baseline (2009): 375.8092 
(purchasing power parity constant 
2011 international, United States 
dollars)
Target: (2026): $659
2.5. Unemployment rate, by sex, and 
age
Baseline (2015): 20.7% (2015)
Target (2026): TBC
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (MADER); Integrated 
agriculture survey (IAI) 2015 and 2017
INE household survey
Responsible: Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO)
Frequency: Annual
INE households survey 
Responsible: ILO
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.1.1. Resilient and inclusive economic recovery of 
communities vulnerable to disasters strengthened.
• Indicator 2.1.1.1. Number of vulnerable disaster-affected 
people, including IDPs, receiving assistance to recover and 
strengthen their livelihood resilience.
Baseline (2020): 50,000
Target (2026): 200,000 (50% women)
Data source: GREPOC
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 2.1.1.2. Number of disaster-affected vulnerable 
people, including IDPs, that access resilient infrastructure 
important for livelihoods recovery and productivity 
(disaggregated by sex).
Baseline (2020): 1,000
Target (2026): 5,000 (50% women)
Data source: MOPHRH, MEF, GREPOC
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 2.1.1.3. Number of functional local riskmanagement committees in targeted districts.
Baseline (2020): 1,439
Target (2026): 2,939
Data source: INGD
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 2.1.1.4. Number of people with access to 
information about extreme event alerts
Ministry of Land and 
Environment (MTA); INGD/ 
National Centre for Emergency 
Operations (CENOE); Ministry 
of Public Works, Housing and 
Water Resources (MOPHRH)/
Cabinet for Reconstruction 
Post-Cyclones (GREPOC); 
Youth and employment 
Secretariat (SEJE)
UNICEF, World Food 
Programme (WFP), United 
Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO), UNWomen, the United Nations 
Human Settlements Programme 
(UN-HABITAT), Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian 
Affairs (OCHA)
Regular: $7,374,975
Other: $32,490,558Baseline (2020): 500,000
Target (2024): 2,400,000
Data source: CENOE
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 2.1.1.5. Number of women, youth, victims of 
violence, IDPs and people with disabilities in resettlement 
camps trained in market systems.
Baseline (2020): 1,200
Target (2024): 5,263
Data source: PGQ 2020-2024
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.1.2. Livelihoods of the most vulnerable 
communities, including IDPs, in areas affected by violent 
extremism, especially in the informal economy, diversified 
and strengthened.
• Indicator 2.1.2.1. Number of beneficiaries of livelihood 
support interventions (disaggregated by sex, and IDPs).
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2026): 1,000 (600 women)
Data source: Results-oriented annual report
Frequency: Annual
● Indicator 2.1.2.2. Number of MSMEs benefitting from 
 interventions.
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 100 (60 MSMEs owned by women)
Data source: Results-oriented Annual Report 
Frequency: Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PQG Priority 3: Strengthen sustainable management of natural resources and the environment (strategic objectives ii, iii, iv);
Pillar 3: Strengthening international cooperation.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 3.1: By 2026, more people, especially the most vulnerable, are resilient to climate change and disasters, and benefit from more sustainable management of 
environment and natural resources and resilient infrastructures and human settlements, with positive effects on national GDP.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 3: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk.
3.1. Direct economic loss attributed to 
disasters in relation to global gross 
domestic product (GDP)
Baseline (2015): 2.7%
Target: 2% (TBD):
3.2. Percentage of producers 
practicing conservation farming 
techniques
Baseline (2014): 19% 
Target ): TBC
INGD
Responsible: UNDP
Frequency: Annual
MADER
Resp. FAO
Frequency: Annual 
Output 3.1.1. Regulatory instruments promote solutions to 
reduce climate and disaster risks and promote the 
sustainable management of natural resources.
• Indicator 3.1.1.1. Number of local adaptation plans that 
explicitly consider the needs on women and children, 
implemented in targeted districts.
Baseline (2020): 17 
Target (2026): 22
Data source: MTA, INGD 
Frequency: Annual
MTA, National Administration 
of Conservation Areas (ANAC)
United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP), UNWomen, WHO
Regular: $16,693,558
Other: $52,432,420DP/DCP/MOZ/4
3.6. Percentage of degraded land over 
total available land: trends in land 
cover, land productivity and carbon 
stocks
Baseline (2020): 42% degraded (plus 
19% actively degrading)
Target (2026): 42% (TBC)
MTA/ National Directorate for Forests
(DINAF)
Responsible: UNEP
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 3.1.1.2. Number of gender-sensitive normative 
instruments on natural resources, environment, climate 
change and disaster resilience.
Baseline (2020): 3 
Target (2026): 6
Data source: MTA/ANAC, INGD 
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 3.1.1.3. Number of innovative finance 
instruments developed and implemented for natural resource 
management and climate action.
Baseline (2020): 2
Target (2026): 4
Data source: MEF, MTA, National Fund for Sustainable 
Development (FNDS)
 Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 3.1.1.4. Number of women, young people, IDPs
and people with disabilities in resettlement camps trained in 
sustainable production systems.
Baseline (2020): 1,600
Target (2024): 7,976
Data source: PGQ 2020-2024
 Frequency: Annual
Output 3.1.2. Solutions scaled up for biodiversity 
conservation and transparent and inclusive management 
of the environment and natural resources.
• Indicator 3.1.2.1. Number of communities in conservation 
areas implementing initiatives on sustainable management 
of the environment, natural resources, and biodiversity 
conservation.
Baseline (2020): 77
Target (2026): 144
Data source: MTA, ANAC
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 3.1.2.2. Number of ecosystem-based enterprises 
that support sustainable natural resources management 
established in target areas (disaggregated by enterprises 
headed by women).
Baseline (2020): 4
Target (2026): 8
Data source: MTA, ANAC
 Frequency: AnnualNATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PQG Priority 1: Develop human capital and social justice (strategic goals i, ii, iii, iv);
Pillar I: Strengthening democracy and preserving unity and national cohesion;
Pillar II: Good governance and decentralization.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 4.1: By 2026, more people, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized, are protected, enjoy their rights, and benefit from a secure, peaceful 
environment, enabled by inclusive governance systems, and independent and accountable institutions abiding by the rule of law.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2: No one left behind centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development.
4.3. Proportion of seats held by 
women in: (a) national parliaments 
and (b) local governments.
Baseline (2019): 
(a) 42% Parliament
(b) 11% local government
Target (2024): 
(a) 20% Parliament
(b) 11% local government 
4.6. Percentage of districts with fully 
functioning courts
Baseline (2020): 84%
Target (2026): 90% 
Parliament/MAEFP 
Responsible: UN-Women
Frequency: 5 years
MJACR
Responsible: UNDP
Frequency: Annual
Output 4.1.1. Democratic processes and civic space are 
more inclusive, engage women, youth, vulnerable and 
marginalized groups and promote peace and social 
cohesion.
• Indicator 4.1.1.1. Percentage of Electoral Management 
Board (EMB) staff trained to conduct inclusive, credible 
and peaceful elections.
Baseline (2019): 70% 
Target (2024):90%
Source: CNE/STAE/UNDP trainings reports
• Indicator 4.1.1.2. Number of institutions and civil society 
organizations that actively promote peace and social 
cohesion 
Baseline: (2021): 0
Target: (2026): 5
Source: CSO reports
Frequency: Annual
Government: MEF, Ministry 
of State Administration and 
Public Service (MAEFP) , 
MGCAS, National Elections 
Commission (CNE), Technical 
Secretariat for Electoral 
Administration (STAE)
UN-Women, International 
Organization for Migration 
(IOM), UNHCR, OCHA 
Regular: $19,341,538
Other: $33,249,050
Output 4.1.2. Decentralized institutions are strengthened 
to promote inclusion, transparency and accountability.
• Indicator 4.1.2.2. Increase in level of satisfaction of users 
with the quality of services provided by the public 
administration.
Baseline (2019): 2.9 
Target (2026): 4 
Data source: MAEFP 
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 4.1.2.2. Number of SDG-aligned provincial 
strategic plans and budgets approved and inclusively 
implemented.
Baseline (2021): 0
Target: (2026): 2 plans, 8 budgets
Source: Provincial plans/budgets
Frequency: Annual
Output 4.1.3. Access to justice and the protection of 
human rights enhanced, particularly for women and 
vulnerable groups.DP/DCP/MOZ/4
• Indicator 4.1.3.1. Extent to which the NHRC is compliant 
with the Paris principles.
Baseline (2020): C Status Global Alliance of National 
Human Rights Institutions (GANRHI)
Target (2026): B Status GANRHI
Source: NHRC
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 4.1.3.2: Increase in the number of citizens, 
including marginalized groups, receiving free legal advice 
(disaggregated by sex).
Baseline (2020): 161,226 (28% women)
Target (2026): 350,000 (40% women)
Source: IPAJ
Frequency: Annual
• Indicator 4.1.3.3: Unsentenced detainees as a proportion of 
overall prison population
Baseline (2019) 33% 
Target (2026) 24% 
Source: MJCR 
Frequency: Annual