File Name: MOZ-NREP-2012-EN
Year: 2012
Country Name: Mozambique
Country Code: MOZ
Category: NREP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2012
Start Year: 2013
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

RENEWABLES READINESS 
ASSESSMENT 2012
MOZAMBIQUEAbout IRENA 
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
promotes the accelerated adoption and sustainable use of all
forms of renewable energy. IRENA’s founding members were
inspired by the opportunities offered by renewable energy to
enable sustainable development while addressing issues of
energy access, security and volatility. Established in 2009, the
inter-governmental organisation provides a global networking
hub, advisory resource and unified voice for renewable energy. 
www.irena.org
The designations employed and the presentation of materials herein
do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part
of the Secretariat of the International Renewable Energy Agency
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or
of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or
boundaries. The term “country” as used in this material also refers,
as appropriate, to territories or areas.RENEWABLES 
READINESS 
ASSESSMENT 
2012
MOZAMBIQUETable of Contents
4
TABLE OF CONTENTS 4
LIST OF ACRONYMS 6
LIST OF FIGURES 8
LIST OF TABLES 8
LIST OF IMAGES 8
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 9
FOREWORD 11
PREFACE 13
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 15
I. INTRODUCTION 19
Background 19
The Renewables Readiness Assessment 20
Piloting the methodology in Mozambique 22
The RRA Methodology 23
Objectives 24
II. ENERGY CONTEXT 25
Regional energy sector 25
Energy supply and demand 29
Renewable energy resources and potential 32
Key energy stakeholders 34
Policy and regulatory framework 36
Financing and Investment 38
III. MARKET DEVELOPMENT BY SECTOR 41
A. On-grid electricity 41
Key finding and recommendations 42
On-grid hydro 43
On-grid wind 45
B. Off-grid applications 46
Decentralised electrification 46
Thermal and motive applications 48
Key finding and recommendations 49
C. Biofuels for transport 50
Biodiesel 51
Bioethanol 51
Key finding and recommendations 52
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT5
IV. RECOMMENDED ACTIONS 54
V. BEST PRACTICES & FUTURE COOPERATION 57
Identified examples of good practice 57
Good practice demonstration 1: FUNAE and access to electricity 57
Good practice demonstration 1: Eduardo Mondlane University 58
renewable energy programme
Future cooperation 58
VI. REFERENCES & BIBLIOGRAPHY 60
VII. ANNEX 63 
Actions identified to scale up renewables
deployment in the short to medium term
Action 1: Develop a system of feed-in tariffs for electricity 64
generated by RE technologies
Action 2: Evaluate the cost of energy generation 65
from wind energy in Mozambique
Action 3: Support the development of large- and 66
small-scale hydroelectricity projectsS
Action 4: Include potential sites for hydroelectricity
projects in grid extension planning 67
Action 5: Encourage private sector involvement in 68
rural electrification and decentralised energy
Action 6: Scaling up deployment of rural electrification 70
and decentralised energy
Action 7: Promote development of sustainable biofuel projects 71
Action 8: Clarify the requirements for biofuels producers 72
to supply biofuels to the local market
MOZAMBIQUE6
AMOMIF Associação Moçambicana dos Operadores de Microfinanças 
BTC Belgian Technical Cooperation 
CIA Central Intelligence Agency
CIB Inter-ministerial Committee on Biofuels
CNELEC Conselho Nacional de Electricidade
CPI Centro de Promoçaode Investimentos
CPS Country PartnershipStrategy
CTA Confederação das AssociaçõesEconómicas
EDENR Strategy for New and Renewable Energy Development
EDM Electricidade de Moçambique
ESCO Energy Service Company
EUEI-PDF European Union Energy Initiative Partnership Dialogue Facility
FNI National Research Fund 
FUNAE Fundo de Energia
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GIZ Deutsche GesellschaftfürInternationale Zusammenarbeit
HCB CahoraBassa HydroelectricCompany 
IEA International Energy Agency
INE Instituto Nacional de Estatistica (National Statistics Agency)
INNOQ Instituto Nacional de Normalização e Qualidade
IPP Independent Power Producer
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency
KMTC Knowledge Management and Technology Cooperation 
MCT Ministry of Science and Technology
MFI Micro Finance Institutions
MIC Ministry of Industry & Commerce
MICOA Ministry of Coordination of Environmental Affairs
MINAG Ministry of Agriculture
MoE Ministry of Energy 
MOTRACO Mozambique Transmission Company 
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT
List of Acronyms7
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NORAD Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation
PARPA Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty
PCES Community Sustainable Energy Plans 
PETROMOC Petróleos de Moçambique
PNDB National Programme for the Development of Biofuels
PV Photovoltaic 
RE Renewable Energy
REA Rural Electrification Agency
RRA Renewables Readiness Assessment 
SADC Southern African Development Community 
SAPP Southern African Power Pool 
SNV Netherlands Development Organization 
STIFIMO Programme of Cooperation in Science, Technology and 
Innovation between Finland and Mozambique
TPES Total Primary Energy Supply 
UEM University Eduardo Mondlane
UNIDO United Nations Industrial and Development Organization 
USD United States Dollars
MOZAMBIQUE8 RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Southern African Development Community 27
Figure 2: Total Primary Energy Supply in Mozambique 28
Figure 3: Total Primary Energy Supply Evolution excluding electricity trade 28
Figure 4: Mozambique Energy Profile 30
Figure 5: Evolution of National Electricity Access through EDM 31
Figure 6: Electricity generated from HCB 42
Figure 8: Mozambique Electricity Grid 44
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Types, location and potentials of energy resources 29
Table 2: Hydropower projects in Mozambique 32
LIST OF IMAGES
Image 1: Mozambique Mipandi Solar Wind System 14
Image 2: Cahora Bassa Dam and Reservoir located on the Zambezi River in Mozambique 29
Image 3 and 4: Mozambique: Solar water pumping; Community solar battery charger 33
Image 5: Wind Blade Manufacturing, Pemba 39
Image 6: Mozambique rural village shop solar panel 47
inside Limpopo National Transfrontier Park 
Image 7: Solar Energy Installation in Mozambique 53
Image 8: Sailboat off the Mozambique Coast 629
Acknowledgements
This Renewables Readiness Assessment report was prepared by the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) working in close
collaboration with the Government of Mozambique. The International
Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) provided valuable support
to the process and the report. 
We wish to thank the following experts, in alphabetical order, for their
insights and constructive guidance during the peer review process:
Boaventura Cuamba (Eduardo Mondlane University, Mozambique),
Francis Yamba (CEEEZ), Haruna Gujba (ACPC), Peter Zhou (EECG
Consultants Pty, Ltd), Veli-Pekka Heiskanen (SADC Secretariat), 
Karmic Design provided the design and layout. 
Comments or questions about this Renewable Readiness
Assessment report can be sent to SAlzouma@irena.org,
MSokona@irena.org, or to info@irena.org.
MOZAMBIQUE10 RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT11
Realising the full potential of my country’s huge renewable energy resources is key to the
development we require to expand our economy and lift our people out of poverty.
Mozambique has worked tirelessly over the past decade to set up the framework in which
these resources can be scaled up to the quantity we need. Our Ministry of Energy has been
a separate entity since 2005 and incorporates a Directorate for New and Renewable Energy.
We now have strategies and legal frameworks in place, and agencies – including the Energy
Fund (Fundo de Energia, or FUNAE), and our national electricity utility (Electricidade de
Moçambique, or EDM) – are making strong progress in increasing electrification. In addition,
our petroleum company (PETROMOC) is engaged in biofuels production and future
distribution.
Mozambique has been fortunate to receive very strong support for our renewables upscaling
over many years, from within the country and from a number of strong donors and partners.
Realising our plans will depend on the continuation of this support and the identification of
increased resources for investment. We are actively looking at ways of maximising this
investment, and have opportunities in the renewable energy sector at all sizes – from very
large hydro to pico solar photovoltaic (PV) – and for all major resources: hydro, wind, solar
and biomass.
Mozambique is a strong supporter of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
and its mission. We were proud to volunteer to host the second pilot study of the Renewables
Readiness Assessment programme. The process and conversations with a range of
Foreword
MOZAMBIQUE12
government and other stakeholders, and with the external team led by IRENA, were very
stimulating and have helped us to identify the key opportunities and barriers we can focus
on over the short term. We are pleased that two of our examples of good practice are
included in this report and are very keen to discuss and help to roll out these opportunities
and the good practice examples from other countries, in the months and years ahead.
I commend this report to you and look forward to working with you in upscaling
Mozambique’s renewable energy.
Salvador Namburete
Minister of Energy
Republic of Mozambique
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT13
IRENA has a mandate to act as the focal point for international cooperation to promote the
adoption of renewable energy. The IRENA-Africa High-level Consultative Forum, held in July
2011, recognised “Renewable Energy Readiness” as a crucial first step for better
understanding the opportunities and constraints in African countries and regions, and for a
collaborative process that will provide a rapid, objective assessment of the status of
renewable energy opportunities, and identify pathways to address gaps. 
Renewables Readiness Assessments (RRAs) will allow IRENA to identify and provide
country-specific support and advice to participating countries. More broadly, RRAs will also
generate the knowledge of good practice and the cooperation between countries that are
essential to increasing deployment. The readiness assessment will help IRENA to provide
assistance to countries in a targeted manner. Receiving one of the first RRAs – presented
here by Mozambique – is an important milestone for IRENA.
In keeping with its strong and consistent support of IRENA and its mission, Mozambique
kindly volunteered to host one of the first country pilot studies and test the RRA methodology. The process and details of RRAs will necessarily evolve with experience. We thank
Minister Namburete and his team for their patience and generosity in hosting this first study.
Their engagement and input have gone beyond what we could have expected and we are
grateful for their important contribution. 
IRENA hopes that this RRA will enable Mozambique to increase its deployment of
renewables. We offer our continuing support, across all our functions and work programmes,
to Mozambique in implementing the actions identified.
Adnan Z. Amin 
Director General, IRENA
Preface
MOZAMBIQUERENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Image 1: Mozambique Mipandi Solar Wind System
Source: renewable-world.orgMOZAMBIQUE 
BACKGROUND
Mozambique, despite 16 years of civil war, is one of the fastest-growing
economies in sub-Saharan Africa, with annual growth of 7% for the past
decade and a 2011 GDP of USD 9.893 billion. This was partly achieved
through the implemention of a comprehensive Structural Adjustment
Programme initiated by the government which was aimed at liberalising
the economy, improving resource distribution, promoting agricultural
production, expanding the private sector, and adjusting the country’s
internal and external trade imbalances. As a result, Mozambique’s
economy is no longer solely dependent on the primary sector – all three
sectors now play an important economic role with 31.5% of GDP from
the primary, 23.8% from the secondary, and 44.7% from the tertiary
sector. 
RRA IN MOZAMBIQUE
Mozambique has one of the highest hydroelectric potentials in Africa
and is home to one of the largest hydro dams in the continent, the
Cahora Bassa Dam, which has an installed capacity of 2 075 MW and
produces electricity for Mozambique, South Africa, Zimbabwe, Botswana
and the Southern African Power Pool. The dam plays an important role
in Mozambique’s economy as a source of foreign revenue, especially
after the country gained majority ownership of the dam (85% of the
shares). Despite being endowed with significant renewable energy
sources (hydro, biomass, solar and wind) as well as fossil fuels (natural
gas and coal), Mozambique’s national grid only serves about 18% of the
population and is subject to transmission and high distribution losses
(25%). The country constantly ranks among those with the lowest
electricity access rates. 
Executive Summary6 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Mozambique has actively pursued energy
sector reform for over two decades.
Reform has included the privatisation of
the national utility (EDM) and the
introduction of the Electricity Law, which
provided elements of competition and
opened the electricity sector to new
entrants. This required the setting up of a
regulator (CNELEC) and the creation of a
fund for rural electrification (FUNAE).
Policies and strategies on the development
of new and renewable energy and for
biofuels, including multiple blending
targets, were later adopted to reflect the
country’s changing priorities. 
The country has a number of medium- and
large-scale hydro power projects in the
pipeline and plans to expand its distribution and transmission system. The
setting up of small hydro power projects
along the expanded grid network close to
load centres will promote the connection
of renewables-based electricity and increase electricity access rate.
Wind power in Mozambique is in an early
stage of development.The government is
conducting a mapping project, which includes the installation of a number of wind
speed measurement stations throughout
the country to produce a wind energy
resource atlas. This resource mapping
exercise should be used to further refine
the estimates of generation costs and to
inform the policies for the promotion of
wind power. 
FUNAE is responsible for promoting distributed generation through both direct
projects and the promotion of private
sector projects. Although FUNAE has a
successful record of implementing off-grid
projects, the delivery of sustainable rural
electrification on a wider scale will necessitate the participation of the private
sector due to FUNAE’s limited human and
financial resources. However, the number
of privately led projects is currently low,
suggesting that there is still room for
further progress. FUNAE should therefore
engage with the private sector by establishing a forum to discuss possible policies
and regulations that will further stimulate
private sector participation in off-grid
renewable energy projects; expand the
FUNAE is responsible for promoting distributed generation through both direct
projects and the promotion of private sector projects. Although FUNAE has a
successful record of implementing off-grid projects, the delivery of sustainable 
rural electrification on a wider scale will necessitate the participation of 
the private sector due to FUNAE’s limited human and financial resources. 
However, the number of privately led projects is currently low, suggesting 
that there is still room for further progress.
RMOZAMBIQUE 
tender process to include management,
design and maintenance activities previously undertaken by FUNAE; pro-actively
allow a business-led approach to emerge
by encouraging private equipment suppliers and distributors to enter the market in
partnership with micro-finance institutions; and consider the use of a concessionbased system. 
Mozambique is endowed with the potential
for an expansion of biofuel production,
which could reduce domestic demand for
imported oil products. Cultivation of biofuels feedstock could provide local
economic opportunities including the
creation of direct employment and possibly
through the production of additional
feedstock from smaller farms. A number of
concessions have already been granted for
biofuels facilities and a number of
additional expressions of interest have
been received for further developments.
However, concerns continue to be raised
regarding the environmental and economic
sustainability of biofuel production. Therefore, in addition to balancing sustainability
criteria with land availability to identify
available land for biofuels, Mozambique
should investigate clear indications of local
market size and process for allocating
obligations for projects to supply to local
markets.
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Government of Mozambique should: 
w Include potential sites for hydroelectricity projects in grid extension
planning and support the development
of small-scale hydro projects along the
grid.
w Pursue wind ground resource assessment to set the priority for developing
further policy in support of wind
energy.
w Encourage private sector involvement
in rural electrification and decentralised energy in order to scale up the
deployment of renewables in these
energy sectors.
w Promote the development of sustainable biofuel projects and clarify the
requirements for biofuels producers to
the local market. 
w Build entrepreneurs and financiers
capacity in developing and appraising
bankable RE projects by creating
synergies with programmes such as
STIFIMO - Programme of Cooperation
in Science, Technology and Innovation
between Finland and Mozambique -
aiming at mainstreaming innovation in
the country.8 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
786 380 
km2
GEOGRAPHICAL AREA
Maputo
CAPITAL CITY
23.1 
million
POPULATION
7%
ECONOMIC GROWTH RATE
(INE, 2012)
ONE OF THE FASTEST GROWING
ECONOMIES IN AFRICA 
MOZAMBIQUEMOZAMBIQUE 
BACKGROUND
Mozambique, a member of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), borders Tanzania, Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe,
South Africa and Swaziland. The country’s land area is 786 380 km2 and
its population was estimated at 23.1 million in 2011 (INE, 2012).
Mozambique is one of the fastest-growing economies in sub-Saharan
Africa, with an average annual growth rate of 7% for the past decade, a
2011 GDP of USD 9.893 billion and a per capita GDP of USD 1 117. The
economy is dependent on the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors
(respectively representing 31.5%, 23.8% and 44.7% of GDP) (Ibid).
Despite the strong growth, about 54% of Mozambique’s population still
lives below the poverty line. The illiteracy rate is 52.2% and the
unemployment rate 27%(Ibid). As a response, the government
reorganised its development agenda around the Action Plan for the
Reduction of Absolute Poverty (PARPA 2011-2014). This plan focuses on
increasing agricultural production, promoting employment through the
development of small- and medium-scale enterprises and investing in
human and social development by aligning technical and vocational
training systems to the needs of the market. Furthermore, through the
PARPA and the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), the government of
Mozambique has made access to energy a national priority, by defining
access to adequate and affordable energy services to households, rural
schools, administrative offices, hospitals and rural enterprises as a key
driver to economic growth and poverty alleviation. 
I. IntroductionRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Given the strong leadership of Mozambique in the energy sector1 and the high
share of renewables (mainly hydro) in
electricity generation, SADC proposed Mozambique to pilot the first RRA in the
region. This document, the final report
from the Mozambique pilot study, also
includes the insights gained from the RRA
process.
IRENA became a fully-fledged international
organisation in April 2011, with a mandate
to promote increased adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy. With 104 Members of the Agency and
55 signatories, IRENA has the global reach
to act as the focal point for international
cooperation and to underpin the effort to
increase the deployment of renewables in
the energy mix of countries around the
world. Through its work programme,
IRENA is positioning itself as an inclusive
global platform to stimulate policy dialogue and develop strategies to assist countries in their necessary transition to a
renewables-based energy future.
In July 2011, more than 25 Ministers of
Energy and Heads of Delegation attended
the High-level IRENA-Africa Consultative
Forum on Partnership on Accelerating
Renewable Energy Uptake for Africa’s
Sustainable Development, where they set
out a vision and direction for IRENA’s work
in Africa. The communiqué adopted at the
end of this forum urged IRENA to inter alia
“better understand the opportunities and
constraints in our countries and regions by
mapping ‘Renewable Energy Readiness’, a
collaborative process that will provide a
rapid, objective assessment of the status of
renewable energy opportunities, and identify pathways to address gaps”.
RRAs are now an integral component of
IRENA’s work programme and are included
under “Promotion of regional consensus to
adopt renewable energy through strategic
intervention”. The RRA process is meant to
provide input to national and regional
renewable energy action plans and bring
together partners who could support the
implementation of those plans, including
providing solutions to energy access. 
THE RENEWABLES 
READINESS ASSESSMENT
RRAs are designed to define a detailed list
of criteria considered necessary for the installation and ongoing operation of renewable energy facilities. Application of the
RRA framework to individual countries will
provide a comprehensive analysis of the
presence, or otherwise, of enabling conditions for the development of renewables.
Crucially, this should take into account how
the country’s renewables policy contributes
RRAs are now an integral component of IRENA’s work programme and are included
under "Promotion of regional consensus to adopt renewable energy through strategic
intervention”. The RRA process is meant to provide input to national and regional
renewable energy action plans and bring together partners who could support the
implementation of those plans, including providing solutions to energy access.
R
1 Mozambique was the head of the Conference of Energy Ministers of Africa at the time of 
preparation of this RRAMOZAMBIQUE 
to other policy objectives. The exercise also
facilitates comparisons with case studies,
and enables the useful matching of
renewable energy attributes to opportunities.
An RRA comprises a process and a methodology that includes completing a set of
templates and a final report. The RRA
methodology covers all services (transport,
heat, electricity and motive power), and all
sources of renewable energy, with countries selecting those of relevance. The RRA
process enlists strong country stakeholding
as it is designed to be conducted by
national governments, allowing countries
to obtain a comprehensive overview of the
conditions for renewable energy from their
own particular national perspective. All the
processes and the documentation are led
by the country and derive inputs from
discussions with stakeholders, facilitated
by the country focal point with the assistance of IRENA. The resultant report is
therefore a national one, developed and
owned by the country. This sets the RRA
process and methodology apart from other
assessment processes led by international
organisations. Although IRENA offers support during the RRA, it is the actions and
insights that are developed through a
country-owned process that provide the
key to rapid deployment.
RRAs facilitate a coordinated approach and
the setting of priorities, which can inform
discussion with bilateral and multilateral
cooperation agencies, financial institutions
and the private sector regarding implementation of actions and initiatives emerging
out of the RRA. With IRENA’s backing, the
RRA process offers countries access to a
global network with the capacity to follow
up on actions and exchange experiences.
IRENA can facilitate the implementation of
the follow-up actions where necessary
after specific request from the country or
regional entity.
RRA
RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT
R Rapid assessment of the conditions
necessary for the installation and 
ongoing operation of renewable energy
facilities in a country.
R Covers all RE sources and services of
preference to the country’s national
product.
R The RRA report is a product of the
country, and the actions and insights in it
come from a country-owned process.
IRENA
INTERNATIONAL RENEWABLE
ENERGY AGENCY
AS OF N0VEMBER 2012
104 
Members of the Agency
55
Signatories/applicants for membership
159
Total participation 
(158 states plus the European Union)
48
Participating states in AfricaTHE RRA METHODOLOGY
The methodology adopted for the countrylevel RRA has a number of distinct stages,
as shown in the RRA methodology chart.
PILOTING THE METHODOLOGY 
IN MOZAMBIQUE
The pilot study in Mozambique was
undertaken to field-test the draft RRA
methodology, obtain feedback from key
stakeholders on the criteria being used to
assess readiness, and further improve the
methodology. An extensive literature review was also undertaken of recent relevant
studies.
Stakeholder mapping helped identify the
key stakeholders in government departments and public sector bodies, financial
institutions, research bodies, the private
sector and NGOs. These key stakeholders
are highlighted in Section II. This research
set the stage for a mission to Mozambique
to complete the on-ground assessment
process.
The mission comprised of the following
elements:
w An introductory meeting with the Minister of Energy launched the project
and provided knowledge-sharing opportunities with key stakeholders including representatives of the Ministry of
Energy (MoE), Power Utility “Electricidade de Moçambique” (EDM),
Energy Fund (FUNAE) and key institutions in the energy sector.
w A site visit to Pessene, a village located
40 kilometres from Maputo where very
small-scale (“pico”) photovoltaic (PV)
systems have been used to electrify a
school building and teachers’ accommodation, as well as village dwellings.
w A series of fact-finding interviews with
stakeholders from the renewable energy sector.
w Working sessions with senior MoE
officials and other stakeholders to fill in
RRA templates for different renewable
energy resources and services.
w A validating workshop with stakeholderswas held on the final day of the
mission, to present findings from the
week, elicit further feedback and develop the set of actions needed to be
taken to stimulate renewable energy
dissemination.
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
MOZAMBICAN
RRA MISSION
R Introductory meeting with MoE and
affiliated institutions.
R Site visit to Pessene for decentralised PV
electricity generation for the village school
and dwellings.
R Fact-finding interviews with key
stakeholders.
R Working sessions to fill RRA templates with
employees of MoE and other stakeholders.
R Final workshop with stakeholders to
present findings, obtain feedback and to
develop a set of actions.
OBJECTIVES
R Assess and review the status and issues
of energy & RE in Mozambique
R Approaches for developing institutional
structures for RE
R Framework for providing access to RE
technology & infrastructure
for delivering energy & RE
R Opportunities & barriers for viable business
models for RE developmentMOZAMBIQUE 
Renewable Readiness
Assessment Methodology
STEP 1A 
PREPARATORY
WORK
R Setting up of an RRA team
initiated and led by national
government.
R Contextualisation of RRA.
R Identification of key
stakeholders, RE projects
and programmes.
R Roadmap and timeline for
assessment.
STEP 1B
PLANNING 
THE PROCESS
R Identification of appropriate
service–resource pairs.
R Preparation of list of
interviewees, appointments
and tentative questionnaire
for bilateral meetings.
Scoping
STEP 2A
INITIAL 
PLENARY
SESSION
R Introductory session led by
a high-level government
official (e.g., Minister of RE).
R Discussion on status,
potential and barriers to
scale up RE.
R Description of how to
conduct RRA.
R Refining and selection of
key renewables applications.
STEP 2B
ASSESSMENT
R Filling out of RRA templates
with regards to:
Policy and strategy;
Business models;
Institutional, regulatory and
market structure;
Resources, technologies and
infrastructure; and
Finance, build, operate &
maintain.
STEP 2C
VALIDATION
WORKSHOP
R National workshop to
present and validate
preliminary findings.
1 2Assessing
STEP 3A
FINAL REPORT
R Final report writing drawn
on preparatory materials,
completed RRA templates
and list of actions.
R RRA Director comments on
and approves work on
behalf of the country.
STEP 3B
FOLLOW UP
ACTIONS
R Working with IRENA.
R RRA Director and
government focal point
identify areas for
subsequent collaboration
and action.
3FinalisingRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
OBJECTIVES
This report aims to foster understanding
and debate around the renewable energy
sector in Mozambique and provide an
introduction to the issues facing the
country together with a broad summary of
the experiences of the energy market and
the deployment of renewables. The key
objectives for this report are: 
w To assess the energy issues facing
Mozambique and review the current
status of energy policy and regulatory
frameworks, and specifically renewable
energy policy, at a regional and national level; 
w To critically review existing and planned approaches to developing institutional structures for renewables;
w To review the framework for providing
access to modern energy services
using renewable energy and the status
of technology and infrastructure in delivering it;
w To critically assess the opportunities
and barriers for developing viable business models for renewable energy
projects; and
w To suggest a set of actions to address
any identified barriers.
The analysis presented here is intended to
put the issues and proposed actions in the
context of regional and international
experience.MOZAMBIQUE 
REGIONAL ENERGY SECTOR
The SADC region is characterised by fast-growing economies with most
averaging GDP growth rate of 5% or more resulting in increasing power
demand and consumption. While progress is being made to scale up
access to modern energy, the region’s average electricity access is about
30% despite abundant energy resources. In 2008, SADC primary energy
supply was estimated at around 9 552 PJ (227 978 ktoe) (IEA, 2011). Coal
dominated the primary energy mix with a large share of 44%, followed
by renewable energy (39%), oil (14%), gas (2%), and nuclear (1%). The
39% share for renewable energy is distributed among traditional
biomass (36.66%), primarily used for cooking and heating, hydro
(1.95%), and modern biomass (0.39%). Other renewable energy sources
such as solar, geothermal, wind and biofuels were negligible (Ibid).
Electricity generation, transmission and distribution are mainly provided
by publicly owned, vertically integrated national utilities. Efforts have
been made with varying degrees of success in a number of SADC
countries to mobilise private sector finance through Independent Power
Producers (IPPs). Policies in most countries reflect an aspiration for
greater private sector involvement in power generation but efforts are
hampered by risk perceptions from investors due to unfavourable legal
and regulatory framework for private sector participation (concerns over
competition between public and private generation assets) and
difficulties in developing well-structured bank-able projects (DBSA,
2010).
II. Energy Context6 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Southern African 
Development Community
SOUTHERN AFRICAN 
POWER POOL (SAPP)
Set up in 1995 by 12 SADC countries to optimise 
the use of energy sources available in the region
56.558 GW
Regional installed capacity 
49 877 MW
Secured capacity
45 436 MW
Demand
1 214 kWh
Per capita electriciy generated
50%
Target set for electricity access
and
34%
RE penetratration by 2020
REGIONAL ENERGY POLICIES
ENERGY PROTOCOL
Signed in 1996; recognised the need for a coordinated 
approach to energy planning in SADC.
Regional Energy Strategy and ActionPlan
drafted in 2010 with EUEI support.
RENEWABLE ENERGY STRATEGY 
AND ACTION PLAN (RESAP)
Under consideration for adoption, it focuses on enhancing
integration of renewable energy and EE into present and 
future energy systems in the region.MOZAMBIQUE 
In 1995, 12 SADC countries (excluding island states) signed an Inter-Governmental
Memorandum of Understanding that led to
the creation of the Southern African Power
Pool (SAPP) with the aim of creating a
common market for electricity that would
provide reliable and economical electricity
to the consumers in each SAPP member
country, optimise the use of available energy resources in the region, and support
inter-country cooperation during emergencies. This initiative has been furthered by
the 1996 signing of the Regional Energy
Protocol, which recognises the need for a
coordinated approach to energy strategy
formulation and planning for the SADC. As
of 2011, SAPP’s total installed capacity was
56 558 MW with a secured capacity of 
49 877 MW, against a peak demand of 
45 436 MW (SAPP, 2012). This installed
capacity generates on average 1 214 kWh/
capita/year, providing access to about 35%
of the region’s urban population, although
electricity access rates are much lower in
rural and peri-urban areas. With a rising
power demand estimated at 4% per year, it
is estimated that a total additional generating capacity of 52 GW is required by
2025 (SADC, 2010). The SADC region generates about 74% of its electricity from thermal plants (mainly coal), while hydro
accounts for only about 20%. The region
intends to reduce its energy dependence
on coal to about 59% by 2015. Gas and
diesel is expected to contribute more than
18% and wind and solar are expected to
account for about 2% (SADC, 2011).
SADC has drawn up multiple energy access
goals. The strategic goal of energy access
to adequate and reliable energy services
for the entire SADC region was identified
as playing a pivotal role in achieving a
regional growth rate of 7% and reducing
poverty on a sustainable basis. As a step
towards this objective, SADC established
an operational goal to reduce the number
of SADC inhabitants without access to
energy services by 50% by 2020, and halve
the number of those remaining without
access every five years until the strategic
goal of full access is achieved. The 10-year
goal to halve the number of people without
energy access is indicative of the political
will in the region to address energy access.
Efforts are on to increase access to energy
Figure 1: Southern African Development Community8 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
focus on the expansion of distribution
networks, often implemented by the
national utilities, and the use of small-scale
distributed generation, often implemented
through Rural Electrification Agencies2
(REAs) or funds.
A Regional Energy Access Strategy and
Action Plan was drafted in 2010 with the
support of the European Union Energy
Initiative (EUEI) and a Renewable Energy
Strategy and Actions Plan (RESAP) was
being drafted at the time of the RRA.
Figure 2: Total Primary Energy Supply in Mozambique (IEA 2011a)
Figure 3: 
Total Primary Energy Supply 
Evolution excluding electricity
trade, IRENA, 2011a
2 Rural Electrification Agencies or Rural Electrification Funds will be henceforth referred to as REAs.MOZAMBIQUE 
RESAP also covers energy efficiency and
contributes to the overall goal of SADC
member states to utilise and benefit from
the significant renewable energy resources
that exist in the region.
ENERGY SUPPLY AND DEMAND
The Total Primary Energy Supply (TPES) of
Mozambique in 2009 was 408.9 Peta
joules (PJ). Biomass meets 78% of the
country’s energy needs, followed by hydro
(13%), oil products (7%) and other
resources (2%) (See Figures 2 & 3). The
current use of coal and gas is marginal and
accounts for about 1% of the TPES and,
although Mozambique is a producer of
natural gas, most of the production is exported to South Africa. All oil products used
are imported and their cost accounts for
15% of the country’s imports, making
Mozambique vulnerable to increases in the
price of oil products.
Mozambique has no significant proven reserves of oil and no domestic upstream or
downstream production capacity. Imports
are used to meet the domestic demand for
refined oil products. Meanwhile, coal reserves are significant with reserves in the
Zambezi coal basin estimated at 20 billion
tons (Mozambique Coal Ltd, 2012). Gas
reserves and production in Mozambique
are substantial and are likely to remain
important in the future. As of 2011, proven
reserves of gas were estimated at 127
billion m3, the 51st largest proven reserves
in the world and the third-largest reserves
in the SADC region. Recent discoveries off
the coast of Mozambique by Anadarko
Petroleum and EniSpA may increase
proven reserves by many times in coming
years. This large potential resource has proTable 1: Types, location and potentials of energy resources
Resources Sites Potential
Coal Zambezi basin 20 billion tons
Natural Gas Offshore & On Shore 127 billion m3
Biomass Countrywide 8.9 million ha 
Hydro Zambezi Valley & other sites 12 000 MW (small Hydro >1 000 MW)
Solar Countrywide 1.49 million GWh (5.2 kWh/m2/day)
Wind Coast & Niassa Provinces Speed 5 m/s(> 6 m/s in some areas)
Geothermal Tete, Manica & Conservative estimate of 25 MW
Niassa Provinces
Image 2: Cahora Bassa Dam and Reservoir located
on the Zambezi River in Mozambique444 PJ
Total Primary Energy Supply
408 PJ
Share of renewables in TPES
(91% of TPES)
17 TWh
Electricity generation 
17 TWh
Share of renewables
(99.9% of total)
2 428 MW
Installed capacity (2008) 
2 179 MW
Share of renewables
(89.7% of total)
122%
Mozambique’s energy
Self-sufficiency
USD 581 Million
Mozambique’s fuel imports
(15.4% of total imports)
143 kWh
Per capita electricity consumption in Mozambique
579 kWh
Average - Africa
2 825 kWh
Average - world
Mozambique Energy Profile
USD 0.075/KWH
Average electricity tarriffs in Mozambique
Figure 4mpted plans for an LNG terminal and considerable investment in infrastructure that
may have a dramatic impact on Mozambique’s economic future and could lead to
the country overtaking Angola as the largest regional natural gas producer. In
addition to these fossil fuels reserves, the
country has significant potential of all types of renewable energy sources (Table 1). 
Levels of access to electricity in Mozambique have increased significantly both onand off-grid in recent years for the country
and the three regions of Mozambique
(Figure 3). National access to electricity is
estimated for on-grid to be around 18% and
off-grid around 11% (EDM, 2011; FUNAE,
2011). However, increasing electrification
faces challenges, including the highly
dispersed population.
Electricity consumption per capita in Mozambique was 143 kWh in 2011. Per capita
electricity consumption is below the
average of African countries (579 kWh)
high-income countries (9 062 kWh), middle-income countries (1 693 kWh), and the
world (2 825 kWh)
Overall electricity tariffs are estimated to
be below cost recovery. Average tariffs in
Mozambique are reported to be among the
lowest in Africa, approximately USD
0.075/kWh. Historic power costs, including
both operations and maintenance and
capital, are estimated to be around 
USD 0.08/kWh. Long-run marginal costs3
are approximately USD 0.06/kWh. In addition, EDM applies a large-scale, welltracked cross-subsidisation scheme through the implementation of appropriate business units and separated accounts, leading to the application of a uniform tariff
structure throughout the country. 
Consumers in the remote regions (characFigure 5: Evolution of National Electricity Access through
EDM, (EDM, 2011, Figures in percent)
3 Long-run marginal cost (LRMC) refers to the cost of providing an additional unit of service or
commodity under the assumption that this requires investment in capacity expansion. In this context, the
LRMC are the operating and maintenance costs as well as the cost toincrease capacity of an already
established hydropower plant.
MOZAMBIQUEterised by low customers density and low
electricity consumption per capita) are the
main beneficiaries from the cross-subsidy
scheme, since supply and distribution of
electricity is relatively more expensive.
RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES 
AND POTENTIALS
The total hydro potential in Mozambique is
estimated to be approximately 12 000 MW,
of which around 1 000 MW is for smallscale hydro projects. In addition to Cahora
Bassa operated by HCB, there are currently
approximately 109 MW of hydro power plants owned and operated by EDM. Mozambique has been developing a pipeline of
more than 4,000 MW - worth of hydro
projects, mainly large- and medium-scale
to expand generation capacity (see Table 2
below). 
Mozambique has a significant and largely
untapped solar potential. The potential for
solar power is approximately 1.49 million
GWh – many times more than the country’s
current energy consumption. Annual average solar radiation is estimated to be 5.2
kWh/m2/day and varies between 4 and 7
kWh/m2/day across the country. Solar energy is therefore a potential key resource for
off-grid areas. To date, it is estimated that
approximately 1.0 MW of PV has been
installed, much of it by FUNAE.
Mozambique’s wind resource is believed to
be considerable with average wind speeds
of 6-7 m/s in some areas. A mapping
project, under the remit of FUNAE, to
better understand wind resources is under
way, including the installation of a number
of wind speed measurement stations in
Ponta de Ouro, Salamanga, Tofinho and
Chicumbane.
Table 2: Hydropower projects in Mozambique
Project name Location Size Status (as of 2010)
MphandaNikuwa Tete 1 500 MW Commercial agreements
CB North Bank Tete 1 245 MW Pre-Feasibility
Lupata Sofala 600 MW Feasibility
Boroma Tete 200 MW Feasibility
Lürio Cabo Delgado 120 MW Feasibility
Ruo Zambezia 100 MW -
Mavuzi 2&3 Manica 60 MW Conceptual
Malema Nampula 60 MW Pre-Feasibility
Massingir Gaza 25 MW Pre-Feasibility
Source: EDM
RENEWABLE RESOURCES 
IN MOZAMBIQUE
12 GW
Estimated hydropower potential
1.49 MILLION GWH
Solar power potential 
6 to 7 m/s
Average wind speeds 
78%
Of TPES is from biomass
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENTMOZAMBIQUE 
The prospects of geo-thermal energy in 
Mozambique are high since it shares similar
geological formation alongside the East
African Rift Valley 
Biomass, mainly in the form of wood, charcoal and agricultural wastes, provides over
78% of primary energy in Mozambique
although “modern” biomass uses for electricity production or transport fuels are at
an early stage. One study claimed that only
6.6% of Mozambique’s 63.5 million ha of
potential arable land was currently “used”
for biofuels (Hankins 2009). Increased
allocation of land for the cultivation of
biomass and biofuels feedstock is a
controversial issue, due to the social and
environmental impacts of land use change.
The expansion of biofuels production, while
technically feasible, will require sensitive
handling to avoid adverse outcomes.
KEY ENERGY STAKEHOLDERS
A wide range of stakeholders was
identified to participate in the workshops
and discussions in order to support the
RRA process. The stakeholders were primarily technical staff drawn from government departments and public sector
agencies, stakeholders from the private
sector, from civil society, development and
cooperation agencies as well as financial
institutions who participated in the workshops, since they all play an important role
in building a renewable energy sector. In
addition, bilateral meetings and interviews
were conducted with key senior officials of
these different institutions. A considerable
number of participants were able to give
their inputs to the Renewables Readiness
Assessment thus building national consensus on renewable energy in the country. A
list and description of these institutions
follows in Section 2.3.
Image 3 and 4: Mozambique: Solar water pumping; Community solar battery chargerRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Council of Ministers
Takes the major decisions related to energy, especially on-grid electricity.
Ministry of Energy (MoE) 
w Sets policy objectives approved by the Council of Ministers.
w Is also mandated to regulate the sector and is therefore formed by three technical
directorates to help accomplish this task:
w The National Directorate of Electrical Energy is the central technical body within the
MoE responsible for the analysis, preparation and elaboration of energy policies, plans
and programmes. It also determines environmental issues and promotes the rational
use of national energy sources with relevance to the installed capacity by encouraging
investment. 
w The National Directorate of New and Renewable Energy is in charge of framing policies
that will stimulate the use of new and renewable energy sources in the country energy
mix.
w The National Directorate of Fuels is in charge of planning oil products needs and
regulating the market. It also plays a role, in coordination with other entities, in the
preparation, development and management of proposals with regards to forest
resources and waste in order to produce energy, while also promoting the
development and use of technologies for sustainable charcoal and biofuels production.
Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG)
Responsible for the country's all-important forestry resources.
Ministry for the Coordination of Environmental Affairs (MICOA)
Plays an important role in documenting and monitoring the effects of both the extraction and end
use of energy resources.
The Inter-ministerial Committee on Biofuels (CIB)
Created to coordinate policy development issues and research needs as well as overall development
potential in the biofuels sector by developing sustainability criteria, development models, legal and
fiscal frameworks and project evaluation. 
National Fund for Rural Electrification (FUNAE)
Is an autonomous government agency responsible for providing access to modern energy services
and implementing off-grid electrification in rural and isolated communities.
Electricidade de Moçambique (EDM)
The state-owned utility responsible for the majority of electricity transmission, generation and
distribution. 
National Electricity Council (CNELEC)
Has an advisory and arbitration role as it leads consultation on regulatory issues and the
performance of EDM. 
Key Energy Stakeholders 
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENTMOZAMBIQUE 
Mozambican Transmission Company (MOTRACO)
Formed by Eskom, South Africa’s power utility, Mozambique’s EDM and the Swaziland Electricity
Board to supply electricity from South Africa to Swaziland and Maputo.
Cahora Bassa Hydroelectric Company (HCB)
Is the privately owned (85 % Mozambique and 15% Portugal ) company responsible for operating
the Cahora Bassa dam. 
Petróleos de Moçambique (PETROMOC)
The state-owned liquid fuels company responsible for the purchasing, transport and distribution of
petroleum products, thereby holding half of the country’s market.
University of Eduard Mondlane (UEM)
Has a renewable energy programme under the Faculty of Science, the focal point being several
academics. UEM has also played an impressive role in studying renewable energy resources and
training a small cadre of professionals and technicians.
National Research Fund (FNI)
Is an institution set up to finance innovative research in the field of science and technology (i.e.
alternative energy sources to firewood) from government levies, with credit from the World Bank for
strategic areas and donors (Finland and Sweden) for innovative research.
Centro de Promoção de Investimentos or Investment Promotion Centre (CPI)
Offers a package of services to assist national and foreign investors in facilitating access to the
incentives offered by the government for establishment of their businesses.
Associação Moçambicana dos Operadores de Microfinanças (AMOMIF)
Is an umbrella organisation of insititutions operating in the microfinance sector that are licensed by
the Bank of Mozambique in credit operations and other financial services.
Instituto Nacional de Normalização e Qualidade (INNOQ)
Is responsible for standards, quality control and certification systems, including some soon-to-be
introduced biofuel standards.
Confederation of Business Associations (CTA)
Aims to contribute to a business environment conducive to private sector development and a strong
associative movement that is participatory, socially responsible and able to influence economic
policies promoting economic competitiveness and quality business.
Donors, NGOs, international cooperation and development organisations
w These include the World Bank, UNIDO, the Belgian Technical Cooperation (BTC),
German International Cooperation (GIZ), Netherlands Development Organization
(SNV), the Finnish, Swedish, Danish and Norwegian embassies.
w All play an important role in either providing credit and loans, grants and technical
cooperation to improve clean energy access.
MOZAMBIQUE POLICY & REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Mozambique’s first major act of reform was
to begin the corporatisation of EDM. In
1995, Decree 28/95 of 17 July defined the
role of EDM and established its bylaws. As
a commercial entity regulated by the law
for state-owned companies (Law 17/91)
with autonomy over its assets, administration and finances, EDM was given a
degree of independence from the MoE
(Ministry of Energy/ERAP Mozambique,
2011). In 1997, Mozambique further reformed the electricity market by adopting the
Electricity Law (Law 21/97, 1 October), which was introduced with the aim of regulating the production, transmission, distribution and commercialisation of electricity.
This law also established the principle that
each activity should be carried out through
concessions and created the advisory body
CNELEC, acting as the regulator, as well 
as Energy Fund (FUNAE), for the promotion of rural electrification through
renewables. 
In theory, the Electricity Law opened up all
areas of electricity production, distribution
and sale to private operators through
concession contracts, issued under the
responsibility of the MoE. However, similar
to the experience of many African countries, so far there has been little involvement
of private sector operators. Following the
Electricity Law, a number of supporting
decrees have subsequently defined the
roles of CNELEC (Decree 25/2000, of 3
October); awarded the concession for the
operation of the transmission network to
EDM (Decree 43/2005, of 29 November);
and established the methodology by which
tariffs are set (Decree 42/2005, of 29
November).
The National Energy Policy adopted in 1998
(Decree 5/98, of 3 March, 1998) sets the
intended direction for the development of
energy in Mozambique. To implement this
policy, the National Energy Sector Strategy
was established by Decree 24/2000 (3
October, 2000) and was revised in 2009 to
reflect changing priorities and actions.
In 2009, the Policy on the Development of
New and Renewable Energy (Resolution
62/2009, 14 October) was launched to
promote greater access to clean energy
services through the use of equitable,
efficient, sustainable and culturally sensitive sources of new and renewable energies. In 2011, the Strategy for New and Renewable Energy Development (EDENR) 2011-
2025 was adopted with the aim of
6 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
ENERGY PLANNING 
IN MOZAMBIQUE
w 1995: Corporitisation of EDM 
(Decree 28/95, 17July).
w 1997: Electricity Law (Law 21/97, 1 October)
adopted; CNELEC and FUNAE created.
w 1998: National Energy Policy (decree 5/98,
of 3 March 1998) adopted.
w 2000: National Energy Sector
Strategy(decree 24/2000, 3 October 2000)
established to implement National Energy
Policy; revised in 2009 to reflect the
changing priorities and actions.
w 2009: Policy on the Development of 
New and Renewable Energy (resolution
62/2009, 14 October) launched.
w 2009: National Policy and Strategy for
Biofuels approved and formed the basis for
the National Programme for Development
of Biofuels (PNDB), the implementing
programme of the Inter-ministerial
Committee on Biofuels (CIB).
w 2011: Strategy for New and Renewable
Energy Development 2011-2025 (EDENR)
adopted.MOZAMBIQUE 
developing national renewable resources
for generating electric power, ensuring that
demand can be met, diversifying the
energy mix, and preserving the environment. This is to be accomplished using
both off-grid and on-grid applications. The
off-grid component is linked to the PARPA
II/III, which considers access to electricity
as a catalyst for poverty alleviation and
economic development in rural Mozambique.
In 2009, the National Policy and Strategy
for Biofuels, which sets out the high priority of the biofuel resource in Mozambique’s economic and energy policy and its
contribution to energy security and economic development, was approved. This strategy is the basis of the National Programme for the Development of Biofuels
(PNDB), which is the implementing programme of the Inter-ministerial Committee
on Biofuels (CIB). The objectives of the
policy are firstly, to promote and use agroenergy resources for energy and food
security; secondly, to encourage socioeconomic development (multiplier effect,
synergies and byproducts); and thirdly, to
address the instability, unpredictability and
volatility of fossil fuel prices in the international market as well as to reduce the
country's dependence on fuel imports and
the burden of their import on the national
economy. The National Policy and Strategy
for Biofuels will be implemented in three
phases. The pilot phase (2012-2015) is
currently being implemented with a fuel
blending mandate of 10% for bioethanol
and 3% for biodiesel. An operational phase
(2016 to 2020) will follow, with 15% bioethanol and 7.5% biodiesel blending and
conclude with an expansion phase (2021-
onwards) of 20% bioethanol and 10% biodiesel blending. This will progressively increase the proportion of biofuel in Mozambique’s domestic liquid fuel mix.
THE ELECTRICITY LAW
Law 21/97, 1 October 1997
regulates the production, transmission,
distribution and commercialisation of
electricity in Mozambique.
SUPPORTING DECREES:
Decree 25/2000, 3 October – 
defined the role of CNELEC.
Decree 43/2005, 29 November –
concession for the operation of the
transmission network to EDM.
NATIONAL POLICY AND
STRATEGY FOR BIOFUELS
fuel blending mandate 
10%
PILOT STAGE (2009-2015)
implemented from
2012-2015 t
t
t
3%
15%
OPERATIONAL PHASE (2015-2021)
implemented from 
2016-2020
7.5%
20%
EXPANSION PHASE 
2021 ONWARDS
10%
Bioethanol (E10 mandate) Biodiesel (B3 mandate)8 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
FINANCING AND INVESTMENT
In Mozambique, the Investment Law (Law
3/93) seeks to promote investment by
establishing a uniform framework for
investments and providing tax incentives
for investors. More precisely the Code of
Fiscal Benefits (Law 4/2009) provides
fiscal benefits such as exemptions and
reductions on value added taxes (VAT),
investment tax credits, corporate income,
and tax deduction to attract investors. The
Investment Promotion Centre (CPI) is responsible for implementing the Investment
Law, although government approval is
needed before any investment project is
taken up.
At the national level, banks are not generally acquainted with the specifics related
to renewable energy projects, resulting in
high risks perception and extreme caution
in granting credit. However, the capacity of
project developers in presenting fully commercial and bankable renewable energy
projects needs to be enhanced as well.
Also, the general financing tenors of 5 to 7
years generally do not match the requirements for renewable energy projects of 10
to 15 years or more. Therefore, concessional
and development aid funding still plays a
dominant role in financing renewables in
Mozambique. There is a need to build
capacity on project development side but
also on the financial institution side.
With regard to off-grid rural electrification,
the combination of internal financial resources from taxes and levies on electrical
energy concessions; taxes related to
exploration, commercial licences, distribution and transmission of petroleum products; taxes on large electricity consumers;
donor funding (World Bank-GEF, NORAD,
and others); and budgetary allocations
from government; constitute the source of
revenue used by FUNAE to implement its
rural electrification mandate. 
At the local level, Community Sustainable
Energy Plans (PCES) are part of the effort
to improve interaction between the state
and civil society and to lay the groundwork
for district-based development planning,
including the allocation of financial resources directly to the district level to support
local plans for the implementation of specific renewable energy projects. The PCES
planning process is intended to identify
particular projects, the actors needed to
take them forward, and sources of
implementation funding.
Micro-finance institutions (MFIs) have become very active in Mozambique ever since
the government took steps to remove
barriers to their establishment. Currently,
only about 20% of the population have
access to formal and informal finances.
MFIs in Mozambique are under the
umbrella of AMOMIF (Associacao MocamFINANCING 
AND INVESTMENT 
Investment Law (Law 3/93) – 
To promote investment and provide tax
incentives.
Code of Fiscal Benefits (Law 4/2009)
For provision of fiscal benefits.
Investment Promotion Centre (CPI).
FUNAE gets its funding from various
internal and external sources.
Community Sustainable Energy 
Plans (PCESs).MOZAMBIQUE 
bicana Dos Operadores de Microfinancias),
established in 2007 to act as the main
interface between MFIs and the Central
Bank of Mozambique (regulator). AMOMIF
is also involved in the Financing Mozambique portal, a public service project
developed by Swiss Capital Partners and
Financial (two consulting companies with
extensive financial experience in Mozambique). The portal aims to bridge the
gap between projects and available
funding by facilitating local entrepreneurs’
access to information regarding alternative
sources of funding and by providing advice
regarding drafting documents and business plans. 
Finally, certain areas of the country have
been designated as special economic
zones under the regulation of the Investment Law (decree 43/2009) due to their
favourable economic conditions. This,
along with the presence of MFIs, could provide a useful testing bed for renewablesbased electricity projects to be developed
on a commercial basis. 
Image 5: Wind Blade Manufacturing, Pemba
Source: www.renewable-world.org40
MOZAMBIQUE IS A LARGE
COUNTRY WITH A WIDELY
DISPERSED, MOSTLY RURAL,
POPULATION. DESPITE
AMBITIOUS GRID EXTENSION
PLANS, LARGE AREAS OF THE
COUNTRY WILL NOT BE
REACHED BY THE
ELECTRICITY GRID IN THE
SHORT TO MEDIUM TERM. THE
COUNTRY HAS A GREAT DEAL
OF POTENTIAL FOR
SUPPLYING ELECTRICITY FOR
OFF-GRID APPLICATIONS,
ESPECIALLY THROUGH
SOLAR PV, SMALL HYDRO
AND BIOMASS WASTE FROM
FOREST AND/OR
AGRICULTURAL WASTE.MOZAMBIQUE 
A. ON-GRID ELECTRICITY
The largest generator in Mozambique is the hydroelectric plant run by
Hidroelectrica de Cahora Bassa (HCB), which is an IPP. HCB has two
shareholders, the governments of Mozambique (85%) and Portugal
(15%). However, Mozambique’s EDM receives only a small share (15%) of
HCB’s total 2 075 MW output, and this provides 90% of the electricity
supplied to the country’s grid. Power from HCB is not connected directly
to the south of the country but instead is exported to South Africa. The
electricity used in Maputo and Matola actually comes from the combined
generation of South Africa (primarily coal) and Mozambique (hydro and
thermal).
Power generated from HCB is therefore distributed as follows: South
Africa (ESKOM), 65%; Zimbabwe (ZESA), 19%; Southern African Power
Pool (SAPP) and Botswana (BPC), less than 1% (HCB, 2012). EDM’s
existing installed capacity is approximately 240 MW of which 109 MW
comes from hydro (81 MW of which is currently available and supplied
to the grid). Grid losses are estimated at 5% for transmission and 20%
for distribution (EDM, 2011). On the generation side, many of the
country’s power plants and related infrastructure are beyond their
economic life-time. Planned expansion of the internal transmission
infrastructure could reduce imports and exports. As an electricity
exporter, Mozambique consumes less electricity than it produces.
Overall, total production is equal to approximately 140% of domestic
consumption.
IV. Market Development 
by SectorRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
The EDM transmission system comprises
three regions (see image 1): 
w The northern region with a 220 kV transmission system covering about 1 000
km from the Songo substation to
Nampula and continuing at 110 kV to
the town of Nacala. A separate 220 kV
(operated at 110 kV) system extends
from Tete to link with the central region
at Chibata. 
w The central region has a 110 kV system
linking the hydroelectric power stations
of Chicamba and Mavuzi with the load
centres within the Beira–Manica
corridor. 
w The southern region comprises a 110 kV
network extending from Maputo to XaiXai, Chokwe and Inhambane, together
with a 275 km single circuit line from
Maputo to the ESKOM system at
Komatipoort in South Africa.
In an effort to facilitate private sector
involvement in electricity generation, transmission and distribution, the proposed
revision of the Electricity Law will require
project developers to apply for concessions
through public tender. Before a tender is
issued, full specifications are drawn up
against which projects compete. This
process limits speculative project development, effectively giving the responsibility for the development of project
specifications to EDM (Ministry of Energy/
ERAP Mozam-bique, 2011). As a result of
this process, a number of projects have
been identified for possible private sector
involvement.
KEY FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
The issue of ensuring that targets are
specified in policy and strategy documents
was raised during the RRA. Targets would
need to be specified, not just in terms of
capacity, but also in terms of the
contribution of different forms of renewable energy to the electricity mix. Strategy
documents currently lack the estimated
cost of implementation and, in some cases,
clear assignment of responsibility for delivery. The current proposal for the reform of
the Electricity Law is seen as an opportunity to clarify the roles of institutional
stakeholders and expand the scope of
Independent Power Producers beyond
Cahora Bassa Electric Company. 
The role of the regulator is still under discussion in Mozambique. Technically,
CNELEC is an advisory body and regulFigure 6:
Electricity 
generated 
from HCB MOZAMBIQUE 
atory authority rests with the MoE.
However, CNELEC is still referred to as “the
regulator”, perhaps highlighting the ambiguity around the organisation’s mandate,
or an indication of differing opinions on its
preferred future role. Electricity reform
should therefore clearly redefine the role of
CNELEC as an independent institution with
secure financial funding in order to allow it
to undertake some of the responsibilities
currently resting with the MoE.
ON-GRID HYDRO
EDM has a long-term strategy for exploiting large hydro opportunities and has
identified transmission infrastructure gaps
that need to be addressed. It has also
identified bilateral and multi-lateral funding for its hydro projects. The planned
CESUL centre-south interconnection will
enable the development of further large
hydro projects. Furthermore, since Mozambique has a good track record of operating
a network with a large hydro project (HCB),
this experience would be useful in
attracting further investment from the
private sector. 
The grid extension being carried out by
EDM up to the district level provides an
opportunity to link in and promote distributed on-grid generation through the
development of small hydro projects. There
are a number of sites for small hydro projects which would require only 5-10 km of
grid extension to allow them to feed power
into the grid. These sites could be prioritised for development in EDM’s master
plan for grid extension. The development
of this plan for new generation and grid
extension should therefore take the hydro
potential into account and plan for grid
connections for these sources.
An additional motivation for developing
distributed small hydro projects is the fact
that there is good technical experience in
the hydro power sector in Mozambique and
entry of private sector could be facilitated
by formulating an attractive tariff as
compared to the average tariff for large
hydro. However, small hydro projects (5-25
MW) near load centres should be prioritised to take advantage of the grid extension and efforts should be made to mobilise funds to support the development.
There is international experience for formulating feed-in tariffs that Mozambique
could benefit from. This situation lends itself to the formulation of an attractive
feed-in tariff to promote small hydro, which
could reflect the positive impact of reduced
transmission losses, and so allow for more
attractive returns on investment for IPPs. A
higher and more attractive tariff for small
hydro, compared to the average tariff for
large hydro, would be offset by the reduction in grid losses if the development of
small hydro projects near load centres were
prioritised. There is international experience for formulating feed-in tariffs that
Mozambique could benefit from.
Mozambique does not currently have a
Grid Code, although the MoE is looking into
ELECTRICIDADE DE
MOÇAMBIQUE
240 MW
Total installed capacity 
109 MW
From hydropower
5%
Grid loss (transmission)
20%
Grid loss (distibution)Mozambique Electricity Grid. 
Figure 8 
Source: EDM
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENTMOZAMBIQUE 
the possibility of introducing one and
tenets of the Electricity Law should give
impetus to its formulation and implementation. The Grid Code needs to be designed to permit the development, maintenance and operation of an efficient and coordinated system for the transmission of
electricity, and to facilitate competition in
the generation and supply of electricity.
However, the Code also needs to allow realtime injection of variable power from wind
and other renewable energy sources, while
ensuring the stability of the power system
as a whole.
The increase in distributed generation from
small hydro IPPs also needs to be
considered. The Grid Code must deal with
the management of power quality and
stability issues arising from injections of
power across the network. An obligation
should also be placed on the grid to allow
access to generation from IPPs.
As a precursor to fully private sector
projects, EDM could take a small equity
stake in small hydro projects in order to
make them more bankable by reinforcing
the credibility of its long-term power purchase agreements (PPA). Incentives could
be used to encourage the transfer of the
technical expertise available within EDM
into separate commercial ventures to develop small hydro projects. New graduates
from universities could also be attracted to
these ventures. This could help to form the
next generation of IPPs.
The Ministry could also work with the
donor group to develop a partial risk guarantee fund with financial institutions in
Mozambique in order to promote lending
to small hydro projects. 
Finally, there is a need to share knowledge
and experience from other countries regarding best practices, knowledge and knowhow. This will build capacity and links with
other international institutions/centres of
excellence in the field of small hydro.
ON-GRID WIND
Wind power in Mozambique is in an early
stage of development. A 300 kW single
turbine had been installed at Praia, Inhambane, and was expected to generate
experience and data on the operation of
wind turbines as well as grid integration.
Mozambique is considered to have a good
wind resource with average wind speeds of
6-7 m/s in some areas. To better evaluate
these resources, FUNAE is conducting a
mapping project, which includes the installation of a number of wind speed measurement stations in Ponta de Ouro, Salamanga, Tofinho and Chicumbaneto produce a wind atlas. This resource mapping
exercise should be used to further refine
the estimates of generation costs and to
inform the policies for the promotion of
wind power. 
The cost of generation from wind turbines
is likely to be higher than alternatives
including hydro. However, geographical
and infrastructural factors may increase the
value of locally generated electricity. The
There is a need to share knowledge 
and experience from other countries
regarding best practices, knowledge
and know-how. This will build capacity
and links with other international
institutions/centres of excellence in 
the field of small hydro.6 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
proposed feed-in tariffs will help provide
clarity to developers and incentivise
projects. They should take into account the
costs of generation from wind, return on
investment and the impact on electricity
prices. 
Presently, EDM is only partially involved
with the pilot wind project. If future
projects have to be implemented through
IPPs, the PPAs would need to be designed
to reflect the non-dispatchable nature of
wind power. Steps should therefore be taken to involve EDM more extensively so
that learning from the pilot projects can be
embedded in future strategies. 
The possibility of funding through carbon
finance mechanisms4 should also be evaluated to understand other sources of project revenue and to improve the bankability
of projects.
B. OFF-GRID APPLICATION
DECENTRALISED ELECTRIFICATION
Mozambique is a large country with a
widely dispersed, mostly rural, population.
Despite ambitious grid extension plans,
large areas of the country will not be
reached by the electricity grid in the shortto medium-term. The country has a great
deal of potential for supplying electricity
for off-grid applications, especially through
solar PV, small hydro and biomass waste
from forest and/or agricultural waste. The
scale of these off-grid systems range from
pico-scale lighting systems for individual
buildings to more substantial systems for
clinics, schools, or community-level minigrids incorporating productive facilities.
FUNAE has the main responsibility for
delivering the rural electrification strategy.
Although FUNAE was originally set up to
finance projects, it has moved increasingly
into project management. FUNAE is now
involved in identifying and tendering for
projects, and in some cases providing operation and maintenance in order to get projects in rural areas off the ground. While
FUNAE is currently the main player, there
is a strong political ambition to create
opportunities for the private sector to provide these rural energy services, so that
they are based on a more sustainable business model.
Rural energy applications are part of the
country’s poverty reduction action plan
(PARP) and the national development
agenda known as Agenda 2025 and they
therefore require strong coordination and
commitment across several government
agencies.
The policy framework under which FUNAE
operates allows it to implement a social
programme alongside its market-based
projects. The social programme focuses on
the provision of renewable energy to
targeted communities. It is a well-funded
programme implemented with funds from
different sources, with international donors
including the World Bank and a selected
number of European countries providing
about 60% of the funding and Mozambique’s government about 40%. FUNAE
has some mini-hydro and wind energy
projects, but rural electrification in Mozambique is being accomplished mainly
through solar PV systems. 
Since Mozambique’s rural population is
highly dispersed, the majority of the PV
systems installed by FUNAE are dec4 Carbon financing is now possible for countries like Mozambique, with high hydro potential but low
emission factor. This is due to the fact that the SAPP regional Emission factor has been approved by 
the CDM Executive Board.MOZAMBIQUE 
entralised mini-grids. When selecting
locations for PV systems, priority is given
to health centres and schools, as well as
water pumping systems to provide potable
water for community and agricultural purposes. Public buildings, police stations and
households are also included in these rural
electrification projects. 
Mozambique’s success in these projects is
partly due to the involvement of the local
communities from a very early stage. The
creation of “Management Committees” has
played a special role in this process. These
committees, made up of representatives
from the communities and the local authorities, guarantee the maintenance and
good performance of the systems, collect
the monthly fees for the energy services,
and protect the panels against theft and
damage. 
FUNAE is also looking into the possibilities
of micro-financing for poor rural communities. This market-based programme
involves the promotion of off-grid energy
technologies through training, marketing
and other promotional activities. The programme is intended to create favourable
conditions for the deployment of off-grid
renewable energy technologies and uses
business loans to finance actual projects,
although the loan may be provided by
central government and cooperation partners, as well as by commercial sources. To
date, however, there have not been significant numbers of commercial rural electrification projects. The implementation of
the well-funded programme-based social
approach, which has provided very lowcost electricity or equipment, may have
created an expectation that the nominal
fees charged were “fair” and that higher
costs through alternative (market-based)
schemes were therefore “unfair”. This may
lead to some communities refusing to
engage with market-based initiatives, preferring to wait for the availability of
programme-based services. It remains to
be seen whether both approaches can
coexist effectively. 
It is estimated that more than 1.0 MW of PV
capacity has been installed in the solar PV
sector, mainly through FUNAE, in remote
sites around the country. PV prices remain
very high in Mozambique due to the fact
that there is no tax exemption or reduced
SOLAR PV
>1 MW
estimated off-grid PV installations 
through FUNAE
5 MWP
Estimated production capacity of planned PV
module manufacturing facility in Maputo
Image 6: Mozambique rural village shop solar 
panel inside Limpopo National Transfrontier Park
Source: www.fredhoogervorst.com8 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
duty for solar equipment. Consequently,
active commercial markets have not yet
developed and there is relatively little private sector activity. FUNAE is planning to
build a PV module manufacturing plant in
Maputo province with a production capacity of 5 MWp per year and modules ranging from 1.0 to 150 Wp. 
Despite ample resources and a large
number of potential sites, Mozambique has
completed only a handful of small and
micro hydro projects. Focusing on the sector and laying down clear guidelines for
allocating capacities can lead to increasing
the deployment of small and micro hydro
projects. The government is now establishing a simplified process by which investors can obtain exclusive rights to develop
concessions less than 15 MW in which
FUNAE plays a role.
It is also worth noting that international
companies have featured in the deployment of solar energy projects in Mozambique. UK-based company Fortune CP is
reported to have won a contract for supervision of the supply and installation of solar
PV systems in Namula, Cabo Delgado and
Niassa. The German company Phaesun is
also reported to be leading a consortium
for the supply and installation of solar PV
for households, small business enterprises
and public institutions.
The use of biomass for decentralised electricity generation is far less widespread
than other technologies. Although bagasse
is used for electricity production by five
sugar companies, with an installed capacity
of 60 MW, this electricity is generated for
captive use and could potentially feed into
the grid. A grid in-feed mechanism will
incentivise producers to invest in more
efficient technology.
THERMAL AND MOTIVE APPLICATIONS
The EDENR strategy includes a number of
specific targets for thermal technologies,
such as the installation of 100 000 solar
water heaters and 5 000 solar refrigerators
over the lifetime of the strategy, which runs
to 2025. To date, approximately 650 solar
fridges have been installed in health
centres across Mozambique. The use of
renewable energy for thermal applications
is still at an early stage. To support the
development of thermal technologies
FUNAE has commissioned a resource mapping exercise and is working with the MoE
to develop plans for a number of solar
thermal demonstration projects. 
FUNAE has not yet implemented a largescale programme using renewable energy
to provide direct motive power. However,
some experience has been developed and
windmills for water pumping have been
installed in Gaza and Inhambane provinces
(FUNAE, 2011). The low speed, operation,
simple construction and designs for motive
power have changed little over the last
hundred years, meaning that local manufacture is a plausible option for many technologies. Capacity-building to provide
access to standard equipment designs is an
area that could be explored. 
650
Solar refrigerators currently 
installed in health centres
100 000
Solar water heaters
(2025 target as per EDENR)
5 000
Solar refrigerators
(2025 target as per EDENR)MOZAMBIQUE 
KEY FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
OFF-GRID APPLICATIONS
During the RRA process, the lack of
detailed regulation for the rural electrification sector was cited as a gap that
required addressing. The institutional
structures and responsibilities for operation
are broadly understood in practice, but are
not clearly defined in policies and strategies. In some cases there may be some
conflict. In particular, the coordination
between FUNAE and EDM over rural
electrification may benefit from clarification. Mozambique currently employs a
system in which FUNAE is the sole body
identifying projects, although in practice
spontaneous project proposals are
accepted.
Potential conflict also exists between
FUNAE’s “market-based” and “programme
-based” approaches. Where well-funded
programme-based approaches have provided very low-cost electricity or equipment, the expectation has been created
that the nominal fees charged were “fair”
and that higher costs through alternative
(market-based) schemes were therefore
“unfair”. This may lead to some communities refusing to engage with marketbased initiatives, preferring to wait for the
availability of programme-based services.
This conflict may also lead to allegations of
favouritism in deciding where to target
programme-funded schemes.
FUNAE has a successful record of
implementing off-grid projects, and it is
expected that in the short term continued
financial resources will be available to
continue this work. In the longer term,
FUNAE’s ability to deliver rural electrification on a much larger scale will be
limited by human and financial resources.
A strategic approach that will create an
institutional structure which can effectively
engage with and promote the role of the
private sector is a prerequisite for FUNAE
to expand its operations. 
FUNAE could also consider proactively
supporting a business-led approach
whereby private equipment suppliers and
distributors can enter the market in
partnership with micro-finance institutions,
where appropriate. Enabling independent
generators or “electricity as a service” enterprises to operate would also require the
laying down of appropriate regulations and
building the capacity of the regulator or
decentralised set-up to simplify the process for tariff-setting and similar functions.
Existing plans to establish local assembly
of solar modules is a positive development,
which could help Mozambique, develop as
a supplier to its regional neighbours. This
would also provide economies of scale and
help bring costs down. Efforts need to
focus on enabling the private sector to
catalyse local demand for their products
and establish supply chains for replacements and spare parts. This would enable
locally produced plant to compete better
against cheaper imports.
Where available business models are not
financially viable, there are a range of
mechanisms that can be employed to
improve project economics. For example,
concessions have been used whereby a
single entity is given temporary geographical exclusivity for a region following
a competitive tender. This approach can
help reduce the cost of sales and
aggregate demand.
Agricultural residues could provide a lowcost fuel for power generation in rural areas
and the RRA process identified some keyRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
areas where biomass could play a role in
off-grid electricity generation. Potential
biomass sources include bagasse, coconut
waste, cashew waste and municipal waste.
A biomass strategy is being developed to
support further development of this
resource and should be ready shortly.
Another important issue that emerged
during the RRA process was the need for
specific regulation and standards for
thermal systems. It was suggested that
further consultation should be pursued
with a number of bodies to support a
framework for the development of
renewable energy technologies for thermal
applications. These bodies include the
Ministries of Energy, Public Works and
Housing as well as local administrations;
FUNAE; the Technical Council of Energy
(CTA), a lobby for policy reform and a
mechanism for public-private dialogue; CPI
(in charge of investment promotion in
Mozambique); UEM (Eduardo Mondlane
University); and international partners.
C. BIOFUELS FOR TRANSPORT
Mozambique began investigating the potential of biofuels about a decade ago. Since
there is no domestic capacity for refining
petroleum products and almost all fuels
have to be imported, the government encouraged farmers to grow energy crops in
order to promote agricultural development, increase employment and income
generation in rural areas, reduce dependence on oil imports (improved energy
security), and reduce the country’s vulnerability to unstable and volatile oil prices in
the international market. 
Mozambique’s approach to implementing
biofuels production is based on encouraging cross-sectorial cooperation through
the strengthening of an inter-institutional
framework (comprising the Ministry of
Energy, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of
Industry and Commerce, Ministry of Science and Technologies, Ministry for the
Coordination of Environmental Affairs, Investment Promotion Centre, NGOs, banks,
universities and civil society); stimulating
private sector involvement notably through
public-private partnerships; and reinforcing
cooperation with development partners
including South-South and North-South
partnerships. The country aims to develop
liquid biofuels for transport in a sustainable
way by respecting the following principles:
Transparency; Social and environmental
soundness; Incremental implementation;
Fiscal sustainability; and Innovation.
Mozambique has also engaged in resource
mapping and zoning studies to identify
land, water, climate and other relevant
conditions for sustainable biofuels production. Land mapping began with a
national land survey completed in 2008
(scale 1:1 000 000), followed by a second
survey in 2009 (scale 1: 250 000), which
were used to identify opportunities for new
large-scale projects on 7 million ha. As a
result of these studies, the government of
Mozambique has officially received 17
biofuel-related proposals in nine out of 10
provinces, including five bioethanol projects, 12 biodiesel projects and other prop17
Proposals for biofuels-related projects 
in 9 out of 10 provinces
5
Bioethanol projects
12
Biodiesel projectsMOZAMBIQUE 
osals as expressions of interest. To further
stimulate development of the sector, the
government has set aside more than 
USD 700 million to fund biofuel research,
production and promotion, and has allocated 3.5 million ha of land for the
purposes of biofuels.
In 2011, several documents were approved
by the government, including the regulation of biofuels, their blending sustainability criteria, and standards and specification developed by the National Institute
for Normalization and Quality (INNOQ).
BIODIESEL
There are a large number of potential
feedstocks for biodiesel production in
Mozambique including coconut, sunflower,
castor seed, jatropha, soy and African
palm. However, the main crops explicitly
stated in the biofuels policy for biodiesel
production are jatropha and coconut.
Currently, diesel accounts for 80% of national transport fuel consumption and therefore constitutes the largest market segment for liquid fuels. Diesel consumption is
predicted to grow, thereby presenting an
opportunity for the expansion of biodiesel
production for the domestic market. Although jatropha-based biodiesel production
costs are estimated to be lower than the
price of imported diesel, this is not the case
for coconut oil, which competes in different
markets for food and cosmetic use where
commodity prices are significantly higher
than those for biodiesel feedstock. In
addition, diesel prices are controlled by the
government and there are currently no
subsidies for biodiesel production. 
Several companies are currently operating
biodiesel projects in Mozambique. These
include ESV Bio-Africa, which has a concession of 11 000 ha (including 5 000 ha
planted with jatropha), and Enerterra,
which operates a jatropha project aimed to
eventually cover 15 000 ha. 
Ecomoz is another project which has been
involved in biodiesel production since 2007
by Petromoc. However, challenges have
been faced by biodiesel producers due to
problems with adequate feedstock availability. 
BIOETHANOL
Mozambique’s status as a sugar-producing
nation and the presence of an established
infrastructure for sugarcane cultivation and
processing makes it likely that, if clear
market signals were given, the sugar
industry could respond positively to support domestic production of bioethanol. An
increase in the production of sugarcane
and the diversion of feedstock to supply
the bioethanol industry would be possible.
Mozambique is currently developing links
with established international players in
bioethanol production, notably Petrobras
of Brazil.
Domestic bioethanol production could be
further increased using molasses from
existing sugar production. This material is
currently disposed of as waste or used in
animal feed production. The amount of
molasses feedstock currently available
could be used to produce enough bioethanol to meet the proposed 10% blending requirement5. Sweet sorghum has been
identified as another potential bio-ethanol
feedstock.
Two bioethanol projects have been
formally approved since the end of 2006.
5 Mozambique has implemented a fuel-blending mandate, which phases in bioethanol to 10% by
2012–2015, 15% from 2016–2020, and 20% from 2021. For diesel, the blending is 3%, 7.5% and 10% over
these timeframes. RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
The first, a 30 000 ha concession of which
22 500 ha was dedicated to growing
sugarcane for ethanol in Gaza province,
was operated by PROCANA. Due to financial issues the project had to be stopped
in 2011 and the government has since been
in negotiations with a new player. The
second one is being developed by Mozambique Principle Energy and has a concession area of 23 000 ha of which 18 000 ha
is for sugarcane cultivation in Manica
province. The project focuses on the conversion of up to 2.5 megatons of sugarcane
to 65 million gallons of ethanol and about
13 MW of installed electrical power from
cogeneration.
KEY FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
The current biofuels policy and criteria for
sustainability balance the interests of
export-led growth with those of rural
communities so that biofuels can be
developed in the national best interest of
Mozambique. In the long term, Mozambique needs to take a strategic decision on
whether to become a major exporter of
biofuels, taking into account the potential
risks and benefits of such a strategy.
Although the rules regarding exports of
biofuels are laid out in the National Policy
and Strategy for Biofuels, this document
will need to be clarified when it is next
reviewed (it currently covers the period
2009-2015).
Creating a strong and competitive biofuels
industry will lead to financial benefits for
the country, and help fulfill its strategy to
mitigate exposure to international oil price
risk. But in order to encourage biofuels
investment, more certainty is required regarding the ability of biofuel producers to
export their products. There needs to be a
dynamic mechanism for allocating the
obligation to supply into the domestic market to create a level playing field between
all suppliers (existing and new entrants).
This mechanism needs to create a
transparent price for suppliers into the
national market to give greater price
visibility for investment. Additionally, operational procedures for transport, storage,
blending and distribution of biofuels should be established, with the aim of minimising logistics costs.
Finally, there also seems to be a definite
need for technical and legal capacitybuilding especially in the Ministries of Agriculture and Energy and in the agency Petromoc. The necessity of building institutions
with a practical understanding of biofuels,
the limitations and constraints of the
sector, would enable effective policymaking.MOZAMBIQUE 
Image 7: Solar Energy Installation in Mozambique
Source: www.ericsson.com/res/thecompany/images/press/photos/millennium_villagesRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
R The cost of generation from wind turbines is likely to be higher 
than alternatives including hydro. However, geographical and
infrastructural benefits from distributed generation may increase 
the value of locally generated electricity. The resource mapping
exercise should be used to further refine the estimates of generation
costs and to inform the policies for the promotion of wind power.
R The outputs of the resource mapping exercise and any benefits from
distributed generation should be reviewed to determine if the costs of
generation from wind energy projects are acceptable. The outcome
of this exercise should be to set the priority for developing further
policy in support of wind energy.
Evaluate the cost of
energy generation 
from wind energy
in Mozambique
R Efforts should be made to take advantage of the grid extension
ongoing by EDM, so as to mobilise funds to support the
development of small hydro projects along the grid through
distributed generation closer to consumption which could also free
up additional electricity for export and/or use within the country. 
R Reducing the uncertainty of the project revenue streams and
increasing the availability of project finance would help to promote
economically sustainable projects. The following measures should 
be employed to improve project bankability:
R EDM could take a small equity stake in small hydro projects 
to reinforce the credibility of its long-term power purchase
agreement (PPA).
R The Ministry could work with the donor group to develop a partial
risk-guarantee fund with financial institutions in Mozambique to
promote lending to small hydro projects.
R Develop a system of feed-in tariffs to provide long-term power
purchase agreements, access to the grid and attractive return on
investment.
R Consult with stakeholders to design a simpler process for
environmental impact assessment (EIA) for small run of the river
hydro plants.
Evaluate the cost of
energy generation 
from wind energy
in Mozambique
The following schematic identifies the recommended actions from the RRA process. They are not
given in any order of priority, and the list of actions from a rapid assessment is unlikely to be
exhaustive. The detailed list of actions can be found in Annex.
IV. Recom mended Actions
Develop a system of
feed-in tariffs for
electricity generated
from RE
R Will help give clarity to developers and incentivise 
independent power producers (IPPs).
R The design of the tariff should take into account the costs of
generation, return on investment, impact on electricity prices 
and the costs of the support.
R The FiTs could reflect the positive impact of reduced 
transmission losses. 
R There is international experience for formulating feed-in tariffs 
from which Mozambique could benefit. Further dialogue with 
IRENA could explore the possibility of support for the development
of feed-in tariffs. 
R The prerequisite legal powers and for the introduction of feed-in
tariffs should be evaluated to identify changes and legislation that
would need to be drafted to enact such a scheme and map the
legislative timetable for introductionMOZAMBIQUE 
R The grid extension carried out by EDM up to the district level
provides an opportunity to link in and promote distributed on-grid
generation through the development of small hydro projects. There
are a number of sites for small hydro projects, which would require
up to only 5–10 km of grid extension to allow them to inject power
into the grid. These sites could be prioritised for developed in EDM’s
master plan for grid extension.
R The development of EDM’s master plan for new generation and grid
extension should take into account this potential and the need to
plan for grid connections for these sources. A study to assess the
impact of promoting distributed hydro power generation with small
hydro plants on distribution losses would provide further impetus to
the sector. 
Include potential sites 
for hydroelectricity
projects in grid 
extension planning 
R Introduce a role for FUNAE to engage with the private sector
through creation of a private sector liaison officer post.
R Establishment of a private sector forum to discuss possible revisions
to policies and regulations. 
R Expansion of tender process to include management, design and
maintenance activities previously undertaken by FUNAE.
R Provide clear policy and implementation guidelines by which private
sector and community-led projects can apply for funds through
FUNAE. 
R Proactively encourage allow a business-led approach to emerge by
encouraging private equipment suppliers and distributors to enter
the market in partnership with micro-finance institutions where
appropriate.
R Consider the use of a concession-based system. 
Encourage private sector
involvement in rural
electrification and
decentralised energy
R Clear indications of local market size and process for allocating
obligations for projects to supply the local market.
R Balance sustainability criteria with land availability to identify
available land for biofuels production. 
R Develop a legislative and regulatory timetable to provide biofuels
specification standards, compatible with international standards.
Promote development 
of sustainable biofuel
projects 
R The biofuels strategy currently requires domestic markets to be
satisfied first before companies can export. Further clarification is
required regarding how the obligation to supply the local market will
be allocated. There needs to be a dynamic mechanism for allocating
the obligation to supply into the domestic market to create a level
playing field between all suppliers (existing and new entrants). This
mechanism needs to create a transparent price for suppliers into the
national market to give greater price visibility for investment
Clarify the requirements
for biofuels producers 
to supply biofuels to 
the local market
It should also be noted that these recommendations will become more effective provided that the
on-going sector reform process in Mozambique, which will amongst other measures make the tariff
more cost reflective, is successfully completed6 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
TO SUPPORT MOZAMBIQUE’S GROWING SOLAR MARKET; 
FUNAE HAS BEEN INSTRUMENTAL IN DEVELOPING 
PLANS TO CONSTRUCT A SOLAR MODULE
MANUFAC-TURING PLANT TO ASSEMBLE MODULES 
FOR SALE IN MOZAMBIQUE AND NEIGH-BOURING
COUNTRIES. THIS WILL CREATE EMPLOYMENT AND
COULD BE THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS ESTABLISHING 
A DOMESTIC SOLAR MANUFACTURING SECTOR.
RMOZAMBIQUE 
Identified Examples of Good Practice
GOOD PRACTICE DEMONSTRATION 1: 
FUNAE AND ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY
FUNAE aims to provide access to electricity in schools, clinics and
villages using PV, wind and mini-hydro systems. To date, the electrification of 115 villages, 298 schools and 300 clinics has been successfully
completed. 
Solar power has been used in these projects at a wide range of scales,
ranging from just a few watts to tens of kilowatts. The successful
deployment and demonstration of solar energy technologies have led
to an upsurge in awareness and interest in their potential for rural
electrification. In particular, the deployment of pico-scale solar energy
systems has led to requests for kits to be sold on a commercial basis,
providing income generation opportunities in the private sector. 
To support Mozambique’s growing solar market; FUNAE has been
instrumental in developing plans to construct a solar module manufacturing plant to assemble modules for sale in Mozambique and neighbouring countries. This will create employment and could be the first
step towards establishing a domestic solar manufacturing sector.
FUNAE continues to deliver sample projects and provide a range of
examples of solar installations. Plans for 2012 include the electrification
of a further 350 schools, 350 health clinics and 30 villages. In addition,
three large solar projects, in the range of 400 to 500 kW – a size never
before insta-lled in Mozambique – are planned in Niassa province. 
V. Best Practices and 
Future Cooperation8 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Alongside its technology deployment,
FUNAE has developed operations and maintenance capacity through both commercial arrangements and training community representatives. In 2008, FUNAE
initiated a programme to train solar energy
technicians in all provinces of the country.
GOOD PRACTICE DEMONSTRATION 2: 
EDUARDO MONDLANE UNIVERSITY
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAMMES
In Mozambique, the deployment of renewable energy is motivated by the global level
challenges of dwindling fossil fuel reserves
and global climate change, and by countryspecific problems related to excessive consumption of biomass in its primary form
accompanied by very low levels of
electrification. These issues can be addressed by adopting renewable energy and
increased energy efficiency, but this
requires that people be educated in these
technologies. Mozambique is therefore supporting the development of sustainable
energy through university education in the
areas of science and engineering, as well as
vocational training schemes for technicians.
Renewable energy studies have been
included in the syllabi of a number of
graduate level courses at Eduardo
Mondlane University’s Faculty of Science
and Faculty of Engineering. This has helped
provide expertise to many of the energyrelated government departments and
agencies.
To further increase Mozambique’s capacity
to support the development of internal
energy resources, a PhD programme in
Energy Science and Technology has also
been established at Eduardo Mondlane
University. The programme focuses on renewable energy and aims to create institutional capacity for research and training
in socio-economic fields related to energy.
A Master’s programme in the field of
Science and Technology is also planned for
the second semester of 2012. All of these
programmes benefit from and reinforce the
university’s research capacity in renewable
energy, which dates back to the early
1990s.
This commitment to education and
research in the development and application of energy technology is an example
of good practice and will help provide the
human capital needed to meet the energy
challenges of the future.
FUTURE COOPERATION
This RRA pilot study in Mozambique has
served two purposes. Firstly, it has identified a number of actions – many of which
can be undertaken in the short term – to
improve the country’s readiness for
renewable energy deployment. Bilateral
and multi-lateral institutions have a crucial
role to play in supporting the implementation of these actions. Secondly, the
pilot study has provided valuable inputs
into the development of the RRA methodology and process, and IRENA has
expressed its gratitudefor these inputs. 
This report can serve as a basis for the
development of international cooperation
on country-level and regional-level programmes. At the country level, the report
opens up the possibility of piloting a
multilateral initiative to support feed-in
tariffs to promote renewable energy. At the
regional level, IRENA could support the
deployment of renewables by building a
network of countries, resource people andMOZAMBIQUE 
institutions engaged in project development. This would create a much-needed
platform for sharing experience and also
enable countries to build their knowledge
base.
In the next phase of the RRA project, the
improved methodology and process will be
rolled out to a number of other SADC
countries through a regional workshop
session. It is very much hoped that
Mozambique will be able to continue its
leading role in the RRA project by supporting to this roll out and allowing other
countries to benefit from its experience.6
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
CNELEC, (Conselho Nacional de Electricidade) 2012. Bem-Vindoao CNELEC. Available at:
http://www.cnelec.org.mz/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=49&Itemid=53
[Accessed March 7, 2012].
Mozambique Advisory Committee, 2003. Agenda 2025 visiona and strategy of a nation.Maputo,
Mozambique
DBSA ( Development Bank of Southern Africa)., 2010. The role of DFI's in Energy Sector
Development in Southern Africa. Presented to the ASADI conference. 
EDM ( Electricidad de Mocambique), 2011. Stastitical Summary. www.edm.co.moz.
FUNAE (Fundo de Energia), 2011. Annual Report. www.funae.co.moz
HCB, Commercial Relations / Clients / Home - HCB. 
Available at: http://www.hcb.co.mz/eng/Clients/Commercial-Relations [Accessed March 7, 2012].
Hankins, M., 2009.A Renewable Energy Plan for Mozambique. 
Available at:
http://www.internationalrivers.org/files/Clean%20Energy%20for%20MZ%2030_9_09.pdf [Accessed
March 7, 2012].
IEA, 2009. IEA Energy Statistics - Energy Balances for Mozambique. Available at:
http://www.iea.org/stats/balancetable.asp?COUNTRY_CODE=MZ [Accessed March 7, 2012].
IEA, 2011a. Total primary energy supply: Mozambique. Available at:
http://www.iea.org/stats/pdf_graphs/MZTPES.pdf [Accessed March 7, 2012].
IEA, 2011b. World Energy Outlook: Access to Electricity. Available at:
http://www.iea.org/weo/electricity.asp [Accessed March 7, 2012].
IRENA, 2012.Mozambique RRA Preliminary Findings. Available at:
http://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/RRA_Mozambique_English.pdf [Accessed
March 8, 2012].
VI. References 
and BibliographyMOZAMBIQUE 6
Menezes, M., 2011. Power Point Presentation. FUNAE Fundo de Energia
Ministry of Energy, 2011. Electricity Reform Access programme Mozambique
SADC ( Southern African Development Community), 2011. SADC Energy Thematic Group Bulletin.
Issue No 6, April 2011.
SADC, 2010.SADC Regional Energy Access Strategy and Action Plan. SADC Energy Programme.
SADC, 2009. SADC Infrastructure Development Status Report for Council and Summit. 
SAPP ( Southern African Power Pool), 2012. Annual Report.6
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Image 8: Sailboat off the Mozambique Coast
http://magicalmozambique.comMOZAMBIQUE 6
VII. Annex 
Actions identified to scale up renewables 
deployment in the short to medium term
The short- and medium-term actions suggested by the RRA process, originally
published in the Mozambique preliminary report (IRENA, 2012), are presented
below. The actions are presented in the exact form as they appear in the
preliminary report. This is because the wording of the actions were subject to
discussion and debate, and so the actions listed in this form are judged to best
represent the views of those involved in the process. The actions are referred
to throughout the previous sections of this document. This section provides
each action in the order referenced in the report, together with a description
of the action, a list of key actors required for its implementation, a proposed
timing for completion of the action, and some key elements deemed to be
necessary for its successful completion.6
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Action 1
Develop a system of feed-in tariffs for electricity 
generated by RE technologies
Resource-Service pair(s) On-grid electricity, wind, hydro and biomass resources.
Description A number of tax incentives currently exist to support socially
beneficial investments (Code of Fiscal Benefits, Law 4/2009). To
support them, a system of feed-in tariffs could be developed to
promote small hydro, wind and biomass co-generation for
grid-connected electricity generation.
R The proposed feed-in tariffs would help give clarity to 
developers and incentivise independent power producers 
(IPPs). The design of the tariff should take into account the 
costs of generation, return on investment, impact on electricity 
prices and the costs of the support.
R The tariff could reflect the positive impact of reduced 
transmission losses.
R There is international experience for formulating feed-in tariffs 
from which Mozambique could benefit. Further dialogue with 
IRENA could explore the possibility of support for the 
development of feed-in tariffs.
R The pre-requisite legal powers for the introduction of feed-in 
tariffs should be evaluated to identify changes and legislation 
that would need to be drafted to enact such a scheme and 
map the legislative timetable for introduction.
Actors The Ministry of Energy (National Directorate for New and
Renewable Energy and National Directorate for Electrical Energy),
Ministry of Finance and other potential investors (private
companies, utilities and commercial banks), EDM, CNELEC, IRENA.MOZAMBIQUE 6
Timing 18 months.
Keys for success Publish a draft proposal for feed-in tariff scheme for 
key technologies.
R Conduct a legislative review on the introduction of 
feed-in tariffs.
R Conduct a review of international experience relevant 
to the conditions in Mozambique.
Action 2
Evaluate the cost of energy generation 
from wind energy in Mozambique
Resource-Service pair(s) On-grid electricity, wind energy.
Description Wind power in Mozambique is at an early stage of development. 
A 300 kW single turbine has been installed at Praia, Inhambane.
Mozambique is considered to have a good wind resource along its
coastline and in the highlands, with average wind speeds close to
6–7 metres per second in some areas. A study is underway to map
the wind resource across the country in more depth and produce a
renewable energy resource atlas by 2013. To support this process, a
number of wind monitoring stations are currently being installed at
selected locations. 
R The cost of generation from wind turbines is likely to be higher 
than alternative technologies, including hydro. However, 
geographical and infrastructural benefits from distributed 
generation may increase the value of locally generated 
electricity. The resource mapping exercise should be used to 
further refine estimates of generation costs and to inform 
policies for the promotion of wind power.
R The outputs of the resource mapping exercise and any benefits
from distributed generation should be reviewed to determine if
the costs of generation from wind energy projects are 
acceptable. The outcome of this exercise should be to set the 
priority for developing further policy in support of wind energy.66 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Actors National Directorate for New and Renewable Energy, 
National Directorate for Electrical Energy, FUNAE, EDM, 
resource mapping companies.
Timing 18 months.
Keys for success An objective review of the costs and benefits of electricity
generated from wind energy.
Action 3
Support the development of large- and 
small-scale hydroelectricity projects
Resource-Service pair(s) On-grid electricity, hydro resources.
Description Hydro is an important and significant resource for Mozambique.
There is potential for large (greater than 25 MW) and small (5–25
MW) generation. Large hydro opportunities are nationally
significant projects developed on a case-by-case basis and are
discussed directly with the group of multilateral and bilateral
funding agencies. Further efforts should also be made to take
advantage of on-going grid extension by EDM, in order to mobilise
funds to support the development of small hydro projects along
the grid, as these could offer significant reductions in grid losses
(currently at~25%) through providing distributed generation closer
to consumption, and could also free up additional electricity for
export and/or use within the country. 
R The main barriers to the development of small hydro projects 
in Mozambique centre around the lack of a framework to 
support independent power producers. Reducing the 
uncertainty of project revenue streams and increasing the 
availability of project finance would help promote 
economically sustainable projects. The following measures 
should be employed to improve project bankability:
R EDM could take a small equity stake in small hydro 
projects to reinforce the credibility of its long-term 
power purchase agreement (PPA).MOZAMBIQUE 6
R The Ministry of Energy could work with the donor group 
to develop a partial risk guarantee fund with financial 
institutions in Mozambique to promote lending to small 
hydro projects.
R Develop a system of feed-in tariffs to provide long-term 
PPAs, access to the grid, and attractive returns on 
investment.
R Consult with stakeholders to design a simpler process 
for environmental impact assessments (EIAs) for 
small run-of-the-river hydro plants.
Actors The Ministry of Energy (National Directorate for New and
Renewable Energy and National Directorate for Electrical Energy),
donors and other potential investors (private companies, utilities
and commercial banks), EDM, National Electricity Advisory Council
of Mozambique (Concelho Nacional de Electricidade, or CNELEC).
Timing Take one project to contract signature within 12 months.
Keys for success Create mandate for EDM to issue long-term PPAs and agree on
standard terms for acquiring project equity.
R Increase capacity within EDM for working in partnership 
with private sector actors to deliver successful projects.
R Work in partnership with other actors to address 
financing risks.
Action 4
Include potential sites for hydroelectricity 
projects in grid extension planning
Resource-Service pair(s) On-grid electricity, hydro resources.
Description The grid extension being carried out by EDM up to the district level
provides an opportunity to link in and promote distributed on-grid
generation through the development of small hydro projects. There
are a number of sites for small hydro projects, which would require
up to only 5–10 km of grid extension to allow those projects to68 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
inject power into the grid. These sites could be prioritised 
and included in the EDM’s master plan for grid extension.
The development of EDM’s master plan for new generation and
grid extension should take into account this potential and the need
to plan for grid connections for these sources. A study to assess the
impact on distribution losses of promoting distributed hydropower
generation using small hydro plants would provide further impetus
to the sector.
Actors EDM, CNELEC, project developers.
Timing 12 months.
Keys for success Maintain registry of potential projects.
R Place obligations on EDM to consider proximity to 
potential projects in master planning exercises.
R Complete EIA for small hydro plants to create a shelf of 
projects for IPPs.
Action 5
Encourage private sector involvement in 
rural electrification and decentralised energy
Resource-Service pair(s) Off-grid electricity, all resources.
Description Mozambique is a large country with a widely dispersed, mostly
rural, population. Despite ambitious grid extension plans, large
areas of the country will not be reached by the electricity grid in 
the short to medium term. Mozambique has a great deal of
potential for supplying electricity for off-grid applications,
especially through solar PV, small hydro and biomass 
(including forest/agricultural waste). 
FUNAE is involved in identifying and tendering for projects, and in
some cases,for their operation and maintenance. Although FUNAE
is currently the main player, there is a strong political ambition to
create opportunities for the private sector to provide these rural
energy services. These would be based on business models, which
could then be scaled up at lower cost to the state. MOZAMBIQUE 6
Opportunities exist to encourage the private sector to supply
equipment and finance. To promote private sector involvement 
in the rural electrification and decentralised energy sector the
following points could be considered:
R Introduce a role for FUNAE to engage with the private 
sector by creating a private sector liaison officer post.
R Establish a private sector forum to discuss possible 
revisions to policies and regulations.
R Expand the tender process to include those 
management, design and maintenance activities 
previously undertaken by FUNAE.
R Provide a clear policy and implementation guidelines 
by which private sector and community-led projects 
can apply for funds through FUNAE. 
R Proactively encourage a business-led approach to 
emerge by inviting private equipment suppliers and 
distributors to enter the market in partnership with 
microfinance institutions where appropriate.
R Consider the use of a concession-based system.
Actors The Ministry of Energy (National Directorate for New and
Renewable Energy), FUNAE, installers and suppliers of systems. 
Timing 12–18 months.
Keys for success Engagement of FUNAE and the private sector;willingness for
collaboration between the two.
R Capacity-building in the private sector.RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Action 6
Scaling up deployment of rural electrification 
and decentralised energy
Resource-Service pair(s) Off-grid electricity, all resources.
Description FUNAE has the main responsibility for delivering the rural
electrification strategy. Although FUNAE was originally set up 
to finance projects, it has increasingly moved into project
management. FUNAE is involved in identifying and tendering for
projects, and in some cases, their operation and maintenance. 
FUNAE is currently in the process of implementing a 5 MW solar
module manufacturing facility.
FUNAE has a successful record in implementing off-grid projects,
and in the short term needs continued financial resources to
continue this work. In the longer term, a more strategic approach
will be required, as FUNAE’s ability to deliver rural electrification 
on a much wider scale will ultimately be limited by human and
financial resources. A review of the approach could consider the
following:
R Areas of FUNAE’s scope that could be delivered by 
the private sector.
R Scaling up alternative models for deployment by which service
charges could provide a long-term income source to support 
FUNAE’s future projects.
R Assessment of progress against targets for 
electrification and decentralised energy, to highlight 
areas where additional action is needed.
R Review import duties charged on renewable 
technologiesand others (notably diesel generating 
sets) to ensure that cleaner solutions are not being 
penalised; consider favouring renewable technologies 
over fossil fuel-based ones.MOZAMBIQUE 
Actors The Ministry of Energy, National Directorate for New and
Renewable Energy, FUNAE, representatives of civil society,
community associations, Ministry of Finance.
Timing 12 months.
Keys for success Strategic plan for FUNAE to meet policy objectives and promote
private sector growth.
R Engagement of local project developers and 
equipment manufacturers.
R Outreach and engagement with local communities.
R Discussions and identification of resources from 
state budgets.
Action 7
Promote development of sustainable biofuel projects
Resource-Service pair(s) Biofuels for transport, bioenergy resources.
Description Biofuel production in Mozambique centres on investment by
mainly foreign-owned companies in land and equipment for the
cultivation and processing of biofuels. The main factors influencing
the success of attracting investors in Mozambique for the
production of biofuels are the availability and cost of suitable land,
the perceived global and local biofuels price risk, and the stability
and transparency of the regulatory environment. 
The current biofuels policy and criteria for sustainability balance the
interests of export-led growth with those of local consumers so
that biofuels can be developed in the national best interest of
Mozambique. In the long term, Mozambique needs to take a
strategic decision on whether to become a major exporter of
biofuels, taking account of the potential risks and benefits of such a
strategy.RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
In the short and mediumterm the following actions could be
employed:
R Clear indications of local market size and process for 
allocating obligations for projects to supply the local 
market.
R Balance sustainability criteria with land availability 
to identify available land for biofuels production.
R Develop legislative and regulatory timetables to provide 
biofuels specification standards compatible with 
international standards.
Actors The Ministry of Energy (National Directorate for New and
Renewable Energy and National Directorate for Fuels). 
Timing 12 months.
Keys for success Availability of land, engagement with local communities and with
investors.
Action 8
Clarify the requirements for biofuels producers 
to supply biofuels to the local market
Resource-Service pair(s) Biofuels for transport, bioenergy resources.
Description Mozambique is currently entirely dependent on imports for its
transport fuel, which is an incentive to develop domestic sources of
supply to reduce both costs and exposure to price volatility. The
country has implemented a fuel-blending mandate, which phases
in bioethanol to 10% by 2012–2015, 15% from 2016–2020, and 20%
from 2021. For diesel, the blending is 3%, 7.5% and 10% over these
timeframes. There is currently no agreed pricing mechanism on
how much will be paid for biofuels to satisfy this blending
requirement.
The biofuels strategy currently requires domestic markets to be
satisfied before companies can export. Further clarification is
required regarding how this obligation will be allocated. ThereMOZAMBIQUE 
needs to be a dynamic mechanism for allocating the obligation to
supply the domestic market to create a level playing field between
all suppliers (existing and new entrants). This mechanism should
create a transparent price for suppliers into the national market to
give greater price visibility for investment.
Actors The Ministry of Energy (National Directorate for New and
Renewable Energy and National Directorate for Fuels), Ministry of
Agriculture, biofuel producers.
Timing Q2 2012.
Keys for success Clear published guidance for investors regarding the proportion of
production required to meet local demand, and clear pricing
formulae.THIS REPORT CAN SERVE AS A BASIS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
OF INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION ON COUNTRY-LEVEL AND
REGIONAL-LEVEL PROGRAMMES. AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL,
THE REPORT OPENS UP THE POSSIBILITY OF PILOTING A
MULTILATERAL INITIATIVE TO SUPPORT FEED-IN TARIFFS TO
PROMOTE RENEWABLE ENERGY. AT THE REGIONAL LEVEL,
IRENA COULD SUPPORT THE DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLES
BY BUILDING A NETWORK OF COUNTRIES, RESOURCE PEOPLE
AND INSTITUTIONS ENGAGED IN PROJECT DEVELOPMENTInternational Renewable Energy Agency
C67 Office Building
Khalidiyah [32nd] Street
PO Box 236, Abu Dhabi
United Arab Emirates
www.irena.org
Copyright 2012