File Name: MRT-CPD-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Mauritania
Country Code: MRT
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 22-26 January 2018
Start Year: 2018
End Year: 2022
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
20 November 2017
Original: English
1720601X (E) 201217
First regular session 2018
22-26 January 2018, New York
Item 2 of the provisional agenda 
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Mauritania (2018-2022)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. Programme rationale ..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management .................................................................................... 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Mauritania (2018-2022).................. ………………………… 9I. Programme rationale
1. After being appointed as a lower middle-income country in 2011, Mauritania grew
economically from 2012 to 2016 by an average of 5 per cent,1and the poverty rate declined from 
42 per cent in 2008 to 31 per cent in 2014.
2 While progress is commendable, spatial disparities and 
gender inequalities persist, especially in terms of employment, professional training, political 
decision-making, and access to capital and basic services. The poorest regions (Guidimakha, 
Tagant, Assaba, and Brakna) have a poverty rate greater than 40 per cent, while other regions—
such as Gorgol, Hodh El Gharbi, Trarza, and Adrar—have high rates of poverty. Unemployment 
affects mostly women and young people (19 per cent for women, and 21 per cent for young people
aged 14 to 34)
2 while the inequality index was 0.34 in 2014.2 The agriculture and fishery sectors,
which employ most of the workforce in rural areas, have low rates of production and remain 
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. According to the UNDP 2016 Human Development 
Report, Mauritania has a Human Development Index (HDI) ranking of 0.513 and is positioned 157 
out of 185 countries.
2. Disparities between rural and urban areas are due, in part, to unequal resource allocation, lack 
of economic competitiveness and diversification, and weak governance. Other shortcomings 
include poor parliamentary oversight, low participation in local development planning, corruption, 
and lack of accountability and transparency. In 2015, the 1.9 per cent decline in the growth rate 
(after reaching 6.6 per cent in 2014) was attributed to the collapse in the global price of raw 
materials, particularly iron. This demonstrates how the country is vulnerable to external price 
shocks and poor economic diversification.
3. Mauritania is vulnerable to disasters associated with climate change. Floods, such as the one in 
2013 that damaged economic infrastructure and affected over 70,000 people, highlight an
insufficiency in national capacities to coordinate, prepare and respond to emergencies. National 
authorities estimate 24 localities (including 13 cities) are located in high flood risk or landlocked 
areas. To mitigate the climate change risk, Mauritania has made advances in the energy sector by 
developing and adopting the National Renewable Energy Strategy and increasing its share of 
renewable energy to 25 per cent in 2016 (from 5 per cent in 2012).
3 Despite this, rural communities
have benefitted the least as only 5 per cent have access to electricity.
4
4. With regards to political governance, the government organized several dialogues between the 
majority party and members of the opposition, as well as with civil society organizations (CSOs). 
Yet, a portion of the opposition did not participate, which is likely to exacerbate social and 
political tensions. Insufficiencies in governance, lack of employment opportunities, and porous
national borders have led to an uptick in illicit activities such as the trafficking of weapons, drugs 
and humans, along with radicalization, terrorism, and illegal migration. Areas affected by 
radicalization are located near the borders with Mali. They have high poverty rates, and poor 
provision of social services and government infrastructure. Young people and women in these
areas are especially vulnerable. Because peace, security and the fight against terrorism are primary 
challenges for Mauritania, the government approved the National Strategy Against Terrorism and 
Transnational Criminality, and agreed to host the offices of G5-Sahel—created in 2014.5
5. Mauritania has ratified all international human rights conventions and treaties, and presented 
Universal Periodic Review Reports in 2010 and 2015. Slavery and torture were proclaimed crimes 
against humanity in the 2012 revision of the constitution. The country faces major challenges in 
access to justice, and the provision of justice services, particularly women rights.
6 As a response,
 
1 Systematic country diagnostic, 2017 World Bank report.
2 National Household Living Conditions Survey, 2014.
3 Mauritania Renewable Readiness Assessment, 2015.
4 Situation analysis by UNDP/Global Environment Facility Hybrid Mini Grids Project, 2016.
5 An institutional framework for coordination of regional cooperation in development policies and security matters in central Africa, it was 
created at a summit for five Sahel countries: Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, and Niger.
6 R
t tif jtiEUi2014DP/DCP/MRT/3
the government recently approved the National Strategy for Institutionalization of Gender action 
plan, but while this was a good step it is necessary to build the capacity of those working in the
justice sector. Up to 64 per cent of citizens believe corruption is widespread due to the perceived
dependence of the justice sector. According to the Corruption Perception Index, Mauritania was 
ranked 123 in the world in 2012, and fell to 142 in 2016.
7
 
6. The Assessment of Development Results 2015 (ADR) and the United Nations Development 
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) mid-term evaluation for 2012 to 2017 highlighted achievements 
and lessons learned from UNDP interventions, plus ways to address development challenges and 
shortcomings. The capacities and competences of the public administration sector have improved 
in policy planning, development, and monitoring as demonstrated by the formulation of the 
Strategic Framework to Fight Poverty, other sectoral policies and strategies, the development of 
the country's first social accounting matrix, and the elaboration of the National Human 
Development Report. The latter greatly contributed to the national debate on long-term 
development, and paved the way for the formulation, in 2016, of the Sustainable Development 
Goal (SDG)-aligned Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Shared Prosperity (SCAPP). Progress 
still needs to be made regarding policy support to tackle poverty and reach disadvantaged groups. 
Furthermore, the ADR report shows a need for qualitative data tools and requirements that
strengthen the national statistical system.
7. After 15 years of implementing a poverty reduction strategy, Mauritania formulated a new 
strategic development vision: the SCAPP for 2016 to 2030. This strategy addresses challenges in
Mauritania that directly or indirectly contribute to poverty. It is aligned to the SDGs and integrates 
48 SDG targets as prioritized by Mainstreaming, Acceleration and Policy Support and Rapid 
Integrated Assessments tools. The purpose of using SCAPP is to build a prosperous, strong, 
inclusive, and economically sustainable society that meets the basic needs of all citizens. Longterm goals include providing them with access to services that positively affect their well-being, 
and improve social cohesion and justice throughout the country. The Government of Mauritania
plans to achieve these objectives by: (i) facilitating political dialogue; (ii) reforming the business 
climate; (iii) promoting driving sectors of the economy, and (iv) developing a social programme 
based on quality of education and health services. UNDP will provide support in areas where it has 
a comparative advantage, such as inclusive and sustainable growth, good governance (mainly in 
the areas of justice, anti-corruption and parliamentary control), and improved management of 
natural resources.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
8. The objectives of the Mauritania country programme are to support the long-term 
development strategy, promote an inclusive economy and society (including shared and 
sustainable economic growth), and break cycles of inequality and poverty, especially in rural areas 
where populations are most vulnerable. The development pathways that will help stakeholders 
achieve this objective include inclusive growth policies (medium to long-term) and simultaneous 
investments in livelihood programmes for at-risk populations, especially in the south and southeastern parts of Mauritania where the risk of radicalization is high. Due to dependence on natural 
resources, any growth must be accompanied by investments in sustainable natural resource and 
disaster risk management for improved resilience. Development pathways must be focused on 
public sector strengthening that promotes diversification of the economy, strengthens community 
participation in policy formulation and project implementation, and improves local service 
delivery.
9. The UNDP programme is based on three thematic areas: (i) building strong, inclusive and 
sustainable growth that is embodied in the design and implementation of public policies by 
national institutions in charge of economic planning, (ii) improving governance, institutional 
capacities and fighting radicalization and security threats, and (iii) fostering sustainable natural 
 
7 S
TIttil CtiPtiIdt/i2016resource management, and resilience against disasters and climate change. The strategy is 
dependent on links between the three pillars. For example, dependence on commodities will be 
mitigated through diversification of the economy and vocational training, leading to differentiated 
livelihoods in the agriculture and fishery sectors. Since there is potential for agriculture and 
fisheries to become a main source of livelihood for people living in rural areas, it is critical to 
invest in sustainable natural resource management to ensure resiliency and safeguard assets. The 
strategy will prioritize enablers such as supporting national actors in the formulation and 
implementation of development plans and the national statistical system. 
10. The proposed programme supports the new 2016-2030 SCAPP by way of monitoring and 
implementing international commitments and treaties (including the African Union Agenda 2063 
of, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the SDGs, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, 
the Sendai Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction, the Paris Climate Change Agreement,
multilateral environmental agreements, and other international/regional human rights treaties). The 
programme is anchored in the UNDP strategic plan, gender strategic plan, the South-South 
Cooperation strategy, and the plan to prevent violent extremism.
Strong inclusive and sustainable growth
11. Under the previous programme, UNDP direct support to the poor and vulnerable resulted in 
the creation of state-of-the-art ideas.
8 More than 133,000 vulnerable people (54 per cent women) 
could access secure plots of land, irrigated perimeters, seeds, agricultural inputs, and pumps, which
improved their livelihoods.
9 The drawback was reducing inequalities and exclusion were not 
systematically integrated into the programme. The new programme will continue to provide direct 
support, and ensure that inequalities and exclusion are integrated for better access to decent and 
sustainable employment opportunities for marginalized groups, including young people and 
women in urban and rural areas. Strategies include advocating for adequate employment policies 
that make labour market and financial services accessible; engage the private sector in the area of 
vocational training; strengthen public-private partnerships, and improve access to incomegenerating activities.
12. UNDP will prioritize and support the government by building the capacity of the Ministry of 
Economy and Finances (MEF), sectoral departments, and statistical system entities, at the central 
and regional levels, as well as supporting the adoption of gender responsive policies and building 
national capacities to mainstream gender into various sectors. Because capacity development is an 
important component of the programme it will be implemented in line with the United Nations 
Development Group (UNDG) Capacity Development: UNDAF Companion Guidance. To promote 
employment of specific populations under the area of social protection, UNDP will set up a 
national observatory and strengthen the capacities of the national statistical system. This will help 
address and unlock the qualitative data bottleneck, which will allow for the implementation of 
nationally prioritized SDGs, at national and local levels.
13. Conditions for achieving inclusive growth will be created through effective development 
cooperation between UNDP and other development partners: organizations in the United Nations 
System, the African Development Bank, World Bank, European Union, Deutsche Gesellschaft für 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (BMZ), and the German Development Bank. This includes coordinating which
planning, monitoring and evaluation tools are used for SCAPP, SDGs, and sector strategies, and
that build the capacity of national actors in charge of formulating and implementing development 
plans and the statistical system. UNDP will work closely with civil society, local communities and 
academics. The private sector will be mobilized to better fulfill its social responsibilities.
Improving governance, institutional capacity and the fight against radicalization and security 
threats
 
8 Mauritania ADR, 2015.
9 A
t f UNDP ittiiitdltUNDP OtElti2016DP/DCP/MRT/3
14. In the previous programme, the local development capacities of regional and national 
institutions were improved as frameworks for the coordination of local development were 
established in four regions (Brakna, Gorgol, Assaba and Guidimakha), filling gaps in planning, 
coordination and monitoring. Despite this achievement, the framework for local economic 
development is still weak and unstructured. At the municipal level, there are no territorial 
development plans to guide and rationalize investments in economic infrastructure.
10 In addition, 
UNDP contributed to building national capacity to fight corruption and although a national strategy
and corruption law have been adopted, and specialized courts created, more efforts are required to 
make progress. UNDP will build on previous gains, and focus on strengthening the capacities of 
public administration, and local and regional authorities. This will be done to provide quality 
public services and develop a culture of accountability and transparency.
15. UNDP interventions will improve regional governance and instil a built-in approach of local 
economic development to create economic opportunities for women and youth. Interventions will 
focus on the poorest regions and UNDP will work with the European Union, World Bank, GIZ, 
French Development Agency, and other partners on decentralization and regional governance, and 
in facilitating coordination between development partners and the government. In addition, UNDP 
will fight against radicalization and security threats, and promote social cohesion by assisting 
national stakeholders in developing youth and women-leadership programmes for improved social
and economic integration and to create economic opportunities for the poorest living in urban and 
rural areas. UNDP will coordinate with the governments of the United States of America and
Japan, and the G5 Sahel platform, as well as local religious authorities and community leaders on 
these interventions. 
16. UNDP contributed to strengthening democratic institutions and the capacities of Parliament.
There was an increase in the number of laws voted for, and number of amendments made to bills 
submitted by executive powers (15 proposals in total).
11 Parliamentary oversight of government 
actions improved, allowing for discussions to take place on the allocation and use of state 
resources.
9 Yet, because progress has been slow it is imperative to work at the parliamentary and 
technical secretariat levels.
10 UNDP will continue to promote transparency and accountability by 
strengthening the capacity of policy-making institutions. UNDP will advocate for increased 
participation of women and youth (as candidates in national and municipal elections) and work 
with stakeholders to stimulate social cohesion.
17. With UNDP support, the percentage of female members of parliament rose from 2 per cent in 
2005 to 19.7 per cent in 2014.
12 This positive evolution, endorsed by the National Gender Strategy 
in 2015, provides a strong basis for UNDP to assist Mauritania in meeting the global objective of 
33 per cent female representation in Parliament. UNDP will continue to support Parliament in 
implementing a women’s peace and security agenda by promoting gender equality in legislative 
functions. The programme will strengthen the capacity of justice actors to develop protection and 
legal assistance mechanisms for vulnerable groups, with attention placed on women, youth and
prisoners. Moreover, UNDP will partner with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and 
the Empowerment of Women (UN Women) on building the capacity of national institutions 
regarding gender equality and women’s empowerment.
18. In partnership with the European Union, other United Nations organizations—such as the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the International Organization for Migration (IOM)
and the Office for the High Commissioner of Human Rights (OHCHR)—and the governments of 
the United States of America and Japan, UNDP will support the dissemination and publication of 
international conventions and treaties, training of justice actors and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) on human rights, and modernization of judicial work through the use of new 
technology.
 
10 ART GOLD Project Mid-Term Evaluation, 2015.
11 Final Review Report of the Project support to Parliament, 2016.
12 C
tGdfilAfDB 2015Fostering sustainable natural resource management and resilience to disasters and climate 
change
19. UNDP supported the government in mainstreaming environment and climate change into
national development strategies and policies.
13 The next step is to ensure implementation is 
effective, and includes methods to improve national environment coordination mechanisms and 
capacities. UNDP will do this by revitalizing existing inter-sectoral environmental coordination 
bodies to improve their operational capability. UNDP will ensure the framework for consultation 
and co-ordination of national actors is carried out on a sustainable basis, and the government 
allocates long-term, financial resources for future initiatives.
20. UNDP helped improve Mauritania’s capacities to respond to the risk of disasters and provide 
legal and institutional feedback in this area. Yet, it is still necessary to provide clear institutional 
organization, a strategic plan for disaster risk reduction, and mechanisms for mobilizing resources. 
The programme will contribute to the formulation and implementation of the National Plan for 
Disaster Risk Reduction, as well as integrate climate risks; improve community resilience by
collaborating with local, NGOs; strengthen the national early warning system, and mobilize
partnerships and funding. The programme will focus on post-disaster recovery by strengthening the 
capacity of local governments and communities. Support will include developing risk reduction 
plans/strategies at the local level that directly involve communities. The programme will support 
mainstreaming gender into the formulation and implementation of the National Plan for Disaster 
Risk Reduction, local contingency plans, and strategies on renewable energies and water.
21. The programme will contribute to the unification of legal and regulatory frameworks for 
sustainable environmental management by harmonizing legal arrangements related to natural 
resources and environment sustainable management, along with finalizing and adopting legislation 
on the framework law on the environment. Ecosystem management and better use of natural 
resources are areas of focus, and UNDP will strengthen the technical and institutional capacities
for ecosystem and water resource management. UNDP will identify and implement projects that 
are sustainable and directly affect communities and national institutions. The programme will 
continue to integrate environmental, disaster risk reduction, and climate change issues into 
national, sub-national and sectoral development policies, strategies and programmes. 
22. Despite advances made in the energy sector, impoverished rural communities do not have
access to clean and affordable sources of energy. The new programme will support the Sustainable 
Energy for All (SE4ALL) process by using complementary approaches from international financial 
institutions (e.g. World Bank and AfDB) and best practices from United Nations Development 
Programme. The programme will support government efforts in creating an enabling environment 
for the development of renewable energy and in alleviating energy poverty, particularly in rural 
areas. Because of the potential impact, agricultural, market, and community income generating 
activities will be prioritized to reach the most vulnerable and at-risk, especially women.
III. Programme and risk management
23. The programme will be executed nationally. Projects will use the most appropriate 
implementation modality to ensure an effective and efficient delivery of nationally owned and
sustainable results. Direct implementation will safeguard and ensure UNDP accountability in 
complex programming situations. The Harmonised Approach to Cash Transfer (HACT) will be 
used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations organizations in managing financial risks. 
Where appropriate, UNDP will provide necessary support to national implementing partners in 
addressing capacity gaps. Accelerated procedures may be adopted to provide a rapid response to 
crisis situations and respond effectively to new requests for UNDP support. In accordance with 
Executive Board decision DP/2-013/32, all direct costs associated with project implementation 
 
13 Assessment of UNDP contributions to mainstreaming environment and climate change issues in national strategies. UNDP Outcome 
Elti2016DP/DCP/MRT/3
should be charged to the concerned projects. UNDP will review structures and procedures to 
ensure they are “fit for purpose” when implementing the programme, and agile enough to adapt to 
evolving contexts, United Nations reforms, and the new UNDP Strategic Plan. 
24. UNDP will improve country office staff capacities to properly implement the country 
programme, mainly through training courses, seminars, and modules. The country office will make 
use, when necessary and possible, of existing UNDP business centre services to address specific 
needs, and will take steps to strengthen the capacities of the National Execution Support Cell to 
improve delivery capacity (while contributing to building the capacity of national partners). 
Complementary actions will be taken with other partners for efficiency and economies of scale.
25. UNDP identified five areas where risk mitigation strategies are required, these are: (i) 
programmatic areas; (ii) climate impact and disasters; (iii) security; (iv) limited capacity of 
national partners and structures to execute programmes, and (v) socio-political conflicts, with 
special attention on human rights and gender equality. To adequately address these risks, a 
mitigation plan will be developed during the programme/project preparation phase in collaboration 
with national stakeholders. This will be done to ensure increased national contributions to 
programme activities. The country office will adopt new UNDP quality assurance standards.
Actions will be identified and implemented to strengthen the resource mobilization strategy, and 
will include improved communication and donor visibility, development of an early warning 
system, and seeking assistance from the UNDP Regional Service Centre. Fast-track procedures 
will be utilized to generate timely responses to crisis situations and emergencies.
26. Programmatic risks arise from reduced levels of support from traditional donors, a lack of 
resources to implement programmes, and not enough funds. To mitigate this UNDP will
implement a resource mobilization plan that involves non-traditional donors, such as Gulf 
countries (e.g. the United Arab Emirates), and countries with emerging economies: Brazil, Russia, 
India, China, and South Africa. Greater focus will be placed on raising the communication and 
visibility profile of interventions, as well as exploring new funding mechanisms like the Green 
Climate Fund, the Global Environment Facility, public-private partnerships, and South-South 
Cooperation funding opportunities such as the Perez-Guerrero Trust Fund, and collaborative 
approaches with the G5-Sahel. UNDP will advocate for the government to shift from funding to 
financing, in accordance with the spirit of the Addis Ababa agreement, and make a greater 
contribution to the national programme, mainly in terms of regional governance.
27. To address climate change and disasters risks, the office will adopt UNDP social and 
environmental standards. As for security risks, most arise because Mauritania shares a border with 
Mali and Morocco. The country office will implement a plan to reinforce the capacities of security 
partners at the national level. This will be done in collaboration with other United Nations
organizations implementing the HACT. A Business Continuity Plan will be established in 
collaboration with the United Nations Department for Safety and Security (UNDSS).
Collaborations with the United Nations Political and Development Advisor and OHCHR will 
hopefully mitigate socio-political conflict, while gender-related risks will be alleviated through the 
implementation of programmes on economic empowerment and political participation. Programme 
risks will be monitored every six-months through a mid-term review, and project risks will be 
monitored on a quarterly basis.
28. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional,
and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the UNDP Programme 
and Operations Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
29. UNDP support to the government will be results-driven by investing in careful monitoring and 
evaluation of the programme. Country Programme Document (CPD) indicators are aligned with national indicators (National Development Plan), the UNDAF, the UNDP Strategic Plan 2014-
2017, and the SDGs.
30. To monitor its contribution to national results, UNDP will use, to the greatest extent possible, 
national monitoring systems, including SCAPP and outputs from the national statistical system. 
National reference surveys on population living conditions (EPCV), reference surveys on 
employment, national accounts, analyses of the results of the general census of the population 
(2013), will be used to monitor progress. At the global level, international good governance 
indicators will be used. UNDP will develop a multi-year study and research plan and work with 
national strategic research institutions and think tanks to conduct thematic studies to test certain 
assumptions of the theory of change.
31. Despite recent progress in collecting and publishing statistical data, there is little
disaggregated data at the sub-national and local levels on gender.
14 A recent study on the baseline 
situation of the SDGs in Mauritania revealed not enough data is available to monitor progress. 
UNDP, in partnership with UNFPA, Economic and Statistical Observatory of Sub-Saharan Africa, 
and the European Union, will support capacity development for the national statistical system to 
produce reliable data for the monitoring of the SDGs, SCAPP, and UNDAF indicators. UNDP will 
support implementation of the new 2016-2020 National Strategy for the Development of Statistics 
and the corresponding action plan.
32. UNDP Strategic Plan Results and Resources Framework (SP IRRF) will be the reference for
setting programme outcomes and output indicators. The SP IRRF will be completed with other 
relevant indicators if necessary. Big data, and South-South and triangular cooperation approaches
will be explored to establish a reliable data system on the SDGs. The office will develop proxy 
indicators when data on outcome and output indicators are not available.
33. The UNDP results monitoring system will be aligned with the UNDAF mechanism. The 
Programme Steering Committee will, on a semi-annual basis, regularly monitor progress towards 
achievement of outcomes, based on indicators. At the project level, steering committees will 
ensure regular monitoring of project progress. A mid-term evaluation will be conducted for each 
outcome, and a final evaluation will be carried out in the last quarter of the fourth year. UNDP will 
strengthen its monitoring mechanisms by actively engaging beneficiaries.
34. Evaluations will be selected, planned and conducted to measure progress and results for 
learning and accountability purposes, and to provide stakeholders with the information they require 
for making informed decisions and necessary adjustments during the implementation phase. 
Gender markers will be used to track CPD budgets and expenditures to improve planning and 
resource allocation regarding gender equality. UNDP will implement the project quality assurance 
system and develop capacities for gender sensitive monitoring and evaluation. 
35. UNDP will allocate at least 5 per cent of its programme budget to data collection, monitoring 
and evaluation of the programme.
 
14 E
ltif thSttiFk tFiht Ait PtJl2015DP/DCP/MRT/3
Annex. Results and resources framework for Mauritania (2018-2022)
 
15 Assessment of UNDP contributions to promote access to job opportunities for women and young people, UNDP Outcome Evaluation 2016.
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Pillar 1: Promoting strong, sustainable and inclusive growth
UNDAF (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: The institutions in charge of economic steering develop and implement 
policies that contribute to inclusive and sustainable growth.
SDG: SDG 1, SDG 8, SDG 10
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1. Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and 
excluded
UNDAF outcome indicators, 
baselines, targets
Data source, frequency 
of data collection, 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs
Major partners / 
partnerships
frameworks
Indicative resources 
by outcome ($)
1.1 The employment rate by sex, age, 
region (moughataa), maternal 
language.
Baseline: 50.66% (F: 40%; 
M: 75.15%)
Target: 55 % (F: 45%; M: 82%)
1.2 Poverty rate
Baseline: 31%% (Urban: 16.7%; 
Rural: 44.4%; Female-headed 
households: 20.02%; Male-headed
households: 23.2%)
Target: 25% (Urban: 11%; Rural: 
40%; Female-headed households: 
15%; Male-headed households: 18%)
1.3 Gini index 
Baseline: 0.34
Target: 0.30
1.4 Percentage of Sustainable 
Development Goal indicators with 
disaggregated data:
Baseline: TBD
Target: to be determined after second 
year
Data source: EPCV
Frequency: Quadrennial 
Data source: EPCV
Frequency: Quadrennial 
Data source: EPCV
Frequency: Quadrennial 
Data source: SCAPP 
implementation Report
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.1: National institutions in charge of economic affairs (MEF) have the 
capacity to design strategies, carry out inter-sectoral coordination, implementation 
and monitoring and evaluation of gender responsive public policies that create 
employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded. 
Indicator 1.1.1: Extent to which policies, systems and/or institutional measures 
are in place at the national and sub-national levels to generate and strengthen 
employment and livelihoods 
Baseline: Partially15
Target: Fully
Indicator 1.1.2: Extent to which the National Employment Observatory is 
operational
Baseline: Partially operational
Target: Fully operational 
Indicator 1.1.3: Number of SCAPP’s implementation and monitoring reports 
Baseline: 0
Target: 4
Output 1.2: Marginalized groups (women and youth) in target areas have 
improved employment opportunities 
Indicator 1.2.1: number of new jobs generated 
Baseline: 112 (F: 56; M: 56)
Target: 600 (F: 300; M: 300)
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of additional women and men who benefit from 
strengthened livelihoods 
Baseline: 5,230 (F: 3,560; M: 1,670)
Target: 10,000 (F: 7,000; M: 3,000)
Output 1.3: Institutions have increased capacities and expertise to produce and 
make available disaggregated data and vulnerability analyzes to ensure regular 
MEF;
World Bank;
European Union;
GIZ;
BMZ;
German Development Bank;
National Bureau of Statistics;
UNICEF;
UNFPA;
AfDB;
International Labour 
Organization (ILO), and the
private sector.
Regular: 3,828,000
Other: 2,500,000 
16 National Statistic Development Strategy report, 2016.
17 Final report of the project “Consolidation of Peace, Security and Justice in Mauritania,” 2016.
18 Ibid.
19 ART GOLD Project Mid-Term Evaluation 2015.
monitoring of the level of achievement of outcomes, including SCAPP.
Indicator 1.3.1: National data system provides geographic and gender 
disaggregated data on new areas (governance-peace, security and climate change).
Baseline: No16
Target: Yes
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Pillar 3: Strengthening governance in all its dimensions
UNDAF (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: The democratic institutions work in a more transparent and participatory manner, the justice and prison 
system is more independent and effective, the democratic space is expanded (especially for civil society organizations and marginalized groups) to improve peaceful coexistence, 
social cohesion and security.
SDG: SDG 5, SDG 16
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: Citizen expectations for voice, development, the rule of law and accountability are met by stronger systems of democratic governance
2.1 Percentage of women in national 
parliaments
Baseline: 21% (2016)
Target: 33% (2021)
2.2 Index of corruption perception:
Baseline: 29 points (2016)
Target: 39 points
2.3 Perception of terrorism as a crime 
by young people and women
Young people: Baseline: 50% 
Target: 70%
Women: Baseline: 48.5% 
Target: 70%
2.4 Extent to which there is open 
access to data on government 
budgets, expenditures, and public 
procurement [IRRF 2.1]
Baseline: Partially 
Target: Fully 
2.5 Percentage of state expenditures 
allocated to regional and local levels 
Baseline: 8.8% (2015)
Data source: National 
Assembly Activity 
Report
Frequency: Annual
Date Source: 
Transparency 
International Report
Frequency: Annual 
Data source: Study on 
the socioeconomic 
determinants of terrorism 
in Mauritania
Frequency: quadrennial
Data source: PEFA 
report
Frequency: Quadrennial
Data Source: Systematic 
Country Diagnostic
Output 2.1: The justice actors have the technical and organizational capacities 
for law enforcement 
Indicator 2.1.1: Number courts at the national and subnational level organized 
and equipped for delivering Justice record:
Baseline: 1517 
Target: 56
Output 2.2: The CSO human rights actors have the technical and organizational 
capacities to assist victims
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of operational CSOs legally authorized to represent 
victims in the justice system. 
Baseline: 418
Target: 8
Output 2.3: The vulnerable groups (women, extreme poor, handicapped, victims 
of the aftermath of slavery) have access to legal aid service 
Indicator 2.3.1: Number of people with access to legal aid services, desegregated 
by sex 
Baseline (Women/Men): F:0; M:0
Target (Women/Men): F: 100; M: 600
Output 2.4: Public administration and local government actors in eight wilayas
(regions) have the technical, financial and organizational capacities to design and 
implement gender sensitive development policies at sub-national level. 
Indicator 2.4.1: Level of capacity of sub-national governments/administrations 
for planning, budgeting and monitoring basic services delivery 
Baseline: 3 (partial capacity)
19
Ministry of Justice;
Ministry of Social Affairs;
National Commission on 
Human Rights;
CSOs on Human Rights;
Ministry of Public Service;
MEF;
Ministry of the Interior and 
Decentralization;
GIZ;
European Union;
France Development Agency;
World Bank;
AfDB;
CENI;
Ministry of Youth and Sports;
Youth and women's 
associations at local levels;
Embassy of the United States 
of America; Embassy of Japan;
and the private sector.
Regular: 2,832,400
Other: 17,500,000DP/DCP/MRT/3
 
20 Ibid.
21 Study on the socioeconomic determinants of terrorism in Mauritania, Ministry of Interior and UNDP, 2016.
22 Assessment of UNDP contribution to mainstreaming environment and climate change issues in national strategies, Outcome Evaluation 2016.
Target: 15% Frequency: Annual Target: Capacity largely in place
Indicator 2.4.2: Number of functional SCAPP-based regional development plans 
Baseline: 420
Target: 8 
Output 2.5: Women and youth participate as candidates in local and national 
elections. 
Indicator 2.5.1: Number of women participating as candidates in local and 
national elections supported by UNDP 
Baseline: 365
Target: 400
Indicator 2.5.2: Number of youth participating as candidates in local and national 
elections supported by UNDP
Baseline: 0
Target: 500
Output 2.6: Young people and women at national level and in border areas have 
improved knowledge of the dangers of radicalization and terrorism. 
Indicator 2.6.1: Percentage of youth declaring having knowledge of danger of 
violent extremism. 
Baseline: women 12%; men: 22%21
Target: women: 50%; men: 80%
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Pillar #3: Strengthening governance in all its dimensions / Strategic work of environmental governance
UNDAF (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: The institutions and communities contribute to the sustainable management 
of natural resources, to anticipate and respond to crises and the effects of climate change.
SDG: SDG 1, SDG 6, SDG 7, SDG 11, SDG 13, SDG
14, SDG 15
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1. Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and 
excluded
3.1 Share of renewable energies in 
the mix (SCAPP)
Baseline: 32% (2015)
Target: 50% (2020)
3.2 Percentage of rural population 
with access to electricity [IRRF 
1.4.A.2.1]
Baseline: 5% 
Target: 15%
Data Source: SCAPP 
Implementation Report
Frequency: Annual
Data Source: SE4ALL
Frequency: Annual 
Output 3.1: National institutions have the technical, financial and organizational 
capacities to ensure operational environmental coordination, ecosystem protection 
and effective disaster risk management
Indicator 3.1.1: Extent to which there is a mechanism in place for effective 
institutional coordination 
Baseline: 3 (partially)
22
Target: Fully 
Indicator 3.1.2: Extent to which disaster risk reduction and/or integrated disaster 
risk reduction and adaptation plans, and dedicated institutional frameworks and 
multi-stakeholder coordination mechanisms, are in place and are gender 
Ministry of Environment and 
Sustainable Development;
Ministry of Economy and 
Finances; 
Ministry of Agriculture;
Ministry of Fisheries;
Ministry of Interior and 
Decentralization;
GIZ;
European Union;
Regular: 2,600,000
Other: 17,450,000 
23 Ibid.
24 Community Adaptation Plan, 2016.
25 Solar Platforms Project Evaluation, 2015.
26 Ibid. 
3.3 Economic loss from natural 
hazards (e.g. geo-physical and 
climate-induced hazards) as a 
proportion of Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) [IRRF Indicator 5.2]
Baseline: 17% 
Target: 16%
Data Source: National 
Communication on 
Climate Change 
Frequency: Annual
responsive.
Baseline: 023
Target: 3
Indicator 3.1.3: Number of Government documents into which social and 
environmental standards have been integrated.
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Output 3.2: Vulnerable communities have adequate capacities, resources and an 
enabling environment to enhance the resilience of socio-economic development 
assets and community livelihoods through effective disaster and climate risk 
management 
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of households sustainably benefiting of disaster and 
climate risk management projects
Baseline: 1,40024
Target: 8,000
Output 3.3: National actors have the technical, financial and organizational 
capacities for the effective integration of Climate Change and disaster risk 
reduction into development policies and strategies and for the promotion of the 
use of renewable energies 
Indicator 3.3.1: Extent to which there is a strengthened system in place to access, 
deliver, monitor, report on and verify climate finance 
Baseline: 3 (partially)
Target: Fully 
Output 3.4: National institutions and rural communities develop and implement 
sustainable models to access renewable energy
Indicator 3.4.1: Total number of citizens disaggregated by sex with improved 
access to energy as a result of UNDP-supported intervention 
Baseline: 19,70025
Target: 30,000
Indicator 3.4.2: Percentage of women headed households benefitting from 
improved energy access
Baseline: 55%26
Target: 70%
Output 3.5: National institutions have the technical and organizational capacities 
for effective gender responsive management of water resources. 
Indicator 3.5.1: Extent to which capacities to implement national and local plans 
for Integrated Water Resources Management have improved 
Ministry of Water and 
Sanitation;
CSOs, and the
private sector.DP/DCP/MRT/3
Baseline: 3 (partially)
Target: Fully