File Name: MRT-NREP-2015-EN
Year: 2015
Country Name: Mauritania
Country Code: MRT
Category: NREP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2015
Start Year: 2015
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Copyright © IRENA 2015
Unless otherwise stated, this publication and material featured herein are the property of the International Renewable Energy 
Agency (IRENA) and are subject to copyright by IRENA. 
Material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that all such material 
is clearly attributed to IRENA and bears a notation that it is subject to copyright (© IRENA). 
Material contained in this publication attributed to third parties may be subject to third-party copyright and separate terms of 
use and restrictions, including restrictions in relation to any commercial use.
About IRENA 
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that supports countries in their 
transition to a future of sustainable energy, and serves as the principal platform for international co-operation, a centre of 
excellence, and a pool of renewable energy policy, technology, resources and financial knowledge. IRENA promotes the 
widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, 
solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low-carbon economic 
growth and prosperity.
www.irena.org
About UNDP
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is the United Nations’ global development network – an organisation 
advocating for change and connecting countries to knowledge, experience and resources to help people build a better life. 
On the ground in 166 countries, UNDP works to assist national counterparts on their own solutions to global and national 
development challenges, considering rule of law an indispensable factor for the enhancement of human development and the 
reduction of conflict, poverty and insecurity.
About RRA
A Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) offers a holistic assessment of the situation in a given country and identifies the 
actions required to overcome barriers to renewable energy deployment. This is a country-led process, with IRENA primarily 
providing technical support and expertise to facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders. While the RRA helps 
to shape appropriate policy and regulatory choices, each country determines which renewable energy sources and technologies 
are relevant and consistent with national priorities. The RRA is a dynamic process that can be adapted to each country’s 
circumstances and needs. Experience in a growing range of countries and regions has allowed IRENA to continue refining 
the basic RRA methodology. In June 2013, IRENA published a guide for countries looking to speed up their renewable energy 
deployment. For more information, visit www.irena.org/rra.
Acknowledgement
This report was commissioned by IRENA in collaboration with UNDP, with valuable input from Laurent Dittrick (international 
consultant) and Ahmedou Hamed (national consultant). 
IRENA and the UNDP would like to acknowledge the valuable comments and guidance offered by Cheikh Moctar (APAUS), Dah 
Ould Sidi Bouna (Director and RRA Focal point, MPEM) and Cherif Kane (UNDP, Mauritania)
IRENA wishes to thank the following experts for their insights and constructive comments during the peer review process: 
Ashraf Kraidy (League of Arab States – LAS), Chingiz Orujov (Islamic Development Bank), Habib El Andaloussi (United Nations 
Economic and Social Development Commission in Western Asia – UN ESCWA), Maged Mahmoud (Regional Centre for Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency – RCREEE), Linus Mofor (IRENA) and the Country Support and Partnerships team at IRENA (Ilham 
Talab, Juan Martinez and Kavita Rai).
Authors: Mustapha Taoumi, Gauri Singh and Gürbüz Gönül (IRENA)
Disclaimer
This publication and the material featured herein are provided “as is”, for informational purposes. 
All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the material featured in this publication. Neither 
IRENA nor any of its officials, agents, data or other third-party content providers or licensors provides any warranty, including as to 
the accuracy, completeness or fitness for a particular purpose or use of such material, or regarding the non-infringement of thirdparty rights, and they accept no responsibility or liability with regard to the use of this publication and the material featured herein. 
The information contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA, nor is it an endorsement 
of any project, product or service provider. The designations employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply the 
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its MauritaniaII
Over the past five years, the electricity sector of 
Mauritania has experienced steady growth in all of its 
segments: generation, transport and distribution. An 
ambitious programme, based on a series of appropriate 
reforms and major investment, is being led by the public 
authorities to carry out a recovery plan for the sector to 
ensure universal access to sustainable energy services 
at a lower cost and to ensure the availability of reliable 
and secure electricity for economic operators. The 
programme places great emphasis on reducing energy 
costs through the enhancement of national energy 
resources, including less-polluting resources such as 
thermal (natural gas) and renewables (solar and wind). 
After establishing a clear diagnosis of the situation of 
the sector in 2009, the Government has undertaken to 
develop a clear strategic vision structured around the 
following main axes: 
•	 Add production capacity from local resources, mainly 
natural gas and hydroelectricity.
•	 Develop national and regional grid and interconnection 
networks.
•	 Enhance the role of renewable energy in the energy 
mix. 
•	 Implement decentralised solutions in remote and 
isolated areas.
Thus, a Master Plan for the Production and Transport 
of Electricity was adopted in 2012, intended to provide 
guidance and technical, economic and financial 
recommendations for developing the means of 
production and transportation to cover energy demand 
in the interconnected network, reduce the number of 
isolated centres and develop rural distribution networks. 
It is in this context that the authorities decided in 2011 
to launch a project to generate electricity from offshore 
natural gas deposits discovered in Banda in 2001. The 
natural gas extracted from this project will feed several 
electric generating units interconnected with domestic 
and industrial demand centres
It should be noted that renewable energy already 
dominates the sustainable development programme 
initiated by the authorities in Mauritania. The Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) has set a target of 
raising the share of renewable energy in the national 
energy mix to 15% by 2015 and 20% in 2020. Following 
the commissioning in 2013 of the Sheikh Zayed 15 MW 
solar photovoltaic (PV) plant in Nouakchott, and after 
completion of the construction of a 30 MW wind power 
plant and a 30 MW solar PV plant in Nouakchott, this 
goal will be greatly exceeded. With the contribution 
made by hydropower, the share of renewable energy 
in the national energy mix will reach 34% in 2015. 
Furthermore, a feasibility study is under way for the 
construction of a 100 MW wind farm in Boulenouar in 
the northern part of the country. 
The authorities have sought the support of the 
United Nations Development Programme and the 
International Renewable Energy Agency, with a view 
to integrating renewable energies into a long-term 
vision, highlighting the contribution of these resources 
in structuring interventions by key stakeholders, and 
encouraging the use of renewables in all sectors of the 
economy, as well as creating the optimum conditions 
for achieving the country’s national objectives. The 
authorities are very grateful to IRENA and UNDP for 
their support in the implementation of the Renewable 
Readiness Assessment as a principal component of a 
comprehensive renewable energy strategy in Mauritania.
In conclusion, I would like, on behalf of the Government 
of Mauritania, to thank IRENA for its support for the 
country, and I remain convinced that with the support of 
technical and financial partners in general development 
actions, and especially that of IRENA, Mauritania will 
achieve its goals in promoting renewable energies.
Mohamed Salem Bechir
Minister of PetroleumEnergy and Mines of Mauritania
FOREWORD
from the Minister of Petroleum, Energy and MinesIII
An ambitious programme, based 
on a series of appropriate reforms 
and major investment, is being 
led by the public authorities to 
carry out a recovery plan for the 
sector to ensure universal access 
to sustainable energy services at 
a lower cost and to ensure the 
availability of reliable and secure 
electricity for economic operators.IV
Energy is one of the key elements of human 
sustainable development. Fossil fuels are among 
the most used energy sources in the world, 
even if their import weighs heavily on national 
budgets. They are also partly responsible for 
climate change, as the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change recently confirmed. Finally, 
these resources are finite, underlining the need 
for humanity to think of other, cleaner, energy 
sources to support sustainable and inclusive 
development. 
This is why the United Nations SecretaryGeneral, Ban Ki-moon, launched the 
Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) initiative 
in 2011. It has three interlinked objectives to be 
achieved by 2030: 1) ensure universal access to 
modern energy services, 2) double the global 
rate of improvement in energy efficiency and 
3) double the share of renewable energy in the 
global energy mix. As Mr Ban Ki-moon said: 
“Energy is the golden thread that connects 
economic growth, increased social equity, and 
an environment that allows the world to thrive. 
Sustainable Development is not possible 
without sustainable energy.” 
Mauritania joined the SE4ALL initiative in 
2014. This global priority has been included in 
the United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework 2012-2016 of the United Nations 
System in Mauritania. The United Nations 
leadership in this area in Mauritania. It is in this 
context that UNDP initiated the elaboration 
of a “National Strategy for Renewable 
Energy” in 2012, at the request of the Ministry 
of Petroleum, Energy and Mines, to help 
Mauritania optimise its use of an abundant 
renewable energy resource. 
In 2013, UNDP mobilised the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) to join the 
initiative. The final objective of this initiative is 
to improve the population’s access to clean and 
sustainable energy resources, namely in rural 
areas, where access to electricity remains low 
(approximately 5%). These renewable energy 
sources can also be used by the productive 
sector, including mining, as well as for 
production, transformation and conservation 
of agricultural and fishing activities. 
These efforts are illustrated by the inauguration 
in 2013 of the 15 MW solar photovoltaic power 
plant. A 30 MW wind farm is also being 
installed, while hydropower continues to be 
pursued through recent OMVS installations. 
This does not account for numerous smallerscale initiatives already operational or planned 
by SOMELEC, SNIM, APAUS, ADER and others.
M. Mario Samaja
Resident Representative 
FOREWORD
From the Resident Representative, UNDP MauritaniaV
Renewable energy can be used 
by the productive sector, including 
mining, as well as for production, 
transformation and conservation of 
agricultural and fishing activities.VI
Like much of the Middle East and North Africa, Mauritania enjoys an abundance of sunshine and 
also considerable wind resources. The transition to making large-scale use of these clean, renewable 
energy sources entails considerable challenges on the policy, infrastructure and investment fronts. 
The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) process provides a holistic evaluation of a country’s 
conditions, identifying actions to overcome the barriers to renewable energy deployment. The 
process is country-led, with the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) offering technical 
support and expertise to facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders.
Since 2011, more than 14 countries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America and the Caribbean, 
Asia and the Pacific Islands have undertaken the RRA process, which generates knowledge of 
best practices and supports international co-operation to enable the accelerated deployment of 
renewable technologies. Mauritania, in keeping with its strong and consistent support of IRENA’s 
mission, is one of the countries pioneering the RRA process in the Middle East and North Africa 
region.
As the RRA highlights, the country has already taken steps towards large-scale use of renewable 
energy for on-grid and off-grid applications. The 15 megawatt-peak Sheikh Zayed solar photovoltaic 
plant, commissioned in 2013, now provides 7% of the power supply of Nouakchott. The same city 
is also set to benefit from a new 30 megawatt commercial wind farm, a project financed by the 
Mauritanian government and the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development.
FOREWORD
from the IRENA Director-GeneralVII
With an electricity network consisting of mini-grids, Mauritania is well positioned to integrate 
solutions and business models based on renewable energy. Meanwhile, the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP), within the Sustainable Energy for All initiative, is helping tackle 
the gaps the country faces regarding access to energy.
By supporting the RRA process, IRENA and UNDP aim to demonstrate the viability of renewable 
energy solutions for Mauritania and thereby attract investment in the sector. This report provides 
the foundation for a concrete and visible strategy for doing so, along with a related action plan.
IRENA would like to thank Minister Mohamed Salem Bechir, former minister Mohamed Ould Khouna 
and their teams for their generosity in hosting this study. We are grateful for their important 
contributions, which have resulted in valuable insights for RRAs in other countries. Additionally, 
this report will feed into IRENA regional work, including modelling and analysis on integration and 
planning for renewable energy across North Africa.
We sincerely hope that the outcomes of these RRA consultations will help Mauritania in its pursuit of 
the transition to an energy system driven by renewables. IRENA stands ready to provide continuing 
support to the country in implementing the actions identified.
Adnan Z. Amin
Director-General
IRENAVIII
LIST OF FIGURES IX
LIST OF TABLES IX
LIST OF BOXES IX
ABBREVIATIONS X
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
XI
I ECONOMIC AND ENERGY BACKGROUND 1
Introduction 1
Energy in the socio-economic context 2
Regional context 3
Energy sector institutions 4
Energy supply and demand 6
Electricity system overview 7
The Renewables Readiness Assessment methodology 12
The RRA process in Mauritania 12
Conducting RRA in Mauritania 14
II ENABLING FRAMEWORK FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY 17
Renewable energy resources and use 17
Energy policy and regulatory framework 27
Investment and financing 29
R&D and capacity building 30
III CHALLENGES IN THE DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY 33
Costs and electricity tariffs 33
On-grid electricity 36
Off-grid electricity 36
IV STRATEGY AND ACTION PLAN FOR DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLES 41
Elements of a renewable energy strategy 41
RECOMMENDATIONS 49
REFERENCES 51
ANNEX 53
CONTENTSIX
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Organisation of the energy sector 4
Figure 2 Cost of hydrocarbon imports, by source, 2002-2012 6
Figure 3 Installed electricity capacity, by source, 2013 (SOMELEC, ASPs, mining) 7
Figure 4 Electricity generation by source, 2011-2016 7
Figure 5 Electricity network in Mauritania, 2013 and plans for 2018 9
Figure 6 Renewables Readiness Assessment process
Figure 7 Installed hydroelectric capacity (OMVS) available to Mauritania, 2012-2025 13
Figure 8 Solar potential in Mauritania 17
Figure 9 Energy supplied to Nouakchott, by source, January and April 2013 18
Figure 10 Wind energy resources in Mauritania 21
Figure 11 Consumption of wood fuel and charcoal, 1995-2004 23
Figure 12 Price of solar PV in selected countries, 2010-2014 26
Figure 13 Electricity generation costs, by source, on the ECREEE network: commercial versus soft 
loan conditions
34
Figure 14 Mauritania’s electricity grids and mining areas 37
Figure 15 Renewable energy deployment strategy in Mauritania 42
LIST OF TABLES
LIST OF BOXES
Table 1 Overview of grid-connected electricity generation plants under the high-growth scenario 8
Table 2 Rate of access to electricity, 2013 9
Table 3 Comparison of residential electricity rates in West Africa 10
Table 4 Existing and proposed fee schedule for customers on and off the network 10
Table 5 SOMELEC electricity tariffs 11
Table 6 Potential annual electricity generation from conventional fixed PV systems 19
Table 7 Key R&D institutions and training centres in Mauritania 31
Table 8 Unit cost of generation from the Banda gas project (SPEG) 35
Table 9 Updated generation costs of wind power plants 35
Table 10 Unit costs of bids received by APAUS over three years for off-grid RFQs for capacity 
ranging from 50 kWp to 120 kWp
35
Box 1 Solar platforms for rural electrification 20
Box 2 The Sheikh Zayed solar PV plant in Nouakchott 21
Box 3 IRENA’s Global Atlas for Renewable Energy initiative 23
Box 4 IRENA wind project for four coastal communities 38X
ABBREVIATIONS
ACP/EU-EF African Caribbean and Pacific/ European Union Energy Facility
ADER Rural Electrification Development Agency 
AFD Agence Française de Développement 
AMU Arab Maghreb Union
ANADER National Agency for the Development of Renewable Energy
APAUS Agency for the Promotion of Universal Access to Basic Services
ARM Multisectoral Regulation Authority
ASP Authorised service provider
CILSS Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel
CNRADA National Research Centre for Agronomy and Agricultural Development 
COMELEC Maghreb Electricity Committee 
CRAER Centre for Applied Research in Renewable Energy (University of Nouakchott)
CSP Concentrated solar power
DEME Directorate of Electricity and Energy Control
ECOWAS ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States
ECREEE Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
EDF European Development Fund
ENFVA School of Education and Agricultural Extension 
ESMAP Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
FADES Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development 
FAUS Fund for Universal Access to Services
GDP Gross domestic product
GIS Geographic information system
GIZ Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GNP Gross national product
GRET Group for Research and Technological Exchanges
HFO Heavy fuel oil
IDB Islamic Development Bank
IPP Independent power producer
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency 
ISET Higher Institute of Technological Education: Institut Supérieur d’Enseignement Technologique
ITC Canary Islands Institute of Technology 
kWh Kilowatt-hour
MPEM Ministry of Petroleum, Energy and Mines
MW Megawatt
MWp Megawatt-peak
NGO Non-governmental organisation
OFID OPEC Fund for International Development
OMVS Senegal River Basin Development Authority
PPA Power purchase agreement
ProCEAO Programme for Efficient Cooking Energy in West Africa
PRS Regional Solar Programme
PRSP Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
MFSP Multifunctional Solar Platform
SE4ALL United Nations Sustainable Energy for All initiative
SPEG Company for the Production of Electricity from Gas
SNIM National Company for Industry and Mining
UNDP United Nations Development ProgrammeXI
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Renewable Readiness Assessment (RRA) is 
a wide-ranging tool initiated by the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) aimed at 
assessing national conditions for the development 
and deployment of renewable energy and, more 
specifically, the actions required to improve those 
conditions. The RRA process was initiated at 
the request of Mauritania in collaboration with 
the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) country office. The official launch of the 
RRA process was held on 12-13 November 2013 in 
Nouakchott with strong participation and engaged 
discussions. The final report validation workshop 
was organised on 28 May 2014 in Nouakchott. 
ECONOMIC OVERVIEW
Mauritania is a large, semi-arid country with 
a population of 3.4 million people, 60% of 
whom are under the age of 25. Just over 41% 
of the population lives in urban areas, and 
urbanisation is increasing at a rate of 2.9% 
per year. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per 
person was USD 1 247 in 2012, and overall GDP 
grew 6.7% between 2012 and 2013. 
The main economic activities are extractive 
industries (83% mining, with the remainder 
oil and gas), fishing and agriculture. Industrial 
activities represent 54.6% of GDP, while 
services represent 28.5% and agriculture 
(including fishing) represents 16.9%. In terms 
of employment, the balance is inverted, with 
50% of the active population working in the 
more labour-intensive agriculture and fisheries 
sector, 40% in the services sector and 10% in 
the industrial sector. 
Although resource exports boost the national 
economy, they also expose it to external 
fluctuations in commodity prices. Extractive 
industries provided approximately 38% 
of national revenues (excluding foreign 
development aid) in 2011, up from 24% in 2010. 
In 2008, exports of crude oil brought in USD 
326 million, whereas fossil fuel imports cost 
the country USD 546 million. 
Although the Mauritanian economy will remain 
exposed to commodity price variations for its 
export revenues, it can help to reduce price 
risks by increasing its use of domestic energy 
resources. The country has acknowledged 
this situation in its national policies by, among 
other solutions, supporting the use of offshore 
natural gas for electricity production as well as 
promoting renewable energy.
ENERGY AND DEVELOPMENT
Energy is explicitly acknowledged as a 
development priority of the country and is a 
key element of several of the main themes of 
the government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Paper (PRSP) (IRM, 2000, 2006, 2011). These 
include aims to: 1) accelerate economic growth 
to improve the economy’s competitiveness 
and reduce its dependence on external factors,
2) develop the growth potential and productivity 
of the poor by promoting the sectors that 
directly benefit them and the areas in which 
they are concentrated, 3) develop human 
resources and improve access to services, and 
4) promote institutional development and 
governance, a goal that can be linked to efforts 
to reform the energy sector. 
Access to energy services remains limited 
in Mauritania due to various geographical 
factors, including widely spread large 
urban population centres (Nouakchott and 
Nouadhibou) and significant rural populations 
distributed throughout the country. The share 
of households connected to the grid has 
increased from 18% in 2000 to 34% in 2013 
(MPEM, 2014). 
Electricity demand is growing by 10% per year, 
led primarily by industry needs and fuelled in 
part by rising domestic demand. The current 
installed generation capacity is around 350 
megawatts (MW), of which 75% is based on 
heavy fuel oil (HFO). In a “high-growth” scenario 
for the electricity sector, grid-connected demand 
(excluding mining activities) is projected to grow XII
by 450% between 2010 and 2030 (INTEC, 2012). 
This underlines the need for sound policies to 
lead future capacity expansion. 
Planned investments in national electricity 
capacity, including several new wind and solar 
projects, would increase the contribution of 
renewables to 36% of capacity by 2020 and 41% 
by 2030. However, these numbers do not include 
demand from the mining sector, which is mostly 
off-grid (due to the remote location of production 
sites) and is expected to represent nearly three - 
quarters of total electricity demand by 2025. If 
mining activities are included, the overall demand 
growth could near 600% by 2030.
Mauritania has significant renewable energy 
resources. The estimated solar photovoltaic 
(PV) potential is 2000-2300 kilowatt-hours per 
square metre per year (kWh/m2
/year), with the 
lowest radiation measurements being on par with 
the highest solar resources in southern Europe. 
For wind, the values are similarly high but are 
more localised around coastal areas, with peak 
wind speeds of more than 9 metres per second 
(m/s) in the Nouadhibou region. 
These resource potentials indicate that 
renewable energy sources can be competitive 
with HFO-generated electricity in most 
regions, to be balanced via load adjustment 
to account for variability in production. In 
addition, significant hydropower resources 
have begun to be tapped through the Senegal 
River Basin Development Authority (OMVS), 
although the potential for small hydropower 
still needs to be assessed in the country’s 
south. Biomass, while still used primarily in 
a traditional form, has the potential to meet 
many energy needs if managed carefully in a 
context of local desertification.
RENEWABLE ENERGY STRATEGY
Thus far, renewable energy options in Mauritania 
have been developed on an ad hoc basis. This 
has resulted in a project-led renewable energy 
of two large projects in the country: a 15 MW 
solar PV plant, inaugurated in 2013, and a
30 MW wind project in Nouakchott, which began 
construction in 2014. This project-led policy has 
helped to jumpstart renewables deployment in 
the country, both for on- and off-grid uses. The 
challenge now is to capitalise on this experience 
and to further develop these nascent solutions 
while maximising the country’s capacity to 
boost employment while cutting costs. 
Mauritania has a unique opportunity to develop 
its local economy and industry while addressing 
some of the economic challenges it faces today, 
including the need to generate local employment 
and to reduce the economy’s exposure to 
commodity-related price shocks. In this vein, the 
country may wish to further develop regional 
co-operation with both the Maghreb region 
and West Africa, with the aim of becoming an 
exporter of renewable electricity. 
Based on its economic development priorities, 
Mauritania has identified three key “serviceresource pairs” – priority pairings of energydemanding services with relevant renewable 
energy resources (IRENA, 2013a) – within the 
RRA process. These are:
•	 Access to renewable energy services for 
rural and off-grid applications – including 
services based on solar, small hydropower, 
biomass and wind energy;
•	 Productive activities for economic 
development – such as industry and mining 
applications and fishery transformation 
activities – based on solar and wind 
energy; and
•	 Centralised electricity production for gridbased power, based on solar and wind energy.
Yet despite the significant renewable resources 
at the country’s disposal and recent project 
installations, several recurring challenges have been 
identified. To capitalise on recent and historical 
experience in the renewable energy sector, the XIII
•	 The lack of a clear strategy for renewable 
energy deployment, which has resulted in 
overlap among programmes and agencies 
and in a lack of co-ordination of actions in 
the field of renewables.
•	 The lack of legislative and regulatory 
stability, including an electricity tariff 
structure that fails to accurately reflect 
costs and a regulatory authority that 
remains limited in its scope. The lack of legal 
and regulatory stability impedes necessary 
investment in the electricity system.
•	 A range of capacity-building issues, including 
the need to better capitalise on national 
experience in the renewable energy sector 
to increase knowledge and understanding 
of renewable resources, technologies and 
their potential. These needs are widespread 
within the economy, ranging from public 
actors to the private sector.
To address these and other issues identified 
during the RRA process, country stakeholders 
defined an initial plan of five actions, covering 
all three key service-resource pairs: 
ACTION 1: DEVELOP A NATIONAL 
POLICY ON RENEWABLE ENERGY
Mauritania needs to develop a comprehensive 
national renewable energy policy that 
embraces renewable technologies within a 
long-term vision that recognises the benefits 
of large-scale renewables development. This 
policy should confirm the current renewable 
generation targets of 15% by 2015, 20% by 2020 
and 35% by 2030. However, the country may 
consider increasing these targets, as it already 
has exceeded the target set for 2015. 
The policy should also confirm the current 
targets for electrification of 108 villages in 
nine of the poorest provinces (wilayas), as well 
as support for current collective and private 
electrification initiatives in 192 local areas 
to reflect the existing PRSP and Millennium 
Development Goal (MDG) targets for urban and 
rural electrification (80% and 40%, respectively, 
by 2015). For the country to meet these targets, 
however, the policy also needs to include 
equalisation (pérequation) and tariff principles 
in order to enable sufficient revenue generation 
to facilitate new project development, including 
off-grid. Finally, the policy should outline 
regulatory and institutional frameworks that 
are needed to ensure better co-ordination of 
national programmes and projects.
ACTION 2: UPDATE THE ELECTRICITY 
CODE AND ITS ASSOCIATED 
IMPLEMENTING DECREES
To be effective, the renewable energy strategy 
and related targets need to be reflected in future 
decrees and legislation. The new electricity 
code under development should specify these 
objectives as well as the underlying rules for 
promoting renewables in each sector. The 
electricity code also needs to help level the playing 
field in terms of generation costs. Current ongrid generation costs need to be better reflected 
in the power pricing structure to allow for a 
competitive comparison of generation solutions 
(i.e. renewable energy). In addition, because the 
country may become an exporter of renewable 
power, the electricity code should reflect this 
option for potential regional co-operation.
ACTION 3: CREATE THE 
INSTITUTIONAL AND REGULATORY 
FRAMEWORK TO FACILITATE 
DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLES
Beyond the electricity code itself, Mauritania needs 
to create a favourable institutional and regulatory 
framework for the deployment of renewables. A 
first step is to optimise current interventions in the 
energy sector by clearly addressing the overlap 
among agency, state and non-governmental 
(NGO) activities in the renewable energy area. 
The country could reinforce this message through XIV
specific to renewables. To create sufficient 
local capacity for maintaining and installing 
renewable energy projects, the country 
also needs to reinforce vocational training 
(formation professionelle) and education 
programmes. Although some resources and 
infrastructure already exist, these could be 
exploited more broadly. Finally, the local 
human resources that have been developed 
to implement and maintain existing projects 
should be better deployed to help reduce the 
overall national costs for maintaining on- and 
off-grid renewable projects.
With regard to research and development 
(R&D), the creation of a renewable energy 
monitoring centre and training resources, 
among other actions, could help to develop 
national competencies. The country should 
also consider the development, verification 
and dissemination of a wind and solar atlas, 
with the collected information then integrated 
into a public database on renewable energy 
resources. Applied research related to 
nationally specific solutions and needs should 
be developed within existing universities and 
engineering schools. This would necessitate a 
dialogue with all stakeholders from the public 
and private sectors to ensure relevance of the 
research topics to the country needs. 
ACTION 5: DEVELOP A FINANCIAL 
FRAMEWORK AND INCENTIVE 
SCHEMES 
A key barrier for renewable energy 
development is the cost and availability of 
financing. The government of Mauritania 
may be able to provide the most effective 
support to renewables in this area, by 
promoting stable legislative rules that 
would lessen inherent country risks and 
help to greatly reduce the cost of financing 
projects. Technology risks could be reduced 
through the promotion of a national human 
resources capacity for installation and 
maintenance, and by developing technical 
•	 Revise the legal framework to enhance 
the role of regulatory agencies in the 
renewable energy area and to cover all 
actors in the sector (including the national 
electric utility, SOMELEC).
•	 Create a renewable energy unit (pole des 
energies renouvelables) dedicated to these 
resources within the Directorate of Electricity 
under the Ministry of Petroleum, Energy and 
Mines (MPEM).
•	 Encourage off-grid industrial Independent 
Power Producers (IPPs), which represent 
a large majority of the national electricity 
generation capacity, to mix their current 
capacity with renewable sources. On a large 
scale, renewable energy can contribute to 
the production of electricity in Mauritania 
through IPPs and other private producers. 
In general, Mauritania should modernise 
its legislative and regulatory frameworks 
to enable private investment in energy 
production in order to meet industrial 
needs. The economies of scale might 
bring savings to off-grid consumers, 
while eliminating the administrative and 
technical investments and responsibilities 
that are attached to electricity generation. 
All stakeholders in the RRA process identified 
the need to create a dedicated renewable 
energy “monitoring centre”. This entity could 
be in charge of capitalising on previous 
experiences within the country as well as 
centralising all renewable energy-related data, 
including renewable resource assessments.
ACTION 4: PROMOTE CAPACITY 
BUILDING AND RESEARCH 
PROGRAMMES, DEDICATED 
TRAINING AND EDUCATION 
Considering the breadth of renewable
power capacity being installed both on- and 
off-grid, Mauritania needs to develop capacityXV
conditions of the country and its impact 
on the operating efficiency of equipment. 
In addition, the government could create 
a specific national fund dedicated to 
promoting renewable energy for off-grid 
access, to further encourage these solutions. XVI
Mauritania needs to find alternative 
sources of employment to balance 
the structural lack of jobs in the 
extractive industries. Extreme poverty 
is not declining as much as overall 
poverty in the country, indicating 
the lack of decent employment 
opportunities, particularly in
rural areas. 1
I. Economic and 
energy background
INTRODUCTION
The Islamic Republic of Mauritania is a
Saharo-Sahelian country in West Africa, 
covering 1 030 000 square kilometres (km²) 
and with an Atlantic coastline of 700 km. In 
2013, the population was 3 461 041, with a 
total of 557 248 households and an average 
household size of 6.1 persons. A large majority 
of the population is concentrated in the capital 
city of Nouakchott (with 809 360 inhabitants) 
and in the northern city of Nouadhibou, as 
well as in a strip running between the Route 
de l’Espoir and the southern border. Just over 
half (51%) of the population lives in urban 
areas, and the urban population is growing by 
2.9% annually (UN, 2014). 
GDP per person in Mauritania was USD 1 247 
in 2012, and overall GDP grew 6.7% between 
2012 and 2013. The economy is based mainly 
around mining and quarrying activities, with 
the country exporting primarily iron ore, 
copper and gold, in addition to crude oil. Oil 
production from the Chinguetti field totalled 
2 242 358 barrels (or 6 143 barrels per day 
[/day]) in 2013, and the country soon will 
extract natural gas, to be used exclusively 
for electricity production. Overall, industrial 
activities account for 48% of GDP, ahead of 
the service sector at 37% and agriculture 
(including fisheries) at 10%. 
In terms of employment, these figures 
are reversed, with 50% of the workforce 
employed in agriculture, 40% in the service 
sector and 10% in industrial activities. Despite 
the importance of mining and other extractive 
industries to the economy, these industries 
are not as labour-intensive and thus employ 
unemployment rate is estimated at 10% of the 
workforce, down from 30% in 2008. 
Extractive industries accounted for roughly 38% 
of total government revenue in 2011 (excluding 
official development assistance), up from 24% 
in 2010. The mining sector represents 83% of 
the extractive sector revenue, compared with 
17% for oil. Notably, Mauritania spent nearly 
USD 546 million on petroleum product imports 
in 2008, compared to total export revenue of 
USD 1 627 million, of which USD 326 million 
came from crude oil exports. (Although the 
country’s fishing industry is highly developed, 
making it a net exporter in this sector, this 
is not necessarily reflected in the balance of 
payments, as fisheries exports do not bring in 
as much foreign currency as mining, and the 
country exports most of its fishery products 
unprocessed.) 
This shows how dependent Mauritania is on 
commodity prices, both for its exports and 
for its import costs. This leaves the economy 
exposed to external economic shocks. A 
2013 report from the International Monetary 
Fund notes: “Several potential risks that 
may adversely affect [the country’s] growth 
outlook are still very real threats, and the 
economy remains vulnerable to adverse 
changes to terms of trade. The top priorities 
remain reducing the economy’s vulnerability 
to external shocks” (IMF, 2013). In terms of 
exports, mining will continue to be vulnerable 
to fluctuations in world commodity prices. 
However, it is possible to reduce the country’s 
dependence on imported resources (including 
petroleum products) through greater use of 2
Mauritania also needs to find alternative 
sources of employment to balance the 
structural lack of jobs in the extractive 
industries. Extreme poverty is not declining 
as much as overall poverty in the country, 
indicating the lack of decent employment 
opportunities, particularly in rural areas. In 
a country like Mauritania, the decentralised 
nature of renewable energy can have enormous 
benefits, particularly for poorer rural areas, 
as renewable energy technologies can often 
offer a secure and reliable energy alternative 
that is able to increase the standard of living 
of rural and less developed communities. 
Further, local authorities can invest in local 
renewable energy infrastructure and services, 
allowing for significant local added value 
creation in terms of job creation and boosting 
local economic growth (IRENA, 2014)
ENERGY IN THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC 
CONTEXT
Energy has been explicitly identified as one of 
the priorities for Mauritania’s development. The 
country’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
(PRSP) covers four main themes, which are 
summarised as follows (IRM, 2000, 2006, 2011):
•	 The first theme is aimed at accelerating 
economic growth to improve the 
competitiveness of the economy and to 
reduce its dependence on external factors.
•	 The second theme is aimed at enhancing 
the growth potential and productivity of 
the poor. This involves the promotion of 
sectors that directly benefit the poor and 
areas with a high concentration of poverty. 
This focus, based on the implementation of 
public investment programmes, will help 
reduce inequalities and improve the poor’s 
resource base.
•	 The third theme focuses on developing 
human resources and access to basic 
services. This area will, in the long run, 
through its impact on productivity and 
by improving living conditions for the 
poor. Access to education and health, in 
particular, significantly reduces the poor’s 
vulnerability.
•	 The fourth theme aims to promote genuine 
institutional development based on good 
governance and on the full participation of 
all poverty-reduction stakeholders.
The four themes of the PRSP can be linked 
indirectly or even directly to energy policy, 
including the promotion of renewables in 
the country. The current system of access to 
energy services, focused primarily on diesel 
generators, barely mobilises the resources 
required to pay for fuel and, by extension, 
renewal costs. In addition, the PRSP includes a 
target to increase the renewable share of ongrid electricity generation to 15% in 2015 (IRM, 
2011) and 20% in 20201 (IRM, 2006). 
Renewable energy sources present a significant 
opportunity, among other things, to:
•	 help secure the country’s energy supply;
•	 reduce its dependence on imported oil and 
stabilise the cost of electricity generation; and
•	 contribute to the energy supply in areas 
not covered by the national grid.
In addition, the use of renewables could reduce 
the overall expense of efforts to provide basic 
services to off-grid populations. Moreover, 
deploying renewable energy to a level that 
goes beyond domestic needs could allow the 
country to become an exporter of clean energy 
to neighbouring countries in the region and 
beyond, thereby accelerating its development.
To take advantage of these potential 
contributions, however, Mauritania must better 
integrate and appropriate the benefits of 
concerted development of renewable energy. 
This would require implementing a national 3
resources, but it especially requires reducing 
the barriers to renewables development. This 
in turn necessitates implementing adequate 
and effective economic policies, creating 
a framework for effective regulation, and 
developing strong and dynamic institutions 
as well as a sustained capacity-building 
programme.
REGIONAL CONTEXT
Mauritania straddles two distinct regions and 
cultures. To the north, it is a member of North Africa 
and the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), and to the 
south and west, it is an “observer” in the Economic 
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). 
The AMU, a Pan-Arab trade agreement 
formally established in 1989, includes a 
Ministerial Committee on Infrastructure, and 
the General Secretariat of the AMU includes an 
Infrastructure Directorate. There is now also a 
Maghreb Charter on Environmental Protection 
and Sustainable Development and a strategy 
for renewable energy. 
Mauritania was a founding member of 
ECOWAS but withdrew from the organisation 
in 2000; however, it continues to participate 
as an observer and to engage in a number of 
projects, including those related to regional 
electrical interconnection. Moreover, the Banda 
gas field project, an offshore project being 
planned for electricity production, would not 
be economically viable without the possibility 
of exporting power to ECOWAS countries 
(in this case, Guinea, Mali and Senegal). The 
project includes several planned transmission 
lines, either as an extension to the 225 kilovolt 
(kV) transport network to Nouadhibou, or via 
a proposed new 225 kV transport line between 
Nouakchott and Tobène, Senegal.
1 The renewable share of capacity is 19.8% today and is
expected to increase to 26% following construction of the new
30 MW wind farm in Nouakchott. Planned dual-fuel plant 
investments would change this share to 25% in 2016 and 23%
in 2018, and planned investments in combined-cycle natural
gas power plants from 2022 would reduce this share further.
In 2012, ECOWAS adopted a regional renewable 
energy policy, which includes a plan for 
increasing the share of renewables in order to 
support the development policy of the West 
African Power Pool (WAPP) and to contribute 
significantly to energy access goals (ECOWAS, 
2012). The mandate of the WAPP (a specialised 
institution of ECOWAS) is to ensure regional 
power system integration and the realisation of 
a regional electricity market. WAPP comprises 
public and private generation, transmission and 
distribution companies involved in electricity 
operations in West Africa. ECOWAS has also 
established a Centre for Renewable Energy and 
Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) to help countries 
develop renewable energy support policies and 
to provide related decision-support tools. 
Mauritania has also been a member of the 
Senegal River Basin Development Authority 
(OMVS) since that organisation’s inception in 
1972. The mission of the OMVS is to:
•	 achieve food self-sufficiency for the 
people of the basin and sub-region,
•	 secure and improve people’s incomes,
•	 preserve the balance of ecosystems in the 
basin,
•	 reduce the vulnerability of member state 
economies to climate and external factors, 
and
•	 accelerate the economic development of 
the member states.
Within the OMVS, Mauritania has participated 
in the construction and development of the 
Manantali dam (which began producing 
electricity in 2001) and the Félou dam (which 
began producing electricity in 2013), for 
which it has drawing rights of 15% and 30%, 
respectively. The country’s allocation of 
projected OMVS dams has increased to 25%, 
on par with the other three OMVS countries 
(Guinea, Mali and Senegal). 4
Figure 1: Organisation of the energy sector
Mauritania is also part of the Permanent 
Interstate Committee for Drought Control 
in the Sahel (CILSS), which brings together 
nine countries in the Sudano-Sahelian region 
for discussions about food security and the 
fight against the effects of drought and 
desertification. In addition, the country is an 
active member of the Maghreb Committee 
for Electricity (COMELEC), via the national 
utility SOMELEC. For now, the country is not 
interconnected to the COMELEC network, but 
a connection is planned from Nouadhibou to 
Morocco, which would strengthen Mauritania’s 
position and open up export prospects to 
North Africa and Europe, given the high wind 
potential in the Nouadhibou region.
Because it is no longer an ECOWAS member, 
Mauritania does not, as such, have an integrated 
regional approach for energy issues. However, 
with some elements of its national policy directly 
touching on energy policy in West Africa, it is 
still indirectly linked, for example through OMVS 
hydropower activities and the Banda gas project. 
Additionally, in 2013, Mauritania joined the United 
Nations Sustainable Energy for All initiative, and 
it also recently joined RCREEE, which includes as 
members 15 other Arab countries, including all 
North-African Arab countries aside from Sudan 
and Djibouti, as well as other West-African Arab 
countries.
It is clear that anchoring national policy in regional 
policies, as a reflection of Mauritania’s pivotal 
position between North and West Africa, would 
add visibility to the country’s objectives and could 
allow it to benefit from effects of scale, especially 
in the field of renewable energy.
ENERGY SECTOR INSTITUTIONS
The key renewable energy stakeholders in 
Mauritania are government ministries, national 
agencies, non-governmental organisations 
(NGOs) and the private sector. The roles of 
several of these players are outlined in figure 1 and 
summarised briefly below.
REGULATING LAW
(2001)
REGULATING
AUTHORITY
APAUS ADER
INDEPENDENT
PRODUCERS
SNIM
MINISTRY IN CHARGE OF ELECTRICITY
Regulating electricity,
water, telecommunications
and postal services
Enforces the code
Approves tenders, oversees
their launch, evaluates bids
and awards the licenses
and evaluations
Draws up the specifications
for public service delegations
for electricity
Determines the amount of
compensation due to
delegations
(e.g. MRO 200 million in 2010)
Develops, implements and monitors the enforcement of policies, strategies and programmes in the field of electricity
ELECTRICAL CODE (2001)
Governs the liberalisation of the generation, transmission, distribution
and the resale of electricity, subject to the licensing under the control of
the Regulatory Authority (2001).
SOMELEC CONTRACT
PROGRAMME
Intervenes in urban and rural areas
(Moughataas)
Ensures the generation, transmission,
distribution, purchase and sale of electricity
in urban areas
Currently manages 44 centres
Rates administered:
• 36.01 MRO/kWh social; 60% of customers
 20% of revenue
• 59 MRO/kWh
165 000 subscribers
Balancing subsidy in 2013: 6 billion MRO
Self producer
Distribution: Zoueratt
Self producer
MCM
Self producer
TAZIAST
Agency for
Universal public
access to
regulated services
Intervenes in
rural areas
Construction of
networks
Thermal plants
Large-scale
maintenance for
delegatee plants
Solar kits
Thermal plants
Hybridisation of 
plants
Large-scale
maintenance for
delegatee plants
Private law
association created
in 2000
recognised to
be of public
interest in 2001
Intervenes in
rural areas
6 000 subscribers / 20 centres / Rates:
(1) 51 MRO/kWh 
(2) 81 MRO/kWh
(3) 90 MRO/kWh
SPEG Network production
SOMELEC: 40*
SNIM: 26%
Kincross KGP: 36%5
Ministry of Petroleum, Energy and Mines 
(MPEM):
MPEM oversees the main governance 
structures for energy, including the Department 
of Electricity and Energy Management 
(DEME) for the fields of electricity (under 
the supervision of SOMELEC) and operators 
on- and off-grid. The Directorate General 
of Hydrocarbons (DGH) is responsible for 
granting and monitoring operating licences 
and distributing petroleum products. 
These governance authorities, among others, 
aim to supervise operational structures, such 
as SOMELEC and the Rural Electrification 
Development Agency (ADER) for DEME 
(with the Agency for the Promotion of 
Universal Access to Basic Services, APAUS, 
falling under the Ministry of Economic Affairs 
and Development, MAED); and SOMIR 
(Mauritanian Refining Industries Company), 
SMH (the national hydrocarbon company), 
SOMAGAZ (Mauritanian Gas Company) 
and GIP (Petroleum Facilities Management 
Company) for the DGH. 
Multisectoral Regulation Authority (ARM):
Established in 2001 under Law 2001-18, the ARM 
is responsible for regulating activities in the areas 
for which it is responsible, including the water, 
electricity, telecommunications and postal services 
sectors (IRM, 2001a). For now, in the area of 
electricity, the ARM is in charge of regulating only 
authorised service providers (ASPs); SOMELEC is 
not yet included in its scope of action.
Agency for the Promotion of Universal Access 
to Basic Services (APAUS):
Created in 2001 under ORD 2001-06 (IRM, 
2001b), APAUS is a multi-sectoral public 
entity in the areas of water, energy and 
telecommunications. As an independent body, 
it receives independent funding. Its mission is to 
promote universal access to services through: 
advocacy actions, some of which are specific 
to the private sector; resource mobilisation; 
ensuring coherence and convergence between 
the strategies of external partners interested 
in universal access; and the design and 
implementation of pilot projects that aim to 
demonstrate the viability of guidelines and 
disseminate lessons learned. 
APAUS also manages the government’s 
Fund for Universal Access to Services 
(FAUS), which aims to gradually consolidate 
most of the resources used for expanding 
and operating regulated services. APAUS 
conducts electrification and infrastructure 
development actions in some villages, while 
being responsible for heavy equipment 
maintenance for ASPs. 
Agency for the Development of Rural 
Electrification (ADER):
ADER is a non-governmental and not-for-profit 
association that carries out rural electrification 
actions under the supervision of MPEM. 
Previously invested mainly in the distribution 
of PV kits, ADER now operates more to 
complement the projects run by APAUS.
Mauritanian Electricity Company (SOMELEC):
SOMELEC was set up in 2001 following the split 
of SONELEC (the National Company of Water 
and Electricity), with a view to liberalising 
the electricity market. It is responsible for the 
generation, transport, distribution and sale of 
electricity in urban and suburban areas across 
the country. It is also in charge of managing 
remote networks in the regional capitals 
(moughataas) and for managing solar and 
wind power plants connected to the grid, 
including the 15 MW solar PV plant and the 30 
MW wind plant in Nouakchott. 
Company for the Production of Energy from 
Gas (SPEG):
SPEG was founded in 2012 by its shareholders 
(SOMELEC 40%, SNIM (the National Company 
for Industry and Mining) 26% and Kinross Gold 
Power 34%) to develop, finance and operate 
energy projects. The primary purpose of SPEG 
is to capitalise on the natural gas resources 
of the Banda offshore field, in particular 
developing them for electricity production.6
Figure 2: Cost of hydrocarbon imports, by source, 2002-2012 (in USD)
Petrol Kerosene Diesel Fuel Oil Butane Gas
0
100 000 000
200 000 000
300 000 000
400 000 000
500 000 000
600 000 000
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Mining companies:
Some of the mining companies run village 
electrification operations on which many 
villages depend. The companies are 
considering the possibility of reducing their 
operating costs through the increased use of 
renewable energy to meet off-grid needs.
NGOs:
A number of NGOs, including international 
ones, are involved in the energy sector, 
providing both awareness and demonstration 
projects on the possible use of renewables, 
especially in rural areas.
ENERGY SUPPLY AND DEMAND
Production
The full extent of Mauritania’s oil and gas 
reserves remains unknown; however, these 
resources are large enough to be commercially 
exploited. The Regional Atlas on West Africa 
(OECD, 2009) has estimated the country’s oil 
reserves at 1 billion barrels, which would put 
it just behind Nigeria in total reserves. But 
investors have sometimes been disappointed 
with the results of operations. Oil fields such 
as Chinguetti, used exclusively for export, 
saw output fall from 70 000 barrels a day 
in 2006 to 6 143 barrels a day in 2013. This 
uncertainty in production may be due in 
part to the lack of knowledge about the full 
extent of these resources. To date, the country 
remains under-explored, with just 1.7 wells per
10 000 km2
 in the licensed areas, compared 
to a worldwide average of 50 wells per
10 000 km2 (Zawya, 2013).
The Banda gas field, with an estimated
1.2 trillion cubic feet of reserves (MPEM, 
2014), is expected to enter into production 
by 2017. The start of operations will depend 
on the finalisation of negotiations on gas use 
initiated as part of the SPEG framework. The 
gas reserves of the Banda field do not justify 
activities such as building gas liquefication 
facilities to enable export on a global scale, 
building a pipeline to connect to the West 
African Gas Pipeline, or even exporting gas to 
Morocco. The decision was made to use the 
gas to produce electricity for domestic use 
by mining companies, with the surplus then 
exported to the OMVS area.
Demand
Oil consumption in Mauritania was estimated 
at 13 000 barrels a day in 2012 (MPEM, 2014). 
This level of demand corresponds to a net 
import of 7 000 barrels a day. Despite its 
domestic production of crude oil, the country 
is a net oil importer because it must import 
all of its refined oil resources. This situation 
affects oil import costs as well. Figure 2 shows 
the increase of these costs during 2002-2012, 
with net predominance of diesel, which is 
used mainly in the transportation sector and 
in off-grid power stations.7
Annual primary energy consumption in 
the country was estimated at 4.8 million 
barrels of oil equivalent (0.7 million tonnes 
of oil equivalent, or toe) in 2010 (EIA, 
2013). Annual consumption per capita is
0.3 toe (GTZ, 2009), or 0.17 toe if traditional 
biomass is excluded. Mauritania’s energy 
mix comprises approximately 67% biomass 
(wood and charcoal), followed by petroleum 
products, which account for the vast majority 
of commercial energy used in the country. 
Electricity consumption is increasing by 
more than 10% per year, yet less than 5% of 
the rural population has access to electricity 
(EIA, 2013).
Overall, access to energy services is limited in 
the country. Major efforts are focused on rural 
electrification, but the bulk of the population 
remains dependent on non-commercial 
energy resources for its needs (traditional 
biomass provides 64% of primary energy 
consumption). The main resources used to 
generate electricity are imported, and all 
petroleum products are imported due to 
the lack of local refining capacity. Although 
domestic natural gas exploitation will reduce 
the country’s dependence on imports, any 
lag in the extraction timeline could have a 
significant effect on the economy.
ELECTRICITY SYSTEM OVERVIEW
Generation
The main resource used in the country for 
electricity production is heavy fuel oil (HFO), 
which accounts for 75% of the installed 
generation capacity (just over 315 MW total in 
2013; see figure 3). Under the “high-growth” 
scenario, excluding demand projections for 
capacity, electricity demand (both on the 
grid and from mining) is expected to increase 
from 220 MW in 2013 to nearly 1 400 MW 
in 2025, multiplying the current installed 
capacity by six (INTEC, 2012). Notably, 75% 
of this projected capacity is related to mining 
sector demand (1 050 MW in 2025).
The new gas project in Banda for electricity 
production is expected to change the trends 
of electricity generation. As figure 4 illustrates, 
a significant drop in the contribution of 
thermal power plants in the electricity mix is 
expected in 2016 with the commissioning of 
the 30 MW wind power plant and the 120 MW 
dual-fuel plant (mixed HFO / natural gas), as 
well as the completion of the upgrade and 
additions to the distribution networks in 
Nouakchott and within major cities, which 
will be commissioned in 2015.
Figure 3: Installed electricity capacity, by 
source, 2013 (in MW) (SOMELEC, ASPs, 
mining)
Figure 4: Electricity generation by source, 
2011-2016 (in GWh/year)
Source: MPEM, 2014
Source: APAUS, 2014b
315
HFO
LFO
Hydro
Solar PV
Wind
4.4
26
48
18
Gas
Solar PV
Wind
Hydro
Thermal (oil)
1500
1000
500
0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
2000
Electricity generation (GWh/year)8
With the country’s planned network capacity 
additions, total generation capacity would 
reach 752 MW by 2030, with 280 MW 
from HFO and mixed power, 217 MW from 
hydropower and 75 MW from solar and wind 
(see table 1), for a total of 39% renewable 
capacity connected to the grid. However, 
these figures do not include additional 
Transmission and distribution
The Mauritanian transmission network is built 
around the main centres of demand (see 
figure 5). A 225 kV line (red line) runs south 
along the coast to Rosso, then along the 
planned capacity in the mining sector, 
are not correlated in terms of planned 
electricity generation, and do not account 
for the systems used for rural electrification. 
Moreover, in the event of a delay in planned 
gas operations, the country will become even 
more heavily exposed to volatile oil prices 
and security of supply issues.
border on the Senegal side before joining the 
OMVS network at Dagana. Transmission along 
the border is provided by a 33 kV line (green 
SOMELEC line) from Rosso to Boghé and a 
90 kV line (blue OMVS line) from Boghé to Matam.
Table 1: Overview of grid-connected electricity generation plants under the high-growth scenario
Source: INTEC, 2012; MPEM, 2014
Name Plant Type
Power 
available 
(MW)
Year of 
commissioning
Last year 
planned
Manantali
Félou
Gouina
Gourbassi
Bouréya
Koukoutamba
Badoumbé
Total Hydropower
Hydropower
(Available power to 
Mauritania)
30
18
35
6.25
40.25
70.25
17.5
217.25
2002
2013
2016
2017
2021
2023
2025
2030
2030
2030
2030
2030
2030
2030
Total Natural Gas Combined-cycle
natural gas 180
Dual 1
Dual 2
Total Mixed
Mixed HFO / natural gas 
(114)
120
54
174
2015
2018
2030
2030
Arafat 1 rehabilitated
Arafat 2
Wharf
Nouadhibou
Total HFO
HFO
39
8.75
36
22
105.75
2014
2011
2011
2013
2023
2020
2014
2030
Wind Farm Nouakchott Wind 30 2014 2030
Solar Nouakchott
Solar 2 Nouakchott
Total Non-Hydro 
Renewables
Solar PV
15
30
75
2013
2015
2030
2030
TOTAL 7529
Figure 5: Electricity network in Mauritania, 2013 and plans for 2018
Source: MPEM, 2014
The boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any official endorsement or acceptance by IRENA.
• Tourine
• Nouadhibou
• Nouakchott
• Rosso
• Mâl
• Bogué
• Kaédi
• Sélibaby
• Kiffa
• Tintane
• Ayoun el Atrous
• Tidjikja
• Akjoujt
• Atâr
• Néma • Timbédra
• Adel Bagrou
• Tourine
• Nouadhibou
• Rosso
• Mâl
• Bogué
• Kaédi
• Sélibaby
• Kiffa
• Tintane
• Ayoun el Atrous
• Tidjikja
• Akjoujt
• Atâr
• Néma • Timbédra
• Adel Bagrou
• Nouakchott
As figure 5 illustrates, the network is expected 
to expand greatly by 2018. Two new 225 kV 
line projects (red lines) are planned as part of 
the Banda gas field operations, one extending 
the transport network to Nouadhibou in the 
north (and extending to the mining areas 
within the country), and the other running 
south to Senegal, allowing for cross-border 
export. Additional 90 kV and 33 kV network 
extensions are planned in the country’s south 
to increase population access. 
The rate of access to electricity is low in 
Mauritania, due in part to the difficulty 
of extending the network and to the 
scattered nature of demand, which makes 
interconnection difficult. Overall, it is 
estimated that the number of households 
connected to the network increased from 
22% in 2000, to 24% in 2004, and to 34% in 
2013 (see table 2). 
National access rate 34%
Urban 58%
Rural 5%
Nouakchott 70%
Nouadhibou 68%
Table 2: Rate of access to electricity, 2013
Source: MPEM, 2014
2 The rate of electricity access is the ratio between the number 
of households covered and the total number of households in
the area or district.
To overcome these disadvantages, the 
Master Plan for the Production and Transport 
of Electricity considers extending the 
network from the main consumption centres. 
Connection areas within a radius of 120 km 
from the point of generation/interconnection 
are defined to measure the potential of 
connection to the network/mini-grid. Some 
of these areas could be connected directly 
to the national grid, and others could be 
powered by solar hybrid/diesel power (Kiffa 
would be one of the first areas covered by 
hybrid production and a 33 kV network).10
Costs and tariffs
Despite growing diversification, Mauritania’s 
energy system remains heavily oil-dependent, 
both on- and off-grid. Moreover, the country’s 
geography and the distribution of population 
and activity centres are not conducive to 
development of the domestic energy market. 
All of this affects electricity production costs 
and tariffs.
As in many West African countries, electricity 
tariffs in Mauritania are established by 
government decree, with the monthly 
residential rate set relatively high at just above 
USD 0.20 per 100 kWh (see table 3). Currently, 
two sets of tariffs co-exist in the country: the 
SOMELEC tariffs that are applied on- and offgrid in the regional capitals (moughataas), and 
the off-grid tariffs proposed by the authorised 
service providers (ASPs) (see tables 4 and 5).
Table 3: Comparison of residential electricity rates in West Africa
Table 4: Existing and proposed fee schedule for customers on and off the network
Source: IRENA, 2013b; Mauritania from SOMELEC, 2013 and INTEC, 2012 
* 2013 GDP was used for Mauritania
Source: SNC Lavalin, 2013
Note: Conversion rate is 1 Ouguiya (MRO)= EUR 0.00250428 = USD 0.00343770
Name 
Effective monthly 
residential rate 
(USD per 100 kWh)
2009* monthly GNP 
per capita (USD)
Share of GNP per capita 
spent for 100 kWh of 
electricity (%)
Gambia 0.280 98 21.7
Senegal 0.238 139 17.2
Mauritania 0.203 104 19.5
Burkina Faso 0.200 103 19.5
Côte d’Ivoire 0.119 134 8.9
Ghana 0.820 128 6.4
On- and off-grid tariffs (SOMELEC) Off-grid tariffs (ASPs/subcontractors)
Current rate Proposed 
monthly rate
Domestic rate 
<25 kWh 
per month
Middle rate 
25-120 kWh 
per month
Higher rate 
>120 kWh 
per month
Fixed premium:
MRO 329 (USD 1.12) Energy prices:
Fixed premium:
MRO 600 
(USD 2.06)
Fixed premium:
MRO 1 625 
(USD 5.58)
Fixed premium:
MRO 7 513 
(USD 25.77)
Energy prices:
<2 kVA: 
MRO 30.74/kWh 
(USD 0.11/kWh)
Domestic: 
MRO 36.01/kWh 
(USD 0.12/kWh)
Higher voltage: 
MRO 59/kWh 
(USD 0.21/kWh)
Energy price:
MRO 51/kWh 
(USD 0.18/kWh)
Energy price:
MRO 81/kWh 
(USD 0.27/kWh)
Energy price:
MRO 90/kWh 
(USD 0.32/kWh)
>2 kVA: 
MRO 59.03/kWh 
(USD 0.21/kWh)
Medium voltage: 
MRO 37/kWh 
(USD 0.12/kWh)11
Table 5: SOMELEC electricity tariffs
Voltage Category
Current rate
Energy price 
(USD/kWh)
Monthly fixed 
premium (USD)
Low Voltage (LV) 
Domestic
0.12
0.19
0.19
11.37
49.59
151.66
Street lights 0.18 144.95
Industries, crafts and 
commerce 
0.19
0.18
0.19
11.37
49.59
151.66
Administration 0.18
0.19
49.59
248.24
Medium Voltage 
1
st Category 0.12 13.97
2nd Category 0.08 252.90
Source: SOMELEC, 2014
The off-grid ASP tariffs are maximum tariffs set 
by the ARM under MPEM decree. The operators 
–ASPs – apply these prices for each service area. 
The ARM assesses the subsidy granted to each 
ASP on a quarterly basis, using a grant taken 
from the Fund for Universal Access to Services 
(FAUS) managed by APAUS. Thus, the state, 
through the ARM and via APAUS (FAUS), issues 
the quarterly operating subsidies required to 
ensure the economic sustainability of the ASPs. 
Both on- and off-grid rates are subsidised and 
currently do not allow the state to recover the 
operating costs on either market. Furthermore, 
the country’s average electricity generation 
costs are higher than currently applied tariffs. 
Because of the high share of oil-fired generation, 
average generation costs are increasing, reaching
USD 0.36/kWh in June 2012 (AFD, 2013), 
compared with USD 0.34/kWh in 2011 and 
USD 0.32/kWh in 2010. The updated generation 
costs for a medium-sized (1-5 MW) diesel power 
plant are estimated at USD 0.38/kWh (INTEC, 
2012). These cost variations indicate how difficult 
it is to compare conventional power generation 
costs to renewable energy generation costs, and 
point to the need to standardise the different 
approaches and methods for estimating costs to 
avoid creating confusion among decision makers, 
These low electricity tariffs are one of the 
reasons for SOMELEC’s strong deficits and 
the slow progress in access to energy services. 
To respond to these constraints, SOMELEC, 
with the support of the state, has launched 
a recovery plan and emergency measures. 
In 2013, the ASP’s operating subsidy was 
MRO 430 million (USD 1.37 million) for 6 000 
subscribers, while SOMELEC’s balancing 
subsidy was MRO 6 billion (USD 20.5 million) 
for 180 000 subscribers (MPEM, 2014). 
However, the state is still obliged to pay 
annual operating subsidies every year. In 
2013, the grant allocated to SOMELEC was 
USD 20.5 million. 
Emergency measures to balance SOMELEC’s 
accounts focus largely on recapitalising the 
company through capital injection and tariff 
adjustments (IMF, 2012). But longer-term 
actions have not been implemented. The Banda 
gas project is expected to improve SOMELEC’s 
financial situation by generating electricity 
at low prices. Further, the average cost of 
production is projected to drop significantly 
starting in 2015, with the commissioning of the 
30 MW wind plant and the 120 MW dual-fuel 
plant, as well as completion of the upgrades 
and additions to distribution networks in 12
The country’s electricity price projections are 
influenced in large part by the planned use of 
natural gas for electricity generation via the 
Banda project. However, given that the gas 
is not yet available (with the production and 
transportation facilities not yet built), it is difficult 
to predict when the planned dual-fuel plant will 
actually switch from oil to gas. Through the Banda 
project, the country hopes to reduce electricity 
supply costs sufficiently to enable reductions in 
the annual operating grants for SOMELEC and 
to maintain current electricity prices. Shrinking 
SOMELEC grant budgets would ease pressure 
on the state’s budget and free up additional 
resources for rural electrification. In essence, the 
current tariff structure focuses available grants 
on the most well-off, grid-connected population, 
without addressing the development needs of 
the poorest populations.
THE RENEWABLES READINESS 
ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY
The Renewables Readiness Assessment 
(RRA) process, developed by IRENA, is a 
comprehensive assessment tool for the 
promotion and deployment of renewable 
energy. The present RRA process was 
configured to assist Mauritania in the necessary 
transition to a renewables-based energy future.
IRENA became a full-fledged international 
organisation in April 2011, with a mandate to 
promote increased adoption and sustainable 
use of all forms of renewable energy. With its 
138 members and 33 countries in the process 
of accession, IRENA has the global reach to act 
as the focal point for international co-operation 
and to underpin the effort to increase the 
inclusion of renewables within the energy mix 
of countries around the world. Through its work 
programme, IRENA aims to position itself as a 
platform for stimulating policy dialogue and 
developing strategies to assist countries in their 
renewable energy transitions.
RRAs are now an integral component of the 
in “Promotion of regional consensus to 
adopt renewable energy through strategic 
intervention”. The RRA process is designed 
to provide inputs to national and regional 
renewable energy action plans and to bring 
together partners who can support the 
implementation of action plans
RAPID
The RRA highlights the 
requirements for the installation 
and on-going operation of 
renewable energy facilities
in a country
COMPREHENSIVE
It covers all renewable energy 
sources and services
NATIONAL
The RRA report, along with the 
insights and recommended 
actions therein, arise from a 
country-led process
THE RRA PROCESS IN MAURITANIA
The Directorate of Electricity and Energy 
Efficiency, within the Ministry of Petroleum 
Energy and Mines, was the RRA representative 
for Mauritania. 
The process itself was initiated in collaboration 
with the UNDP country office, which played a 
historic role in this area in the country. Initial 
preparations were funded by the UNDP 
Mauritania Office, which chose to launch 
an advisory mission, “Performing a national 
strategy for renewable energy development 
in Mauritania”, at the country’s request. This 
mission was linked to the RRA process, after 
a first consultation meeting between MPEM, 13
Preparations were carried out by a national 
consultant, an international consultant and 
MPEM. These, in collaboration with IRENA 
and UNDP, formed the “expert team” working 
group of the RRA. The development of the 
RRA methodology entailed an intensive 
literature review of the various assessment 
methodologies in the renewable energy sector 
and interaction with key experts in the field. The 
“expert team” invited a representative panel 
of stakeholders to present the findings of the 
preliminary report and to start a discussion on 
the key needs, in order to promote the increased 
use of renewable energy in the country. 
The official launch of the RRA process was 
held on 12-13 November 2013 in Nouakchott. 
Approximately 70 participants from the public 
and private sectors discussed the main issues 
that the sector faces. The lively discussions 
helped highlight a number of priorities that were 
identified in sub-workshops, including access 
to energy services, on-grid production and 
productive activities. 
In parallel, IRENA and MPEM launched a mission 
to identify capacity-building needs, which 
offered an opportunity to take stock of existing 
in-country training and additional needs.
The results of the RRA workshop and the 
mission identification needs were then 
included in an interim report. To determine 
the prospects of the renewable strategy and 
the initial findings of the report, a meeting 
was held in early April 2014 with the RRAselected committee. The committee provided 
comments and suggestions to finalise the 
report and the recommendations. 
The final report validation workshop was 
organised on 28 May 2014 in Nouakchott. 
Participants, as numerous as those for the 
launch workshop, were very active and satisfied 
with the report. Comments on the report were 
summarised and included in the final report. 
The process adopted for the country-level RRA 
has several distinct stages, as shown in figure 6.
Step 1a: Preparatory Work
•	 Setting up of a RRA team initiated 
and lead by National Government
•	 Contextualisation of the RRA
•	 Identification of key stakeholders, 
renewable energy projects and 
programmes
•	 Roadmap and timeline for 
assessment
Step 1b: Planning the Process
•	 Identification of appropriate 
service–resource pairs
•	 Preparation of list of interviewees, 
appointments and tentative
questionnaire for bilateral meetings
1. SCOPING
2. ASSESSING
3. FINALISING
Step 2a: Initial Plenary Session
•	 Introductory session led by high-level 
government official 
•	 Discussion on status, potential 
and barriers to scale up renewable 
energy
•	 Description of how to conduct the 
RRA
•	 Refining and selection of key 
renewables applications
Step 2b: The Assessment
Filling out of RRA templates with regards to:
•	 Policy & strategy
•	 Business models 
•	 Institutional, regulatory & market 
structure
•	 Resources, technologies & 
infrastructure
•	 Finance, building, operations & 
maintenance
Step 2c: Validation Workshop
•National workshop to present and 
Step 3a: Final Report
•	 Final report-writing drawn on 
preparatory materials, completed 
RRA templates and list of actions
•	 RRA Director comments and 
approves work on behalf of the 
country
Step 3b: Follow-Up Actions
•	 Working with IRENA
•	 RRA Director and Government Focal 
Point identify areas for subsequent 
collaboration and action
FIigure 6: Renewables Readiness Assessment process14
CONDUCTING RRA IN MAURITANIA
The RRA implementation in Mauritania 
was initiated with an extensive literature 
review of studies and reports relevant to 
the national context of the energy sector 
and the current renewable energy status. A 
preliminary background report was prepared 
in accordance with IRENA guidelines.
The stakeholder mapping exercise identified 
key entities in public sector bodies, financial 
institutions, research bodies and the private 
sector. A series of visits to Mauritania was 
conducted between June 2013 and May 2014, 
comprising the following activities:
•	 An introductory meeting with the Ministry 
of Energy and UNDP, focused on RRA 
initiation and information sharing with key 
stakeholders. 
•	 An inception workshop with stakeholders 
aimed at presenting the RRA template 
information, eliciting further feedback on 
the findings, and developing the action 
agenda, which is the key RRA outcome 
document.
•	 A consultation process involving the key 
governmental bodies to identify the main 
elements and priorities of the action plan 
and to give guidance on the direction 
that the future renewable energy strategy 
should take.
•	 A validation workshop with key 
stakeholders aimed at discussing and 
validating the RRA recommendations.
Aims and Objectives
The key objectives of this report are: 
•	 To assess the energy issues that Mauritania 
currently faces and to review the status of 
the country’s energy policy, specifically 
regarding renewable energy. 
•	 To critically review employed and planned 
approaches for developing institutional 
structures for deploying renewables.
•	 To review the framework for providing 
access to renewable energy, as well as 
the current status of technology and 
infrastructure to deliver it.
•	 To critically assess the opportunities and 
barriers for developing viable business 
models for renewable energy projects. 
•	 To suggest a set of actions to address the 
identified barriers.
ASSESS & REVIEW
STATUS AND ISSUES
of energy & renewable energy 
in Mauritania
APPROACHES
for developing institutional 
structures for renewable energy
FRAMEWORK
for providing access to 
renewable energy
TECHNOLOGY & INFRASTRUCTURE 
for delivering energy & 
renewable energy
OPPORTUNITIES & BARRIERS
for viable business models for 
renewable energy
RECOMMEND
A SET OF ACTIONS TO 
ADDRESS IDENTIFIED ISSUES
OBJECTIVES1516
The country already has hydropower 
resources provided by the Senegal 
River through the OMVS. In addition, 
it boasts extensive wind and solar 
resources, while meeting a majority 
of its primary energy needs through 
the use of traditional biomass.17
II. Enabling 
Framework For 
Renewable Energy
RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES 
AND USE
Mauritania is at a critical stage in its energy 
development. Numerous steps have been taken to 
guarantee electricity supply at a low price through 
exploitation of the Banda gas field. Nevertheless, 
the country is endowed with substantial renewable 
resources that can contribute significantly, both 
economically and competitively, to energy supply 
and development. The country already has 
hydropower resources provided by the Senegal 
River through the OMVS. In addition, it boasts 
extensive wind and solar resources, while meeting 
a majority of its primary energy needs through the 
use of traditional biomass.
HYDROPOWER
Mauritania has significant hydropower 
resources, the majority of which are linked to 
the Senegal River. As a member of the OMVS, 
Mauritania participates in projects that are 
conducted and planned within this framework.
The two main projects currently in operation 
are the Manantali dam, for which Mauritania 
has 30 MW of the 200 MW of available 
capacity, and the Félou dam, for which it has 
18 MW of available capacity (see figure 7). 
Mauritania has received close to 217 MW of the 
just under 690 MW of capacity planned for 
all OMVS projects. Additional OMVS dams in 
Gouina and Gourbassi, slated for completion 
by 2020, are coupled with interconnection 
projects to distribute the electricity produced 
to participating countries.
Apart from these planned large-scale projects, 
Mauritania has limited small hydropower 
potential in the south that could be exploited 
to serve small communities. The extent of 
these resources is not well assessed, but they 
could lead to a joint irrigation and power 
generation operation. It is recommended that 
the country better measure and promote 
the use of its hydropower resources through 
studies and measurements of the technical and 
economic potential of building reservoirs and/
or dams.
Figure 7: Installed hydroelectric capacity (OMVS) available to Mauritania, 2012-2025 (in MW)
0
50
100
150
200
250
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Manantali
Félou
Gouina
Gourbassi
Bouréya
Koukoutamba
Badoumbé
Installed capacity (MW)18
SOLAR
Mauritania receives a large amount of 
sunshine. The average radiation on a 
horizontal surface is 4.9-6.5 kWh/m²/day 
(1 800-2 400 kWh/m²/year), within three 
general climatic regions: the north, exposed 
to a hot and dry desert climate; the south, 
exposed to a more humid climate with lower 
solar resources; and coastal areas, exposed to 
lower temperatures but more humidity.
As illustrated in figure 8, radiation varies between 
a minimum of 1900-2000 kWh/m2
/year and 
a maximum of 2 300-2 400 kWh/m2
/year. 
There are several potential “hot spots” (with 
higher radiation) in coastal areas (GTZ, 2009;
INTEC, 2012).
Table 6 provides an overview of estimated 
solar PV production at five potential project 
sites. These measurements, which offer an 
order of magnitude for the expected scale 
of production, are estimated on an annual 
basis from direct and indirect radiation. 
The projected production at these sites is 
substantial compared to other regions where 
solar energy is strongly developed, such as 
Europe. 
Variations in production among regions are 
related to differences in overall irradiation 
as well as estimated heat losses (which can 
be limited through the use of appropriate 
technologies) and barriers such as cloud 
cover, wind, sand and mist. Table 6 also shows 
that the optimum tilt of solar panels varies 
between 15° for the localities situated in the 
south of the country (Rosso and Nouakchott) 
and 21° for the localities located in the north, 
such as Atar and Nouadibou.
Figure 8: Solar potential in Mauritania
Surface Solar Irradiation
 - Global Horizontal Irradiation
(GHI) - Annual Mean (2004-2011) -
1km - Solar Med Atlas project
1500 kWh/M2
1750 kWh/M2
2000 kWh/M2
2250 kWh/M2
2500 kWh/M219
Table 6: Potential annual electricity generation from conventional fixed PV systems
Source: EC JRC, 2008
Location kWh generated per kWp Optimum tilt installation
Nouadhibou 1 780 21°
Atar 1 590 20°
Kiffa 1 460 16°
Rosso 1 420 15°
Nouakchott 1 330 16°
Mauritania has high levels of direct and indirect 
radiation. Current data, obtained primarily 
from satellite measurements, allow for good 
estimates of the available potential but need 
to be verified at the ground level. Several pilot 
projects and measures launched in the 1990s 
could be used to refine the data, but this 
information often is not available or usable. 
Although solar energy has been explored for 
a long time in Mauritania, existing facilities 
are based almost exclusively on PV. Other 
technical options, such as concentrated solar 
power (CSP) and solar hot water, are possible 
(given the nature of the radiation), but they 
remain largely overlooked. Many PV systems 
are available locally, but these are mostly 
for small-scale (individual or collective) 
applications. Nouakchott is home to a PV 
module framing assembly unit with a limited 
production capacity.
Off-grid solar applications
Until recently, solar was used in Mauritania 
primarily for decentralised, off-grid 
applications. One of the first large-scale solar 
programmes implemented in the country was 
the Regional Solar Programme (PRS), which 
focused initially on the use of PV systems to 
supply drinking water (CILSS undated-a,b) 
and was expanded to include the distribution 
of community solar systems (e.g. lighting and 
refrigeration kits). Approximately 210 water 
and community systems were installed during 
the two phases of PRS 1 (1990-1998) and 
PRS 2 (2001-2007). Notably, as many as 30% 
of the systems installed during PRS 1 had to 
be rehabilitated during PRS 2, highlighting 
the need to properly design and maintain the 
units on site.
ADER, a Mauritanian non-governmental 
association that acts on behalf of the state, has 
installed just over 12000 solar kits throughout 
the country, with a total installed capacity of 
309 kWp. ADER has since included the 
development of mini-grids in its programme. 
APAUS, the main public stakeholder for rural 
areas in hydropower and energy, is also active 
in identifying solar-based solutions. These 
include solar lighting and refrigeration kits and 
water pumping, as well as the hybridisation of 
diesel plants used to power some mini-grids and 
multifunctional solar platforms (MFSP) (see box 1). 20
Box 1. Solar platforms for rural electrification
The solar platforms project, implemented by the French NGO GRET in conjunction with APAUS, 
cost USD 4.8 million and was funded with USD 3.4 million from the ACP-EU Energy Facility 
and USD 1.37 million from the Mauritanian government. It aims to install 100 multifunctional 
solar platforms in Brakna, Gorgol, Assaba and Hodh El Gharbi, with the goals of contributing 
to economic development and employment, improving socio-economic conditions and 
integrating the rural population into the national community.
Based on lessons learned from past projects, several different models of platforms will be 
installed, ranging from 1.5 kWp to 5 kWp. Past initiatives include 24 platforms within the 
PERUB project (funded by Energy Facility/APAUS, at USD 2.2 million), 24 platforms from 
UNDP/USAID/APAUS and 6 platforms from APAUS. 
The new models will be adapted according to village size and identified needs. The feasibility 
study has identified the following types:
•	A comprehensive platform consolidating the services of phone and battery charging, 
television, welding, crafts, cooling and a mill.
•	A simplified platform consolidating the services of phone and battery charging, television, a 
mill or cooling (or other services, as defined with local input).
•	A single-service platform providing cooling OR a mill OR crafts and welding.
•	A charging station, consolidating the services of phone and battery charging (two-way or 
four-way charging load) (or other services, as defined with local input).
•	Individual lighting kits, using a 12V socket, one to three low-energy bulbs, and a regulator 
that controls the discharge level of the battery and maximises the lifetime.
Large-scale solar projects (on- and off-grid)
Among the country’s objectives are multiple 
large-scale solar PV projects. The Sheikh Zayed 
plant, with a peak capacity of 15 MW, was 
launched in March 2013 in Nouakchott, funded 
primarily by a donation from Abu Dhabi in the 
United Arab Emirates (see box 2). Many other 
projects are also under consideration or in 
progress.
Among the planned initiatives are several 
hybrid solar-diesel generation projects coupled 
with 33 kV distribution networks for areas not 
yet electrified. The first is expected to be the 
Kiffa project, which includes 1.3 MWp of solar 
power and 4 MW of thermal power. Other 
similar projects are expected in the coming 
years and will be implemented depending 
on the availability of financing. The proposed
2.6 MW Aftout Echargui project, involving 
200 km of 33 kV line, already has raised up to 
USD 30.4 million in funding from the Islamic 
Development Bank (IDB) and the OPEC Fund 
for International Development (OFID). 
Projects to reduce the fuel use of off-grid 
industries are being considered as well. 
The first, the 3 MWp Zouerate project, is 
being carried out by SNIM and should begin 
operations shortly. 21
Box 2. The Sheikh Zayed solar PV plant in Nouakchott
The Sheikh Zayed solar PV power plant in Nouakchott, commissioned in March 2013, has a 
capacity of 15 MWp and covers an area of 30 hectares. The PV modules, provided by MASDAR 
Company, are made from amorphous silicon with two power ratings (410 W and 420 W) and 
from micromorph silicon with power ratings ranging from 470 W to 560 W. The plant is equipped 
with 17 SMA inverters and transformers of 9 1.6 MVA each. The electricity that is produced is sent 
to the station north of Nouakchott, providing 7% of the city’s supply (see figure 9).
SOMELEC has calculated that the solar PV plant enables annual savings of approximately
5 million litres of HFO, 46000 litres of diesel and 72 800 litres of oil, resulting in cost savings 
of more than USD 4 million/year. In addition, the plant has reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
by an estimated 20 000 tonnes of CO2
-equivalent. The plant construction cost a total of 
USD 32 million, funded by the Emirate of Abu Dhabi.
Photo: L. Dittrick
Arfat Plant
27%
Wharf Plant
53%
Energy
provided
by Manantali
18%
Arfat 2
Plant
2%
Solar
Production
0% Arfat Plant
28%
Wharf Plant
40%
Energy
provided
by Manantali
18%
Arfat 2
Plant
7%
Solar
Production
7%
Figure 9: Energy supplied to Nouakchott, by source, January and April 2013
Source: SOMELEC, 201422
Solar manufacturing and supply chain
The recent development of Mauritania’s 
solar market, previously limited to offgrid applications, has not yet fostered the 
emergence of significant industry and 
expertise in this area. Nouakchott is home to 
one assembly unit for mounting solar panels 
(assembling the frame and junction box) – 
ATERSA Mauritania – but its activity is irregular. 
The market is currently too small to justify the 
existence of a complete solar manufacturing 
supply chain. 
From an economic perspective, Mauritania’s 
significant solar resources can be considered 
competitive with the fossil fuel resources 
currently being used (i.e. diesel HFO). However, 
comparing the actual costs of providing power 
on site from various energy sources remains 
difficult, as this would require accounting for 
all development funding obtained for each 
infrastructure element. 
Rural solar electrification projects are 
numerous in Mauritania and include village 
electrification via hybrid solar-diesel minigrids, the installation of solar platforms 
(MFSP) and the distribution of solar lighting 
and refrigeration kits. Recurring issues with 
these projects include:
•	 Sustainability of the systems: Once the 
projects are implemented, their economic 
viability depends on their financing 
capacity and ability to increase their 
revenues. However, currently applicable 
tariffs help fund only the operation and 
a small part of renewal, which remains 
primarily the responsibility of the state and 
whose terms have not yet been defined.
•	 Maintenance of the installed systems, 
during and after the programmes.
Management of fees and funds collected 
from customers, as well as differences 
in pricing among areas connected and 
not connected to the grid; communities 
managed by SOMELEC; and communities 
•	 The necessary transition between off-grid 
communities and those that potentially 
could be connected but are not covered 
by SOMELEC. Communities previously 
connected to an independent mini-grid 
that potentially now could be connected 
to the main grid do not have access to it 
due to a lack of SOMELEC resources.
•	 The need for harmonisation of tariffs 
between the communities served by 
SOMELEC and those served by ASPs.
The context is particularly favourable for 
implementing extensive solar projects to 
reduce the fuel consumption of off-grid 
industries, particularly the mining sector. 
The first SNIM test projects will help to 
better evaluate possible savings. Similarly, 
hybridisation projects for mini-grids will 
reduce energy costs. 
Despite all this, the following challenges 
remain:
•	 It is difficult to prove that savings have 
been achieved or are feasible because of 
the existing tariff system and the lack of 
information regarding the true costs of 
generating electricity savings. However, 
off-grid, this measurement is easier.
•	 There remains a need for better control of 
hybridisation and/or coupling of solar with 
other technologies to balance electricity 
production and consumption either on- or 
off-grid.
•	 A project to monitor and evaluate the 
impact of existing solar plants would 
provide a better understanding of the 
conditions of implementation, productivity 
and the need to extend these applications 
throughout the country.
WIND
Mauritania’s wind resources are estimated 
mainly from global satellite measurements and 23
and assessments on the ground (see box 3). 
As illustrated in figure 10, the northern coastal 
areas show wind speeds of between 8.3 m/s 
and 8.7 m/s, although speeds can exceed
9 m/s in Nouadhibou. Moving south, values drop 
gradually but remain above 7 m/s along the 
coast, a level that is still high in absolute terms. 
It is more difficult to establish wind patterns 
inland, as they are affected by topography and 
specific conditions related to the sites.
Box 3. Solar platforms for rural electrification
IRENA’s Global Atlas for Renewable Energy initiative, which Mauritania joined in January 2014, 
was launched with the support of an international global consortium. The Global Atlas provides 
an Internet platform that includes homogeneous global solar and wind data and allows users 
to add layers of information on, for example, protected areas, roads or infrastructure, in order 
to identify areas of opportunity to develop projects. The Atlas also helps with the formulation 
of energy policies, in planning and with the stimulation of investments in pre-feasibility studies 
for wind and solar projects.
IRENA’s Global Atlas platform provides basic information, while enabling businesses and 
service providers to focus on personalised and high-added-value services based on specialised 
commercial databases for specific sites and projects. Through the initiative, Mauritania will 
receive support from IRENA to tackle gaps in data collection and availability in the country. 
Figure 10: Wind energy resources in Mauritania
3TIER’s Global Wind Dataset 5km
onshore wind speed at 80m height
units in m/s
3.0 m/s
3.6 m/s
4.2 m/s
4.8 m/s
5.4 m/s
6.0 m/s
6.6 m/s
7.2 m/s
7.8 m/s
8.4 m/s
9.0 m/s24
Wind power projects
Wind power has been explored in Mauritania 
since the late 1980s, focusing primarily on 
the use of mechanical wind energy for water 
pumping and electricity generation (both onand off-grid). Between the late 1990s and early 
2000s, a major demonstration and testing 
programme in collaboration with the Canary 
Islands Institute of Technology (ITC) included 
the development of a wind atlas for the country, 
a demonstration platform for renewable 
energy and maintenance at the University of 
Nouakchott, and the commissioning of four 
water desalination units (20-40 m3
/day) in 
Banc d’Arguin National Park (Izquierdo, 2005).
A research project involving Mauritania 
and Morocco, funded by NATO under the 
Science for Peace and Security programme, 
is exploring ways to convert wind energy 
into hydrogen gas (through electrolysis) and 
to store it to use when necessary. Currently, 
some wind measurement instruments have 
been installed on communication towers in 
the two countries (NATO, 2012).
Since 2012, a 4.4 MW wind farm has been in 
operation in Nouadhibou, serving SNIM needs 
for the mining industry. It comprises 16 Vergnet 
turbines mounted on retractable pylons. In 
addition, a new 30 MW plant is being finalised 
in Nouakchott and will be connected to the 
SOMELEC network. The result of the call for 
tenders for wind power in Nouakchott surprised 
many national stakeholders because of the low 
price per kWh stipulated, despite slower wind 
speeds in this area than in the country’s north.3
Wind supply chain and technical barriers
The size of the Mauritanian market does 
not justify developing local wind turbine 
manufacturing, although some elements, 
such as towers and civil works, can be 
produced locally. However, an assessment of 
the potential of local manufacturing of wind 
components should be performed.
The major technical barriers to the integration 
•	 The lack of companies with experience in 
the field.
•	 The difficulty of connecting to the 
network. Today, the only wind plant in 
operation, in Nouadhibou, feeds a small 
percentage of potential output into the 
SNIM network. The plant is used only for 
marginal production when most fuel units 
are in use.
•	 The lack of lift capacity. There is no crane 
in Mauritania capable of installing modern 
masts and turbines, which can reach over 
100 metres high and weigh tens of tonnes.
•	 No overall wind measurement campaign 
has been conducted in the country.4
However, some measurements have been 
made from specific masts, either with a 
view to carrying out pre feasibility studies 
for projects or as part of past scientific 
research.5
 The most accurate data 
obtained for feasibility studies have been 
collected over short periods of a month. 
These, provided by scientific facilities, are 
difficult to process today, although they 
are still available, and require further study.
In addition to these barriers, it would also be 
useful to process the long-term data from 
installed measuring stations, as well as to 
retrieve the data related to the Wind Atlas 
prepared in 2000.
3 MPEM calculated the price of wind power at USD 0.052/kWh.
Since this price is highly dependent on the structure and cost
of financing, it should not be used as a standard or benchmark
(any comparison should be made as an equivalent cost of
funding); however, it helps to show how some of these solutions
become competitive with the existing system. 
4 The only modern measurement campaigns were performed 
at Nouadhibou and Boulanoir, mainly by EED and Hélimax. 
5 Sites already equipped thanks to the NATO Science for 
Peace and Security programme (SaharaWind implementation)
include: Tweila, 40 kilometres northeast of Nouakchott; the 
ACS building roof, with a measurement of solar radiation; Wad
Naga, 50 kilometres southeast of Nouakchott; and
Nouadhibou road, 33 kilometres north of NKT. Sites to equip
quickly include: Nouadhibou; Boulanoir, 129 kilometres south
of Nouadhibou and its water source Inal, 40 kilometres east of
Boulanoir on a proposal from the APAUS, and another site to
bidtifid d fAPAUS25
Wind project in Mamghar carried out by APAUS and opened in July 2013.
Photo: APAUS
BIOMASS
Despite Mauritania’s largely desert climate, an 
estimated 67% of the country’s primary energy 
needs are met through the use of traditional 
biomass (wood and charcoal). Between 1995 
and 2004, the use of wood decreased, while 
the use of charcoal increased (see figure 11). 
Although these resources are a preferred 
energy source for cooking food, the use of 
traditional biomass combined with the effects 
of drought and fire have severely reduced 
the vegetation cover. The country is engaged 
in substantial replanting programmes, the 
results of which have yet to be evaluated.
Agricultural waste in the country previously 
totalled just over 500 000 tonnes/year, with 
3.7 gigawatt-hours (GWh). However, the 
period between 1991 and 2001 saw a decline in 
agricultural production. Although agricultural 
activities have since resumed, the resource 
potential should be re-evaluated.
Two additional potential biomass resources are 
jatropha and typha. Jatropha (nettlespurge), 
a perennial plant that consumes little water, 
has been praised for its potential to combat 
desertification and boost biofuel production.
It could be used as part of the Mauritanian 
replanting programme. Typha (bulrush, 
cattail) could replace charcoal in cooking. 
Its use as a fuel would also help combat the 
typha invasion in rivers and streams, which 
has contributed to habitat destruction and 26
Figure 11: Consumption of wood fuel and charcoal, 1995-2004 (in thousand tonnes)
Source: Environment Directorate, 2008
Wood Wood Charcoal
100
50
0
150
200
250
300
350
400
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Fuel consumption (1000 tonnes)
Potential biomass projects
Typha charcoal could reduce pressure on 
forest resources. A typha carbonisation 
programme is being tested in Rosso to 
produce a replacement for wood charcoal. The 
first production units have been established, 
and efforts should gradually be extended 
in the area. The project is an initiative of 
APAUS, implemented by the French NGO 
GRET in collaboration with the High Institute 
of Technological Education (Institut Supérieur 
d’Enseignement Technologique - ISET) and 
UNDP, and co-funded by the European Union 
within the framework of the African Caribbean 
and Pacific/ European Union Energy Facility. 
Preliminary results show the value of the 
programme in restoring biodiversity – for 
example, the re-emergence of water lilies and 
fishing in typha-prevalent areas.
Other biomass projects include a feasibility 
study that is under way for a gasification / 
waste incineration plant in Nouakchott, which is 
intended to be an independent power producer 
(IPP) and could allow for 15-20 MW of generation 
capacity. Additionally, a sugar production 
project being evaluated in Foum Gleita could 
enable up to 18 MW of electrical output from the 
combustion of sugarcane bagasse and produce 
38 million litres of ethanol per year.
Producing Typha charcoal in Rosso27
Biomass supply chain
The main biomass energy technologies produced 
in the country relate to improved cookstoves. 
About 56% of the population (roughly 30% of the 
urban population and 82% of the rural population) 
uses solid fuels (wood and charcoal) for cooking. 
According to the interviews organised during the 
inception phase of the RRA, only an estimated 
0.4% of the population uses improved cookstoves, 
leaving significant room for growth. 
The two main available improved stoves are the 
Ouaga Metallic Vita wood-burning stove, which 
has efficiencies greater than 45% and costs 
about USD 4.11-8.22/unit (Reikat, 2012), and the 
Multi 4-7-30 or “maslaha” wood-burning stove, 
which was introduced in the 1990s and has 
efficiencies of 30-35% (PREDAS, 2005).
The first outreach and training programmes 
for improved cookstoves, supported by the 
World Bank’s Energy Sector Management 
Assistance Program (ESMAP), targeted the 
neighbourhoods of Nouakchott in 1990. The 
programmes included significant training for 
potential producers of the stoves, including 190 
blacksmiths and metalworkers. More recently, 
the ProCEAO programme, funded by GIZ and 
the European Commission, implemented a 
project to distribute improved Vita cookstoves 
to approximately 5000 households in the 
Guidimaka region by 2014. However, an 
evaluation of the success of this project should 
be carried out to determine whether the initial 
aims of the project have been achieved and if 
the project can be duplicated elsewhere.
Biomass energy can be used for both 
centralised and decentralised generation, 
and the options are numerous, ranging from 
the development of waste-to-energy plants, 
to the distribution and manufacture of 
improved cookstoves, to the potential use of 
biodigesters. There remains a need for: 
•	 Updated estimates of the resource 
potentials for agricultural waste, 
generation capacity and the use of 
•	 Capitalising on past experiences (whether 
successes or failures); and 
•	 An updated summary of available 
technologies and assessment of local 
producers in business.
SUMMARY
Mauritania has significant renewable energy 
resources, the extents of which are generally 
unknown and poorly quantified. One priority 
would be to improve the level of knowledge 
by collecting and collating existing (often 
unprocessed) information sources to enable 
an initial assessment and the identification 
of priorities for further action. With regard 
to biomass, where the exploitable resource 
depends directly on the management of forest 
and agricultural resources, it would be useful 
to learn the extent to which certain laws and 
decrees have been applied, as well as their 
effects (e.g. regarding community participation 
provided for under the Forest Code).
ENERGY POLICY AND REGULATORY 
FRAMEWORK
Mauritania’s energy policy is defined largely 
in an ad hoc manner, based around existing 
opportunities and financed by international 
institutions and bilateral projects. This 
approach has served the country by allowing 
it to become a leader in the sub-region in 
the installation of renewable energy projects. 
To capitalise on this success and to ensure 
ongoing and co-ordinated development of 
renewables, the country needs to better define 
its goals and the means of achieving them.
STRATEGIC GUIDELINES
Energy has been identified as a priority for 
Mauritania’s development. The first theme 
of the country’s Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Paper (PRSP), for example, emphasises:
•	 Developing infrastructure to support 
growth through the improvement and 28
with particular emphasis on the fact that 
the country pays “specific interest to the 
development of energy as a factor of 
production”. 
•	 Optimal exploitation of sources of growth 
through the development of oil drilling 
and exploitation of the Banda gas field to 
overcome the energy deficit.
In all, the four priority themes of the PRSP are 
linked either directly or indirectly to energy. 
The document also reflects the country’s 
renewable energy objectives, pointing to the 
role of renewables in not only contributing to 
national development, but also reducing the 
influence of external factors on the economy.
Mauritania has clearly identified the lack of 
access to basic services, including energy, as 
a stumbling block to national development 
efforts. The PRSP seeks to expand existing 
electricity distribution channels as soon as 
possible and to provide services independently 
in locations where the grid is not available. 
Specifically, it mentions the need to develop 
local or regional energy resources (natural 
gas and hydropower) and to balance the 
renewable energy mix. 
The PRSP includes targets for the 
electrification of 108 villages in the 9 poorest 
wilayas and support for collective and private 
electrification initiatives in 192 local areas 
(villages of 500 to 1 200 inhabitants). It also 
includes the objectives of increasing the urban 
electrification rate from 50% to 80% by 2015, 
and the rural electrification rate to 40% by 
2015 (IRM, 2011).
REFORMS IN THE ENERGY AND 
ELECTRICITY SECTORS
The economic situation for energy supply 
development in the country is complex. The 
electricity sector still faces chronic deficits 
linked to a combination of factors that are 
Mauritania began a reform programme based 
on liberalisation of the electricity sector in 
1998 (World Bank and Nodalis, 2010). This 
specifically planned for the abolition of any 
power supply monopoly, for the participation 
of private operators in the sector and for setting 
rates that reflect the cost of service. The reform 
was intended to result in the privatisation of 
SOMELEC. However, the privatisation process 
tender was not conclusive, with only one 
qualifying bid.
Key laws and regulations relating to the 
electricity sector are described below.
Act 2001-19: This legislation establishes the 
electricity code and has among its objectives: 
liberalisation of the electricity sector; the 
harmonious development of electricity within 
the framework of existing laws; the creation 
of economic conditions that guarantee a 
return on investment in the electricity sector; 
growth in electricity use in all segments of the 
population and industry; and the conditions 
for just and fair competition, upholding the 
rights of users and operators.
Although planned privatisation projects have 
been abandoned, some of the structure that 
was put in place under the Act to support the 
industry still exists, including the possibility of 
IPPs and the establishment of a regulator that 
is now active in the sector. For the moment, 
however, the regulator covers only authorised 
service providers (ASPs), not SOMELEC. 
State–SOMELEC Programme Contract: To 
date, this is the only formalisation of relations 
between the state and SOMELEC. The contract 
dates from 2001 and does not cover the role 
of the regulator. Since then, the state has 
implemented several specific measures, such 
as shifting the supply of energy services in the 
mougathaas from ASPs to SOMELEC. 
Master Plan for the Production and Transport 
of Electricity: In its Master Plan for the 
Production and Transport of Electricity 29
energy scenarios and their consequences, 
covering the major themes of diversifying 
production and reinforcing and expanding the 
transport and distribution network. 
PRSP: The PRSP specifically mentions renewable 
energy sources and includes renewable 
generation targets of 15% by 2015, 20% by 2020 
and 35% by 2030 (IRM, 2011). It recognises the 
contribution of renewable energy in helping to 
secure the country’s energy supply, reduce its 
dependence on imported oil, stabilise electricity 
generation costs and improve energy access 
in off-grid areas. However, the PRSP does not 
specifically point to renewables as an option for 
producing lower-cost electricity for large, offgrid applications. The Banda gas project is seen 
as an end-all solution for developing the mining 
and industrial sector. However, many centres 
of energy demand are located so far from the 
network that grid extension is not feasible. In 
these cases, renewable energy could be used 
as a “fuel saver” to complement conventional 
generation.
In a pragmatic way, Mauritania has deployed 
renewable energy through a project-based 
approach, making it a leader in the sub-region 
in major solar and wind power capacity (in 
addition to the hydropower projects deployed 
through the OMVS). The country has made 
similar strides with efforts to improve access to 
energy services, with substantial achievements 
in solar hybrid off-grid production and the 
construction of wind-diesel hybrid projects 
for coastal communities, in addition to gridconnected projects. 
With these models in place, it would now be 
useful for Mauritania to provide structure to its 
renewable energy activities by developing a 
policy that clearly defines the country’s goals 
and means to achieve them. This would allow it to 
continue to progress in a more deliberate manner 
by ensuring the continuity and sustainability of 
actions, while giving visibility to participants in 
the renewable energy field. This long-term vision 
is critical not only to help national actors plan 
reduce prices. Any instability in energy policies, 
whether perceived or real, may increase country 
risks, potentially discouraging participants from 
investing in projects and increasing the cost of 
financing available from banks and donors.
INVESTMENT AND FINANCING 
As in other countries in the region, much of 
the financing for energy sector investments in 
Mauritania comes from international donors. 
This is the case for most newly built projects 
as well as for many of the projects currently 
under evaluation. SOMELEC’s shaky financial 
position precludes additional debt, and the 
company is unable at present to provide 
energy services in rural areas (whether 
based on renewables or conventional fuels). 
The current average generation cost for 
ASPs is MRO 261 (USD 0.93) /kWh (APAUS, 
2014a), which far exceeds the selling price of 
MRO 51-90 (USD 0.18-0.32) /kWh.
Many international donors are active in 
Mauritania’s energy sector. A leading donor 
is the Arab Fund for Economic and Social 
Development (FADES), which in 2013 
contributed USD 10.4 million to finance 
power generation facilities in rural areas, 
USD 5.2 million to finance the 30 MW wind 
power plant in Nouakchott and USD 105 million 
to modernise the national electricity generation 
and transport system (AF, 2011). All of this 
funding, in the form of concessional loans, is 
granted with interest rates ranging from 2.5% to 
3% over a period of 20-25 years.
The French development agency AFD 
has been active in the electricity sector, 
providing budgetary support in the form of 
two sovereign concessional loans, totalling 
USD 89 million, to accompany reform of 
the sector. It also granted a sovereign loan 
of USD 26 million, plus a European grant of 
USD 6.6 million, for the construction of a hybrid 
solar-thermal power station in the Kiffa region. 
In addition, it participated in the financing of the 30
The World Bank is heavily involved in the 
institutional arena and in guaranteeing 
development of the Banda gas field, which 
involves processing the gas, converting it 
into electricity and transmitting this power 
throughout the country and beyond. Other 
donors – such as the European Commission 
through the European Development Fund (EDF) 
and the ACP-EU Energy Facility – are involved 
in energy service provision projects. Additional 
donors include the Islamic Development Bank 
(IDB), one of the country’s major donors today; 
the OPEC Fund (OFID); and the Saudi Fund, 
which allocated the additional USD 70 million 
needed for construction of the Nouakchott - 
Nouadhibou high-voltage line. In addition, the 
Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi funded the 15 MW 
Sheikh Zayed solar PV plant in Nouakchott, 
through a grant of USD 32 million.
This financing structure allows the country to 
limit capital costs for national projects. But it 
also reflects a difficulty in raising commercial 
funds, given the national economic situation. 
Mobilising low-cost funding from donors can 
be an advantage for renewable energy projects, 
which typically are capital intensive and have 
low variable costs. The 30 MW wind plant in 
Nouakchott, for example, was funded with
USD 52 million from FADES and USD 6.85 million 
from the Mauritanian government, bringing 
the cost to USD 0.066/kWh (MPEM, 2014). But 
renewable energy sources are not necessarily 
best suited to donor funding mechanisms, 
as these mechanisms are not always able to 
take into account renewable energy project 
specificities (e.g. smaller projects require the same 
administrative processing costs as larger ones). 
Moreover, national funding mechanisms do exist 
in Mauritania. The country’s Fund for Universal 
Access to Services (FAUS), for example, is 
funded through several sources. These include: 
fees collected within specific laws, among them 
the law relating to the Multisectoral Regulatory 
Authority (ARM) and sectoral laws relating to 
water, electricity (only ASPs contribute fees, 
not SOMELEC) and telecommunications (a key 
partner contributions for developments; and 
allocations for poverty reduction resources.
A critical issue for renewable energy in particular 
is the availability and cost of financing. Because 
most renewable technologies have low variable 
costs, the bulk of the funding must be raised during 
the project’s “bank closing” to cover fixed costs. 
This is perhaps an area where the government of 
Mauritania can have the most influence. Without 
spending more, it can significantly reduce the 
cost of financing renewable energy projects 
by implementing stable legislation that would 
reduce country-related risks. Technological 
risks could be managed by developing a strong 
national capacity for installing, managing and 
maintaining renewable technologies. Many 
measures could be taken to use planned and 
commissioned projects (both on- and off-grid) 
to train future installers and project managers. 
The country also may consider creating a specific 
national fund dedicated to the promotion of 
renewable energy, thereby reducing financial 
risks and helping to lower the cost of projects.
The government’s biggest impact on the 
development of renewable energy sources could 
be through the creation of a stable, sustainable 
and transparent environment. In this context, 
it may be useful to consider creating longterm rate guarantee mechanisms for power 
producers, whether they are on the SOMELEC 
network or directly producing electricity for 
off-grid industrial needs. The legal framework 
of the National Electrical Code provides for the 
existence of IPPs, but it could include specific 
provisions for renewable energy, as well as 
provide a standard power purchase agreement 
(PPA) that could be adapted as needed.
R&D AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
Research and development (R&D) is an important 
component for harnessing new technologies, 
developing know-how and improving energy 
performance. In Mauritania, a variety of R&D 
institutions and training centres for renewable 31
to-date information for policy makers and 
developers (see table 7). But close co-ordination 
among industry, academia, research institutions 
and governments is needed to better take 
advantage of renewable energy resources. 
Additionally, there is a great need in the 
country for training in renewable energy at 
the technical and engineering levels (CNA, 
2013). Companies lack qualified personnel 
for maintenance and installation jobs, and 
the courses offered today are not suitable or 
are too theoretical to meet the need. Training 
institutions also lack the resources to conduct 
quality training. 
To overcome these shortcomings, the 
following steps are encouraged:
•	 Regional and international co-operation 
to allow the exchange of experiences, 
expertise and know-how. ECREEE (of 
which Mauritania recently became a 
member) provides various capacity 
development, internship and knowledge - 
exchange activities. Other regional training 
institutes, including at the secondary level, 
could share technical platforms, teaching 
and methods.
•	 Collaboration with companies in the 
country and region, to take advantage of 
their feedback and to ensure that trainees 
are tailored to their needs.
•	 Renovation of existing R&D and training 
facilities and the identification of 
sustainable resources to maintain them, as 
well as installation of additional equipment 
adapted to new R&D needs.
Table 7: Key R&D institutions and training centres in Mauritania*
Institution/Centre Description
Centre for Applied Research in 
Renewable Energy in Mauritania 
(CRAER)
Created in the context of the proposed Renewable Energy Park funded by the 
Canary Islands (Spain) to promote renewable energy applications, desalination 
of water, and cooling with national and international partners. CRAER uses 
applied research to solve new problems posed by different applications in the 
field and the need for academic training; however, the lack of resources and 
the cyclical nature of projects make data collection and capitalisation difficult.
Nouakchott University – Faculty of 
Science and Technology
Offers theory-based bachelor-, master- and doctorate-level courses, focused 
mainly on energy calculation and the design of renewable energy systems. 
However, it suffers from a deficit in teaching staff and a need for training. 
It also lacks the necessary resources to meet all requests received for the 
Renewable Energy Masters.
École des Mines in Mauritania (EMIM)
A newly created institution (the first graduates have not yet completed their 
engineering education) that offers a specialisation in electro-mechanics. EMIM 
plans to create a renewable energy option, but details on this are not yet 
available.
Higher Institute of Technological 
Education : Institut Supérieur 
d’Enseignement Technologique 
(ISET) 
Primarily an institute of higher education, at the technician level. It provides 
training that touches on energy but does not specialise in this field. In 
collaboration with GRET, it also conducts applied research on system 
maintenance and processing of Typha for the manufacture of a charcoal 
replacement. ISET offers many agricultural activities that may be of use in the 
field of bioenergy (use of agricultural residues, etc.).
Centre for Advanced Technical 
Training (CSET) 
Provides short vocational training in tertiary areas (secretary, office assistant, 
managing SME) and technical occupations (mechanical, electrical, cooling and 
air conditioning, maintenance, etc.).
SNIM Technical Training Centre of 
Zouerate
Offers vocational and technical training through alternated learning, including 
courses in mechanics, industrial electricity and welding. Graduates of the 
Training Centre are given priority when applying for SNIM.32
One of the greatest limitations to 
renewable energy development is 
the difficulty of comparing investment 
costs. Renewables are often deemed 
“more expensive” than conventional 
fossil resources, in part because most 
cost comparisons do not account for 
the environmental or social benefits of 
renewables or for the large subsidies 
that fossil fuels still receive. 33
III. Challenges In 
The Deployment Of 
Renewable Energy 
COSTS AND ELECTRICITY TARIFFS 
Mauritania boasts substantial renewable 
energy resources in many areas. However, 
the electricity network and the level of 
interconnection are still limited. Many 
population pockets and economic activities 
are not connected to the grid and could benefit 
from a renewable energy supply. Existing 
renewable energy projects have demonstrated 
their potential to provide generation to the 
grid as well as their competitiveness with 
conventional solutions. However, many of the 
benefits of renewables – in terms of securing 
energy supply, price stability, job creation, 
climate change mitigation and others – are 
currently not included in calculations of the 
cost of generating electricity.
One of the greatest limitations to renewable 
energy development is the difficulty of comparing 
investment costs. Renewables are often deemed 
“more expensive” than conventional fossil resources, 
in part because most cost comparisons do not 
account for the environmental or social benefits of 
renewables or for the large subsidies that fossil fuels 
still receive. Because of their inherently different 
characteristics, including their variable nature, 
renewable energy sources cannot be planned, 
managed or analysed in the same manner as 
conventional solutions. Nevertheless, price trends in 
the global renewable energy sector – especially for 
wind and solar (see figure 12) – confirms that these 
resources already are competitive with conventional 
sources in some regions.
Figure 12: Price of solar PV in selected countries, 2010-2014
0
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
2013 USD/kW
Germany residential
Chinese c-Si module
prices (EU)
US residential
US non-residential
US utility
Australia
China
Italy
Japan
2010 2011 2012 2013 201434
Price comparisons should also be made 
under similar conditions. Most global 
comparisons of conventional versus 
renewable generation costs are made under 
commercial bank financing conditions, 
which are not always available in Africa. 
Projects in Mauritania typically are funded by 
development banks, combining grants and 
traditional debt to reduce interest rates (see 
earlier discussion of financing). Comparing 
costs for grid-connected generation funded 
by development financing (soft loans), as 
opposed to commercial conditions, paints a 
very different picture, with diesel costs much 
higher than those for renewable energy (see 
figure 13). 
Figure 13: Electricity generation costs, by source, on the ECREEE network: commercial versus soft 
loan conditions
Source: ECOWAS, 2012
Resulting costs for renewable energy grid-connected
production - Commercial conditions
Resulting costs for renewable energy grid-connected
production - Soft loans conditions
0,150
0,100
0,050
0,000
0,200
Diesel
Wind
Solar PV
CSP
Mini-Hydro
Biomass
Average
WAPP
€/kWh
0,150
0,100
0,050
0,000
0,200
Diesel
Wind
Solar PV
CSP
Mini-Hydro
Biomass
Average
WAPP
€/kWh
The comparison also shows that the 
“average production price”6
 of the West 
African Power Pool (WAPP) is quite low, at 
USD 0.068-0.096/ kWh. This is because 
most of the infrastructure built – including 
the transmission network and the generation 
capacity – has been subsidised, and because 
cost calculations are based on infrastructure 
that has already been widely written off, limiting 
costs to the variable costs of this infrastructure.
To be consistent, cost comparisons should be made 
between new infrastructure to be installed, in order 
to provide a better idea of the opportunity cost 
of each option. Furthermore, renewable energy 
provides the important benefit of price stabilisation: 
the low share of variable costs helps to stabilise the 
generation cost over the long term. In addition, 
renewables can, among other benefits, significantly 
increasingly resource-constrained environment, 
meeting growing demands for water and food 
(IRENA, 2015).
For Mauritania, comparing the calculated 
generation costs for electricity from the 
Banda gas field (table 8) and centralised 
wind power (table 9) shows that the costs 
not only are comparable, but even give wind 
energy the edge. A similar comparison for 
centralised solar PV generation has not been 
possible, because the analysis (Tractebel, 2010) 
used a methodology based on off-grid use. 
Nevertheless, centralised solar PV could reach 
similar levels of competitiveness.
6 It is important to distinguish between “price” and “cost”. Price
involves measuring a unit of value expressed in the market that 
does not necessarily take into account all costs incurred by the 
state and the population. To make two options comparable, it is35
Table 8: Unit cost of generation from the Banda gas project (SPEG) 
Table 9: Updated generation costs of wind power plants 
Source: Tractebel, 2012
Note: IRR = Internal Rate of Return; O&M = Operation and Maintenance
Source: Tractebel, 2010
Components of the 
unit cost
IRR = 10% IRR = 13% IRR = 15%
USD/MWh USD/MWh USD/MWh
Spec cost. recov. capital 34.22 43.51 34.22
Fixed cost O&M 7.41 7.41 7.41
Variable cost O&M 9.2 9.2 9.2
Cost of fuel 167 167 167
TOTAL 117.82 127.10 133.86
Wind speed 
(m/s)
Production 
(MWh/MW)
Updated production costs 
(USD/kWh)
9.0 4 004 0.768
8.5 3 627 0.850
8.0 3 224 0.954
7.5 2 803 1.098
7.0 2 375 1.296
OFF-GRID PRICE COMPARISON 
As might be expected, renewable resources 
have much higher investment (capital) 
costs than diesel in Mauritania (see table 
10). However, the costs per kWh generated 
paint a different picture. According to one 
calculation (Tractebel, 2012), the average 
generation cost for isolated SOMELEC diesel 
plants was MRO 78.83/ kWh (USD 0.28/kWh), 
and for authorised service providers (ASPs) 
(who manage smaller plants), it was
MRO 141/ kWh (USD 0.51/kWh) (excluding fuel) 
and MRO 261/ kWh (USD 0.93/kWh) (including 
fuel) in 2009. This is higher than the average 
generation cost for solar energy with storage, 
calculated at USD 0.27/kWh in the Master Plan 
for the Production and Transport of Electricity 
(Tractebel, 2012).
However, the Master Plan does not take these 
figures into consideration when comparing 
generation costs. This is not surprising, 
because the document is mostly technical and 
does not cover micro- and macro-economic 
aspects. Nevertheless, the country needs to 
be aware of the true price and consequences 
of its energy choices, which is not the case 
today given the difficulty of measuring the 
true costs of generation.
Table 10: Unit costs of bids received by APAUS 
over three years for off-grid RFQs for capacity 
ranging from 50 kWp to 120 kWp
Source: APAUS, 2014a
Resource Cost (USD/kW)
Solar 5 297.8
Wind 4 281.2
Diesel 471.2836
ON-GRID ELECTRICITY 
As seen above, renewable energy can prove 
competitive for grid-connected generation. It also 
offers numerous economic and environmental 
benefits that are difficult to measure through 
electricity tariffs. However, the competitiveness of 
a renewable energy solution ultimately depends 
on the technology, the quality of available 
resources, the availability of funding, as well as 
issues specific to the location of the generation. 
For example, although the Nouadhibou region has 
strong wind resources – and thus high potential for 
large wind farms – local electricity demand may not 
be sufficient to warrant such an investment. Even in 
the case of significant demand, however, it would 
be necessary to plan generation based on the 
capacity of the existing transmission grid, to enable 
the transport of the electricity to consumption 
centres. The Banda gas project includes significant 
transmission capacity, including the creation of a 
major north-south transport axis, which could be 
used in part by renewable power plants. The wind 
conditions in the country’s north could enable 
Mauritania to consume and export any excess 
power at reasonable prices to ECOWAS countries 
via the OMVS network.
For solar PV, based on the country’s average 
electricity production price of USD 0.34/kWh 
(AFD, 2013), generation is already competitive 
with numerous national production solutions.
One advantage of renewable energy is its 
inherently decentralised nature. If there are 
sufficient resources, they can be deployed 
directly where they are consumed in order to 
reduce transmission costs. This makes it possible 
to plan renewables deployment based on 
network needs and not vice versa, as in the case 
of conventional technology (with the network 
designed around the plant). Renewable energy 
therefore can provide significant value added by 
being produced on-site. For example: 
•	 End-of-the-line production can strengthen 
the grid, reduce transmission losses and 
•	 Siting a renewable energy plant at an 
overloaded substation can help reduce 
electrical losses and avoid the construction 
of a new line.
•	 A renewable power plant can be built faster 
than a conventional plant; for example, a 
solar PV plant can be completed in three 
months to quickly strengthen the grid 
where needed.
Finally, long-term planning of renewable 
power plants is necessary for the preparation 
of feasibility studies, the possible extension 
and capacity expansion of the transport or 
distribution system, and to demarcate areas 
(zoning) with high renewables potential. This 
systematic planning should lower potential 
risks related to site selection and therefore 
reduce the burdens and costs of projects.
OFF-GRID ELECTRICITY
Mauritania is a vast country with a small 
population that does not require an extensive 
electricity network, and load centres are 
spread throughout the country. Therefore, the 
need for decentralised services is important. 
Mining operations are often located outside 
populated areas and away from the grid in the 
north (see figure 14; mines are depicted with 
pink squares).
These mining centres are supplied mostly 
by large diesel/HFO plants (up to 10 MW 
per unit and 50 MW per mining centre). But 
in these conditions and locations, solar and 
wind energy (depending on wind conditions) 
can be competitive with existing solutions 
and used to reduce fuel consumption. There 
is a rising awareness of renewable energy’s 
potential to lower production costs within 
these areas; however, applicable solutions 
are still not fully understood or are unsuited 
to the needs of industry (there is a need for 
IPP offers). Little information is available on 
planned projects in the short term, but the 37
Figure 14: Mauritania’s electricity grids and mining areas
Source: INTEC, 2012
The boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any official endorsement or acceptance by IRENA.
The Banda gas project is seen as the solution for 
meeting industrial power needs at a reasonable 
cost. Although the project will help to supply 
existing needs, many industrial centres (such as 
those in the northeast) will remain unconnected 
to the network. The country should encourage 
the use of renewable energy in these remote 
centres to reduce the overall cost of generating 
electricity and to reduce the effect of imported 
petroleum products on the balance of trade. 
Moreover, greater private sector investment in 
renewables would allow Mauritania to reduce 
numerous costs related to renewable energy 
deployment (maintenance, installation or 
merely investment costs), as the market would 
be much larger. 
GENERATION IN OFF-GRID
CONSUMPTION CENTRES
The Master Plan for the Production and 
Transport of Electricity offers an interesting 
scenario for connecting consumption centres 
outside of the main grid system. Because 
grid-based electricity, they depend on diesel 
generation. Renewable energy, depending on 
the location, can be used economically in the 
energy production mix.
This solution already is being used in several 
isolated consumption centres to reduce the 
cost of electricity through the hybridisation 
of generation. One of the first such projects, 
being built in Kiffa, includes a 4.8 MW thermal 
unit and a 1.3 MWp solar field. Other planned 
projects will be launched as and when they 
can be financed.
ENERGY SERVICES IN RURAL AREAS
Numerous programmes and electrification 
projects in Mauritania focus on poor rural areas 
that are not connected to the grid (see box 
4). The government has developed a unique 
process within Africa to finance a portion of 
the cost of extending services to rural areas 
through the Fund for Universal Access to 
Services (FAUS), which is presently supplied by 38
be supplemented by contributions from the 
country’s grid-connected network, including 
authorised service providers (ASPs) and SPEG 
in the future, bearing in mind that the current 
electricity tariff does not generate even enough 
money to make SOMELEC financially viable.
The country has been able to develop a market 
for ASPs. It would be interesting to support 
and extend this system to provide solutions 
for off-grid populations. Nevertheless, ASP 
businesses are still struggling, with tariffs and 
state subsidies barely able to maintain the 
status quo. The inclusion of renewable energy 
sources in these production systems would 
reduce the variable costs of production and, 
by the same token, the subsidies required by 
the state. However, it is essential to consider 
revising electricity rates to introduce some 
degree of balance among different areas. 
Prices and services vary greatly among the 
areas connected to the grid, the moughataa 
mini-grids managed by SOMELEC, and 
networks managed by the ASPs. 
As part of the Master Plan for the Production and 
Transport of Electricity, an exercise was carried 
out to measure potential demand and existing 
solutions for off-grid villages and to identify 
potential additional means to provide them 
with the necessary services. However, the plan 
largely downplays the potential for renewables 
and heavily overstates their generation costs. 
For wind power, it plans for an additional 
120 MW by 2030, and for solar, it plans for an 
additional 105 MW by 2030 to meet state goals 
for renewables. But the plan only provides 
these figures as indicative – highlighting that 
the necessary production margins would not 
be sufficient – without explaining further.
Box 4. IRENA wind and hybrid projects for rural communities including 
fishing villages
A wind power mini-grid project and a grid-connected hybrid solar, wind and hydro project 
were approved for funding by the IRENA-ADFD (Abu Dhabi Fund for Development) project 
facility in 2014 and 2015 respectively. Valued at USD 22 million, the projects will be 50% funded 
by ADFD the rest coming from the Mauritanian government. The multi-sectoral projects seek 
to provide access to clean energy to 169 villages with an average population of about 1 000. 
The National Agency for Development of Renewable Energy (ANADER) and the Agency for 
the Promotion of Universal Access and Services (APAUS) are the project coordinators.
The wind energy mini-grid project is to use wind not only to meet electricity needs but also 
water (desalination) and refrigeration needs (ice production) in the conservation of fishery 
products. It would include 18 wind turbines of 15 kW each, a meteorological measurement 
system, a 4 kilometre medium-voltage (15 kV) transport network, a 5 kilometre low-voltage 
(0.4 kV) distribution network, storage with batteries, two desalination units based on reverse 
osmosis of 100 m3
/day and two ice manufacturing units producing 5 tonnes/day.
i The IRENA-ADFD project facility supports renewable energy projects in developing countries The total available concessional loans 
per year are USD 50 million. The amount available per project is USD 5-10 million, with the loan amount not allowed to exceed 50% 
of the estimated project cost. Interest rates on concessional loans granted vary between 1% and 2% annually, with a term of 20 
Solar plant from IRENA-ADFD backed hybrid project in Mauritania 
Photo: APAUS39
CHALLENGES
Despite Mauritania’s existing efforts to develop 
renewable energy sources, many challenges 
remain that continue to impede the scale-up 
of renewables. Several of these challenges 
were mentioned at all of the workshops and 
sub-workshops associated with this report, 
including:
•	 The lack of an identifiable strategy and 
long-term vision for the development of 
renewable energy. 
•	 The inability of the current legal 
environment, whether the regulatory or 
the institutional framework, to sufficiently 
reflect these priorities and thus to provide 
a sufficient level of support. 
•	 The existence of too much overlap between 
current programmes and institutional 
participants, creating inefficiencies in 
managing priorities and available budgets. 
This overlap affects both equipment 
maintenance and the management of 
production facilities. It also creates price 
inequality, mostly for off-grid applications, 
as the SOMELEC-supplied moughataas 
co-exist alongside the ASPs that supply 
the smaller villages, as well as alongside 
solar platforms and individual solar kits – 
each with a specific per kWh price. 
•	 The lack of a stable regulatory and tariff 
structure, and the need to overhaul 
existing electricity tariffs. 
•	 The need to expand the role of the 
regulator to cover the electricity company, 
SOMELEC, and to have broader authority 
in setting tariffs and market rules.
Challenges also were identified in the 
capacity-building arena, starting with a lack 
of qualified personnel. This highlighted the 
need to adapt existing vocational training in 
line with business needs. Finally, expertise 
and necessary data, which are sometimes 
collected but not saved, are often missing.40
The key drivers for integrating more 
renewables into the country’s energy 
mix are clear, and there is political 
support from all of the stakeholders. 
There is a consensus to diversify the 
energy mix, particularly through 
increased use of renewable energy, 
increased energy efficiency and 
greater integration of the
private sector. 41
IV. Strategy and action 
plan for deployment 
of renewables 
The recommendations for the RRA process 
outlined in this report all were made during 
presentations and validation workshops, or 
were confirmed later within the RRA process. 
All of the stakeholders unanimously adopted 
the three service-resource pairs identified 
during the framework of the process. These 
were defined, based on Mauritania’s economic 
development objectives, as follows:
•	 Access to energy services: solar, small 
hydro, biomass and, to a lesser extent, 
wind.
•	 Productive activities (mining, fishing, 
agriculture): solar and/or wind (depending 
on the location) for, e.g. cooling and 
freezing fisheries resources after 
processing.
•	 Centralised production network: wind 
and solar, plus storage and network 
management.
The main discussions and exchanges were 
structured around these service-resource 
pairs. Several common themes emerged from 
exchanges on the RRA process. 
The main objective of the RRA process and 
this report is to prepare the ground for the 
formulation of a renewable energy strategy 
and action plan in Mauritania. The RRA seeks 
not only to identify barriers and challenges 
to renewable energy deployment, but also 
to develop a targeted programme of actions 
through a comprehensive participatory 
approach and consultation process.
ELEMENTS OF A RENEWABLE ENERGY 
STRATEGY 
The key drivers for integrating more 
renewables into the country’s energy mix are 
clear, and there is political support from all 
of the stakeholders. There is a consensus to 
diversify the energy mix, particularly through 
increased use of renewable energy, increased 
energy efficiency and greater integration of 
the private sector. However, key obstacles 
holding back developments in the renewable 
energy sector include: 1) the absence of a clear 
strategy and policy for renewable energy,
2) the lack of a clear institutional framework 
to facilitate implementation of the policy and 
3) the lack of a clear financial mechanism 
to support the deployment of renewables 
projects (both on- and off-grid). A national 
strategy and policy for renewable energy 
therefore should be launched in Mauritania 
with involvement of the key stakeholders.
The renewable energy strategy can be 
segmented into four main pillars (see figure 15): 
•	 Legal and regulatory framework
•	 Institutional and organisational framework
•	 Capacity building, R&D and outreach
•	 Financial framework and incentives.42
Figure 15: Renewable energy deployment strategy in Mauritania
RENEWABLE
ENERGY
STRATEGY
Institutional and
organisational
framework
Financial 
framework and
incentives
Legal and 
regulatory
framework
Capacity
building, R&D 
and outreach
LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Although long-term objectives for renewable 
energy exist in Mauritania, they are included 
only in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
(PRSP) and may not be sufficiently visible. 
It therefore is necessary to reiterate the 
country’s goals in a general policy document. 
Participants in the RRA process and ministry 
officials have suggested including the specific 
elements of the renewable energy strategy 
in the country’s more ambitious “Energy 
policy declaration note”, in order to increase 
the visibility and political significance of the 
strategy. It is expected that this note will be 
updated to better reflect the situation. 
This policy declaration note should include the 
following ambitious targets already set in the 
PRSP: 
•	 The share of renewable energy in electricity 
generation is to increase to 15% by 2015, 
20% by 2020 and 35% by 2030. To make 
these goals more ambitious, it would be 
possible to exclude hydropower generated 
•	 Electrification rates are to increase from 
50% to 80% in urban areas, and from 5% 
to 40% in rural areas, by 2015. The energy 
policy note could maintain these goals 
while adopting a longer time frame, for 
example 2030, to reflect the government’s 
commitment within the UN SE4ALL 
initiative, which aims to double the current 
share of renewable energy by 2030. 
Moreover, the note should indicate the specific 
legislative, institutional and capacity-building 
framework actions detailed below. The note 
should also cover private sector involvement 
in the successful implementation of this policy. 
A recurring comment made during discussions 
with RRA participants was the need to 
enforce and harmonise existing policies and 
regulations. Although the laws and statutes of 
the various entities cover the main needs of 
the country, they are not necessarily enforced. 
As a result, there was less interest in adopting 
a renewable “stand-alone” law and greater 
support for including a declaration note 43
would contain the necessary elements for 
renewables. 
Initially, the general policy note, which is 
expected to be produced shortly, will integrate 
the country’s vision and objectives for 
renewable energy. The corresponding decrees 
must be adapted to account for the changing 
needs of the country and to set the conditions 
for renewable energy use and operation – for 
example, by giving renewables priority access 
to the grid, establishing the conditions for 
export, opening up the market to IPPs within 
a PPA framework, and establishing the roles of 
various participants. 
A specific law for renewable energy could then 
be developed in a second phase and would 
further strengthen the role of renewables 
and provide a legal and statutory basis, while 
attracting investments and building a climate 
of mutual trust between public and private 
sector participants. This law could reflect the 
initial results in applying the general policy 
note, making it possible to draft the law to 
better meet the country’s renewable energy 
objectives.
An initial set of amendments to the laws and 
decrees in force is summarised below. These 
changes could later be reflected directly in 
the new renewable energy law, or modified in 
response to lessons learned.
Electricity Code: The current electricity code, 
which dates from 2001, should be amended to:
•	 Change regulation thresholds (currently 
at 30 kVA) to require all producers, 
via mandatory declaration, to notify 
the regulator, in order to ensure better 
monitoring of the country’s facilities.
•	 Include the possibility for derogation 
regimes (for self-generation), in order to:
•	 Feed excess electricity into the grid 
where this is in the national interest, at 
•	 Build and manage distribution 
networks, limited to the people 
surrounding the self-generation site, 
where the public grid is not available.
•	 Allow multiple non-grid-connected 
entities to form a consortium to 
generate electricity for their production 
needs (extended self-generation).
•	 Encourage or even require selfgenerators to “hybridise” a portion 
of their production with renewable 
energy in order to further reduce the 
national oil bill.
•	 Recognise the importance of the 
private sector in off-grid generation 
(self-generation) and encourage their 
participation in discussions about the 
country’s energy choices and decisions.
•	 Reflect the possibility of increased regional 
co-operation, especially with regard to 
production and export.
State-SOMELEC contract: The 2001 contract 
between the state and SOMELEC should be 
updated to better reflect the changing needs 
of the country and the energy sector. The 
contract should place SOMELEC within the 
scope of the regulator, which is presently not 
the case, despite the fact that ARM statutes 
provide for this. 
Electricity tariff framework: The tariff 
framework (whether on- or off-grid) should 
be revised to better reflect the situation of the 
country and to ensure operators’ economic 
viability (a principle already stated in the 
Electricity Code), while also reflecting the 
purchasing power of the population. The tariff 
changes being evaluated should:
•	 Ensure the economic viability of operators, 
such as SOMELEC and the ASPs.
•	 Balance the situation in rural areas, where 44
unconnected moughataas) with ASP 
tariffs, leading to a confused price signal.
•	 Consider tariff equalisation mechanisms 
to ensure that subscribers in urban areas 
can contribute, even if only partially, to 
subsidising rates in rural areas.
ASP statutes and concession contracts: 
Statutes and contracts related to ASPs should 
be revised to better reflect changes in markets, 
delegations and population needs. Proposed 
changes include:
•	 Revising tariffs to ensure the economic 
viability of operators, while adjusting to the 
purchasing power of the population.
•	 Restructuring balancing subsidies to allow 
operators to install renewable systems
(i.e. making it possible to front-load 
subsidies at the start of projects to allow for 
investment in renewable energy).
•	 Revising the concession contract length to 
provide better long-term visibility to local 
operators.
•	 Revising the equipment leasing concept 
(affermage) to allow operators who wish 
to do so to invest in renewable energy 
facilities.
•	 Providing necessary maintenance of 
light and heavy equipment to ensure its 
longevity.
•	 Seeking additional funds (such as those 
collected under the Fund for Universal 
Access to Services, FAUS) to stabilise 
available revenues for financing access to 
services and to allow authorities to extend 
access to energy services.
INSTITUTIONAL AND ORGANISATIONAL 
FRAMEWORK
As with the country’s legal framework, 
institutional needs relate mainly to optimising 
illustration, competition between institutions 
led to the decision to dissolve the National 
Agency for Renewable Energy Development 
(ANADER) in January 2013, after being in 
existence for just over two years, and to share 
ANADER’s powers among existing agencies 
and institutions rather than maintaining a 
specific entity. This highlights the need to 
co-ordinate the actions of key actors before 
considering the creation of new entities. 
An initial set of recommendations for key 
institutions is summarised below.
MPEM: MPEM should be the exclusive 
institutional anchor for all structures and 
interventions in the energy sector, in order to 
provide a clear framework for interventions in 
this area. This role can be shared with other 
departments, such as APAUS, which is also 
controlled by the Ministry of Economic Affairs 
and Development. However, MPEM should 
maintain its role in policy co-ordination and 
intervention. A specific service for renewable 
energy could be created within MPEM to coordinate policies and actions in this area.
Multi-sector committee: As is the case for 
ECOWAS countries, Mauritania should consider 
establishing a multi-sector committee that 
brings together all “operational” departments, 
headed by MPEM, to co-ordinate line ministry 
investment needs in energy services. This 
would optimise the funds invested in these 
resources and ensure that they are put to best 
use and maintained. 
ARM: The scope of the Multi-sector Regulatory 
Authority should be extended to cover all 
participants in the energy sector, including 
SOMELEC, to ensure greater consistency 
among market stakeholders, fair and 
reasonable pricing, market transparency and 
the possibility of arbitration in case of dispute 
or conflict.
Monitoring centre: The creation of a monitoring 
centre for renewable energy would help 45
existing projects, specifically those run by 
NGOs, the private sector and individuals. This 
monitoring centre could be created within a 
public-private-NGO partnership framework 
and should be responsible for collecting all 
renewable energy project information in the 
country. The centre also could be responsible 
for centralising all renewable energy data 
collected in the country, including data 
related to rural electrification. A geographic 
information system (GIS) database could be 
created to include all existing and planned 
installations, to ensure better co-ordination 
of the location and maintenance of installed 
systems.
ASP equipment maintenance: Currently, 
several entities are responsible for heavy 
maintenance of ASP equipment, including 
APAUS and ADER. However, it seems that 
heavy maintenance is currently problematic. 
This may be related in part to the day-today maintenance that must be performed 
by the ASPs, but also to the difficulty of 
organising such maintenance, given that 
several participants are tasked with ensuring 
the maintenance without necessarily having 
the ability or opportunity to influence the use 
of the equipment to guarantee its longevity. 
It would be useful to give this responsibility 
to a single entity or to completely revise the 
concession contracts so that the responsibility 
for heavy maintenance falls to the ASPs.
CAPACITY BUILDING, R&D AND OUTREACH
An initial set of recommendations in the area 
of capacity building, R&D and outreach is 
summarised below.
Training and education: These are perhaps 
the most important issues for the country’s 
future development. Existing training and 
education programmes should be supported 
and expanded to better meet the needs of the 
private sector and to enhance co-operation 
with this sector and within the various regional 
organisations. In addition to education, 
vocational training should be developed to 
This requires regular financial resources to fund 
institutions, training centres and laboratories.
Technical platform certification, testing, 
research and training: There is a need to 
maintain a technical platform for testing, 
certification and training. Currently, there is no 
certification process for imported materials, 
leading to wide-ranging quality in imported 
equipment. Although numerous training 
and demonstration materials were installed 
historically in Mauritania, inconsistent budgets 
did not allow for their maintenance. It would 
be appropriate for the country to consolidate 
a number of technical activities into a single 
common entity to facilitate the maintenance 
of a capacity to test, certify, train and 
demonstrate. 
This technology platform could be shared by 
different institutes for training, research and 
demonstration to give the country the ability to 
track the evolution of technology and to adapt 
training and national standards. Equipment 
already exists and could be regrouped under a 
common entity to ensure better operation and 
maintenance. This platform would need regular 
funding, which could come from certification 
and testing activities (which can be funded), 
from training institutes (based on their use of 
the facilities) and from international donors. 
When combined, these resources could be 
used to create a common platform, facilitating 
the provision of additional and sustained 
support for local capacity building. There is 
also a need to certify the personnel who would 
be ensuring the installation and maintenance 
of, for example, off-grid PV systems. 
Resource assessments: Numerous resource 
assessments have been carried out in the 
country at different times, but the measurements 
and results often have been lost due to lack of 
regular resources. It is necessary to collect these 
existing results in a common database and to 
conduct additional assessments, particularly for 
wind, solar, biomass and small hydropower. The 
technical platform team could conduct these 46
researchers already involved in the renewables 
field in the country. 
To be as complete as possible, the assessments 
should include local measurements from 
already established projects (each plant 
solar and wind is equipped with measuring 
devices to enable estimation of performance). 
These measurements should be incorporated 
into a GIS system that includes existing and 
future infrastructure in order to better assess 
the technical potential and development 
opportunities by location. The “monitoring 
centre” should store the collected data so that 
it is made available to all participants. 
Technical studies: Mauritania is among the 
leaders in the region in installed renewable 
generation capacity. To capitalise on this 
experience and go further, the country should 
initiate several pilot projects to manage the 
integration of existing renewable resources 
and to develop additional expertise in coordinating the renewable generation with 
existing conventional production. 
Installation, operation and maintenance: 
Mauritania already has a relatively large 
number of installed renewable energy projects. 
To ensure their sustainability, the country needs 
to develop its own capacity for maintenance 
and installation through a shared technical 
platform and the development and adaptation 
of technical training on these topics. This 
should be done through the support of existing 
maintenance structures in the country. In 
addition, private companies with experience in 
providing energy services could be trained to 
potentially provide services and maintenance 
to existing solar power plant facilities.
Regional co-operation: Mauritania intersects 
several regional power groupings (COMELEC 
in the north and OMVS/WAPP in the south). It 
could benefit greatly from more extensive cooperation with these regions in order to draw 
useful experiences for its own development 
and its potential to become a regional 
Several national projects are already under 
way to meet the needs of neighbouring 
countries; this model could be expanded and 
developed to provide an additional source of 
national economic development.
Outreach and communication: Finally, the 
country should consider launching an outreach 
and communication programme with the 
public and policy makers to raise awareness 
about renewable energy and its applications 
and to help ensure the sustainability of 
implemented programmes.
FINANCIAL FRAMEWORK AND INCENTIVES
Mauritania’s renewable energy market must 
be developed in a concerted and sustainable 
manner. The actions outlined above will 
provide the framework for developing 
renewable energy resources while reducing 
the technical risk perceived by the private 
sector and banks. However, the stability of 
the legal and regulatory framework will be 
decisive in developing this market by reducing 
the country risk. Technical and country risk 
factors most affect the cost of financing. 
Because renewable energy entails primarily 
capital costs and not variable costs (fuel, 
maintenance, etc.), controlling these two risk 
factors (which influence the cost of capital) 
will likely have the greatest effect on the 
country’s development of renewables. Even 
if most project funds come from international 
donors, the donors themselves use banking 
methods for calculating risk when establishing 
their funding conditions. 
An initial set of recommendations regarding 
financing and incentives is summarised below.
Financial and customs incentives: The 
government should consider possible financial 
and customs incentives that would encourage 
the deployment of renewable energy without 
endangering the national budget. To bolster 
its efforts to reduce exposure to risk and 
to volatile commodity prices, the country 
may consider earmarking a portion of 47
to promote renewables. This would not only 
limit the import of petroleum products, but 
also potentially redistribute mining profits in 
sectors that have not necessarily benefited 
from them until now.
Revolving access fund: Apart from grid 
investments, which are rising at a constant 
rate, a leading challenge in the country is 
access to energy services. The country already 
has implemented a universal fund (FAUS) to 
help increase this access. The energy-specific 
elements of this fund should be strengthened 
by identifying additional resources to maintain 
a consistent pace of progress in access to 
services. Including SOMELEC in regulation 
would raise additional resources related to 
licensing, but other resources should be 
identified as well. Some of these resources 
could come from an increase in electricity tariffs 
from grid-connected populations (as a sign of 
solidarity towards rural and poor populations), 
while additional funds would need to come 
from donors and, for example, from a slight 
increase in mining activity taxes (similar to the 
tax on mobile telecommunications that helps 
to support FAUS). 
Centralised purchasing platform (centrale 
d’achat): To reduce the overall costs of access 
to energy, Mauritania could consider creating a 
centralised platform for purchasing PV modules 
and materials to supply off-grid projects. By 
purchasing and trading in bulk, the country 
could greatly reduce its supply costs.
Standard power purchase agreement (PPA): 
A fairly specific legislative measure would 
simplify negotiations for PPAs that are 
now established on a case-by-case basis. 
Developing a standardised PPA that outlines 
the main terms, conditions and state guarantees 
needed (while allowing enough flexibility to 
adapt to the specifics of each project) would 
offer the advantage of clarifying the main 
clauses for producers wishing to invest in the 
country, while providing the authorities in 
charge of negotiations with a stable basis for 
Dedicated renewable energy fund: Finally, 
to facilitate financing of renewable energy 
projects, a dedicated renewable energy fund 
could be developed to support renewables 
deployment in Mauritania. This fund could be 
supported by local, regional and international 
donor funds.
CONCLUSION
Mauritania is blessed with substantial 
renewable energy resources in the areas 
of wind, solar, biomass and even small 
hydropower (with large hydropower being 
developed as part of the OMVS). The country is 
highly dependent on the availability of energy 
and electricity for its development and is also 
highly sensitive to changes in commodity 
prices, both for its export revenues and its 
import costs. Within this context, the large 
Banda gas field project was presented as a 
means to provide additional power generation 
capacity (260 MW by 2022 and 350 MW by 
2030).
Developing renewable resources to meet the 
country’s energy needs can help stabilise 
the economy by reducing its dependence 
on energy imports and its exposure to price 
fluctuations. Already, Mauritania is one of the 
first countries in sub-Saharan Africa to install 
large renewable energy projects, including the 
15 MW solar PV plant in operation, the 4.4 MW 
wind project installed by SNIM and the 30 MW 
wind plant under construction. Renewable 
energy has also been used historically (since 
the early 1990s) to meet off-grid generation 
needs.
Today, the opportunities far outweigh the 
constraints. The country can use its pro-active 
policy for grid-connected projects to become 
an energy exporter to both West Africa and 
North Africa. Substantial work will be needed 
to strengthen management of both the 
network and generation, but it may allow the 
country to develop a new expertise that could 
generate further export revenues. To promote 
development of the national market, the 48
adoption of renewable energy solutions by offgrid industries. This would enable the country 
to develop expertise in low-cost renewable 
energy deployment for off-grid applications, 
which remains a top national priority. 
Mauritania now has an opportunity to move 
towards achieving the targets outlined in the 
UN Millennium Development Goals as well as 
in the SE4ALL initiative,7
 which Mauritania 
joined in 2014. To do so, the country should 
clearly define and announce its goals and plan 
the implementation and action needed to 
achieve them. This activity should be reflected 
in national laws and decrees to ensure the 
stability of the institutional framework and the 
monitoring of all sector participants. 
Beyond this, the institutional and regulatory 
structure should ensure the monitoring of 
these objectives. A significant programme 
of capacity building is needed to assist the 
country in this area by providing essential 
skills on-site, ensuring the necessary training 
and supporting applied research needs. A 
financial framework and incentives should also 
be implemented to achieve these objectives 
without putting a strain on public finances. 
This effort would contribute not only to the 
security of supply and to the availability of 
energy for all at reasonable prices, but also to 
widespread access to energy by 2030, while 
ensuring streamlined energy consumption 
and protection of the environment. The 
effects on the country’s development would 
be significant and long-term, ensuring 
diversification of economic activity and 
employment sources. 
Participants in the RRA process also 
recognised the crucial role that co-operation 
with IRENA has in assisting the country in its 
efforts to integrate more renewable energy 
into the energy mix. In particular, international 
and regional co-operation can be effective 
in capacity building, education, technology 
transfer, information sharing, R&D and the 
mobilisation of resources.
The concluding section provides an outline of 
actions identified and recommended during 
the RRA process. 
7 The SE4ALL initiative aims to provide universal access to
electricity, double the energy efficiency rate and double the
share of renewable energy in the energy mix by 2030.49
RECOMMENDATIONS
Action Steps
Develop a national policy 
on renewable energy
•	 Redefine the country’s objectives through a “general policy note” for 
renewable energy.
•	 Set breakthrough objectives for renewable energy.
•	 Equalise pricing principles and sectorial priorities.
•	 Set up clear institutional and regulatory objectives. 
Include the objectives for 
renewables and operating 
principles in a new 
electricity code and related 
implementing decrees
•	 Develop a new electricity code that includes the objectives and operating 
principles relating to the promotion of renewables in all sectors, as well as 
the operating principles of potential regional co-operation and export.
•	 Update the State-SOMELEC contract to include SOMELEC in the scope of 
regulator.
•	 Review and update the bylaws and contracts related to ASPs to allow 
for the economic equalisation of operators, review of concession periods 
(better visibility) and revision of the concept of leasing to make it easier 
for ASPs to invest in renewables.
•	 Work towards levelling the costs associated with electricity generation 
and the price differences between SOMELEC and ASPs in rural areas.
Create the institutional and 
regulatory framework to 
facilitate the deployment of 
renewable energy
•	 Address jurisdiction overlaps between the agencies, NGOs and SOMELEC 
to optimise the use of resources.
•	 Give MPEM exclusive institutional anchoring structures and operations in 
the field. 
•	 Create a unit of renewable energy and energy efficiency within the DEME.
•	 Revise the legal framework to place the Multi-sector Regulatory Authority 
(ARM) at the heart of the system.
•	 Consider creating a multi-sectorial committee dedicated to access to 
energy services and assemble a national energy access programme with 
a renewable energy component, involving all participants (especially local 
authorities and the private and public sectors). 
•	 Set realistic and achievable goals for 2030 and take into account the 
guidelines of the SE4ALL initiative. 
•	 Create a “monitoring centre” for renewable energy in a collaborative 
framework between the government, the private sector and NGOs to 
focus information on past experiences, data and reports within a single 
unit.
•	 Clarify responsibility for the maintenance of ASP heavy equipment so that 
one entity is responsible.
The RRA process for Mauritania has identified and recommended five main actions and related 
steps, as outlined below. These actions apply to all three of the identified service-resource pairs and 
have been developed in light of the SE4ALL guidelines. The actions are not listed in any order of 
importance, nor are they exhaustive, given the rapid nature of the assessment process. 50
Action Steps
Promote capacity-building 
and research programmes, 
dedicated training and 
education
•	 Create a common technical platform for certification, testing, research 
and training. Consolidate existing equipment within a single entity that is 
able to operate and maintain this equipment as well as facilitate applied 
research in the country. 
•	 Evaluate the country’s renewable resource potential by using existing 
data and launching additional measures. Allow for the development of a 
solar and wind atlas to be integrated into a GIS system that includes the 
resources, existing production facilities and infrastructure.
•	 Initiate technical impact assessments and projects to manage the further 
integration of renewables into the Mauritanian grid.
•	 Develop the technical capacity for operation, maintenance and installation 
of renewable systems in the country.
•	 Enhance local skills in finance analysis to help with assessment of 
renewable energy projects.
•	 Reinforce vocational training and education related to renewable energy 
to ensure its applicability.
•	 Launch an outreach and communication programme with the population 
and renewable energy decision makers.
Financial framework and 
incentives
•	 Stabilise the legal and institutional framework to reduce country risk, 
and ensure technical capacity for installation and maintenance to reduce 
technology risk.
•	 Identify and implement possible financial and customs incentives that 
may encourage renewable energy development.
•	 Create a national fund dedicated to the promotion of renewable energy 
(e.g. state guarantees) and decentralised rural electrification projects.
•	 Consider creating a purchasing centre using the orders related to largescale power plants to reduce the provision costs for off-grid renewables 
projects.
•	 Develop an IPP model contract containing the main terms, conditions and 
state guarantees to facilitate the negotiation and finalisation of contracts 
in the country.
•	 Reform the system of subsidies for fossil fuels to improve the cost 
comparison with renewable energy and to remove barriers to the 
introduction of renewables.
•	 Encourage industrial self-generators to hybridise via the production of 
renewable resources.
•	 Facilitate access to guarantee funds and loans for private companies.
Actors •	 MPEM, Ministry of Finance, APAUS, SOMELEC, Regulatory Agency
Timing •	 Preparation during 2015-2016 and implementation from 2017.
Keys for success •	 Nomination of one key Mauritanian actor to drive the process, setting and 
respecting a time frame for stakeholder consultations and inputs.51
REFERENCES
AF (Arab Fund for Economic & Social Development) (2011), www.arabfund.org.
AFD (French Development Agency) (2013), “Public Operation Communication note, Financing a 
hybrid photovoltaic/thermal plant in Kiffa and electricity networks in the region of Kiffa”, April.
APAUS (Agency for the Promotion of Universal Access to Basic Services) (2014a), internal note.
APAUS (2014b), “Annual Report”.
CNA (2013), “Mission Report, Capacity Needs Assessment under the RRA Mauritania”, IRENA, Touria 
Daffrallah, November.
CILSS (Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel) (undated-a), “Objectives 
and results, Regional Solar Programme 2”, www.cilss.bf/prs/article.php3?id_article=5.
CILSS (undated-b), “Areas of intervention, organisation and implementation of the PRS 2”, www.
cilss.bf/prs/article.php3?id_article=5.
EC JRC (European Commission Joint Research Centre) (2008), Ecole des Mines de Paris/Armines/
CNRS, “PVGIS (Photovoltaic Geographical Information System)”, Institute for Energy and Transport, 
http://re.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pvgis/. 
ECOWAS (Economic Community of West African States) (2012), “ECOWAS Renewable Energy 
Policy (EREP), Final Version”, September 2012.
EIA (U.S. Energy Information Administration) (2013), “Mauritania country profile”, www.eia.gov/
countries/country-data.cfm?fips=MR#pet.
GTZ (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit) (2009), “Renewable Energies in 
West Africa”, Regional Reports on Potentials and Markets – 17 Country Analysis, Energy Policy 
Framework papers, Bonn.
IMF (International Monetary Fund) (2012), “Islamic Republic of Mauritania: Letter of intent, 
memorandum of economic and financial policies, and technical memorandum of understanding”, 
Washington, DC, November 5, www.imf.org/external/np/loi/2012/mrt/110512.pdf.
IMF (2013), “Sixth Review under the Three-year Extended Credit Facility Arrangement and Request 
for Waiver of Nonobservance of Performance Criterion”, Washington, DC, 31 May, www.imf.org/
external/pubs/ft/scr/2013/cr13188.pdf.
INTEC (2012), “Master Plan for the Production and Transport of Electricity in Mauritania Between 
2011 and 2030”, November.
IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2013a), “Renewables Readiness Assessment. 
Design to Action”, Abu Dhabi, www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/RRA_Design_
to_Action.pdf.
IRENA (2013b), “The Gambia Renewable Readiness Assessment 2013”, Abu Dhabi. www.irena.org/
DocumentDownloads/Publications/RRA_Gambia.pdf.
IRENA (2014), “The Socio-economic Benefits of Solar and Wind Energy”, Abu Dhabi, www.irena.
org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/Socioeconomic_benefits_solar_wind.pdf.
IRENA (2015), “Renewable Energy in the Water, Energy & Food Nexus”, Abu Dhabi, www.irena.org/
documentdownloads/publications/irena_water_energy_food_nexus_2015.pdf.
IRENA (undated), “Global Atlas for Renewable Energy”, www.irena.org/globalatlas/.52
IRM (2001a), “Law No. 2001-18 on the Multisectoral Regulation Authority”.
IRM (2001b), “Order No. 2001-06, Establishing the Agency for the Promotion of Universal Access 
to Services”.
IRM (2006), “Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper Action Plan 2006-2010”, October.
IRM (2011), “Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. Volume 2: Action Plan 2011-2015”. 
Izquierdo, Gonzalo Piernavieja (2005), “The Canary Islands Institute of Technology ITC”, 
Presentation, www.exportinitiative.de/fileadmin/publikationen_veranstaltungsdoku/dokumente/
Expo_ES_05/6b_Do_n_Wrage_proexca.pdf.
MHE-MCI (2008), “Joint Order 2418, MHE MCI fixing the maximum retail prices of electricity in 
locations subject to delegation by the public electricity service”, 23 June.
MPEM (Ministry of Petroleum, Energy and Mines) (2014), “Annual Report”.
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) (2012), “NATO-sponsored project helps harvest 
wind energy in the Sahara”, 29 October, www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/news_91105.
htm?selectedLocale=en.
Nodalis (2012), “Study on the Delegation of Public Service of Electricity in Mauritania”, Paris.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) (2009), “Regional Atlas on 
West Africa”, Paris, http://browse.oecdbookshop.org/oecd/pdfs/product/4409011e.pdf.
PREDAS (Regional Programme for the Promotion of Household and Alternative Energies in the 
Sahel) (2005), “Surveys on Domestic Energy Consumption in Mauritania”, CECO COUNCIL, CILSS 
PREDAS, February.
Reikat, Andrea (2012), “Programme pour l’Energie de Cuisson Economique en Afrique de l’Ouest :
Présentation globale”, presentation at the ECOWAS Regional Bioenergy Forum, Bamako, Mali, 
20 March, www.globalbioenergy.org/fileadmin/user_upload/gbep/docs/2012_events/WGCB_
Activity_1_Bamako_19-22_March_2012/IV.3_Presentation_on_GIZ-ProCEAO_Cookstoves_
project.pdf.
SNC-Lavalin (2013), “Rate Study of SOMELEC”, Montreal, March.
SOMELEC (2013), Annual Report.
SOMELEC (2014), Annual Report.
SWERA (Solar and Wind Energy Resource Assessment) (undated), “Mauritania”, http://en.openei.
org/apps/SWERA/?active=Mauritania.
Tractebel (2010), “Study on the Master Plan for the Generation and Transport of Electric Power in 
Mauritania (2011-2030)”.
Tractebel (Tractebel Engineering SA) (2012), “Report of Stage III (APD) of the Feasibility Study for 
the Production and Transport of Electricity Based on Gas (SPEG)”, September.
United Nations (2014), “World Urbanization Prospects, The 2014 Revision”, New York.
World Bank and Nodalis (2010), “Restructuring of SOMELEC and the Electricity Sector in Mauritania”, 
February.
//53
ANNEX: 
RECOMMENDED ACTIONS
ACTION 1
Develop a national renewable energy policy and an action plan
Action Centralised production, access to energy services, productive activities, all renewable 
energy sources
ServiceResource Pair(s)Centralised production, access to energy services, productive activities, all renewable 
energy sources
Description
There is broad consensus among government and non-governmental participants in 
Mauritania on the importance of the potential role of renewable energy. The Ministry of 
Petroleum, Energy and Mines (MPEM) is responsible for developing renewable energy policy 
and the action plan that sets guidelines for the widespread use of renewable resources. 
Apart from the centralised hydropower plant (developed under the auspices of the OMVS), 
wind and solar energy can greatly help reduce the country’s dependence on oil.
MPEM will set achievable goals for existing renewable resources based on the results of the 
RRA process, additional resource assessments and network capacity. 
Initially, MPEM shall formalise existing targets and the means of achieving them within the 
energy policy note expected in early 2016. Depending on the results, a second specific law 
for renewable energy could take into account experiences related to the implementation 
of the note on energy policy.
Key participants MPEM, ARM, APAUS
Timing 2016-2017
Key to success
The success of the policy depends on how realistic the objectives are (based on the 
results of resource assessments and network penetration studies) and its adoption by 
industry stakeholders. The objectives of the note on energy policy may be integrated 
into a specific renewable energy law if it turns out that the note is not sufficiently 
encouraging or binding. 
ACTION 2
Include the objectives and operating principles for renewables in a new electricity code 
and related implementing decrees
Action Inclusion of renewables objectives and operating principles in the electricity code and 
related decrees
ServiceResource Pair(s)Centralised production, access to energy services, productive activities, all renewable energy 
sources
The RRA process has identified and recommended the five actions below. They are not given in any 
order of priority and should not be considered exhaustive. These actions could improve the ability 
of Mauritania to develop and deploy renewable energy more rapidly and more sustainably.54
Description
The existing consensus on the use of renewable energy in the country should be expressed 
specifically in the laws and decrees relating to the energy sector that do not currently take 
renewables into account.
MPEM shall be responsible for developing legislative proposals and implementing regulations 
to put this policy into practice. The texts to be modified include: 
•	 The electricity code, which must include the objectives and operating principles for the 
promotion of renewable energy and potential regional export;
•	 The State-SOMELEC contract, which should include SOMELEC in the scope of the 
regulator; and
•	 ASP statutes and contracts with the ARM, which should reflect a better economic balance 
of the operators, revised duration of concessions and updated leasing that allows direct 
investment in renewable ASP solutions.
Moreover, the costs of electricity generation should be levelled to balance the price 
differences between SOMELEC and ASPs in rural areas.
Key participants National Assembly, MPEM, ARM, SOMELEC, APAUS, ADER, NGOs, private sector
Timing 2016-2017
Key to success
One of the main keys to success will be the inclusion of industry representatives in 
discussions and debates related to the structuring of new laws, decrees and acts to 
be implemented. Furthermore, the inclusion of SOMELEC in the scope of the regulator 
will require real co-ordination work between SOMELEC and the state to ensure that 
objectives are understood and shared by all participants. 
ACTION 3
Create the institutional and regulatory framework to facilitate the deployment of renewable 
energy
Action Create the institutional and regulatory framework to facilitate the deployment of 
renewable energy
ServiceResource Pair(s)Centralised production, access to energy services, productive activities, all renewable 
energy sources
Description
MPEM, shall, with its institutional, private and community partners, define and implement 
an institutional and regulatory framework for optimising actions within the sector.
As part of planned development work, this should be presented and developed in 
collaboration with participants so that everyone can take part and ensure its adoption. 
The framework should permit MPEM to ensure the institutional anchoring of the sector. 
But MPEM needs to provide the regulator with comprehensive coverage in the industry to 
ensure the consistency of measures put in place. MPEM should also create a “monitoring 
centre” for renewable energy in a collaborative framework between the government, the 
private sector and NGOs to focus information on past experiences, as well as the relative 
data and reports within a single entity.
Moreover, MPEM should encourage the emergence of a dedicated multi-sectoral 
committee for access to energy services in rural areas. This will, among other things, 
co-ordinate the actions of public participants in the provision of energy services in 
these areas and maintain them more efficiently. This committee should set realistic and 
achievable goals for 2030, in accordance with the guidelines of the SE4ALL initiative. 55
Key participants MPEM, ARM, APAUS
Timing 2016-2017
Key to success One of the keys to successful implementation will be the participation of stakeholders 
and their adoption of shared goals. 
ACTION 4
Promote capacity-building and research programmes, dedicated training and education
Action Promote capacity-building and research programmes, dedicated training and 
education on renewable energy
ServiceResource Pair(s)Centralised production, access to energy services, productive activities, all renewable 
energy sources
Description
Mauritania already has significant experience with renewable energy, dating from the 
1990s. However, part of this experience has been diluted due to lack of resources or 
capacity. Capacity building – including in the areas of R&D, education and awareness – 
is essential for the success of this policy.
By creating a common technical platform for users (whether in the area of research, 
training or standards), the country would develop a centre of excellence, based on its own 
needs, that would significantly reduce the technical risk of the projects implemented. 
In technical terms, there is a need for additional means to test and certify equipment 
used, as well as a need to use existing equipment to produce detailed solar and wind 
atlases that are integrated into a GIS system. In addition, studies and pilot projects 
should be launched in the short term to better measure the impact of renewables on 
the current network and to manage the network and the existing means of production 
according to renewable energy sources.
Renewable energy training within the country should be strengthened and made 
more relevant to ensure better “employability” for students and to ensure the highest 
possible practical vocational training. Finally, a public awareness programme would 
help to better integrate renewable energy within the country. 
Key participants MPEM, Ministry of Education, universities, schools, NGOs, private sector
Timing 2016-2017
Key to success
Capacity building should be implemented in a fair and transparent manner in order to 
maximise its effects. It should also take into account the needs for fiscal stability of the 
agencies involved, regarding both research and training units and testing of equipment to 
ensure sustainability. 56
ACTION 5
Developing Capacity Building for renewable energy 
Action Develop a financial framework and incentive schemes for the development of 
renewable energy
ServiceResource Pair(s)
Centralised production, access to energy services, productive activities, all renewable 
energy sources
Description
Before considering any further action, it is important to recognise how legislative, 
institutional and regulatory stability is critical to reducing project costs. 
MPEM, in partnership with industry players, may suggest the use of customs and tax 
incentives for renewable energy sources in the country. These actions can be justified 
by the potential savings that they offer in terms of balance of trade and energy 
dependence. 
A fund dedicated to the promotion of renewable energy could be considered. This 
would cover a portion of energy access needs by complementing the actions of the 
Fund for Universal Access to Services (FAUS) to encourage the use of renewable 
resources. Actions in the field of centralised projects and self-generation/independent 
production should be measured accurately. Because budgets are limited, it is more 
difficult to guarantee a significant impact.
Description
However, the country could create a specific“guarantee fund” for Renewable EnergiesIPP contracts that would not need to be refinanced but would have the advantage of 
further reducing the cost of financing, including for international financial institutions.
Other concrete and high-leverage actions to be implemented could include: 
•	 Defining an IPP model contract for renewable energy resources.
•	 Creating a purchasing centre that takes advantage of larger volumes to reduce the cost 
of equipment.
•	 Encouraging industrial self-generators to hybridise with renewable-based generation. 
Finally, the system of subsidies for fossil fuels should be reformed to ensure greater 
market balance and to reduce barriers hindering the development of renewable energy.
Key participants MPEM, ARM, APAUS, Ministry of Finance, industries
Timing 2016-2017
Key to success The sustainability of financial resources used and their optimisation are the biggest keys 
to the success of this policy.