File Name: MUS-CPD-2016-EN
Year: 2016
Country Name: Mauritius
Country Code: MUS
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 6-10 June 2016
Start Year: 2017
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
4 April 2016
Original: English
16-05419 (E) 110416
*1605419*
Annual session 2016
6-10 June 2016, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Mauritius (2017-2020)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale ................................ .................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships ................................ ... 5
III. Programme and risk management ................................ ....... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation ................................ ............. 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Mauritius (2017-2020) ........................... 9I. Programme rationale
1. Mauritius continued to record positive economic growth in 2015, with a goal of attaining a 
high-income economy by 2030. Gross domestic product growth in 2015 was slightly higher than 
in recent years, at 3.4 per cent1(3.2 per cent in 2014). An important factor in the sustained growth 
of the economy were prudent fiscal, exchange rate, trade, investment and monetary policies2.
Political stability, not only in terms of the political landscape, and adherence to an economic
strategy of outward-orientated, market-driven development3also contributed to growth, helping
Mauritius become an upper middle-income country. Mauritius maintained its position as the most 
competitive economy in sub-Saharan Africa4and consistently maintained its position as a strong
performer in global indices: the Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance (1st in 2015), the World 
Bank ease of doing business index (28th out of 189 countries in 2015), the Global Competitiveness 
Index (1
st in Sub-Saharan Africa), and the UNDP Human Development Index (63rd out of 
188 countries in 2014). Mauritius has achieved 82 per cent of the targets for Millennium 
Development Goals 1-7
5
. It has a comprehensive social protection system made up mainly of 
universal pensions and social assistance to the needy, which has been instrumental in reducing
poverty by more than half, from 19 per cent without transfers to 9.8 per cent with transfers6.
2. Despite these successes, several important challenges remain: residual but significant relative
poverty of 9.8 per cent, up from 7.8 per cent in 2001-2012, and increasing inequality, with the 
Gini coefficient moving from 0.37 in 2007 to 0.44 in 20147, due largely to the widening 
differences in remuneration, including between the formal and informal sectors, and increased 
demand for high-skill labour. Most notably, the income of the bottom 40 per cent of the 
population has been growing at an annual rate of 1.8 per cent compared to 3.1 per cent for the rest 
of the population, indicating that prosperity is not equally shared as growth dynamics are tilted 
toward high-skilled services sectors and against the most vulnerable and uneducated. Wage 
income is the main driver of prosperity in Mauritius, yet the most vulnerable struggle to reap the 
benefits of economic growth, as not enough employment is created and many workers lack 
adequate skills for the current labour market. Consequently, extreme poverty (measured by the 
number of people living on less than $1.90 purchasing power parity a day), though still low, is 
rising: 0.4 per cent in 2007 and 1.4 per cent in 20148. These trends raise concerns and signal that a 
proportion of the population risks falling back into poverty.
3. Poverty is higher in households headed by women and those with education below secondary 
level. In 2012, women were more likely to be in relative poverty, at 10.5 per cent (66,700) against 
9.0 per cent (56,000) for males9. Poverty is highly concentrated among children and youth, which 
has implications for inclusion and intergenerational transmission of poverty10. Challenges for 
gender equality include under-representation of women in parliament (12 per cent11) and on 
corporate boards (5.6 per cent12), and low activity rates (45.3 per cent against 75.2 per cent of 
men13). Twenty-four per cent of women have experienced gender-based violence14. These 
disparities have led to a regression in ranking (120th out of 145 countries) in the Global Gender 
Gap Index, 2015.
4. An important development is the government preparation of ‘Vision 2030’, aimed at 
transforming Mauritius into a high income country by 2030, which supports the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development15 and the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway. 
As part of that process, through UNDP support, the Marshall Plan Against Poverty was developed 
 
1
Statistics Mauritius
2 Zafar, Mauritius: an economic success story, World Bank, 2011
3 Treebhoohun, The Experience of Mauritius in Economic Transformation, 2015
4 African Economic Outlook: African Development Bank, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and UNDP, 2015
5 Mauritius National MDG Report, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Regional Integration and International Trade, 2015
6
2012 Poverty Analysis Report, Statistics Mauritius, 2015
7 UNDP-International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth analysis of the Mauritius Continuous Multipurpose Household Survey, 2015
8
Ibid.
9
2012 Poverty Analysis Report, Statistics Mauritius, October 2015
10 Ibid.
11 Global Gender Gap Index, World Economic Forum 2015
12 Board Remuneration and Practice in Mauritius, Hay Group, 2015
13 Gender Statistics, Statistics Mauritius, 2014
14 DP/DCP/MUS/4
to support the sustainable development goals on poverty (1), gender equality (5), inclusive and 
sustainable growth (8) and inequality (10)
16
. This common transformational agenda emphasizes
poverty eradication and social inclusiveness as indispensable for sustainable development.
5. Although Mauritius has made considerable progress in governance over the past two decades, 
improvements in public-sector efficiency have slowed down or even reversed17. A limited 
monitoring and evaluation culture impedes effective planning, budgeting, and tracking the 
performance of public institutions. Public sector efficiency lags behind other upper-middle-income 
countries, hampering efforts to accelerate economic growth and inclusiveness18. Advancement 
from an upper upper-middle-income to a high-income country will require civil service reforms to
improve performance and increase public sector effectiveness19.
6. Environmental pressures are significant20, as is the complexity of a small island developing 
State, considering a population density of some 640 people per km2(the highest in Africa21)
compounded by challenges of environmental vulnerability, water and chemicals management, 
exposure to natural disasters, coastal zone erosion, and reduction in forest and coral coverage22. 
Renewed effort is needed to halt biodiversity loss, with the number of endangered plants and 
animals increasing over the past five years23– and meet the 2020 Aichi biodiversity targets. 
Mauritius has one of the largest marine territories in the world, at 2.3 million km2, including an 
exclusive economic zone of 1.9 million km2and a co-managed economic zone with Seychelles of 
0.4 million km2. For many years, Mauritius has been benefiting from the ocean economy with 
substantial ocean-related economic activities24. Mauritius is working to protect the balance 
between sustaining economic growth and ensuring terrestrial, coastal, and marine environmental 
sustainability through its ocean governance practices. Coastal areas are facing increasing marine 
and terrestrial environmental pressures, with coral cover currently at only 30 per cent25, down 
from 60 per cent a decade ago. Since marine protected areas are not being actively managed, there 
is an urgent need for action. In addition, over 30 coastal sites have been identified as being prone 
to erosion or surges threatening anthropogenic activities.
7. Sustainable development and successful climate change adaptation and mitigation will require
improved access to modern energy services, grid enhancement, energy efficiency measures, and
maximization of emerging technologies. Carbon dioxide emissions have been on an increasing 
trend owing to increased emissions from the energy sector, while the share of renewable energy is 
on the decline26. With an energy dependence rate of 84 per cent, Mauritius, like many small island 
developing States, is vulnerable to energy shocks and external fossil fuel price fluctuations. The 
need to increase energy self-sufficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions is recognized in the 
country’s intended nationally determined contribution, 2015, the Second National Communication 
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC), 2010, and the FCCC 
technology needs assessment, 2014, as well as in a comprehensive suite of government strategies 
contained in the long-term energy strategy, 2009-2025 (now being reviewed for 2016-2030).
8. Official development assistance remains on a downward trend: in 2014 Mauritius received 
only $11.3 million, representing 0.1 per cent of its gross national income27. That trend is mirrored 
in the support available from United Nations agencies, funds, and programmes, only two of which 
are present in Mauritius (the World Health Organization and UNDP). As a small island developing 
State and upper-middle-income country with limited grant-based and concessional financing 
available, Mauritius has created an innovative mechanism to ensure that social projects are funded 
by the private sector. A corporate social responsibility levy of 2 per cent is channelled towards 
programmes that contribute to the social and environmental development of the country28. This 
 
16 Marshall Plan Against Poverty, March 2016
17 Systematic country diagnostics, Report No. 92703-MU, World Bank, 2015
18 Ibid.
19 Vision 2030, Speech of the Prime Minister, August 2015 and World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report 2014-2015
20 Mauritius 5th National Report on the Convention for Biological Diversity, 2015
21 United Nations Statistics Division Demographic Yearbook, 2014
22 Energy and environment statistics, Statistics Mauritius, 2014
23 Mauritius 5th National Report on the Convention for Biological Diversity, 2015
24 Mauritius SIDS National Report, 2014
25 Capacity Development on Coastal Protection and Rehabilitation Final Report, Japan International Cooperation Agency, 2016
26 Energy and environment statistics, Statistics Mauritius, 2014
27 directly supports more than half of the annual government budget spent on welfare and social 
security29.
9. Under the present country programme, 2013-2016, the midterm review of October 2015 
showed that UNDP made significant contributions to addressing many of the above development 
challenges focusing on inclusive growth, social inclusion and empowerment, and sustainable 
development. These include the establishment of the Social Register of Mauritius, mainstreamed 
as the backbone of social policies and schemes on housing, child allowances and social aid. As 
roughly 50 per cent of the poorest households in the register are female-headed, compared to 21.3
per cent female-headed households in all of Mauritius30, the register is a powerful tool not only for 
reaching the poorest but also for mitigating the gender bias against women in the most povertystricken areas. The scaling-up of an electronic learning system – a new platform for in-service 
training of civil servants – is considered pivotal for improved governance and civil service reform. 
The Kolektif Rivier Nwar pilot on community development and empowerment is another tangible 
result with a very promising scalability potential to target pockets of poverty within the upcoming 
‘Marshall Plan’. The establishment of gender strategies in twenty ministries and the creation of 
gender ‘cells’ have potential for significant impact in the longer term, as well as for impact in the 
climate finance portfolio31. In addition, the support to energy and the environment serves as a 
strong catalyst (with a legal basis) for the work towards sustainable development, and assists the 
Government in achieving progress in the implementation of international conventions.
10. The midterm review highlights the UNDP comparative advantage and success factors related 
to its strategy, flexible approach, and programme impact. The review explains that this flexible
approach is key to cooperation with Government, so that UNDP support is seen as impartial and 
multi-faceted rather than driven by narrow agendas. It emphasizes the ability of UNDP to mobilize 
support through funding linked to the global conventions on sustainable development. The review 
also highlights UNDP programme responsiveness to government priorities. This was underlined in 
the 2015 MDG Status Report for Mauritius, which explained that “[d]espite being an upper middle 
income SIDS, the continued support through grants, technical assistance and capacity-building 
support from UNDP … have substantiated the country’s endeavours towards MDG 
achievement”
32
.
11. The midterm review further noted that strategic results were achieved through UNDP 
interventions such as the recent development of a national early warning system for the 
Meteorological Service and the continued development of intermittent renewable energy 
strategies. The work, started in the Energy Efficiency Management Office during the current 
programme cycle, resulted in the development of a market for energy audits. Considerable 
progress was achieved in invasive alien species control through partnerships with the private 
sector, private landowners, and non-governmental organizations. Foundational work was carried 
out in chemicals management, resulting in a ‘national chemicals profile’, as well as action plans 
for chemicals and mercury. However, the programme encountered significant delays owing to the 
lack of nationally executed project management skills, including monitoring and evaluation. An 
area of learning from the review was the need for better-informed gender analysis in the climate 
finance portfolio.
12. The overarching theory of change supports the underlying notion of strengthening 
development pathways to tackle the connected issues of poverty, inequality, exclusion and the 
environment while transforming productive capacities, avoiding the irreversible depletion of social 
and natural capital, and reducing risks arising from shocks. A fundamental conviction is that 
strengthening national capacities across the priority areas will lead to economic growth and 
sustainable development, as expressed in the sustainable development goals. Knowledge 
management and South-South cooperation will be harnessed to facilitate innovation and the scaleup and replicability potential of good practices, particularly through country-led regional 
programmes and joint initiatives. UNDP will expand its work in promoting gender equality, 
human rights and the empowerment of women, focusing on communications and disseminating 
results.
 
29 2012 poverty analysis report, Statistics Mauritius, October 2015
30 Ibid.
31 DP/DCP/MUS/4
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
13. Based on those lessons, and the mandate provided by the UNDP strategic plan, the 
programme will employ a two-pronged approach focusing on inclusive and sustainable 
development and climate change. Given the middle-income status of Mauritius and the challenges 
facing a small island developing State, the programme will focus predominantly on environmental 
and climate change interventions designed to support the achievement of sustainable development 
goals 12-15. UNDP will focus on environmental sustainability and ‘greening’ the economy by
strengthening synergies and further mainstreaming disaster risk reduction and climate-informed 
policies to transition to a low-carbon, climate-resilient economy. The programme intends to 
leverage those investments towards sustainable development by emphasizing the ‘green’ and 
‘blue’ economy, thereby tackling challenges related to residual poverty. The programme will 
continue with relatively small yet strategic and catalytic interventions to improve social protection 
and public-sector performance.
14. UNDP is well positioned to partner with the Government to tackle the many challenges 
related to inclusive and sustainable growth. The programme aims to achieve this by contributing to 
two interrelated outcome areas to enhance inclusiveness and gender equality: public sector 
management and sustainable development. Using a human rights-based approach, attention will be 
devoted to building the capacity and knowledge of duty-bearers as well as rights-holders. 
15. The UNDP country programme is anchored in the government programme, the sustainable 
development goals and the SAMOA Pathway, supported by the UNDP strategic plan. The 
programme will bring significant added value in high-level upstream policy support. Investment 
will strengthen the capacities of national actors, systems and institutions through targeted policy 
interventions and translation of the goals –at the national level, to accelerate sustained growth and 
safeguard development gains (midterm review, October 2015). Partnerships and networks in 
implementing and monitoring national initiatives will be established.
Pillar 1: Inclusive development and public sector efficiency
16. This pillar will prioritize social protection, gender equality and public sector efficiency to 
support the implementation of ‘Vision 2030’ in achieving equitable growth and promoting an 
inclusive society. Mauritius will collaborate with the African Union for exchanges among 
countries, and circulation of knowledge, expertise and best practices will enhance and consolidate 
the regional strategy for social protection. 
17. To assist in the delivery of the ‘Marshall Plan Against Poverty’, announced in the 
Government Programme 2015-2019 and developed with the technical assistance of UNDP, the
programme will support the Government in developing the capabilities of the poorest tenth of the 
population through a community development strategy, bringing together government services, 
the private sector and civil society through empowered communities at the local level. Building on 
UNDP technical assistance to the Mauritius Qualification Authority in generating standards in 
social work practice, UNDP will support the professionalization of the social work sector through 
the formal recognition of prior learning, designing capacity-building programmes, and setting up a 
social work council. To fight exclusion and marginalization, UNDP will work with the United 
Nations Global Pulse Lab to explore the use of new sources of existing big data to monitor and 
improve service delivery in pockets of poverty.
18. The fight against poverty includes support to the consolidation of social protection and 
enhancement of a social safety network, through the Social Register of Mauritius, that protects the 
poorest and seeks to preserve and restore physical and human capital. The programme focuses on 
improving the effectiveness of the social register using in-house capacity-building for social 
protection analysis. Evidence-based policy options will be deepened by engagement with Statistics 
Mauritius and the UNDP International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth in policy-oriented 
research and analysis to provide support for inclusive growth strategies.
19. In collaboration with UN-Women, UNDP will work closely with the Government to deepen 
gender policies, women’s organizations (such as Women in Networking), and the private sector 
(Standard Chartered Bank) to build and reinforce their commitment to bridging the gender gap. 
The programme will support the National Assembly in setting up a gender caucus and public and private measures to advance women’s leadership. In partnership with the National 
Women’s Council and national counterparts, UNDP will provide knowledge and technical 
assistance to help women become economically empowered and have a strong say in family and 
community decisions. UNDP will strengthen the national capacity for evidence-based gender 
strategies and policies through active analysis of sex-disaggregated data. The programme will 
upgrade mechanisms for eradicating gender-based violence through advocacy and engagement 
with local communities, schools, national institutions and media, and will support institutional 
solutions to address and fight sexual harassment in the workplace.
20. To promote transformational change in the civil service and assist Government in 
strengthening performance management in the public sector, the programme will scale up strategic 
foresight with a focus on human capital development, streamlining of processes, and optimization 
of information and communication technologies, in line with the objectives of Vision 2030. To 
that end, in partnership with the Singapore-based UNDP Global Centre for Public Service 
Excellence and the newly established Civil Service College in Mauritius, the programme will 
support the Government in developing foresight capacity in the civil service and extending elearning options in the public sector, including promoting awareness of gender equality in public 
sector projects. In collaboration with the Public Sector Reengineering Bureau, UNDP will assist in 
prototyping solutions for modernizing public service delivery, priority being given to building 
institutional capacity in central agencies and key line ministries in organizational and management 
review exercises and human resources audits and assessments.
21. Building on the introduction of e-budgeting, the programme will support the Government in 
scaling up business intelligence tools to inform public policy and management and developing
accountability mechanisms in the public sector, supporting the National Assembly to perform its 
oversight function more effectively. The programme will support public institutions in 
strengthening the culture of demand and feedback from customers and citizens through an 
innovative survey mechanism. To improve public expenditure efficiency and reduce cost overruns 
in investment projects, UNDP will explore with the Government the establishment of a 
standardized and centralized evaluation system, including to measure progress towards the 
implementation of Vision 2030 and the sustainable development goals, in collaboration with the 
relevant national committee.
Pillar 2: Climate change and sustainable development
22. Mauritius, as a small island developing State situated far from the African continental land 
mass, is subject to particular vulnerabilities related to energy independence, climate change, and 
sustained and sustainable inclusive economic growth. Attention will therefore be devoted to 
enhancing its resilience, particularly in supporting renewable energy and energy efficiency, 
integrated coastal zone management, marine and terrestrial biodiversity and ecosystem, 
sustainable land management, and chemical and hazardous waste management. The importance of 
poverty alleviation and gender empowerment will be strengthened across the programme pillars to
strengthen the linkage with pillar 1 and the work being done under the ‘Marshall Plan’; the poorest
areas of Rodrigues and Agalega will be targeted specifically. Action will be taken to integrate and 
measure the impact of ‘green growth’ on women, and environmental sustainability. An important 
strategy will be the implementation of social and environmental safeguards, and gendered 
dimensions will be integrated in all projects. 
23. The programme will scale up efforts to sustain the growth of the renewable energy sector 
based on government priorities and targets, as well as energy efficiency policies and projects in the 
building, industry, transport and commercial sectors, sustainable consumption and ‘green’
business development, particularly for micro, small and medium enterprises. UNDP will support 
innovative technologies in the energy sector to boost the ability of the national grid to absorb 
intermittent renewable energy from the current 70 megawatts to 100 megawatts and enable further 
deployment of renewable energy. The outer island of Agalega will be fully powered by renewable 
energy, strengthening its resilience. Attention to the more vulnerable segments of the population 
will be addressed, ensuring a fair representation in terms of programme beneficiaries. 
24. In support of the government priority to boost employment generation in all sectors,
including environment, UNDP will assist priority areas in marine, coastal and terrestrial 
biodiversity and ecosystem sectors, in line with the terrestrial protected area networks strategy and DP/DCP/MUS/4
establishment of specific targets. The programme will implement measures addressing 
preservation and protection of coastal biodiversity, coastal zone management, coral restoration, 
and forest and land degradation in both Mauritius and Rodrigues Islands. The programme will go 
further into the extended continental shelf and assist in managing activities concerned with the
Joint Management Area of the Extended Continental Shelf with Seychelles. Activities focused on
climate change adaptation will be supported through the National Climate Change Adaptation 
Framework and will seek to enhance the design and delivery capacity of relevant institutions to 
mainstream climate change adaptation across programmes. Climate change adaptation activities 
will contribute directly to reducing the risk from climate-related disasters. Disaster risk reduction
will thus remain a priority and will be a primary cross-cutting stream across this pillar. The United 
Nations Environment Programme is supporting climate change mitigation in parallel and in 
partnership with UNDP.
25. Building on its experience in the management of persistent organic pollutants, and as a 
continuation of the long-term assistance that UNDP has been providing the country in meeting its 
obligations under international conventions, the programme will address the management of 
chemicals and hazardous waste to improve their collection and disposal. Since Mauritius is a 
signatory to the Minamata and Stockholm Conventions, the programme will assist it in meeting 
convention-related obligations.
III. Programme and risk management
26. The present country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the 
UNDP programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal controls framework.
27. National implementation will be the preferred modality for programme implementation. The 
risk of insufficient implementation capacity will be mitigated by using the Harmonized Approach 
to Cash Transfers procedures, including a macro assessment of the public financial management 
system and micro assessments of implementing partners. UNDP will provide implementation 
support services as needed, and all implementation-related activities undertaken by UNDP will be 
charged directly to the project concerned in accordance with UNDP policies and procedures. The 
use of direct implementation may be explored where necessary in agreement with the Government 
and UNDP headquarters.
28. UNDP will adopt a portfolio approach with fewer outcomes, consolidating smaller projects, 
applying integrated cross-cutting programming and increasing the share of regional projects. To 
further mitigate risks, projects will undergo a systematic review to ensure environmental and 
social safeguards. There will be an emphasis on integrated, flexible and innovative programme 
design, systems of data collection, evidence-based results reporting and communication, and 
ensuring that lessons identified are addressed and initiatives are scaled up and sustainable. 
29. Mauritius is prone to environmental risks that particularly affect the poorest. Moving from 
the reactive strategy of the previous programme, the forthcoming one builds on and reinforces exante strategies (risk-reduction and risk-mitigation, rather than risk-coping), which are not only 
protection and prevention measures, but help promote and transform livelihoods.
30. Supporting the UNDP transition to differentiated country presence, the Government has
extended its financial support for the base structure of the office, with an agreed increase in
government contributions towards local office costs. The size of the UNDP presence will be 
directly tied to government support levels for both local office costs and government cost-sharing.
31. Since Mauritius is an upper-middle-income country, many traditional bilateral partners have 
reprioritized their assistance towards lower-income countries, creating a challenge in mobilizing 
resources that limits the donor base and creates sustainability risks. This calls for a broader, more 
creative approach to partnerships and support to the Government to harness available climate 
financing. Resource mobilization seeks to increase the number of regional climate projects 
managed by the country office. With support from the UNDP regional service centre, the office 
will explore access to new and innovative climate fundsThe private sector and other non32. UNDP will strengthen existing partnerships within and outside Mauritius, based on the 
strength of results and links built with the Government and development partners over the past 
decade. The aim will be to expand the strong funding pipeline through collaborative arrangements
with partners and government. Long-standing coordination mechanisms with the European Union, 
the French Development Agency, the Indian Ocean Commission, Japan International Cooperation 
Agency and the World Bank, as well as with the United Nations country team members, will be 
strengthened to achieve synergies on collective climate change programmes. Ongoing partnerships 
will be strengthened, particularly in areas supporting the transition to a ‘green’ economy. There 
remains significant potential for South-South and triangular cooperation through the portfolio of 
regional Global Environment Facility and Adaptation Fund Board programmes managed through 
the country office.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
33. UNDP will ensure that project monitoring and evaluation frameworks are in place and 
aligned with this programme and with government priorities, including support to national 
counterparts in building capacity in monitoring and evaluation. UNDP will set up and manage a 
project cost-shared monitoring and evaluation function, supporting the baseline, evaluations, and 
impact evaluation of all activities carried out. The UNDP gender marker will be used to monitor 
expenditure and improve gender-based planning and decision-making. The aim will be to monitor 
the impact of the programme in relation to the sustainable development goals, the Samoa Pathway, 
and commitments under the intended nationally determined contribution, 2015, by improving the 
capacity of institutions to collect and analyse environment statistics. The above will be built into 
programme grants across the portfolio to meet an estimated 2 per cent of programme spend.
34. UNDP will provide support to the development of accountability mechanisms in the public 
sector and civil society organizations to help them become flexible change agents, responsive to 
community needs.
35. To facilitate evidence-based programme design and broaden debate on the national
development agenda and the sustainable development goals, in collaboration with other key 
stakeholders (the World Bank, academic institutions, Statistics Mauritius and Business Mauritius)
research, surveys and issue briefs will be produced. The focus will be to monitor the 
implementation of Vision 2030, the 2030 Agenda, the Samoa Pathway, and the Marshall Plan, 
among other plans. Performance review meetings (internal and external) with key stakeholders, 
including Statistics Mauritius, will be conducted annually as part of the monitoring process. The 
main purpose of the reviews will be to assess progress and identify challenges and solutions. 
UNDP will set up partnerships to plan, coordinate, and manage monitoring and evaluation
activities.DP/DCP/MUS/4
Annex. Results and resources framework for Mauritius (2017-2020)
National priority or goal: Inclusive development and public sector efficiency
Outcome: Improved public sector management supporting poverty reduction, social inclusion and gender equality is promoted through responsive strategies. 
Related strategic plan outcome
Outcome 1. Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded
Outcome indicators, baselines and
targets
Data source, frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines and targets)
Major partners, partnerships
and frameworks
Indicative resources by 
outcome (in 
$ thousands)
Indicator: Gini index 
Baseline: 0.41 (2012)
Target: 0.35 (2020) 
Data source: Household budget 
survey; poverty analysis report; 
continuous multi-purpose 
household survey 
Frequency: Estimates yearly 
(continuous multi-purpose 
household survey); household 
budget survey every 5 years
Responsibility: Statistics 
Mauritius; development partners
Output 1. Social workers and public institutions are enabled to 
perform core functions to fight poverty through implementation of 
the Marshall Plan Against Poverty 
Indicator 1.1. No. of accredited social workers, disaggregated by 
gender, as the result of Marshall Plan Against Poverty
implementation
Baseline: 30 (2015)
Target: 300
Source: Mauritius Qualifications Authority reports 
Indicator 1.2. No. of institutions using Social Register of Mauritius 
(SRM) data for evidence-based policymaking and implementation of 
social schemes
Baseline: 2 (2015)
Target: 5 
Source: Ministry of Social Security, Social Register of Mauritius unit 
reports
Ministry of Social Security
Ministry of Social Integration and 
Economic Empowerment
National Empowerment 
Foundation
Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development (MOFED)
Mauritius Council of Social 
Services
Statistics Mauritius
Regular: 877
Other: 900
Indicator: Mauritius ranking in Global 
gender gap index
Baseline: 
Economic participation: 127th (2015)
Political empowerment: 120th (2015)
Target:
Economic participation: top 100 (2020)
Political empowerment: top 100 (2020)
Data source: Global Gender Gap 
Report, gender disaggregated 
employment figures based on 
yearly continuous multi-purpose 
household survey 
Frequency: Yearly
Responsibility: World Economic 
Forum
Data source: Statistics Mauritius, 
crime, justice and security 
statistics
Output 2. Measures in place to increase women’s capacities to 
participate in decision-making processes at all levels and to fight 
gender-based violence
Indicator 2.1. Percentage of Gender Caucus members equipped with 
gender analysis tools
Baseline: 0% (no Gender Caucus) (2015)
Target: 100% of Gender Caucus members equipped with gender 
analysis tools (2020)
Source: National Assembly reports
Indicator 2.2. No. of women benefiting from private and public 
measures to support women’s preparedness for leadership and 
decision-making
Gender links
UN-Women
Women in Networking
National Corporate Social 
Responsibility
National Women’s Council
National Women Entrepreneur 
Council
Mauritius Enterprise
Mauritius Chamber of Commerce 
and IndustryFrequency: Yearly Baseline: 400 (2013)
Target: 5,000 (2020)
Source: Ministry of Gender Equality, Women in Networking reports
Indicator 2.3. Number of gender based violence cases
Baseline: 1,895 cases in district courts (2014)
Target: <500 cases (2020)
Source: District courts reports
 
33 Rating scale 0-5: 0 = none, 1 = low, 2 = below average, 3 = average, 4 = above average, 5 = high
34 Rating scale 1-5: 1 = low, 2 = below average, 3 = average, 4 = above average, 5 = high
35Rating scale 0-5: 0 = none, 1 = low, 2 = below average, 3 = average, 4 = above average, 5 = high
Indicator: Mauritius score in the Global 
Innovation Index under ‘government 
effectiveness’
Baseline: 0.9 (2015)
Target: 1.5 (2020)
Data source: Global Innovation 
Index Report
Frequency: Yearly
Responsible: Cornell University;
European Institute for Business 
Administration; World 
Intellectual Property Organization
Output 3. Institutions enabled to optimize use of foresight and elearning techniques, performance management tools and citizen 
feedback mechanisms for enhanced public sector performance
Indicator 3.1. Extent to which ministries and departments are 
conducting and implementing strategic foresight exercises33
Baseline: 0
Target: 4
Source: Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reforms
(MCSAR) annual report
Indicator 3.2. No. of staff of public sector institutions accessing elearning solutions for professional development 
Baseline: 500 
Target: 20,000 
Source: MCSAR; Civil Service College reports
Indicator 3.3. Extent to which ministries and departments are using 
business intelligence tools for performance management34
Baseline: 1
Target: 4 
Source: Oracle Business Intelligence MFED database
Indicator 3.4. Extent to which client and citizen feedback surveys
implemented by public sector institutions are demonstrating 
improvement in public service user satisfaction35
Baseline: 1
Target: 5
Source: MCSAR annual report
MCSAR
Public Sector Re-Engineering 
Bureau
MFED
Civil Service College
Civil Service unions
Strategic Policy Unit 
National Audit Office
National Assembly
Office of Public Sector
 Governance
University of Mauritius
Customers’ associationsDP/DCP/MUS/4
National priority or goal: Implementing low-carbon, climate-resilient strategies while ensuring employment and livelihoods opportunities for the poor and excluded
Outcome: Design and implementation of a portfolio of activities and solutions developed at national and subnational levels for sustainable management of natural resources, integration of ecosystem services approaches, 
sound management of chemicals and waste, while ensuring that climate change challenges in terms of adaptation and mitigation are fully addressed
Strategic plan outcome
Outcome 1: Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded
Indicator: Emissions of carbon dioxide (in 
million metric tons)
Baseline: 3.67 million metric tons (2014),
increasing at 3% per year. 
Target: 4.20 million metric tons, 
increasing at 2.5% per year
Data source: Digest of Statistics
Frequency: Annual
Responsible: Statistics Mauritius
Output 1. Scaled-up action on climate change mitigation across 
sectors, funded and implemented 
Indicator 1.1. Megawatt of new intermittent renewable energy 
capacity installed 
Baseline: 67 MW (2016)
Target: 100 MW installed
Source: Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities (MEPU) and
Statistics Mauritius energy statistics
Indicator 1.2. Energy intensity of the Mauritian economy
Baseline: 0.72 (2014)
Target: 0.70 
Source: MEPU, Energy Efficient Management Office, and Statistics
Mauritius
Indicator 1.3. No. of plans, strategies, policies, and programmes 
implemented to achieve low-emission and climate-resilient 
development objectives
Baseline: 30 Strategy
Target: 42
Source: Statistics Mauritius, annually
Indicator 1.4. No. of jobs created for women 
Baseline: 6.3% of women total
Target: 30% (disaggregated by sex)
Source: Statistics Mauritius
MFED
MEPU
Central Electricity Board
Agence française de 
développement
Ministry of Infrastructure, Land 
Transport and Shipping
Green Climate Fund (GCF)
Global Environment Facility
Regular: 
100
Other: 
23.4 – GCF
15 – GEF
1.5 – GEF regional
7.0 Adaptation Fund 
Board
Data source: National 
legislation, budget documents, 
strategies and action plans
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Government of 
Mauritius
Output 2. Effective institutional, legislative and policy frameworks 
in place to enhance the implementation of disaster and climate risk 
management measures at national and subnational levels
Indicator 2.1. No. of coastal protected sites
Baseline:1
Target: 3 
Source: Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, and 
Disaster and Beach Management (MESDDBM)
MESDDBM
Ministry of the Environment
National Disaster Risk Reduction 
and Management Center
JICA
Ministry of Ocean Economy
Mauritius Oceanography Institute
Adaptation Fund Board 
36 Rating scale 1-5: 1 = low,2 = below average,3 = average,4 = above average, 5 = high
Indicator 2.2. No. of institutions with a disaster risk reduction and/or 
integrated disaster risk reduction and adaptation strategy or action 
plan with clearly defined institutional responsibilities and a multistakeholder coordination mechanism
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Source: (MESDDBM)
Indicator 2.3. Number of women benefitting from natural resource 
management initiatives. 
Baseline: To be determined
Target (disaggregated by sex): To be determined (survey will be 
conducted during programme implementation)
Indicator: Hectares of land managed 
sustainably through protected area 
management, biodiversity and ecosystem 
conservation
Baseline: 14,879 ha
Target: 17,000 ha
Data source: National Digest of 
Statistics
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Statistics 
Mauritius
Output 3. Solutions developed at national and subnational levels for 
sustainable management of natural resources, ecosystem services, 
chemicals, and hazardous waste
Indicator 3.1. Extent to which Mauritius fulfils its obligations 
regarding international conventions on chemicals and wastes –
Stockholm Convention and Minamata Convention36
Baseline: 2
Target: 4
Indicator 3.2. No. of new partnerships for sustainable management 
of natural resources, ecosystem services and protected areas
Baseline: 8
Target: 10
Source: GEF project reports
Ministry of Agro Industry and 
Food Security
National Parks and Conservation 
Services
Ministry of Ocean Economy
Mauritius Oceanographic Institute
Rodrigues Regional Assembly
GEF MESDDBM