File Name: MWI-CPD-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Malawi
Country Code: MWI
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 4-8 June 2018
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2023
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
2 April 2018
Original: English
First regular session 2018
4-8 June 2018, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Malawi (2019-2023)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale ..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management .................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Malawi (2019-2023) 9I. Programme rationale
1. Malawi is classified as a least developed country; nearly 70 per cent of its 17 million people live 
on less than $1.90 a day, with poverty concentrated in rural areas, where 95 per cent of the poor live.1
Inequality is rising: the Gini coefficient increased from 0.339 to 0.461 between 2005 and 2017,
2
and 
the share of the poorest quintile in national consumption worsened from 10.1 per cent in 2005 to 5.5 
per cent in 2012. Despite being largely peaceful, Malawi ranks 170 of 188 countries with a Human 
Development Index of 0.476, placing it well below the sub-Saharan average of 0.523.3 Gender 
inequality is high (Gender Inequality Index of 0.614)4 mainly due to negative social norms and 
discriminatory practices, resulting in women’s low levels of representation in politics and the 
economy (93 per cent of women are in unpaid labour compared to 79 per cent of men).5
2. The application of gender analysis in policymaking and budgeting is lacking. Coupled with weak 
enforcement of equality policies and laws, female-headed households are disadvantaged in terms of 
access to credit, subsidized fertilizer and extension services.6 Economic progress has been volatile.
7
The economy grew by only 3 per cent in 2015 and 2.8 per cent in 2016, largely due to weather-related 
shocks impacting agricultural productivity, but is projected to grow by 4.4 per cent in 2017.
8
 With 
86 per cent of the population reliant on subsistence agriculture, there is limited diversification in the 
economy; the manufacturing sector contributes less than 10 per cent to the gross domestic product 
(GDP).9 Unemployment in 2016 was 6.74 per cent but higher for women (7.1 per cent) and youth 
(9.15 per cent).
10 Despite 81 per cent of the population engaging in labour activities,11 formal 
employment opportunities are limited. Around 130,000 young people enter the labour market each 
year, with the formal sector producing only 30,000 jobs,
12 risking increased social tensions.
3. Lack of access to finance, corruption and unreliable electricity and water supply are key 
constraints hindering private sector development and investment.
13 The private sector presents a 
dualistic structure with a few, large and often foreign-owned companies engaged primarily in 
agricultural production with limited in-country value addition, and many micro- and small-scale 
enterprises mainly in the informal sector (with a ‘missing middle’). Malawi is extremely vulnerable 
to the impacts of climate change, the costs of which were estimated at $994 million in 2015-2016 (14
per cent of GDP).14 Investments to break the cycle of multidimensional poverty and build more 
resilient communities are disrupted by recurrent shocks; floods and droughts led to nearly half the 
population requiring humanitarian assistance in 2015-2016. 
4. Over half of the 28 districts are disaster prone, exacerbated by limited early warning systems, low 
preparedness and recovery capacity, weak local institutions and an unsustainably high dependency 
on natural resources for livelihood and energy (88 per cent of household energy needs are met by 
biomass).15 Women are disproportionately vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, in light of 
their unequal access to resources and low participation in decision-making.16 Structural deficits in 
 
1 Poverty Assessment, World Bank, 2017
2 Malawi Country Profile; http://www.sdgindex.org/; accessed on 12/12/2017
3 UNDP, Human Development Report 2016.
4
Ibid.
5 UNDP, Africa Human Development Report 2016
6 UNDP, National Human Development Report, 2015, UNDP
7 World Bank, ‘From Falling Behind to Catching Up, Country Economic Memorandum for Malawi’, 2017.
8 The World Bank projection as reflected in the 2017 Malawi Economic Monitor. 
9 Annual Economic Review, 2016, Government of Malawi.
10 http://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Malawi; data source World Bank. Accessed on 12/12/2017
11 2016. http://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Malawi/Labor_force_participation/
12 Danish Trade Union Council for International Development Cooperation, Malawi – Labour Market Profile 2014. 
 www.ulandssektretariatet.dk/site/default/files/uploads/public/PDF/LMP/Imp-malawi-2014-final-version-pdf.
13 Enterprise Survey, World Bank 2010 and 2014
14 UNDP, European Union and World Bank, ‘Malawi 2015 Floods: Post-Disaster Needs Assessment’ and ‘Malawi Drought: Post-Disaster Needs 
Assessment, 2016’.
15 Stockholm Environment Institute, ‘Energy Biomass Access and Biomass Resource Transitions in Malawi’, 2013.
16 University of Leeds, London School of Economics, Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, ‘Gender, Agriculture 
and Climate Change in Malawi’2016DP/DCP/MWI/3
electricity access, including frequent power cuts and the fact that only 10 per cent of the country and 
less than 2 per cent of the rural population are connected to the grid,
17 are fueling deforestation and 
undermining business growth through intermittent energy supply. 
5. The Malawi Growth and Development Strategy 2017-2022 aims to accelerate the transition to a 
productive, competitive and resilient nation and integrates the Sustainable Development Goals. It has 
five key priority areas: (a) agriculture, water development and climate change; (b) education and 
skills development; (c) energy, industry and tourism development; (d) transport and information and 
communication technology infrastructure; and (e) health and population. Peace, good governance, 
effective decentralization and gender mainstreaming are key enablers. Malawi achieved only four of 
the eight Millennium Development Goals and the transition to the Sustainable Development Goals
will require enhanced coordination and evidence-informed planning and implementation. A National 
Planning Commission created in 2017 is responsible for planning and oversight of implementation. 
6. Malawi has ratified almost all international human rights conventions and treaties and 
strengthened the legal and policy framework for human rights. It has undergone two cycles of 
universal periodic review (2010 and 2015). While the law forbids discrimination in all forms, persons 
with albinism, women, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) populations and 
others continue to face hostilities that undermine their freedoms including access to services.18 Access
to justice is a challenge due to weak policy implementation, institutional capacities and the 
dysfunctionality of informal justice mechanisms, which has resulted in overcrowded courts and 
prisons. 
7. Weak governance contributes to inefficient public services, lack of transparency and 
accountability, weak rule of law and low representation by the poor and disadvantaged groups in 
decision-making.19 Corruption remains a challenge, reflected in Malawi’s ranking of 120/176 on the 
Corruption Perception Index.20 Accountability is low, with disempowered citizenry and weak 
oversight institutions. The legislative and policy framework is strong, but implementation and 
regulatory enforcement remain weak due to insufficient institutional coordination, restrained public 
sector finance and weak performance incentives. Gaps in competences and skills for evidenceinformed policy and programme formulation, lack of disaggregated data and the disconnect between 
use of data and policy formulation and implementation also need improvement.21
8. Effective decentralization, by making governance more responsive to the needs of the citizens and 
ensuring social accountability, is a government priority and will impact on achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals. A decentralization framework and policy are in place, although 
planning, implementation and monitoring and evaluation at national and district levels have not yet 
been harmonized, devolution is not fully implemented and district councils do not sufficiently involve
communities in planning or delivering services. Tensions stemming from inequality and political and 
socioeconomic exclusion periodically threaten Malawi’s peace and unity. A National Peace Policy 
launched in 2017 will establish a framework for increased collaboration among stakeholders involved 
in conflict prevention, more effective and timely responses to early warning signs of conflict, and 
promotion of peace. Coordination mechanisms are needed for all players in conflict prevention and 
peacebuilding.
9. Evaluations (United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), country programme 
end-of-cycle, outcome and project-level evaluations) have noted that UNDP interventions have been 
highly relevant, contributing to strengthening of the legislative and policy frameworks, including 
 
17 Sustainable Energy for All Country Report: Malawi, 2016.
18 Amnesty International, ‘We are not animals to be hunted or sold: violence and discrimination against people with albinism in Malawi’(AFR 
36/4126/2016), London, 2016; Joint Malawi Civil Society Organizations Shadow Report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination 
Against Women, 2015; Mujuzi, Jamil. (2011), Discrimination against homosexuals in Malawi: Lessons from the recent developments. 
International Journal of Discrimination and the Law. 11.
19 UNDP, National Human Development Report: Inclusive Growth in Malawi 2015.
20 https://www.transparency.org/country/MWI; accessed on 3 November 2017.
21 Capacity Needs Assessment on Evidence-Based Policy Coordination, Formulation and Implementation – Final Draft Report; Government of 
MalawiNovember 2017compliance with international obligations and reporting. Work on social cohesion, electoral reform 
and environmental sustainability yielded positive results. However, there is need to strengthen 
implementation, particularly at subnational levels, and to strengthen the application of evidence and 
data for development. The country programme evaluation also noted the need for improved indicators 
and strengthened coherence of interventions through a clear theory of change. The midterm evaluation 
reaffirmed the need to focus on outcomes, including gender-related outcomes, across programmes 
and projects
10.UNDP has benefited from diverse partnerships, including with bilateral and multilateral agencies, 
private companies and associations, civil society and national and subnational government partners. 
Resource mobilization has seen an average annual ratio of regular to other resources of 1: 2.48 in the 
past five years. Key partners have been the Government22,the European Union, United Kingdom 
Department for International Development (DfID) and the Government of Norway. UNDP secured 
funding from International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), German Development 
Cooperation (GDC), the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and Green Climate Fund. UNDP is 
exploring engagement with new partners such as the World Bank, the African Development Bank
(AfDB) and foundations. Partnership surveys in 2015 and 2017 showed that partners view the 
performance of UNDP favourably in terms of aligning to national priorities, contributing to 
democratic governance and poverty reduction and deploying high-quality professionals. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
11.The principal objective of the programme is to contribute to reduction of poverty, inequality and 
vulnerability to shocks. This will be achieved by scaling up employment and sustainable livelihood 
opportunities for vulnerable groups, including women, youth, persons with disabilities and albinism, 
and communities living in areas prone to flooding, drought and other shocks. Given Malawi’s high 
level of dependence on natural resources and environmental degradation, the programme will focus 
on building resilience of vulnerable groups to shocks by increasing their knowledge and skills to 
adapt and mitigate the effects of climate change. The integrated Sustainable Development Goals 
modelling found that Goal 16 has the maximum multiplier effect on achieving all Goals.
23
12.The programme will have a strong focus on strengthening governance and human rights 
institutions for development effectiveness and accountability, improved service provision and civic 
participation. It will also strengthen oversight institutions, decentralized structures and systems, and 
disaggregated data generation and analysis. To scale up integrated solutions to complex and 
interconnected development challenges, three complementary streams define the new programme: 
(a) enhancing economic innovation, inclusive business, job creation, and renewable energy access; 
(b) scaling up climate adaptation and resilience to shocks; and (c) strengthening effective, accountable 
and inclusive governance that promotes civic engagement, respect for human rights, rule of law, peace 
and democracy. The programme adopts a risk-informed approach to safeguard Malawi’s development 
gains in the context of a changing climate. 
13.It supports the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy 2017-2022 and other key national 
policies and strategies. The country programme is rooted in and supports domestication and 
integration of international commitments and treaties, including the African Union Agenda 2063, the 
Sustainable Development Goals, Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the Paris 
Agreement on Climate Change, other multilateral environmental agreements and international and 
regional human rights treaties, in particular the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights. UNDP will continue to cooperate with the Government at all levels for effective 
implementation of policies and to ensure greater ownership and sustainability of interventions 
including through further cost-sharing. UNDP will also partner with bilateral agencies, civil society, 
academia and the private sector to mobilize resources to multiply the impact of interventions. UNDP 
will continue to leverage the United Nations system in its programming, and provide an operational 
 
22 The Government of Malawi contributed $20.9 million towards the NRIS budget of $50.9 million.
23 UNDP
Draft Integrated Sustainable Development Goal Modelling Report for Malawi2017DP/DCP/MWI/3
platform of support.
 Enhancing economic innovation, inclusive business, job creation and access to renewable energy 
14. Innovative financial instruments such as the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund (MICF), which
targets the private sector’s “missing middle”, will continue to channel productive investment in 
agriculture, manufacturing, irrigation and services and will be expanded to the renewable energy 
sector. By offering a “challenge” to the private sector to achieve pre-defined objectives, the MICF is 
enabling technological innovation, and pre-defined pro-poor impact, by allocating financial support 
to innovative projects to test the long-term commercial viability of the ideas. Based on interest from 
development partners such as DfID and the Government of Norway, UNDP will expand focus to 
accelerate growth of start-up companies, crowding-in impact investment for sustainable enterprise 
development and social enterprises, and scaling innovation (such as de-risking24 business growth for 
small- to medium-sized enterprises). 
15.Support will be aimed at creating jobs and promoting entrepreneurship through access to risk 
capital, business development services and business acceleration. Youth and women will be the 
primary targets as emerging innovators and positive disruptors for development. UNDP will continue 
to support the Ministry of Industry, Trade and Tourism and the Bureau of Standards, while increasing 
its focus on direct support for small- to medium-sized enterprises to access domestic and export 
markets by improving adherence to quality standards, opening opportunities for employment growth, 
economic diversification, innovation, higher productivity and competitiveness. 
16.UNDP will help close the energy gap by supporting sustainable energy for all, complementing 
government efforts to create an enabling environment to accelerate renewable energy uptake, with a 
focus on clean energy mini-grids that deploy sustainable business models and strengthen social 
entrepreneurship. Priorities will focus on: increasing clean energy for poor households that are 
unlikely to be grid-connected over the next 10 years; promoting policy and market incentives for 
scaling up access to and uptake of renewable energy; through a joint United Nations programme, 
scaling up sustainable business models for the application of solar energy in the health and education 
sectors, while building markets for private sector innovation; and facilitating a transition to renewable 
energy by the private sector through challenge funds modelled on previous experience. Cooperation 
will be pursued with the United Republic of Tanzania as a regional leader on clean energy mini-grids.
17.UNDP will deepen its analytics and responsible engagement with the private sector, including 
deploying its convening power to mobilize private capital for domestic investments to achieve the 
Sustainable Development Goals. Achieving inclusive growth will be aided by cooperation with 
AfDB, IFAD, the World Bank and United Nations partners to catalyse private sector partnerships 
through blended finance and scaling up social entrepreneurship. 
Scaling up climate adaptation and resilience to shocks
18.In line with the civic engagement and decentralization priorities described below, UNDP will 
focus on improving the integration of climate change adaptation into national, subnational and sector 
development plans, including accelerating adaptation investments based on community priorities, 
sustainable solutions to natural resources management and responsive local institutions. Leveraging 
engagement with the GEF and Green Climate Fund, UNDP will assist in building national climate 
information and early warning systems to improve access to reliable and timely information to reduce 
disaster risk, inform livelihood decisions, and guide infrastructure and urban planning with the United 
Nations Children’s Fund, World Food Programme and World Bank.
19.With the Departments of Disaster Management Affairs, of Climate Change and Meteorological 
Services, of Water Resources, of Fisheries, of Agriculture Extension Services, the Ministry of 
Transportation and Public Works, city administrations and districts, priority will be extended to 
 
24 Financial instruments such as the MICF help absorb some of the commercial risks in triggering innovation, speeding up 
implementation of new business models and/or technologies that have high social impact. Reducing such risks has proved 
compelling to commercial banksoperating in Malawi and abroadthat have co-invested in MICF projects with debt and equityscaling-up disaster risk reduction and preparedness in urban and peri-urban areas, while strengthening 
household resilience to shocks through nature-based solutions such as watershed rehabilitation. 
UNDP will focus on women and vulnerable groups in post-disaster recovery by strengthening local 
government structures and communities for disaster preparedness and risk reduction plans in rural, 
urban and peri-urban areas.
20.UNDP will leverage its investment in the biometric national identification cards to strengthen 
Malawi’s social registry and the national statistical system to monitor the impact of resiliencebuilding and related programming on households. This focus will help to remove a data bottleneck,
enabling accelerated implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. UNDP will prioritize 
collaboration with the Ministries of Finance, Economic Planning and Development, of Local 
Government and Rural Development, and the Department of Disaster Management Affairs.
21.UNDP will work to improve coordination between national actors including scaling up access to 
domestic and international sources of climate finance – such as local “green taxes” – to enable priority 
actions that accelerate Malawi’s transition to more risk-informed and climate-resilient development. 
Opportunities to leverage private sector know-how and resources for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation will be pursued. UNDP will strengthen South-South cooperation, including with China in 
disaster risk management and with Rwanda in climate change development funds. 
Strengthening effective, accountable and inclusive governance that promotes civic engagement, 
respect for human rights, the rule of law, peace and democracy
22.Drawing on its normative mandate and work on human rights in Malawi, UNDP will strengthen 
technical capabilities of human rights institutions and coordination mechanisms at national and 
subnational levels. It will focus on the harmonization, implementation and enforcement of laws and 
policies in line with international standards. A joint United Nations programme on human rights will 
bring together the Government’s Human Rights Commission, Ombudsman and Ministry of Justice
and Constitutional Affairs with civil society in a new approach to expand the space for dialogue, 
focusing on implementing the recommendations of United Nations human rights mechanisms and 
advancing the rights of marginalized and vulnerable groups. UNDP will work to strengthen 
monitoring of public reporting on disability, enhancing generation, analysis and use of evidence. 
23.Through partnership with the European Union, Paralegal Advisory Services Institute and 
community-based organizations, UNDP will promote access to justice that will aim to achieve timely, 
effective and inclusive justice processes through provision of village mediation and paralegal 
services. These will reduce the number of people in detention, especially women and children, and 
the duration of incarceration and overcrowding of police cells and prisons, including the backlog of 
court cases. Greater emphasis will be placed on strengthening the technical and financial capabilities 
of democratic governance institutions through implementation and enforcement of laws and policies 
to improve transparency and accountability, through the strengthened oversight institutions such as 
Parliament and the Office of Ombudsman. 
24.UNDP will promote civic engagement and participation in decision-making processes through 
increasing awareness of human rights as well as active, free and meaningful participation of 
marginalized groups, especially women, children, people with disabilities, people with albinism, 
people living with HIV/AIDS and LGBTI people. To improve service delivery and public 
engagement in local development planning, budgeting and monitoring processes, a joint United
Nations programme on decentralization and local governance will support coordination structures 
and alignment of national and local development planning processes. Special attention will be given 
to localization of the Sustainable Development Goals and support to develop the capabilities of 
subnational stakeholders for implementation. 
25.The programme will enhance collaboration at district level to reduce transaction costs and expand 
benefits from interventions focused on economic opportunities, climate adaptation and disaster risk 
reduction. UNDP will continue to support the Government in platforms to improve coordination of 
development assistance, building on its expertise and experience in Malawi in this area, while DP/DCP/MWI/3
adopting new approaches to address shifts in the global development finance landscape, and build 
national capacity to mobilize diverse forms of development finance, based on Rwanda’s experience 
in developing a national climate change investment fund. An integrated programme of support to the 
National Planning Commission will assist in aligning planning and reporting frameworks with the 
Sustainable Development Goals at national and local levels.
26.UNDP will enhance coordination of support to improve data, collaborating with the National 
Planning Commission, National Statistics Office and others. Leveraging its investment in the national 
roll-out of over 9 million identification cards, UNDP, with other United Nations agencies, will 
support the strengthening of the national data ecosystem to ensure the improved collection and use of 
quality disaggregated data for development planning and programming, enhancing evidence-based 
planning, beneficiary and service targeting and accountable administrative systems, including 
harmonization of collection systems at sectoral and district levels. UNDP will also continue to provide 
linkages and interfaces to other public and private sector systems to optimize the use of the 
identification cards. 
27.To respond to political and economic exclusion driving tension and conflict, UNDP will support 
roll-out of the national peace architecture at national and district levels, including developing early 
warning systems to identify triggers for conflict and building conflict resolution mechanisms. 
Interventions will include establishment and capacity-building of district peace committees and multiparty liaison committees; facilitating national dialogues on contentious issues such as land and access 
to resources; building collaborative leadership and dialogue skills for political leaders; and increasing 
the participation women and youth in peace and security. In collaboration with the United Nations 
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and development 
partners, UNDP will establish an integrated programme of support to electoral stakeholders including 
the Malawi Electoral Commission to encourage multi-stakeholder consensus around the tripartite 
elections in 2019 and beyond, to ensure credible and peaceful processes. It will include improved 
operational practices and constructive engagement around civic and voter education, voter 
registration building on the national identification cards, results management and electoral conflict 
management. UNDP will engage political parties to promote gender equality, for example through 
review and implementation of party policies to ensure they include gender equality and strengthen 
women’s political participation and empowerment.
III. Programme and risk management
28.The programme will be nationally executed; projects will use the most appropriate implementation 
modality to ensure an effective and efficient delivery of nationally owned, sustainable results. Support 
to national implementation to address capacity gaps in national implementing partners and direct 
implementation will safeguard and ensure the accountability of UNDP in complex programming 
situations. 
29.In accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/9, all direct project costs associated with 
implementation will be charged to the concerned projects. The capacity of the country office will be 
reviewed to ensure it is well positioned for effective implementation of the programme. The country 
office will collaborate with the Regional Service Centre and headquarters to provide technical and 
managerial assistance, where necessary. Four major sources of risk require mitigation strategies: (a) 
security incidents and social tensions, particularly related to land and elections; (b) climate impacts 
and shocks (flooding or drought); (c) limited reform incentives, implementation and financial 
management capacity at district and sub-district levels; and (d) inability to mobilize resources from 
key donors. 
30.Security risks will be mitigated through close collaboration with the United Nations Department 
of Safety and Security and ongoing support to peacebuilding and social cohesion. Capacity risks will 
be mitigated by implementing a plan to reinforce the capacities of national partner in financial, project 
and procurement management, in collaboration with other United Nations agencies implementing the 
harmonized approach to cash transfers. Climate change risks will be mitigated by ensuring comprehensive disaster contingency plans in collaboration with other United Nations agencies. 
Finally, the resource mobilization strategy will be strengthened through enhanced communication 
and donor visibility, targeting also non-traditional donors, and leveraging capacities of the UNDP 
Regional Service Centre.
31.Interventions will be scaled up or down depending on the availability of resources. A crisis 
modifier approach will be considered to instill flexibility and rapid response in case of need. Risk 
mitigation plans will be developed during preparation of programmes/projects, in collaboration with 
national stakeholders. Accelerated procedures can be adopted to provide a rapid response to crisis 
situations and respond effectively to new requests for UNDP support. The country office will invoke 
the business continuity plan in case of crisis affecting its normal operations. 
32.This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and 
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’s Programme 
and Operations Policies and Procedures and the internal controls framework. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
33.Well-articulated results frameworks will be key to effective monitoring and evaluation initiatives 
under the country programme. UNDP will ensure that the programme’s results framework is aligned 
with national priorities as outlined in the Malawi Growth and Development Strategy 2017-2022 and 
the UNDAF, as well as with the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, the Sustainable Development 
Goals and other international and national commitments. Given the lessons learned from the 
evaluation of the previous country programme, UNDP will pay special attention to maintaining an 
appropriate number of indicators that can be tracked and provide a clear picture of expected change 
at the outcome level. 
34.As far as possible, UNDP will use the national information and data systems to monitor its 
contribution to national results, including surveys and censuses conducted by the National Statistical 
Office. Where appropriate, data generated by international agencies will be used to monitor progress. 
UNDP will contribute to strengthening of existing data and information systems, including improving 
data quality, analysis and use to provide a foundation for programme monitoring. In this regard, 
UNDP will work towards ensuring interoperability of existing data systems and advocate for 
increased use of data for evidence-informed policymaking and monitoring of development results. A 
joint United Nations programme will support a robust data ecosystem through coordination of the 
national statistical system to reduce fragmentation. 
35.Collection and analysis of disaggregated data by sex, location, age, disability and socioeconomic 
status is essential to aid programming anchored on “leaving no one behind”. UNDP will collaborate 
with research institutions, civil society, local and global think tanks in analyzing socioeconomic data 
to provide evidence on trends on vulnerabilities, poverty, income and gender inequalities. UNDP will 
liaise with the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation to access available resources, 
knowledge, experiences and opportunities from regional and global sources for addressing challenges 
of marginalized groups.
36.Evaluations and monitoring of the country programme and related projects will be in line with the
UNDAF monitoring system and UNDP corporate policies. UNDP will set aside at least 1 per cent of 
its programme resources for monitoring and evaluation. The UNDP gender marker will be used to 
assess programme results including budgets and expenditures on gender-related initiatives as a proxy 
for monitoring the responsiveness of the programme to the gender equality agenda. DP/DCP/MWI/3
Annex. Results and resources framework for Malawi (2019-2023)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Transition of Malawi to a productive, competitive and resilient nation.
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: By 2023, Malawi has strengthened economic diversification, inclusive business, entrepreneurship, and access to clean energy
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME Outcome 1: Advance poverty reduction in all its forms and dimensions
UNDAF outcome 
indicators,
baselines and targets
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines 
targets)
Major partners/
Partnerships frameworks
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome (in $)
1.1 The employment rate 
by sex, age, mother 
tongue.
Baseline: 80% (National 
Statistics Office (NSO)
2013)
(F: 74 %; M: 86 %)
Target: TBD % 
(F: TBD %; M: TBD %)
•
•
•
•
• NSO annual report 
• Independent 
assessment of annual 
sector strategy 
reports
•
• Sustainable Energy 
for All country 
assessment (every 
four years)
• Independent 
assessment of energy 
access (triannual)
Output 1.1: Women and youth in targeted areas have access to employment 
opportunities.
Indicator 1.1.1: Number of new jobs generated by firms participating in the 
Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund (MICF)
Baseline: 0; Target: 650, 30% females
Data source: MICF reports
Ministry of Industry, Trade
and Tourism
DfID, GDC
UNIDO, IFAD. Government 
of Norway 
Regular
$21,000,000
Other
$48,500,000
1.2 Share of renewable 
energy in the mix
Baseline: 7% (2017)
Target: 15% (2022)
Output 1.2: Public and private sector institutions enabled to develop and 
implement policies and practices that enhance innovation, productivity and 
entrepreneurship.
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of private sector entrepreneurs enabled to access 
regional and international markets, including access to affordable capital to 
de-risk investment and business growth.
Baseline: 0; Target: TBD
Data Source: Ministry of Industry, Trade and Tourism
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of product certifications granted by an accredited 
national product certification body.
Baseline: 0; Target: 10; Data source: Bureau of Standards annual report
1.3 Number of rural 
population with access to 
clean energy
.
Baseline: 0~1,300,500 
people (2017)
Target: 1,335,700 people, 
of whom 30% women)
Output 1.3: Inclusive and sustainable solutions adopted at the national and 
subnational levels to achieve increased energy efficiency and universal 
modern energy access (especially off-grid sources of renewable energy).
Indicator 1.3.1: proportion of households benefiting from clean, affordable 
and sustainable energy access.
Baseline: 7%; Target: 15% (30% female-headed, 40% coverage of 
households with persons with disabilities)
Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Energy, and 
Mining (Depts. of Energy, of 
Environmental Affairs, of 
Forestry, and of Climate 
Change), GEF, bilateral 
donors.Data source: Department of Energy Services
Indicator 1.3.2: Cumulative installed generation capacity for rural 
populations through mini-grids 
Baseline: 56 kW; Target: 2,000 kW
Data source: Department of Energy Services
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Actively respond to climate change, prevent disasters, strengthen sustainable natural resource management and environmental 
protection
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: By 2023, households have increased food and nutrition security, equitable access to healthy ecosystems and resilient livelihoods.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: Outcome 3: Strengthening resilience and shocks to crises
2.1 Multi-dimensional 
poverty rates (by sex, 
location, income, age)
Baseline: 0.273 (Human 
Development Report 
(HDR), 2016)
Target: 0.260 (HDR, 2023)
2.2 Gini index 
Baseline: 46.1 
(HDR, 2016)
Target: 40.0 [2005 range]
2.3 Economic loss from 
natural hazards (e.g. 
geophysical and climateinduced hazards) as a 
proportion of GDP
Baseline: 12.74% (2016) 
(Sustainable Development 
Goal indicators, 2016 
report)
Target: below 10%. (2023)
•
•
• Integrated Household 
Survey Report
Human Development 
Report
Independent reviews
Output 2.1: Scaled-up action, finance and partnerships for climate change 
adaptation, mitigation and disaster risk management across sectors.
Indicator 2.1.1: Proportion of local governments that adopt and implement 
climate adaptation, mitigation and disaster risk reduction (DRR) strategies, 
including through South-South and trilateral cooperation.
Baseline: 5; Target: 21
Data source: Dept. of Disaster Management Affairs 
Indicator 2.1.2: Percentage of public expenditure on climate change 
adaptation and mitigation.
Baseline: 3.5%; Target: 7%; Data source: independent climate and DRR 
public expenditure review reports 2014, 2018, 2021
Indicator 2.1.3: % of sectoral plans that mainstream climate risk and 
adaptation
Baseline: 20%; Target: 70%; 
Data source: independent climate and DRR public expenditure review reports 
2014, 2018, 2021
Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Energy, and 
Mining; Department of 
Disaster Management 
Affairs; 
UNICEF; WFP; World 
Bank; GEF; Green Climate 
Fund;
Government of China
Regular 
$26,000,000
Other:
$15,000,000
Output 2.2: Adaptive capacity of rural households and reduced exposure to 
climate risks strengthened
Indicator 2.2.1: Percentage of population in targeted areas with access to 
tailored climate information and early warnings
Baseline: 10% of population in target areas (Male: 628,620; Female: 663,136; 
60% of persons with disabilities)
Target: 17% population in target areas (Male: 1,093,242; Female: 1,154,912). 
Target to be confirmed during modernized climate information and early 
warning systems project inception phase
Data source: Independent reviewsDP/DCP/MWI/3
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Good governance
UNDAF (OR OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: By 2023, rights holders in Malawi access more accountable and effective institutions at the central and decentralized levels that 
use quality disaggregated data, offer integrated service delivery and promote civic engagement, respect for human rights and rule of law.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: Accelerate structural transformation for sustainable development
3.1 Percentage of 
governance institutions 
perceived as of high 
integrity and performance.
Baseline: 59.5% (2017); 
Target: 62% (2023)
Mo Ibrahim Index of 
Africa and 
Governance, Annual 
Report
Output 3.1: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs (MoJCA), Malawi 
Human Rights Commission (MHRC), Police Services, Prison Services, 
Judiciary, Legal Aid Services and Paralegal Advisory Service Institute (PASI)
are enabled to implement and monitor policies, laws and strategies for equitable 
access to justice.
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of detainee releases facilitated by paralegal officers 
at police, court, prisons and juvenile centres. 
Baseline: 73, 389 (2017); Target: 81,789 (2023). 
Data Source: MoJCA
Indicator 3.1.2: Percentage of human rights cases/complaints investigated and 
resolved by MHRC within 12 months of submission
Baseline: 59% (2016, MHRC); Target: 60%
Data Source: MHRC reports
Indicator 3.1.3: Mechanism for promoting and protecting the rights of 
marginalized women, children, people with disabilities, people with albinism 
and LGBTI persons in place. 
Baseline: No (2017); Yes (2023)
Source of Data: MHRC
MoJCA, PASI, Judiciary, 
Prisons, Police Service; 
Ministry of Gender, 
Community Dept and Social 
Welfare, UN-Women, 
UNICEF, EU, USAID, 
GDC, DfID, Irish Aid, Royal 
Norwegian Embassy, Law 
Society of Malawi, Office of 
the President and Cabinet
(OPC); Parliament; 
Ministries, Departments and 
Agencies; Anti-Corruption 
Bureau; Accountant 
Generals Office; Auditor 
General’s Office; Office of 
Asset Declaration; Office of 
the Director of Public 
Procurement; MHRC; Law 
Commissions; Office of 
Ombudsman; Media, Legal 
Aid Bureau
Regular: 
$5,100,000
Other: 
$5,470,588
Output 3.2: Selected governance institutions are enabled to perform core 
functions for improved transparency and accountability
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of reforms enforcing transparency and accountability 
in public institutions
Baseline: TBD; Target: TBD
Source of Data: MoJCA
OPC – Performance 
Enforcement Department;
Ministry of Finance, 
Economic Planning and 
Development; MoJCA, 
Office of the Ombudsman,
Parliament, Anti-Corruption 
Bureau, UN-Women, 
UNICEF, EU, USAID, 
DfID, Irish Aid, Royal 
Norwegian Embassy.
Regular: 
$5,560,000
Other: 
$5,500,000
Output 3.3: Central and local government institutions are enabled to develop 
and manage evidence-based policy planning, monitoring and evaluation 
Ministry of Gender, 
Children, Disability and 
Social Welfare; Local 
Regular: 
$2,500,000systems for inclusive and effective delivery of services and achievement of 
development results. 
Indicator 3.3.1: Sustainable financing mechanism for Sustainable 
Development Goal achievement at national and subnational levels in place. 
Baseline: 0 (2017); Target: 1 (2023)
Data Source: Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of local councils with planning, monitoring and 
evaluation systems that incorporate development targets for marginalized 
groups including women, youth, children, persons with albinism and persons 
with disabilities.
Baseline: 0 (2017); Target: 25 (2023)
Data Source: Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development
Councils; Local Government 
Finance Committee; 
Environmental Affairs 
Department, UN-Women, 
UNICEF, UNCDF, EU, 
USAID, GDC, DfID, Irish 
Aid.
Other: 
$2,500,000
Output 3.4 Use of digital technologies and quality disaggregated data enabled 
for improved public services and other government functions
Indicator 3.4.1: Number of public institutions that leverage national ID card 
for delivery and monitoring of services.
Baseline: 1 (2018); Target: 12 (2023); 
Data Source: National Registration Bureau 
Indicator 3.4.2: Number of sectors with data collection/analysis mechanisms 
providing disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the Sustainable 
Development Goals: (a) conventional data collection methods (e.g., surveys);
b) administrative reporting systems; and (c) new data sources (e.g., big data)
Baseline: 0; Target 16; 
Data Source: Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development
National Registration 
Bureau; OPC; World Bank; 
United Nations agencies
Regular: 
$1,000,000
Other: 
$1,500,000
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Good governance
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4: By 2023, Malawi has strengthened institutions for sustaining peace, inclusive societies and participatory democracy.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMEs: Outcome 2: Accelerate structural transformation for sustainable development
4.1 Proportion of seats 
held by women in national 
Parliament and local 
government (Sustainable 
Development Goal 5.5.1; 
Malawi Growth and 
Development Strategy)
Baseline: 17% (2014); 
Target: 40% (2023)
Malawi Electoral 
Commission
Output 4.1: Parliament, Malawi Electoral Commission, Centre for Multi-Party 
Democracy (CMD) and selected non-State actors are enabled to perform core 
functions for inclusive participation and representation
Indicator 4.1.1: Proportion of political parties represented in Parliament with 
effective gender equality policies.
Baseline: 0 (2017); Target: 75%; 
Data Source: CMD
Malawi Electoral 
Commission, CMD, CSOs, 
UN-Women, DfID, Royal 
Norwegian Embassy, 
European Union.
Regular: 
$2,750,000
Other: 
$5,440,000DP/DCP/MWI/3
4.2: Extent to which 
executive and legislative 
elections are free and 
credible, including 
impartiality of the electoral 
laws and framework. 
Baseline: 19% (2015); 
Target: 60% (2023)
Key: 0-39% = Low; 40-
59% =Medium; 60-
79%=High; 80-
100%=Very High
Ibrahim Index of 
Africa and 
Governance, Annual 
Report
Malawi Electoral 
4.3 Voter turnout Commission
disaggregated by sex and 
age
Baseline: 71% (2014)
Target: 80% (2023) 
Output 4.2: Gender-sensitive National Peace Architecture structures with realtime conflict early warning monitoring systems at national and district level are 
adopted.
Indicator 4.2.1: National and subnational coordination and monitoring 
mechanisms for conflict prevention and sustaining peace in place. 
Baseline: No (2017); Target: Yes (2023)
Data Source: OPC Report
Indicator 4.2.2: Proportion of district peace committees with 40:60 female to 
male quota.
Baseline: 3 Target: 28
Data Source: OPC
OPC, Malawi Electoral 
Commission, Public Affairs 
Committee; local councils; 
Multi-Party Liaison 
Committees, UN-Women, 
district peace committees; 
CSOs.
Regular: 
$1,000,000
Other: 
$2,859,412