File Name: MWI-NEP-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Malawi
Country Code: MWI
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: July 2018
Start Year: 2017
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

GOVERNMENT OF MALAWI
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
July 2018i
FOREWORD
The Government of Malawi (GoM) realises that industrial and socio-economic development 
of the country depends on access to modern, reliable and sufficient energy. As such, it has put 
the energy sector as a priority in its National Development Agenda. The Government further 
realises that sustainable development and management of energy sector through well-defined 
policies including legal and institutional frameworks, international assistance from 
development partners, and partnerships with the private sector positively impact on other 
sectors.
In view of this, the National Energy Policy of 2003 has been revised to provide a new policy 
direction and guidance to all stakeholders in the implementation of energy interventions. This 
is necessary in order to spur development as aspired for in the Malawi Vision 2020, and 
Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS) III in the national agenda, and 
Sustainable Energy for All Initiative and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in the 
international agenda.
The revision of the National Energy Policy of 2003 was necessitated by several factors 
including the following: it had a number of shortfalls or challenges which needed to be 
rectified; it was driven by the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) which have given 
way to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); Government’s adoption of Energy
Sector Reforms (Power market restructuring policy and an oil importation policy); Malawi’s 
commitment to achieve targets set under the Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) Initiative; 
and Government’s adoption of Public Sector Reform Programme aimed at ensuring 
efficiency, transparency and accountability in the delivery of public services, of which energy
services is a part. All these factors needed to be factored into the policy and therefore 
provided the rationale for the review of the policy. 
Whilst recognizing the numerous challenges in the energy sector, the National Energy Policy 
(2018) overall goal, therefore, is to provide guiding framework for increased access to 
affordable, reliable, sustainable, efficient and modern energy for all sectors and every person 
in the country. It emphasises the importance of private sector participation in the sector and 
provides an environment conducive for such participation, be it in the form of direct 
investment, PPPs, IPPs or other participation vehicles. It also emphasises on sustainable and 
clean energy which is accessible to all. Energy efficiency is another priority area of this 
Policy, which also recognises the importance of security of energy supply systems. 
Mitigating environmental, social, safety and health impacts of energy production and 
utilization is a key part of the policy. All this will be done under a robust, investor-friendly 
and consumer sensitive regulatory regime. 
The Government of Malawi is committed to addressing the challenges facing the energy 
sector while managing environment and climate change. As such, it has developed an ii
Integrated Resource Plan as a policy implementation tool to guide and facilitate investments 
in the sector. Further the Government has developed Independent Power Producers (IPP) 
Procurement framework, Malawi Renewable Energy Strategy and SE4ALL Action Agenda. 
These are envisaged to facilitate private sector participation in power generation and 
exploitation of renewable energy resources in the country. 
It is, therefore, my conviction that the policy will be critical in attaining socio-economic 
development of our country. I call upon all the stakeholders in the energy sector to join hands 
with the Government as it works tirelessly to achieve the aspirations and targets set in this 
policy.
Hon Aggrey Masi, MP 
Minister of Natural Resources, Energy and Miningiii
PREFACE 
The Government of Malawi adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and is part 
of the Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All) Initiative whose overall goal is to achieve 
universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, efficient and modern energy services.
This Policy demonstrates the government’s commitments to achieve these international 
development agenda through programmes, projects and activities there under. In the same 
vain, this revised energy policy has been guided by national development agenda and 
aspirations as stated in the Malawi Vision 2020, Malawi Growth and Development Strategy 
(MGDS) III and Malawi Public Sector Reforms Program. Further, the Policy demonstrates 
government effort to realise positive gains from various international as well as regional 
associations and agreements such as the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP), International 
Energy Agency (IEA), among others.
The Policy strongly advocates for the private sector to take a leading role in the 
implementation of energy sector interventions. There are also a number of opportunities for 
Civil Society Organisations (CSOs), communities and other partners to participate in the 
implementation of the Policy. 
Much as there are a number of challenges including inadequate funding and technical support 
which could hamper implementation, it is hoped that with this revised Policy being supported 
by an equally attractive legal and regulatory environment, various traditional and nontraditional sources of funding can be accessed.
The Policy was reviewed through a consultative process that involved a range of stakeholders 
including Government ministries, parliamentarians, development partners, private sector, 
Academia, CSOs, local leaders and communities. Desk studies of various countries’ energy 
policies and systems in Africa and Asia were also conducted. Lessons learnt from these 
countries further enriched the process and outcome of this Policy.
The Government of Malawi is highly indebted to all stakeholders that were involved in 
reviewing the Policy. Special appreciation goes to United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) for providing funding for the review process and the Millennium Challenge 
Corporation (MCC) for providing technical support on Social and Gender Inclusion.
Patrick C.R. Matanda
Secretary for Natural Resources, Energy and Miningiv
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AfDB African Development Bank
AUC African Union Commission 
CA Catchment Area
CDB China Development Bank
CDM Clean Development Mechanism
CFPP Coal-fired Power Plant
CFTC Commission for Fair Trade and Competition
CO Carbon Monoxide
CO2 Carbon Dioxide
COCO Company Owned Company Operated
CODO Company Owned Dealer Operated
COLEDO Company Leased Dealer Operated
COMESA Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
CSI Coal Supply Industry
CSO Civil Society Organisation
DfID Department for International Development
DoE Department of Energy Affairs
DoI&WD Department of Irrigation and Water Development
DODO Dealer Owned Dealer Operated
DSM Demand Side Management
DSW Department of Social Welfare
EAD Environmental Affairs Department
EAPP East African Power Pool
EDVP Ethanol Driven Vehicle Project
EGENCO Electricity Generation Company
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
ESCOM Electricity Supply Corporation of Malawi
ESI Electricity Supply Industryv
ESIA Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESIMP Environmental and Social Impact Management Plan
ESSP Energy Sector Support Project
ETHCO Ethanol Company of Malawi
FDI Foreign Direct Investment
FS Feasibility Study
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GHG Greenhouse Gases
GoM Government of Malawi
GTF Global Tracking Framework 
ICA Investment Climate Assessment 
IDA International Development Association
IEA International Energy Agency 
IFC International Finance Corporation 
IHPS Integrated Household Panel Survey
IPP Independent Power Producer
IRP Integrated Resource Plan
JICA Japanese International Cooperation Agency
kV Kilovolt
kWh Kilowatt-hour
LDC Least Developed Country
LED Light Emitting Diode
LF Liquid Fuel
LF&GSI Liquid Fuel and Gas Supply Industry
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MAREP Malawi Rural Electrification Programme
MBS Malawi Bureau of Standards 
MCC Millennium Challenge Corporation
MCCCI Malawi Confederation of Chambers of Commerce and 
Industryvi
MDG Millennium Development Goals
MERA Malawi Energy Regulatory Authority
MGDS Malawi Growth and Development Strategy
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MNREM Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and Mining
MoAI&WD Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development
MoEST Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
MoI&CE Ministry of Information and Civic Education
MoITT Ministry of Industry, Trade and Tourism
MoL&MD Ministry of Labour and Manpower Development
MoT&PI Ministry of Transport and Public Infrastructure
MVA Megavolt-ampere
MW Megawatt
MWK Malawi Kwacha
NCHE National Council for Higher Education
NCIC National Construction Industry Council
NCST National Commission for Science and Technology
NEPAD New Partnership for Africa’s Development
NPCA NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency
NEP National Energy Policy
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NOCMA National Oil Company of Malawi
NSO National Statistics Office
OMC Oil Marketing Company
PCG Partial Credit Guarantee
PCL Press Corporation Limited
PIL Petroleum Importers Limited
PIDA Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa 
PIDA-PAP PIDA Priority Action Program
PRG Partial Risk Guaranteesvii
PPA Power Purchase Agreement
PPP Public Private Partnership
PPPC Public Private Partnership Commission
PSP Pico Solar Products
PwC PricewaterhouseCoopers
REA Rural Electrification Agency
RE Renewable Energy
RER Renewable Energy Resources 
RET Renewable Energy Technologies
ROW Right(s) of Way
SADC Southern Africa Development Community
SAPP Southern Africa Power Pool
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SE4All Sustainable Energy for All
SGIP Social and Gender Integration Plan
T&D Transmission and Distribution
ESCOM Electricity Supply Corporation of Malawi
UN United Nations
UNCB United Nations Convention on Biodiversity
UNCD United Nations Convention on Desertification
UNDP United Nations Development Program
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USA United States of America
USD United States Dollar
VAT Value Added Tax
WEO World Economic Outlookviii
GLOSSARY
Biogas: A mixture of gases that is produced from bio-degradable materials such as 
agricultural materials (crop residues, liquid manure and energy crops), animal manure and 
slaughterhouse waste, vegetable waste, as well as municipal and sewage waste.
Biomass: Organic matter that can be used to provide heat, produce liquid fuel and generate 
electricity.
Electricity Access: In Malawian context, means connection to and usage of electricity from 
national grid, mini-grids, own generators, Solar PV home systems and Pico Solar Products.
Energy Balance: A coherent picture about the flows of all types of energy from their original
form, through transformation processes to their final use.
Energy Efficiency: Total energy input to a machine or equipment that is consumed in useful 
work and not wasted as useless heat.
Grid Code: A set of rules made by the regulatory authority for operation, dispatch and 
reporting of the Malawi Electricity Supply Industry.
Independent Power Producer (IPP): A person that privately builds, own and operate 
facilities to generate and sell electricity to the Malawi Electricity Supply Industry.
Integrated Resource Plan: A document detailing process of planning to meet users’ needs 
for electricity services in a way that satisfies multiple objectives for resource use.
Life line tariffs: A subsidised tariff targeting low income households to enable them access 
and sustain electricity usage.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG): A flammable mixture of hydrocarbon gases used as fuel 
in heating appliances, cooking equipment, and vehicles
None-Renewable Energy: Sources of energy available to mankind arising from natural 
processes in the interaction between the sun and the earth’s surface but not regularly 
replenished, and these include Uranium and fossil fuels e.g. coal, peat, crude oil and natural 
gas.
Petroleum-based fuels: Fossil fuels, which include petrol (gasoline), diesel, paraffin 
(kerosene) and heavy fuel oil (HFO).
Power Purchase Agreement: A contract between a generator and a single buyer or between 
a single buyer and a distributor to buy electricity for a pre-established period of time.ix
Renewable Energy: Sources of energy arising from natural processes in the interaction 
between the sun and the earth’s surface and regularly replenished. These include the sun as 
the primary renewable energy resource and the secondary renewable energy resources that 
derive from the sun such as wind, hydro, ocean thermal, ocean wave, ocean tidal energy and 
electricity from photo-voltaic effects, biomass and geothermal energy.
Rural Electrification: Grid or off-grid extension of distribution lines and installation of solar 
photovoltaic systems, generation of electricity from mini-and micro hydro whose internal rate 
of return is up to 6 per cent per annum and line capacity is less than 66 KV or generation 
capacity is up to 5 MW.x
TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOREWORD........................................................................................................i
PREFACE.......................................................................................................... iii
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS..........................................................iv
GLOSSARY..................................................................................................... viii
TABLE OF CONTENTS ...................................................................................x
1.0 INTRODUCTION.........................................................................................1
1.1 Background 1
1.2 Rationale 5
1.3 Policy Guiding Principles 5
1.4 Linkages with Existing Policies, Laws and International Obligations5
2.0 BROAD POLICY DIRECTIONS ...............................................................9
2.1 Policy Goal 9
2.2 Policy Outcomes 9
2.3 Broad Policy Objectives 9
3.0 POLICY PRIORITY AREAS ...................................................................10
3.1 Policy Priority Area 1: Electricity.............................................................11
3.1.1 Policy Priority Area 1.1: Electricity Generation 11
3.1.2 Policy Priority Area 1.2: Electricity Transmission 12
3.1.3 Policy Priority Area 1.3: Electricity Distribution 14
3.1.4 Policy Priority Area 1.4: Rural Electrification 15
3.1.5 Policy Priority Area 1.5: Electricity from Renewable Energy 17xi
3.1.6 Policy Priority Area 1.6: Definition and Measurement of Access to 
Electricity 19
3.2 Policy Priority Area 2: Biomass.................................................................20
3.3 Policy Priority Area 3: Petroleum Fuels...................................................22
3.4 Policy Priority Area 4: Bioethanol And Other Biofuels..........................24
3.5 Policy Priority Area 5: Liquefied Petroleum Gas, Biogas And Natural 
Gas.........................................................................................................27
3.6 Policy Priority Area 6: Coal.......................................................................30
3.7 Policy Priority Area 7: Nuclear Energy....................................................33
3.8 Policy Priority Area 8: Demand Side Management ................................34
3.8.1 Demand Side Management in the Electricity Supply Industry 34
3.8.2 Demand Side Management in Biomass End-use 36
4.0 IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS.............................................38
4.1 Institutional Arrangements 38
4.2 Implementation Plan 39
4.3 Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 40
4.4 Policy Review 40
ANNEX 1: DEMAND AND SUPPLY-HISTORICAL AND PROJECTED 
(2008-2035)............................................................................................41
ANNEX 2: SE4ALL FRAMEWORK FOR DEFINING AND 
MEASURING ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY..................................42
ANNEX 4: MONITORING AND EVALUATION PLAN FOR THE 
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2018 ..............................................88
ANNEX 5: ENERGY MEASUREMENT AND CONVERSION TABLES
1761
1.0 INTRODUCTION
This Policy seeks to guide planning and implementation of programmes, projects and 
activities in the energy sector with the aim of increasing access to affordable, reliable, 
sustainable, efficient and modern energy services for every person in the country. It reflects 
the latest developments in the energy sector and new national goals. It has an Implementation 
Plan and a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan with time-bound deliverables, and sets out clear 
updated goals, objectives, strategies and priority actions.
Cognizant of the fact that biomass dominates the current energy mix, at 89%, this Policy aims 
at reducing the contribution of biomass in the energy mix by promoting development and use 
of modern energy sources as shown in Annex 1. This Policy has categorised energy sources 
as follows: Electricity from Non-Renewable Sources; Electricity from Renewable Sources; 
Biomass; Petroleum Fuels; Biofuels; Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG); Biogas and Natural 
Gas (NG); Coal; and Electricity from Nuclear Energy. 
1.1 Background
The Government of Malawi identified energy as a priority sector in order to spur socioeconomic development of the country. Improvements in the energy sector are expected to 
positively impact on other sectors, through well-defined policies and institutional 
frameworks, international assistance from development partners, and partnerships with the 
private sector.
In recognition of the above, the Government of Malawi, adopted National Energy Policy 
(NEP) in January 2003. The Policy aimed at achieving the following long-term goals;
a. Make the energy sector sufficiently robust and efficient to support GoM’s socioeconomic agenda of poverty reduction, sustainable economic development, and 
enhanced labour productivity. 
b. Catalyse the establishment of a more liberalized, private sector driven energy supply 
industry in which pricing will reflect the competition and efficiency that will develop 
in the reform process; and
c. Transform the country’s energy economy from one that is overly dependent on 
biomass to one with a high modern energy component in the energy mix. 
 
The NEP 2003 had the following successes;
a. Formulation of the Malawi Energy Regulatory Authority to regulate the energy sector 
b. Formulation of National Oil Company of Malawi (NOCMA)
c. Increased awareness for renewable energy technologies 2
d. Capacity building in Renewable Energy Technologies through introduction of Testing 
Centre for Renewable Energy Technologies (TCRET) and establishment of 
department of energy studies at Mzuzu University;
e. Increased penetration of renewable energy into the energy mix; 
f. Establishment of Rural Electrification Fund and Rural Electrification Management 
Committee;
g. Implementation of Power Market Reforms;
➢ Amendment of the Electricity Act of 2004 to allow participation of Independent 
Power Producers.
➢ Unbundling of ESCOM into two companies- one responsible for generation 
(EGENCO) and the residual ESCOM for transmission and distribution.
h. Implementation of Bulk Fuel Procurement System; and
i. Increased fuel storage holding capacity to 75days.
Despite making progress in implementing NEP 2003, a lot remains to be done if the energy 
needs of all Malawians are to be met. The unfinished agenda is detailed below:
a) Despite the successful unbundling of ESCOM, there is still need to create two 
publicly owned companies one responsible for transmission and the other for 
distribution. 
b) Electricity generation in the country is inadequate to meet the demand. There is little 
private sector participation in generation of electricity to assist Government in filling 
the supply-demand gap. The generation is predominantly hydro (98% as at April 
2018) with 99% of the power plants located on Shire River. To be efficient and 
stimulate inclusive growth, efforts to strengthen electricity generation must 
deliberately co-opt strategies aimed at preventing and mitigating project risks for 
different social groups, as well as creating an enabling environment for equal 
opportunities in the sub-sector. With revised legislation including the unbundling of 
ESCOM it is anticipated that more private players will be attracted to the industry. 
c) Electricity Transmission Capacity constraints are prevalent in the country as 
evidenced by overloading of transmission lines and transformers. Increased 
transmission system capacity is crucial for evacuation of power from the generation 
stations. 
d) Access to electricity remains a major challenge that calls for urgent attention. Some 
of the barriers are high cost of connection to the grid, inadequate capacity by 
ESCOM to connect customers to the grid and lack of flexible connection incentives. 3
e) The Rural Electrification Fund has had impact of extending the grid to the rural 
areas but with limited connections. The fund has not been utilised for off-grid 
electrification.
f) Renewable energy contribution to the energy mix is still low. Some of the barriers to 
exploitation, development and use of renewable energy sources are:
i) Prohibitive capital costs of renewable energy-based systems and renewable 
energy technology (RET) products, e.g. mini grid systems, solar PV systems, 
bagasse co-generation systems and Pico Solar Products (PSPs);
ii) Inadequate human capacity building at all levels in RET products, services, 
installation and maintenance, and marketing;
iii) Lack of enforcement mechanisms for standards resulting in a proliferation of 
poor quality products, e.g. PSPs, on the market, and
iv) Limited dissemination of information to or awareness by the population. 
g) Biomass remains the major source of energy for cooking, heating and brick burning 
which exerts pressure on the diminishing resources. There is low adoption of efficient 
and alternative technologies that could reduce demand for biomass. There is no 
biomass energy regulatory framework.
h) Bio-ethanol and biodiesel contribution to the energy mix is low due to limited 
production capacity, lack of appropriate incentives and limited distribution 
infrastructure. 
i) Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG), Biogas and Natural Gas as alternative sources of 
energy for cooking, heating and electricity generation have not been fully exploited. 
There are, however, challenges that are hindering the uptake of these fuels. These 
include; lack of awareness, cultural barriers and knowledge on the existence of the 
fuels; high capital costs for equipment, inadequate technical expertise in, the design 
and construction of the systems. 
j) Coal has not been used much as an energy source despite the country having proven 
reserves. There are five main challenges facing the Coal Supply Industry (CSI) that 
need to be addressed: 
i) Lack of price competitiveness of local coal compared to imported coal;
ii) None existence of competition within the industry (23 years after the 
liberalisation of the industry in 1995, there are still just a few coal mining 
companies in operation);
iii) Low productivity and high production costs owing to the use of obsolete 
technologies; and4
iv) Overlaps in policy and regulatory framework to govern downstream 
marketing, transportation and utilisation. 
k) Nuclear energy has not been used for electricity generation despite the country having 
uranium deposits. Government has decided to harness the locally available nuclear 
energy for electricity generation. To this end, Government intends to formulate a 
capacity building programme in nuclear science in consultation with the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. The intention is to build adequate capacity to have the first 
nuclear power plant running by 2035.
l) Demand Side Management (DSM) and Energy Efficiency programmes have not been 
comprehensively implemented and fully adopted resulting in a lot of wastage of 
electrical energy and biomass in end-use activities such as cooking, water and space 
heating, as well as lighting occasioned by use of inefficient appliances and devices. 
m) The NEP 2003 was promulgated after the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
were put in place. However, the MDGs did not have any specific goal on energy, 
thereby omitting an important element in development. The new United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that have since been put into place include 
energy as Goal No. 7. The revised policy has taken this into account. In addition, the 
advent of the SE4ALL Initiative of 2011 necessitated a review of the old policy to 
factor in aspects thereof.
In view of the above, the revised National Energy Policy addresses the unfinished agenda and 
reflects the latest developments in the energy sector both nationally and internationally. This 
Policy has an Implementation Plan and a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan with time-bound 
deliverables. The Policy sets out clear updated goals, objectives, strategies and priority 
actions, and focuses on the following issues:
a) Sustainable and reliable energy provision that will catalyse industrialisation and 
modernisation of the economy. Support rapid growth of the productive sectors such as 
agriculture, manufacturing, mining and the service sector;
b) Achieving universal energy access in line with the SE4ALL and United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) i.e. Goal No. 7; 
c) Ensuring cost-reflective pricing with internationally acceptable returns on investment. 
This will include automatic price adjustment mechanisms for all sources of energy;
d) Promotion of regional power interconnection;
e) Reducing the impact of climate change on energy; 
f) Promotion of efficient biomass stoves and biomass briquetting and other alternative 
sources of energy;
g) Enhancing energy intervention’s planning and implementation at district level; and
h) Social and gender inclusion in energy programmes.
s5
1.2 Rationale
The first integrated National Energy Policy was formulated in 2003. Since then, Energy 
Sector as well as the overall economy have gone through structural changes, where the role of 
government in some areas has changed, markets have been liberalized and private sector 
initiatives encouraged. Hence the National Energy Policy of 2018 has been formulated 
considering these changes.
The formulation of the National Energy Policy of 2018 was also necessitated by changes in 
national and international development agenda. The MGDS II has given way to the MGDS 
III and the MDGs have given way to SDGs - both of which have put energy as a high priority 
area. The country is also committed to achieving targets set under the Sustainable Energy for 
All (SE4ALL) Initiative which had to be reflected in the Policy.
1.3 Policy Guiding Principles
The guiding principles of this Policy are as follows:
a) Sustainable Energy Supply and Services 
b) Energy Efficiency and Conservation
c) Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) 
d) Equitable and Inclusive Energy Access 
e) Promotion of Private Sector Participation 
f) Good Governance in Energy Services 
1.4 Linkages with Existing Policies, Laws and International Obligations
Constitution of the Republic of Malawi 
The Constitution under Section 13 embodies principles of national policy that will ensure that 
the State is actively promoting the welfare and development of Malawians. Among others, it 
mandates the State to develop policies that will prevent the degradation of the environment, 
enhance the quality of rural life, support the furtherance of education, support people with 
disability in all spheres of life and ensure the full participation of women in all areas on the 
basis of equality with men. To effectively realise this right, the State has an obligation to take 
all necessary measures, including facilitating equality of opportunity for all in their access to 
basic resources, education, health services, food, shelter, employment and infrastructure. 
Malawi Vision 2020
Malawian Vision is that :6
“By the Year 2020, Malawi, as a God-fearing nation, will be secure, democratically mature, 
environmentally sustainable, self-reliant with equal opportunities for active participation by 
all, having social services, vibrant cultural and religious values and a technologically driven 
middle-income country”.
Energy was set to play a major role in attaining the Vision 2020. However, success of Vision 
2020 has been limited, in part due to limited development and growth in the energy sector.
Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS) III
The Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS) III recognises that energy is the 
lifeblood of the economy as it serves as a crucial input to all economic and social services. A 
well-developed and comprehensive energy sector can improve service delivery and increase 
outputs in industries such as manufacturing, trade, tourism and other services. Access to 
clean, reliable, reasonably-priced and sustainable energy supply is central to maintaining and 
improving the living standards of people.
Legislations
This Policy shall be implemented in line with the existing legislation that touches on energy 
related issues such as: The Environmental Management Act 2016, Mines and Minerals Act
1981, National Forestry Act 1997, Water Resources Act 2013 and Gender Equality Act
2015, among others.
National Gender Policy 2006
The National Gender Policy, under the priority area of ‘environment, climate change and 
management,’ expects the energy sector to ensure integration of gender in environmental 
impact assessments (EIAs). Further, like all sectors, the energy sector is expected to 
contribute to achievement of the priority area on 'gender and economic development' under 
which there is a call to mainstream gender in national budgets, plans, strategies and 
programmes.
National HIV and AIDS Policy 2013
The National HIV and AIDS Policy (2013) requires implementation of comprehensive 
workplace HIV interventions that target highly mobile groups. Workers in energy 
infrastructure development projects would fall under this category. Therefore, mainstreaming 
HIV awareness in the energy sector is necessary for purposes of developing HIV prevention 
measures to protect women and men according to their specific vulnerabilities; minimizing 
disruptions to critical health/treatment services; and to generally prevent, mitigate and 
monitor HIV and AIDS risks in energy projects. 
Mines and Minerals Policy 2013
The Mines and Minerals Policy advocates the development of adequate infrastructure to 
support development of mining in the country. It is therefore important that, in order to 7
ensure rapid development of the mining sector, there is sufficient and reliable energy supply
in the country. 
National Forestry Policy 1996
Biomass is a downstream product of forests hence its use as an energy source must comply 
with the Forestry Policy.
National Climate Change Management Policy (2016)
Power generation and supply has been adversely affected by the negative impact of climate 
change. The National Climate Change Management Policy is promoting adaptation and 
mitigation measures to climate change that will also benefit the energy sector.
International Obligations
Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa (PIDA)
The African Union Commission (AUC), the New Partnership for Africa’s Development 
(NEPAD) Agency (NPCA) and the African Development Bank (AfDB) have developed a 
continental and consensual Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa (PIDA). The 
PIDA Priority Action Program (PIDA-PAP), aims to boost energy trade within and between 
regional power pools which will benefit the region through reduced cost due to economies of 
scale, improved energy mix and increased access to modern energy services. 
Tripartite Free Trade
The Tripartite Free Trade area comprising of SADC, COMESA and the East African 
Community are focusing on harmonising the Regional Economic Communities (RECs)' 
programmes in the areas of trade and infrastructure which include energy. 
SADC Energy Protocol and Energy Cooperation Policy and Strategy (1996)
SADC through its Energy Protocol (1996) and its Energy Cooperation Policy and Strategy 
(1996) identified four key areas in which energy can contribute to regional integration: trade 
in energy, investment and finance, capacity building and training, the exchange of 
information and the sharing of experience. 
SADC Regional Infrastructure Development Master Plan (RIDMP)
SADC, through its Regional Infrastructure Development Master Plan (RIDMP), is expected 
to run until 2027, and is to be implemented in three phases, i.e. short term (2013-2017), 
medium term (2017-2022), and long term (2022-2027) and will benefit SADC member states 
in different aspects of development including building roads, rails and ports. The energy 
division is one of the prioritized sectors and falls under the RDIMP Energy Sector Plan (ESP) 
2012. 8
International Energy Agency (IEA)
The key themes for International Energy Agency (IEA) are energy security, environmental 
protection and economic development. The agreed international goal of greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions reduction is the driver for many energy policies world-wide, and is targeted 
by both improved energy efficiency and a higher level of renewables in national energy 
systems. 
Power Africa Initiative
The United States Government’s Power Africa initiative is supporting economic growth and 
development by increasing access to reliable, affordable, and sustainable power in Africa. 
This initiative is expected to support the implementation of this Policy.
Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) Initiative 2011
The SE4All initiative by the United Nations launched in September 2011 aims to achieve the 
three main goals of ensuring universal access to modern energy services; doubling the global 
rate of energy efficiency; and doubling the share of renewable energy in the global energy 
mix by the year 2030. This Policy provides a platform for achieving these targets. 
Sustainable Development Goals
The Sustainable Development Goal Number 7 aims at ensuring universal access to 
affordable, reliable, and modern energy services by 2030; increasing substantially the share 
of renewable energy in the global energy mix by 2030; and doubling the global rate of 
improvement in energy efficiency by 2030.9
2.0 BROAD POLICY DIRECTIONS
2.1 Policy Goal
The goal of the policy is:
“To increase access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, efficient and modern energy for 
every person in the country.” 
2.2 Policy Outcomes 
The following are the expected outcomes for this Policy:
a) Diversified energy sources;
b) Developed and efficient energy sector; 
c) Modernised and sustainable energy services; 
d) Improved living standards for men and women due to equitable provision of energy 
services, and
e) Increased access to clean, sustainable and affordable energy for all people.
2.3 Broad Policy Objectives 
The broad objectives of this Policy are:
a) To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to 
support industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic 
development and wealth creation, as well as regional electricity trading;
b) To ensure adequate production and supply of petroleum and biofuels at affordable 
prices;
c) To ensure availability of LPG, biogas and natural gas in sufficient quantities at 
affordable prices for industrial and domestic use;
d) To promote a coal supply industry that is more efficient and competitive, and 
harnesses clean technologies that eliminate or greatly reduce harmful emissions;
e) To ensure biomass is sustainably used and carbon emissions are reduced through the 
use of energy efficient technologies;
f) To establish a vibrant, reliable, incentivized and sustainable private sector-driven 
Renewable Energy Technology industry; and
g) To promote energy programming, budgeting and monitoring that routinely address all 
aspects of social and economic development in energy programmes and services.10
3.0 POLICY PRIORITY AREAS
This Policy has identified Electricity, Biomass, Petroleum Fuels, Bio-ethanol and Other 
Biofuels, Liquefied Petroleum Gas, Biogas and Natural Gas, Coal, Nuclear Energy and 
Demand Side Management, as priority areas for actions. 11
3.1 Policy Priority Area 1: Electricity
Electricity as a priority area covers generation, transmission, distribution, rural electrification, 
electricity from renewable energy, and definition and measurement of access to electricity.
3.1.1 Policy Priority Area 1.1: Electricity Generation
Electricity generation industry in Malawi is currently composed of one National Company,
Electricity Generation Company (EGENCO). The industry is liberalised but currently there 
are no private generators operating on the ground. The total installed capacity for the country 
is 361MW, 98% of which comes from hydro power plants located on Shire River and Wovwe 
River and the remaining 2% comes from stand-by diesel/petrol generators. 
The key challenges in electricity generation are the following; inadequate installed capacity
of 361MW against an estimated demand of over 700MW; there are no IPPs in the generation 
industry that could assist in filling generation gap; overdependence on Shire River for 
hydropower generation; and the national electricity grid is currently not interconnected with 
those of neighbouring countries, hence the country is unable to trade power under SAPP or 
EAPP trading arrangements.
Policy Statements
I. Government will create an enabling environment in order to diversify power 
generation sources for security of supply and expand generation capacity to meet 
the demand for electricity in the country. 
Strategies:
• Reviewing the 2017 -2035 Integrated Resource Plan every five years.
• Creating an enabling environment for private sector investment in power generation.
• Conducting feasibility studies on sites for power generation from hydro, coal, 
geothermal, natural gas, solar, wind, agricultural waste, forestry waste, and biogas 
resources. 
• Developing the sites for power generation from Hydro, Coal, Geothermal, Natural
Gas, Solar, Wind, agricultural waste, forestry waste, and biogas resources, up to 
commissioning.
• Developing new hydro power plants up to commissioning.
II. Government will support all the necessary processes relating to the full 
operationalization of Electricity Generation Company (EGENCO) and the 
company responsible for transmission and distribution (ESCOM).
Strategies:12
• Implementing power sector reforms in accordance with the Electricity Amendment 
Act of 2016
III. Government will interconnect its power system with the regional grids of SAPP 
and EAPP to ensure availability of additional generation capacity.
Strategy:
• Interconnecting the Malawi power system with those of Mozambique, Zambia and 
Tanzania
IV. Government will promote plans, programmes and strategies that deliberately 
advance the development of equal opportunities for marginalized and vulnerable 
groups in the electricity generation value chain.
Strategies:
• Developing Social and Gender Integration Plans (or equivalent) by the electricity 
generation company (EGENCO) and IPPs to address inward looking and outward 
looking social and gender issues across all generation functions. 
• Developing robust socially responsive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
(ESIAs) for generation projects.
• Developing and implementing comprehensive socially responsive Environmental and 
Social Impact Management Plans for generation projects. 
• Developing gender sensitive Resettlement Action Plans and/or fair compensation 
packages.
3.1.2 Policy Priority Area 1.2: Electricity Transmission 
Electricity Transmission in Malawi has one national utility owning, operating and 
maintaining the national electricity transmission grid, comprising power transmission lines 
and grid substations operated at two voltage levels, namely 66kV and 132kV. The 
transmission power lines are on either wood or steel structures. The System Operations 
Department, which ran the National Control Centre, is one of the departments of the national 
utility company’s Transmission Division.
This power system is isolated from those of the neighbouring countries, except for crossborder supplies (through the distribution system) to small border towns in Mozambique and 
Zambia. 
There are some capacity constraints in the power transmission system more especially in the 
northern region where highest voltage in use is 66kV. Some transmission lines in the 
Southern and Central Regions are also heavily loaded and cannot transfer additional capacity 
available from expected power stations and interconnections with Mozambique and Zambia. 13
Increased transmission system capacity is crucial for evacuation of power from the generation 
stations, whether operated by National generation stations, IPPs or PPPs. The coming in of 
IPPs will also require that there should be a robust regulatory regime to ensure open access to 
the transmission system in a non-discriminatory manner. Hence the unbundling of the 
national utility company by separating the generation function from transmission and 
distribution was a necessary condition for ensuring this open and non-discriminatory access 
to the transmission system, so that all generation plants should have access thereto in a 
properly regulated manner under a robust Grid Code. 
Since transmission projects can disturb the way of life of local communities then social and 
gender considerations come into play when implementing these projects. 
Policy Statements
I. Government will intensify the expansion and rehabilitation of the transmission 
system in line with the IRP and in a socially and environmentally responsible 
manner, with a view to catalysing industrialisation, rural transformation, 
sustainable economic development, inclusive growth and creation of wealth. 
Strategies:
• Operationalising in full the new transmission and distribution company 
• Including all candidate transmission expansion and strengthening projects in a 20-year 
IRP and updates thereof.
• Empowering generation companies to build transmission lines and substations to 
interconnect the power stations with the transmission grid under the Transmission 
Operator’s coordination.
II. Government will put in place robust power market operation rules and enforce the 
Grid Code.
Strategy:
• Reviewing the Grid Code.
III. Government will interconnect its power system with the regional grids of SAPP 
and EAPP to facilitate Regional power trading.
Strategy:
• Interconnecting the Malawi power system with those of Mozambique, Zambia and 
Tanzania.
IV. Government will ensure that transmission operations do not perpetuate 
inequalities amongst marginalized groups and project affected persons.
Strategies:14
• Developing Social and Gender Integration Plans by ESCOM and contractors to 
address inward looking and outward looking social and gender issues across all 
transmission operations. 
• Developing robust socially responsive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
(ESIAs) for transmission projects.
• Developing and implementing comprehensive socially responsive Environmental and 
Social Impact Management Plans for transmission projects. 
• Developing gender sensitive Resettlement Action Plans and/or fair compensation 
packages.
3.1.3 Policy Priority Area 1.3: Electricity Distribution
The country’s electricity distribution network is owned, operated and maintained by a 
national utility company, ESCOM. The network is operated at 33kV and 11kV, and these 
voltages are stepped down using distribution transformers to 400/230Volts for secondary 
distribution. As of 2016, the country’s national utility supplied electricity to about 250,000 
customers, categorized as domestic, general, commercial and industrial. The current number 
of customers translates to about 10.0 per cent of the national population having access to 
electricity. The government had, under the National Energy Policy of 2003, planned to 
increase the number of people with access to electricity from 4% to 10% of the population by 
2010, 30% by 2020, and 40% by 2050.
Access to electricity in the country remains a major challenge owing to a number of factors 
which include: low coverage distribution network; high cost of connection to the grid,
including the cost of transformers. Further, as of 2016, ESCOM had a considerable number 
of applications for connection of power supply, but it was unable to do the connections for 
various reasons, including material procurement bottlenecks and limited capacity to construct 
the lines to customers. 
Policy Statements
I. Government will intensify the expansion and rehabilitation of the distribution 
network in a socially inclusive manner.
Strategies:
• Constructing new distribution lines and substations.
• Developing robust socially responsive ESIAs for new distribution lines and 
substations projects.
• Developing and implementing comprehensive socially responsive ESIMPs for new 
distribution lines and substations projects. 15
• Developing gender sensitive Resettlement Action Plans and/or fair compensation 
packages
• Rehabilitating existing distribution lines and substations.
II. Government will incentivise distribution licensees to devise schemes that will 
enable consumers connect electricity to their homes, and afford basic energy 
efficient electrical appliances.
Strategies:
• Removing duty and VAT on energy efficient domestic electric cooking and water 
heating appliances.
• Introducing lifeline tariffs to enable low income households access electricity.
III. Government will encourage distribution licensees to expedite connections to 
customers’ premises.
Strategies:
• Implementing a policy whereby the distribution licensees shall allow customers to 
procure transformers and other materials in the event of procurement bottlenecks, and 
thereafter take over the assets with appropriate compensation.
• Implementing a policy whereby construction works will be contracted out.
• Promoting initial connection cost recovery from tariff payments
IV. Government will ensure that distribution licensees have plans and strategies for 
fostering equal access to services and opportunities for low-income consumers 
and marginalized societal groups.
Strategy:
• Developing Social and Gender Integration Plans by ESCOM and distribution 
licensees to address inward looking and outward looking social and gender issues 
across all distribution functions.
3.1.4 Policy Priority Area 1.4: Rural Electrification
Rural electrification entails increasing electricity access to rural and peri-urban areas using 
grid and off-grid options. The Malawi Rural Electrification Program (MAREP) which is 
being implemented by GOM and ESCOM using the Rural Electrification Fund, has had some 
impact on electrification of rural and peri-urban areas in the country.
Rural electrification programme has, up to the time of formulating this policy, targeted 
mainly grid extensions. Renewable energy and mini grids have not been promoted 
significantly. Further, rural electrification has so far concentrated on electrifying selected 
trading or rural growth centres in the districts. Villages, especially households, grain mills, 16
and social service facilities need to be reached in order to increase access to electricity as 
over 80% of the population of Malawi is living in rural areas. 
Rural electrification projects in the country have not fully involved subgroups of rural men 
and women in planning, governance, management, recruitment, procurement and operations.
Many rural public institutions are not connected to electricity from the national grid, mini
grids, or other sources, including renewable ones such as solar installations. 
Policy Policy Statements
I. Government will restructure Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy 
Management governance.
Strategy:
• Establishing a Rural Electrification Agency as a semi-autonomous legal entity to 
manage the Rural Electrification Fund and Rural Electrification activities (in both grid 
extension and off-grid options). 
II. Government will through the Rural Electrification Fund, pay for the cost of a 
transformer and associated infrastructure where it is intended to serve a minimum 
prescribed number of customers.
Strategy:
• Making a provision for payment of infrastructure costs in the new Rural 
Electrification Act.
III. Government will intensify electrification of rural growth or trading centres as well 
as rural settlements and villages, and provide funding for off-grid solutions.
Strategy:
• Committing funds from the Rural Electrification Fund to off-grid rural electrification.
IV. Government will facilitate wiring of public institutional buildings and connection 
of electricity thereto, and devise schemes for the connection of electricity to low 
income households within 500-metre radii of distribution substations in rural 
areas.
Strategies:
• Electrifying institutional buildings, such as schools and hospitals using the Rural 
Electrification Fund 
• Devising schemes for the Rural Electrification Fund to connect low income 
households within 500m radii of distribution substations.17
V. Government will promote rural electrification programmes that create and 
strengthen equal opportunities for all segments of society.
Strategies:
• Developing Social and Gender Integration Plans by the Rural Electrification Agency, 
MAREP and contractors to address inward looking and outward looking social and 
gender issues across rural electrification functions. 
• Devising rural electrification interventions for low income households- that 
deliberately target male, female, child and elderly headed households.
3.1.5 Policy Priority Area 1.5: Electricity from Renewable Energy
Malawi is well endowed with renewable energy resources including good sunshine 
throughout the year for photo-voltaic and photo-thermal applications, reasonable wind speeds 
for water pumping and power generation, a number of perennial rivers with hydro power 
potential, reasonably large quantities of biomass materials for electricity generation and hot 
springs for geothermal power generation. GOM has developed renewable energy strategy and 
SE4ALL action agenda which will guide investments in renewable energy sub-sector. Social 
and gender issues will be taken into consideration in implementing renewable energy 
interventions. Despite having abundant renewable energy resources, they have not been fully 
exploited and their penetration into the energy mix is still low.
The barriers to exploitation of renewable energy resources include the following:
a) Prohibitive capital costs of RET systems and products, 
b) Inadequate human capacity building at all levels in RET products, services, 
installation and maintenance, and marketing;
c) Lack of information to or awareness by the population; and
d) Lack of enforcement mechanisms for standards resulting in a proliferation of poor 
quality products.
Policy Statements
I. Government will strengthen the exploitation of renewable energy resources
Strategies:
• Integrating inclusive renewable energy utilisation into the Integrated Resource Plan.
• Promulgating and regularly review standards for RET products, especially Solar PV 
and Pico Solar Products.18
I. Government will promote use of renewable energy technologies and 
manufacture of renewable energy products such as solar panels
Strategies:
• Expediting assessment and development of renewable energy resources such as 
geothermal, solar, wind and biomass. 
• Adopting an RE strategy that promotes RE through incentives to new players.
• Establishing fiscal incentives for renewable energy using existing funds such as the 
Rural Electrification Fund.
• Developing a strategy for public awareness campaigns on renewable energy 
technologies targeted at rural, urban and peri-urban consumers and focusing on 
availability, benefits, and suppliers. 
• Promoting RET products for vulnerable and marginalized groups.
II. Government will support small-scale renewable energy initiatives by 
communities or entrepreneurs.
Strategies:
• Developing appropriate regulations for specific small-scale technologies under the 
Renewable Energy Act. 
• Reviewing the feed-in tariffs to ensure that all technologies including mini-grids are 
sustainably accommodated.
• Involving communities in community energy planning and implementation.
• Equipping all stand-alone renewable source powered mini-grids and privately owned 
installations with Net Metering to ensure their continued use upon connection to the 
grid.
• Promoting competitive bidding for mini-grid concessions in order to achieve the best 
value for money.
III. Government will promote capacity building, in all areas of RET programming, 
supply and services, as well as in entrepreneurship and management, taking into 
account gender and social issues.
Strategies:
• Developing an inclusive and comprehensive RE Capacity Building Plan that ensures 
that renewable energy interventions/services are suitable to the different needs of 
women and men and their subgroups.19
• Implementing the developed inclusive and comprehensive RE Capacity Building Plan 
that ensures that renewable energy interventions/services are suitable to the different 
needs of women and men and their subgroups.
• Devising incentives to increase numbers of well qualified male and female RET 
artisans, technicians, professional engineers, and entrepreneurs.
IV. Government will build strong partnerships with the private sector and CSOs 
(including PPPs) to promote the manufacture, distribution, use and financing of 
improved renewable energy technologies.
Strategies:
• Introducing financing schemes and incentives for the private sector to locally 
manufacture and distribute RE products.
• Expediting accreditation of RE manufacturers and suppliers and the certification of 
RE products.
• Strengthening the capacity of CSOs and decentralized structures in RET programming 
and interventions.
3.1.6 Policy Priority Area 1.6: Definition and Measurement of Access to Electricity
The method used for defining and measuring electricity access revolved around grid 
connections – one either had a grid connection or did not. In view of the fact that off-grid 
technologies such as PSPs and isolated mini-grids provide fundamental electricity services to 
users, the Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All) Initiative developed the Global Tracking 
Framework (GTF) as an improved method of defining and measuring energy access as 
illustrated in Annex 2.
The Government has noted an increase in the use of PSPs and an emerging potential of 
increasing electricity access through decentralised mini grid systems. These need to be taken 
into account when measuring access to electricity.
Policy Statement
I. Government will adopt the Global Tracking Framework (GTF) for and measuring 
access to electricity.
Strategies:
• Adopting (and if necessary adapting) the Global Tracking Framework.
• Conducting annual surveys to determine percentages for all tiers.
• Presenting access levels for each year in the GTF format.20
3.2 Policy Priority Area 2: Biomass
This Policy priority area relates to biomass used for purposes other than electricity 
generation. Malawi’s energy balance is dominated by biomass (firewood, charcoal, 
agricultural and industrial wastes), which account for 80% of the total primary energy supply 
due to, among other reasons, lack of affordable and reliable alternatives. GoM has recognised 
that biomass remains an important source of energy for the foreseeable future. To this end, 
GoM is promoting sustainable production and efficient use of biomass. Therefore, GoM has 
set a target to roll out 2million efficient cookstoves by 2020 to reduce biomass consumption. 
A national cookstoves road map has been developed in working towards achieving this target. 
The major challenge in biomass sub sector is unsustainable production and inefficient use. 
Beside this, there are negative health issues associated with wood fuel for cooking. Burning 
of bricks for construction of houses is also another cause of high biomass consumption. There 
are technologies now for reduction of biomass required for brick burning, which need to be 
promoted. There are also new improved technologies for charcoal making, which use less 
wood than the traditional charcoal making methods.
Policy Statements
I. Government will build strong partnerships with the private sector and NGOs 
(including PPPs) to promote the manufacture, supply, use and financing of 
improved cook stoves, brick kilns, charcoal kilns and biomass briquettes and 
pellets.
Strategies:
• Promoting the creation of feasible business models for modern technologies for 
biomass technologies (e.g. improved cook stoves, charcoal kilns, etc.)
• Promoting incentives to CSOs to increase the uptake of modern biomass technologies.
• Promoting alternative technologies to charcoal in urban and peri-urban areas to reduce 
the demand for charcoal.
• Introducing incentives for the growth of industries in manufacturing and distribution 
of improved cook stoves, brick kilns, charcoal kilns and biomass briquettes.
• Introducing customs duty and VAT incentives to promote the wide availability of 
improved locally made cook stoves.
• Enforcing of banning of illegal charcoal production.
• Promoting growing of commercial trees e.g. bamboos, as an alternative to natural 
trees for charcoal production.21
II. Government will intensify training and nationwide promotional activities for 
improved cook stoves, brick kilns, charcoal kilns, and biomass briquettes 
Strategies:
• Building and strengthening capacity in new biomass technologies. 
• Increasing public knowledge and utilization of improved biomass technologies and 
their economic opportunities.
• Developing and implementing a Biomass Energy Technologies Training Strategy.
III. Government will ensure that low income and marginalized groups have 
equitable access to, control over and benefit from biomass technologies. 
Strategy:
• Strengthening targeted biomass interventions for low income and marginalized groups 
in urban and rural areas to access and control technologies
IV. Government will entrust and empower local authorities to promote the 
utilisation of efficient biomass technologies.
Strategies:
• Recruiting District Energy Officers.
• Strengthening district level capacity to implement sustainable programmes and 
projects related to biomass technologies.
• Include biomass programmes in District Implementation Plans (DIP).
V. Government will promote the certification and labelling of all energy efficient 
commercial cook stoves that are sold as commercial products on the market
Strategy:
• Developing and enforcing standards on cook stoves sold as commercial products
VI. Government will encourage charcoal making communities to venture into 
alternative income generating activities.
Strategy:
• Building linkages between the energy sector and economic empowerment initiatives 
that are implemented by other sectors in charcoal making areas.22
3.3 Policy Priority Area 3: Petroleum Fuels
The Petroleum fuels industry in Malawi has two principal parts namely upstream and 
downstream. Upstream covers exploration, production and refining of crude oil. Supply 
logistics and marketing petroleum fuel products are downstream. The mandate of the 
Ministry responsible for energy falls within the downstream activities. Petroleum fuels 
distributed in the country are petrol (gasoline), diesel, paraffin (kerosene) and heavy fuel oil 
(HFO). The country is obliged to import refined petroleum fuels since it lacks domestic 
refining facilities. Importation of petroleum fuels is done through a consortium of oil 
marketing companies known as Petroleum Importers Limited (PIL) and National Oil 
Company of Malawi (NOCMA) which also owns, operate and maintain national strategic 
fuel reserves. Retailing of petroleum fuels is done by OMC’s through a franchising system in 
which they are allowed to own a maximum of two retails outlets and franchise the rest. GoM 
uses and is committed to maintaining the Automatic Fuel Price Adjustment Mechanism to 
ensure that the OMCs are able to recover their costs in a timely manner 
The Government is implementing bulk procurement system in the importation of fuel into the 
country. The private sector is being encouraged to participate actively in the downstream 
activities of the fuels market. Government has also established inland dry ports to hold fuels 
that would last for 60 days. All licensees are required to hold at least 30 days of fuel holdings 
not just in tankers but in storage facilities, giving a national total of 90 days’ supply. If 
necessary, the inland ports that have been constructed can be used to host fuel for Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs) at a fee. These should therefore be regarded as common user 
facilities. 
Paraffin has for some time been used for cooking and lighting. Its combustion does, however, 
release fumes that are hazardous. In order to contribute to a shift away from biomass for 
cooking, households shall be encouraged to use paraffin for cooking, but using only modern 
and efficient paraffin cook stoves.
The challenges in the petroleum fuels industry are that some Oil Marketing Companies keep 
fuels in tankers as they do not have sufficient storage facilities. This is not efficient as it 
grounds those tankers instead of letting them go and haul more fuel. Further, some OMC’s do 
not comply with the franchised system.
Policy Statements
I. Government will ensure the country has adequate petroleum fuels, including 
paraffin, at all times to meet the demand of the country.
Strategies:
• Maintaining a minimum reserve of 90 days’ supply of fuel.23
• Promoting cost-effective, efficient and environmentally and socially responsive 
alternative conveyance methods such as pipelines and water barges to ensure lower 
landed cost of petroleum products.
• Promoting exploration for petroleum for energy security.
• Providing customs duty and VAT incentives.
II. Government will promote the participation of the private sector in the oil 
market. 
Strategies:
• Reviewing and enforcing legislation to adopt a system of bulk procurement of fuel. 
• Utilizing the Government fuel storage facilities as inland dry ports and common-user 
facilities.
• Developing and implementing guidelines for franchising of liquid fuel outlets to be 
adhered to by all OMCs. 
• Introducing incentives to contribute to economic empowerment of Malawians in the 
oil market, including ownership, operation and management of filling stations
III. Government will promote deliberate planning that strengthens the equitable 
participation of men, women and marginalized groups in the oil market.
Strategies:
• Introducing and/or strengthening youth and women mentorship and capacity building 
programmes in the oil market.
• Developing social and gender inclusion strategies for increasing equal opportunities in 
employment and addressing social and gender issues in the oil market.
IV. MERA shall maintain the automatic fuel price adjustment system and apply it in 
a transparent manner.
Strategy:
• Regulating fuel prices through use of a transparent and verifiable fuel price 
adjustment system.24
3.4 Policy Priority Area 4: Bioethanol And Other Biofuels
Biofuels, in the form of bioethanol and biodiesel, are another important source of fuel that are 
being exploited in Malawi. Currently Biofuels provide 4% of transport energy coming from 
locally-produced bio-ethanol and bio-diesel that is blended with petroleum fuels at blending 
ratios of 20:80 and 9:91 respectively. Currently, there are only two companies producing bioethanol in the country, and it is being produced from sugarcane molasses. On the other hand, 
there is currently one company that is producing biodiesel, and it is being produced from 
jatropha. 
The key challenges in biofuels industry include bioethanol has a lower calorific value making 
it a less efficient fuel relative to petrol or diesel – a disadvantage that is compensated for by 
its ability to enhance the octane rating of petrol. It also acts as an oxygenate in petrol engines,
thereby contributing to abatement of pollution by eliminating production of carbon monoxide 
and other harmful gases. A more fundamental problem, however, is reliability of supply
because of the current limited national bioethanol production capacity arising from 
insufficient supply of molasses. 
In addition, there is no nation-wide dedicated pump station infrastructure for handling 
bioethanol grades other than the existing blended petrol. While Malawi does not use staple 
food crops, notably maize and cassava, for production of bioethanol, it is important for the
National Energy Policy to ensure that production of bioethanol does not threaten food 
security. Equally, that jatropha plants, as opposed to edible oilseeds such as sunflower or 
groundnuts, are currently being used to produce small quantities of biodiesel does not remove 
the potential risk that could arise from use of food crops for production of biofuels.
Policy Statements
I. Government will support, encourage and promote the production of bioethanol 
and biodiesel for blending or stand-alone use in vehicles, as well as cooking, 
lighting, etc. provided that such production does not threaten food security 
Strategies:
• Increasing the supply of bio-ethanol and bio-diesel.
• Promoting fiscal incentives for bio-ethanol and bio-diesel production.
• Promoting the use of bio-fuels through appropriate pricing incentives.25
• Implementing socially and environmentally responsive large scale bio-ethanol and 
bio-diesel projects.
• Increasing local capacity to produce bioethanol and biodiesel fuels without 
threatening food security, especially through the collaboration of farmers’ 
cooperatives, women farmers’ coalitions, and other marginalized groups.
• Engaging the National Commission for Science and Technology and academic and 
research institutions in discussions on biofuel mixtures and their usage in vehicles.
• Promoting socially responsive research and development in the biofuels areas.
II. Government will promote equal opportunities for the participation of the 
citizenry in the biofuels industry including in building capacity in biofuel 
technologies.
Strategy:
• Developing plans and strategies that facilitate the capacity building of both women 
and men in biofuel technologies and to increase women’s participation in the industry
III. Government will ensure that the production of biofuels does not threaten food 
security.
Strategies:
• Promote the growing and use of non-staple food crops as bio-ethanol and bio-diesel 
raw materials. Food crops and productive land shall only be used for biofuel 
production where there is an assurance that food security will not be impacted 
negatively.
• Intensifying public awareness campaigns to ensure that smallholder farmers’ land for 
the cultivation of food crops is not used to grow biofuel feedstock.
IV. In addition to continuing with the current 80:20 petrol to bioethanol blending 
ratio, Government will promote the use of flex vehicles capable of running on 
100% bioethanol and any other blending ratio
Strategies:
• Implementing a phased installation of bioethanol pumps in line with increased 
production of bioethanol.
• Promoting awareness campaigns on the uptake of new technologies (e.g. flex 
vehicles).
• Promoting importation of conversion kits for existing petrol powered vehicles.26
V. In addition to continuing with the current 91:9 diesel to straight vegetable oil 
blending ratio, Government will promote the use of vehicles capable of running 
on 100% biodiesel and any other blending ratio.
Strategies:
• Implementing a phased installation of biodiesel pumps in line with increased 
production of biodiesel.
• Promoting awareness campaigns to ensure that there is uptake of new technologies 
(e.g. flex vehicles).
• Promoting importation of conversion kits for existing diesel powered vehicles.27
3.5 Policy Priority Area 5: Liquefied Petroleum Gas, Biogas And Natural Gas 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG), Natural Gas and Biogas are important alternative energy 
sources to fuelwood for cooking and heating. Malawi imports LPG for domestic, commercial 
and industrial use. Importation, distribution, wholesaling and retailing of LPG is done by the 
private sector and is regulated by MERA. In the country, LPG is mostly, if not entirely, used 
for cooking and heating on the domestic front.
Natural gas is a source of energy for heating and can also be used for electricity generation. 
The gas has lesser impact on the environment than that of other fossil fuels such as oil and 
paraffin. Malawi’s neighbouring countries of Mozambique and Tanzania have large deposits 
of natural gas which they are planning to extract. Malawi can take advantage of this 
opportunity to tap into the source if it can build appropriate infrastructure such as 
transmission pipelines and distribution and reticulation systems.
There are no large scale gas networks in Malawi but there is a large potential market for 
biogas which could help replace fossil fuel based canisters that are used for cooking in 
homes, as well as lead to a switch from firewood-based fuels in cooking in other areas. There 
are also many opportunities to establish smaller biogas networks, utilising local waste 
products in rural and urban areas. There are, however, several challenges that are hindering 
the uptake of the technology in Malawi. The first challenge is lack of awareness and 
knowledge on the existence of the technology. Secondly, people are reluctant to use biogas 
produced from, for example, animal dung for cooking. The third challenge is the inadequate
technical expertise in the technology. The technology requires experts for the design and 
construction of the biogas systems. 
However, there are several barriers to increased use of LPG and Biogas, and adoption of 
Natural Gas in Malawi, one of which is cost. There is need to look at ways of doing away 
with barriers to lower pricing and increased uptake of LPG, Biogas and Natural Gas, and to 
identify potential partnerships to promote greater market penetration. Infrastructure for 
Natural Gas is also relatively expensive, hence the need for partnerships with the private 
sector.
The second issue is safety. It is perceived by a majority of Malawians that gas is unsafe to use 
i.e. it can cause fire accidents.
The third barrier is lack of a wide distribution network or system for exchanging cylinders. At 
present these are concentrated in cities and towns, and they need to be rolled out to rural areas 
as well. 
Policy Statements28
I. Government will ensure availability of LPG, Biogas and Natural Gas in 
sufficient quantities at affordable prices for industrial (electricity generation, 
heat) and domestic use
Strategies:
• Undertaking legal and regulatory reviews to facilitate institutional reforms for 
investments in and utilization of LPG, biogas and natural gas.
• Promoting tax and other fiscal incentives for large scale investments in LPG, biogas 
and natural gas.
• Implementing a phased program to accelerate the penetration of LPG and natural gas.
• Providing customs duty and VAT incentives to promote the wide availability of small 
LPG cylinders and gas cookers, and make them affordable to low income households.
• Promoting use of LPG, Biogas and Natural Gas through fiscal incentives to 
financially viable companies to construct own storage facilities that meet prescribed 
minimum stockholding requirements.
II. Government will implement programmes aimed at building the capacity of the 
LPG, Biogas and Natural Gas Industry
Strategies:
• Promoting socially inclusive and well trained LPG, biogas and natural gas suppliers 
and users.
• Conducting awareness campaigns on the safe use of LPG, biogas and natural gas.
• Promulgating Regulations and standards on supply and distribution of cylinders for 
LPG (such as safety regulations, quality of cylinders etc).
• Implementing Regulations and standards on supply and distribution of cylinders for 
LPG (such as safety regulations, quality of cylinders etc).
III. Government will promote an LPG, Biogas and Natural Gas industry that 
actively strengthens the participation and economic empowerment of local 
women, men and the youth in the industry.
Strategies:
• Developing plans and strategies to facilitate the capacity building of local women, 
men and the youth to be entrepreneurs in the industry.
• Building the knowledge and skills local women, men and the youth in LPG, biogas ad 
Natural Gas technologies.
• Devising plans, strategies and incentives to increase the employment of local women 
and the youth in the industry.29
IV. Government will establish PPPs for the purpose of exploring and extracting 
Natural Gas and construction of the associated infrastructure
Strategy:
• Engaging private companies with expertise in the industry that are interested in 
establishing partnerships.30
3.6 Policy Priority Area 6: Coal
Malawi has 1 billion metric tonnes of probable coal reserves. These resources occur in some 
parts of the Northern Region (Karonga and Rumphi) and the Southern Region (Lengwe and 
Mwabvi Game Reserves in the Lower Shire Valley). Although coal deposits have been 
known to exist at several locations in Malawi, coal mining only started as recently as 1985.
Main challenges facing the Coal Supply Industry (CSI) include the following: 
a) Lack of price competitiveness for Northern Malawian coal compared to imported 
coal;
b) None existence of competition within the industry (23 years after market
liberalisation of 1995, there are still just a few mining companies);
c) Low productivity and high production costs owing to the use of obsolete 
technologies;
d) None availability of appropriate end-use technologies enabling use of coal in new 
market niches e.g. household and tobacco curing;
e) A general lack of information on firm coal reserves as a result of limited 
exploration; and
f) Absence of an appropriate regulatory framework to govern downstream 
marketing, transportation and utilisation. 
Policy Statements
I. Government will promote and encourage the private sector to take a leading role 
in the coal industry subject to regulatory and licensing requirements.
Strategies:
• Empowering the private sector to intensify exploration for and exploitation of coal 
reserves.
• Ensuring that pricing for locally mined coal is competitive.
II. Government will ensure that the responsible regulatory institutions regulate the 
storage, transportation, importation, marketing, usage, and pricing of coal.
Strategies:
• Implementing a systematic programme of inspection of coal storage facilities, 
combustion processes, and transportation systems,
• Devising mechanisms to monitor pricing and marketing operations,
• Putting in place competitive coal haulage and brokerage arrangements,
• Reviewing and enforcing the relevant legislation and ensuring safe, healthy and 
environmentally friendly operations in the supply chain,31
• Ensuring the coal production, transportation, utilization and waste disposal processes 
produce minimal pollutants.
III. Government will put sustainable measures and regulations in place to ensure 
that the mining, transportation, storage and utilisation of coal have minimal 
adverse health, social and safety impacts.
Strategies:
• Putting in place all-inclusive capacity building programmes
• Developing Environmental and Social Impact Management Plans (or equivalent) to 
address environmental issues affecting the coal industry
• Developing Social and Gender Integration Plans (or equivalent) to address inward 
looking and outward looking social and gender issues affecting the coal industry.
IV. Government will promote coal as a fuel for power generation and as an 
alternative for household, tobacco curing and other applications.
Strategies:
• Implementing environmentally friendly coal-fired electricity generation projects.
• Conducting ESIAs and developing/implementing comprehensive impact mitigation 
plans.
• Developing and implementing Gender Sensitive Resettlement Action Plans and/or fair 
compensation packages. 
• Promoting appropriate end-use technologies to facilitate use of coal in household and 
tobacco curing applications.
V. Government will, through the Environmental Affairs Department and MERA, 
shall ensure that all coal combustion installations abide by set minimum 
standards.
Strategies:
• Implementing systematic inspection programmes for coal combustion installations.
• Supporting research into, and the development of, more efficient coal-combustion 
technologies.
• Promoting the application of clean coal technologies, such as washing, gasification, 
liquefaction and fume capturing.32
VI. Government will, through fiscal incentives, promote coal-dust briquetting 
programmes.
Strategy:
• Encouraging coal producers and entrepreneurs to engage in coal briquette production
VII. Government will encourage the private sector to deliberately develop the 
capacity of women, men and the youth to meaningfully participate in the coal 
industry.
Strategy:
• Developing and implement strategies that promote equal employment and 
entrepreneurship opportunities for men, women and youth in the industry.33
3.7 Policy Priority Area 7: Nuclear Energy 
Malawi had proven reserves of about 63,000 tonnes of Uranium at Kayelekera in Karonga 
District in the northern part of the country until 2009 when mining started, with all the 
uranium from the mine exported out of the country. Due to the sustained low uranium price 
on the world market, Kayelekera site was placed on care and maintenance in May 2014. 
There is also another deposit at Ilomba in Chitipa District. GoM has made a decision to 
harness the locally available nuclear energy for electricity generation, and the first nuclear 
power plant is expected to be commissioned by 2035. 
Policy Statements
I. Government will build capacity in generation of electricity from nuclear energy
Strategies:
• Introducing Nuclear Science and Materials programmes in public universities.
• Building capacity in nuclear energy in Government.
• Promoting Research and Development is Nuclear Science.
• Establishing socially and environmentally responsive uranium processing facility in 
the country.
• Developing and commissioning the first nuclear power plant.
II. Government will promote nuclear energy programming that prioritises the 
aversion and mitigation of different potential health risks that the industry poses 
to workers and ordinary men, women, children and the environment.
Strategy:
• Developing and implementing Social and Gender Integration Plans by nuclear 
companies/projects to address inward looking and outward looking social and gender 
issues affecting the nuclear energy.34
3.8 Policy Priority Area 8: Demand Side Management
Demand Side Management (DSM) is an important means of improving energy efficiency at 
the end-use level of the energy supply chain. Currently in Malawi, there is a lot of wastage of 
electrical energy and biomass in end-use activities such as cooking, water and space heating,
and lighting occasioned by use of inefficient appliances and devices. This priority area
focuses on savings in electricity and biomass consumption.
3.8.1 Demand Side Management in the Electricity Supply Industry
Most electricity supply utilities, including members of the Southern African Power Pool, 
have implemented DSM in various forms with a view to minimize consumption of electrical 
energy. This also translates into a reduction in demand for electrical energy which is a very 
effective means of controlling peak demand especially in capacity constrained systems.
3.8.1.1Utility Actions in DSM
The utilities’ DSM programmes entail a combination of some or all of the following actions:
a) Public information campaigns to raise awareness among consumers;
b) Energy audits to provide energy efficiency advice to consumers;
c) Installation of energy efficient measures in households to help consumers reduce their 
bills, and reduce stress on overburdened utility systems;
d) Provision of financing in the form of rebates below-market loans for energy efficiency
measures, sometimes with the facility of allowing the consumer to repay the loan as 
part of their utility bill payment. Installation of prepaid meters which, in addition to 
reducing non-payment problems for utilities, also have the effect of increasing 
energy-efficiency behaviour by consumers;
e) Implementation of tariffs that encourage efficient use of electricity, such as
i. Inverted Block Rates, whereby a low unit price for the first block of 
electricity use, followed by higher tariffs for additional blocks of usage;
ii. Time of Use (TOU) Tariffs, which typically charge more for energy 
consumed during peak periods thereby incentivizing load shifting to offpeak periods; and 
iii. Dynamic or “Real-time” Pricing- a tariff structure in which the 
electricity price continuously fluctuates based on availability and demand.35
3.8.1.2.Customer Actions in DSM
The consumer decides what energy-efficiency actions to take. The utility can encourage the 
consumer and even provide incentives but the decision is up to the consumer. Under demand 
response programmes, the consumer can still decide whether to participate but the utility can 
control the amount and timing of electricity usage. Participating consumers typically get very 
short notice from the utility that it will be exercising the use of these measures at any given 
moment. The energy-efficient actions include:
a) Entering into Interruptible Contracts - which are agreements between utilities and 
large energy users in which the latter agree to have their power shut-off for a short 
period (e.g. 1-3 hours) in exchange for a financial incentive in order to reduce peak 
demand or relieve strain on an overburdened utility grid;
b) Acceptance of installation of Load Controllers - which are devices installed by the 
utility on a customer’s equipment (usually an air conditioning unit or a geyser) that 
can be remotely controlled by the utility to cycle-off the equipment for 30-60 minutes 
during periods of high peak demand. The customer receives an incentive such as a bill 
credit for participating;
c) Acceptance of the installation of Load limiters in electric meters to prevent consumers 
from using more than a predetermined amount of electricity during peak periods. 
Load limiters can in some cases replace meters and the customers are simply charged 
a flat monthly fee. Customer participation is in most cases involuntary; and
d) Installation of roof-mounted solar water heaters which will serve as an alternative 
source of energy for water heating thereby reducing the amount of electrical energy 
used for this purpose.
3.8.1.3 Government Actions 
Government actions to promote DSM include the following: 
a) Instituting appliance testing, labelling and standards, which will include minimum 
energy performance standards (MEPS);
b) Enforcing building codes on energy-efficiency requirements in the construction of 
new buildings;
c) Reducing or eliminating import duty and taxes on energy efficient products;
d) Enforcing Government procurement rules that require procured energy-consuming 
products such as lighting devices, ballasts, air conditioners, fans to meet or exceed 
minimum energy performance standards; 
e) Instituting mandatory energy audits and energy use reductions by large customers;36
f) Training, certification and technical assistance for industries, building owners, 
bankers, utilities, standards agencies, code-setting organizations, energy auditors
such as electrical contractors, performance contractors; and
g) Providing post-installation inspections and programme evaluations. 
3.8.1.4 CSOs and Private Sector Actions 
Civil Society Organisations and the Private Sector can play a major role in promoting DSM 
through, respectively: 
a) Programme design and management to assist government agencies and utilities 
with the structuring and implementation of energy efficiency initiatives; and
b) Information dissemination and awareness-raising.
3.8.2 Demand Side Management in Biomass End-use
The country is experiencing severe degradation of its forestry resources. Continued reliance 
on firewood and charcoal in the light of forest degradation sabotages development and 
therefore calls for urgent energy efficient solutions. For biomass to be truly renewable, it 
must be utilised in a sustainable manner, which entails replanting of trees with focus on the 
fast-growing varieties and, at the end-use level, use of more efficient cook stoves as well as 
brick and charcoal making kilns.
Policy Statements
I. Government will promote the use of energy efficient technologies
Strategies:
• Enforcing a ban on importation, distribution and use of incandescent bulbs and 
promoting energy saving alternatives. 
• Promoting energy saving electrical and biomass-fuelled devices.
• Promulgating regulations and standards for building designs and energy efficient 
devices.
• Providing duty and VAT waivers for solar water heaters.
• Supporting utility companies in the implementation of tariffs that encourage energy 
efficient use of electricity.
• Encouraging regular energy audits conducted by certified auditors in public, 
industrial, and commercial buildings.
• Encouraging research and development in energy efficient equipment, buildings etc.
• Promoting use of multiple sources of energy and energy efficiency in buildings (a 
limit can be set as to the size of the buildings).37
• Sensitising the public on safe utilisation and disposal of energy saving bulbs.
• Promoting the design of buildings to take advantage of natural lighting, conditioning 
(cooling/ heating).
II. Government will encourage electricity utility companies to implement Demand 
Side Management programmes
Strategies:
• Conducting public information campaigns to raise awareness among consumers.
• Installing energy efficient measures in electricity connected households to help 
consumers reduce their bills, but also to reduce stress on overburdened utility systems.
• Installing prepayment meters and implementing tariffs that will reduce non-payment 
problems and encourage energy-efficient behaviour by consumers.
III. Government will encourage Civil Society Organisations and Private Sector 
players to promote Demand Side Management
Strategies:
• Structuring and implementing Energy Efficient initiatives.
• Developing DSM awareness materials.
• Conducting Information dissemination and awareness raising campaigns.
IV. Government will ensure that importers, retailers and low-income consumers 
have targeted information regarding affordable, modern and sustainable energy 
products
Strategy:
• Developing and implementing a public outreach strategy on sustainable energy 
products targeting importers, retailers and low-income consumers38
4.0 IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
Outlined below is how this Policy will be implemented, and this includes institutional 
arrangements, implementation plan, monitoring and evaluation .
4.1 Institutional Arrangements 
The Government recognises the importance of stakeholders and partnerships in 
implementation of the National Energy Policy. The stakeholders include ministries, 
departments, agencies, development partners, academic and research institutions, the private 
sector, civil society organisations (CSOs), Non-governmental organisations, faith based 
organisations, and the communities which are described below:
Ministry responsible for Energy Affairs
The Ministry will be responsible for provision of oversight and strategic leadership, policy 
direction and interpretation, coordination, resource mobilisation, capacity building and 
monitoring and evaluation of energy programmes, projects and activities. 
Ministry responsible for Forestry
The Ministry will be responsible for ensuring that there is enough biomass supply to meet the 
needs of the population; strictly adhering to the criteria for granting licences for charcoal 
making; and enforcing the legislation on forestry and forestry products for sustainability of 
these resources.
Ministry responsible for Lands
The Ministry will be responsible for facilitating acquisition of land, leasing and assessment of 
compensations for land allocated to energy projects.
Ministry responsible for Mining and Geological Surveys
The Ministry will be responsible for promoting oil, gas, coal, uranium and other energy 
related minerals. 
Ministry responsible for Environmental Affairs
The Ministry will be responsible for ensuring every project requiring environment and social 
impact assessment including energy projects have such assessment and strictly adhere to any 
impact mitigation measures,
Ministry responsible for Finance
The ministry will be responsible for mobilisation of financial resources from government, 
development partners and international lending institutions for energy interventions. 39
Ministry responsible for Justice
The ministry will be responsible for drafting legislation that support energy interventions and 
vetting agreements.
Ministry responsible for Trade
The ministry will be responsible for attracting private sector investments in the energy sector.
Ministry responsible for Local Government and Rural Development
The ministry will be involved in identifying sites for rural electrification and promotion of 
alternative energy sources in districts and supporting district energy officers.
Ministry responsible for water resources
The ministry will be responsible for regulation of the use of water resources for electricity 
generation.
Academic and Research institutions
These institutions will be responsible for conducting rigorous energy research, and 
disseminating findings to inform energy policy and programming.
Civil Society Organisations
CSOs will collaborate with the Government to advocate for and implement energy specific 
interventions notably on alternative energy and energy efficiency technologies.
Private Sector 
Private sector will complement government’s effort in implementing energy interventions 
that will ensure increased electricity generation and supply as well as adoption of clean and 
efficient energy technologies.
Development Partners
Development partners support the government and other organisations by providing human 
and financial resources for development interventions. It is expected that they will continue 
financing and co-financing energy interventions.
4.2 Implementation Plan 
To ensure effective implementation of this Policy, a detailed implementation plan has been 
developed and is attached as Annex 3. The Plan provides linkage between the policy goal and 
objectives on one hand and strategies and institutions responsible for implementing those 
strategies on the other hand. It also includes a time frame for the implementation of each 
strategy. 40
4.3 Monitoring and Evaluation Plan
The implementation of this Policy requires an effective and efficient monitoring and 
evaluation system to measure progress and provide feedback information on implementation 
challenges and gaps. A detailed M&E plan of this policy with appropriate performance 
indicators, outputs and targets is attached as Annex 4.
4.4 Policy Review
Issues of energy in terms of technology; policy; legislation; and commitments at national,
regional and global levels are going through rapid changes. It will therefore be very important 
to continue reviewing the policy periodically to ensure it remains relevant and keeps pace 
with those developments at all times. This Policy shall therefore be reviewed every five (5)
years. The Department of Energy Affairs will initiate and lead the reviews.41
ANNEX 1: DEMAND AND SUPPLY-HISTORICAL AND PROJECTED (2008-2035)
Demand Units Year
Energy Demand Mix
Sector 2008 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035
Industry KTOE 346 458 683 1,009 1467 2,12
Transportation KTOE 216 385 540 737 989 1,312
Household KTOE 3,446 3,616 3,673 3,741 3,741 3,821
Service KTOE 130 104 218 218 266 355
Total 4,138 4,514 5,637 5,637 6,463 7,608
Supply
Energy Supply Mix
Energy Source 2008 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035
Biomass % 88.2 80.5 70.3 57.6 44.8 33.5
Liquid Fuels and 
Biofuels % 6.4 9.9 11.6 13.0 14.2 14.8
LPG, Biogas and Natural 
Gas % 0.0 0.1 2.0 3.7 6.0 9.0
Electricity from 
Renewable Sources % 2.6 6.9 10.7 16.0 23.0 28.9
Electricity from NonRenewable Sources % 0.0 0.3 1.8 5.7 7.5 8.0
Coal % 2.8 2.3 3.6 4.1 4.5 4.9
Electricity from Nuclear 
Energy % 0 0 0 0 0 1
Total 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%42
ANNEX 2: SE4ALL FRAMEWORK FOR DEFINING AND MEASURING ACCESS 
TO ELECTRICITY
Tier-0 Tier-1 Tier-2 Tier-3 Tier-4 Tier-5 Attributes
1. Peak 
capacity
Power No 
Electricity
V. Low Power
Min 1 W
Low Power
Min 50 W
Medium Power
Min 200 W
High Power
Min 2 kW
Daily capacity Min 4 Wh Min 200 W h Min 1.6 KW h Min 4 KW h
2. Duration
Hours per day < 4 hrs Min 4 hrs Min 8 hrs Min 16 hrs Min 23 hrs
Hours per evening < 2 hrs Min 2 hrs Min 2 hrs Min 4 hrs Min 4 hrs
3. Reliability
Max 3 
disruptions 
per day
Max 7
disruptions 
per week
Max 3 
disruptions 
per week
of total 
duration 
< 2 hours 
4. Quality Voltage problems do not prevent the use of 
desired appliances
5. Affordability Cost of a standard consumption package of 365 kWh per 
annum is less than 10% of household income
6. Legality Bill is paid to the utility / pre-paid card 
seller / authorized representative
7. Health and Safety Absence of past accidents and perception 
of high risk in the future43
ANNEX 3: IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR THE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2018
POLICY PRIORITY AREA 1.1: ELECTRICITY GENERATION
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support 
industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional 
electricity trading
Policy Statement 1.1.1: Government will create an enabling environment in order to diversify power generation sources for 
security of supply and expand generation capacity to meet the demand for electricity in the country 
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To harness other potential 
sources of power generation 
and expedite expansion of 
generating capacity
Reviewing the 2017-2035 
Integrated Resource Plan every 
five years
MNREM By December 2022 and every 
5 years thereafter
Creating an enabling 
environment for private sector 
investment in power 
generation 
MNREM
MoJ
MoF
MCCCI
MERA
MoITT
MITC
By December 201944
Conducting feasibility studies 
on sites for power generation 
from hydro, coal, geothermal, 
natural gas, solar, wind, 
agricultural waste, forestry 
waste, and biogas resources. 
MNREM
EGENCO
IPPs
By December 2019
Developing the sites for power 
generation from Hydro, Coal, 
Geothermal, Natural Gas , 
Solar, Wind, agricultural 
waste, forestry waste, and 
biogas resources, up to
commissioning 
MNREM
EGENCO
IPPs
2019 - 2023
Policy Statement 1.1.2: Government will support all the necessary processes relating to the full operationalization of the 
Electricity Generation Company (EGENCO) and the Transmission and Distribution Company (ESCOM). 
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To enact and implement 
enabling legislation for 
improved ESI governance and 
for attracting private sector 
Implementing power sector 
reforms in accordance with the 
Electricity Amendment Act of 
2016
MNREM
2018-202245
investment in electricity 
generation.
Policy Statement 1.1.3: Government will interconnect its power system with the regional grids of SAPP and EAPP to ensure 
availability of additional generation capacity.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure increased security of 
power supply and benefit from 
regional power trading 
Interconnecting the Malawi 
power system with those of 
Mozambique, Zambia and 
Tanzania
MNREM
ESCOM By December 2023
Policy Statement 1.1.4: GoM shall promote plans, programmes and strategies that deliberately advance the development of 
equal opportunities for marginalized and vulnerable groups in the electricity generation value chain.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To create an enabling 
environment for the promotion 
of equal opportunities in 
generation functions and for 
robustly preventing and 
mitigating negative social 
impacts of electricity 
generation projects.
Developing Social and Gender 
Integration Plans (or 
equivalent) by the electricity 
generation company 
(EGENCO) and IPPs to 
address inward looking and 
outward looking social and 
gender issues across all 
generation functions. 
MNREM
EGENCO
IPPs
By December 2019 (social and 
gender integration plan by 
EGENCO)
Developing robust socially MNREM 2019-202346
responsive Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment 
(ESIAs) for generation 
projects.
EGENCO
IPPs
Developing and implementing 
comprehensive socially 
responsive Environmental and 
Social Impact Management 
Plans for generation projects. 
MNREM
EGENCO
IPPs
2019-2023
Developing gender sensitive 
Resettlement Action Plans 
and/or fair compensation 
packages.
MNREM
EGENCO
IPPs
2019-2023
POLICY PRIORITY AREA 1.2: ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support 
industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional 
electricity trading
Policy Statement 1.2.1 Government will intensify the expansion and rehabilitation of the transmission system in line with 
IRP and in a socially and environmentally responsible manner, with a view to catalysing industrialisation, rural 
transformation, sustainable economic development, inclusive growth and creation of wealth. 
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure reliable and efficient Ensuring that the new MNREM By December 201847
power transportation from all 
sources to all customers. 
transmission and distribution 
company is fully operational.
DHRMD
Allowing generation 
companies to build 
transmission lines and 
substations to interconnect the 
power stations with the 
transmission grid under the 
Transmission Operator’s 
coordination.
MNREM
MERA
2019-2023
Policy Statement 1.2.2: Government will put in place robust power market operation rules and enforce the Grid Code.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure a level playing field 
in power trading and provide 
third party access to 
transmission lines for all 
generation companies.
Review the Grid Code
MNREM
MERA
By December 2019
Policy Statement 1.2.3: Government will interconnect its power system with the regional grids of SAPP and EAPP to 
facilitate Regional power trading.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To facilitate cross-border 
imports and exports of power 
Interconnecting the Malawi 
power system with those of 
MNREM
ESCOM
By December 202348
from/to the Regional grids. Mozambique, Zambia and 
Tanzania
Policy Statement 1.2.4: GoM shall ensure that transmission operations do not perpetuate inequalities amongst marginalized 
groups and project affected persons.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To maximize positive impacts 
of transmission projects and 
promote equal opportunities 
between men and women in 
transmission operations.
Developing Social and Gender 
Integration Plans by ESCOM 
and contractors to address 
inward looking and outward 
looking social and gender 
issues across all transmission 
operations. 
MNREM
ESCOM
Infrastructure Development 
Contractors
By December 2019 (Social and 
Gender Integration plan by 
ESCOM
Developing robust socially 
responsive Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment 
(ESIAs) for transmission 
projects.
MNREM
ESCOM
2019-2023
Developing and implementing 
comprehensive socially 
responsive Environmental and 
Social Impact Management 
Plans for transmission projects. 
MNREM
ESCOM
2019-202349
Developing gender sensitive 
Resettlement Action Plans 
and/or fair compensation 
packages.
MNREM
EGENCO
IPPs
2019-2023
POLICY PRIORITY AREA 1.3: ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION
Broad Policy Objectives: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support 
industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional 
electricity trading
Policy Statement 1.3.1: Government will intensify the expansion and rehabilitation of the distribution network in a socially 
inclusive manner.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure that electricity is 
available to all customers 
while preventing and 
mitigating negative social 
impacts of distribution projects
Constructing new distribution 
lines and substations.
MNREM
ESCOM
2019-2023
Developing robust socially 
responsive ESIAs for new 
distribution lines and 
substations projects.
MNREM
ESCOM 2019-2023
Developing and implementing 
comprehensive socially 
responsive ESIMPs for new 
distribution lines and 
MNREM
ESCOM
2019-202350
substations projects. 
Developing gender sensitive 
Resettlement Action Plans 
and/or fair compensation 
packages
MNREM
ESCOM
2019-2023
To make the distribution 
system more reliable and 
capable of delivering quality 
electricity.
Rehabilitating existing 
distribution lines and 
substations. 
MNREM
ESCOM 2019-2023
Policy Statement 1.3.2: Government will incentivise distribution licensees to devise schemes that will enable consumers 
connect electricity to their homes, and afford basic energy efficient electrical appliances.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To promote use of electricity 
in households as a substitute 
for biomass and other fossil 
fuels in homes.
Removing duty and VAT on 
energy efficient domestic 
electric cooking and water 
heating appliances.
MNREM
MoJ
By July 2019
Introducing lifeline tariffs to 
enable low income households 
access electricity. 
MNREM
MoF
MERA
By July 2019
Policy Statement 1.3.3: Government will encourage distribution licensees to expedite connections to customers’ premises. 51
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure expedient 
connections to customers 
premises and increase in 
access to electricity
Implement a policy whereby 
the distribution licensees shall 
allow customers to procure 
transformers and other 
materials in the event of 
procurement bottlenecks, and 
thereafter take over the assets 
with appropriate 
compensation.
MNREM
ESCOM
2019-2023
Implement a policy whereby 
construction works will be 
contracted out.
MNREM
ESCOM
2019-2023
Promoting initial connection 
cost recovery from tariff 
payments
MERA
ESCOM
Other Power Utility 
Companies
2019-2023
Policy Statement 1.3.4: Government will ensure that distribution licensees have plans and strategies for fostering equal 
access to services and opportunities for low-income consumers and marginalized societal groups.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe52
To deliberately address 
inequalities and improve 
access to services for all in 
distribution operations.
Developing Social and Gender 
Integration Plans by ESCOM 
and distribution licensees to 
address inward looking and 
outward looking social and 
gender issues across all 
distribution functions.
MNREM
ESCOM
Distribution Licensees
By December 2019 (social and 
gender integration plan by 
ESCOM)
POLICY PRIORITY AREA 1.4: RURAL ELECTRIFICATION
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support 
industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional 
electricity trading
Policy Statement 1.4.1 Government will restructure Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy management governance
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To improve the management 
governance for Rural 
Electrification and Renewable 
Energy 
Establishing a Rural 
Electrification Agency as a 
semi-autonomous legal entity 
to manage the Rural 
Electrification Fund and Rural 
Electrification activities (in 
both grid extension and offgrid options). 
OPC
MNREM
DHRMD
MoF
EP& D
MoITT
2018 - 201953
Policy Statement 1.4.2: Government will, through the Rural Electrification Fund, pay for the cost of a transformer and 
associated infrastructure where it is intended to serve a minimum prescribed number of customers.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure reduction in cost of 
connection of electricity for 
rural households, settlements, 
villages and peri-urban 
settlements. 
Making a provision for 
payment of infrastructure costs 
in the new Rural 
Electrification Act.
MNREM
MoJ
By December 2019
Policy Statement 1.4.3: Government will intensify electrification of rural growth or trading centres as well as rural 
settlements and villages, and provide funding for off-grid solutions.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure electricity reaches 
rural settlements and villages, 
thereby increasing the 
population’s access to 
electricity.
Committing funds from the 
Rural Electrification Fund to 
off-grid rural electrification.
MNREM
MoF
MoLGRD
2019-2023
Policy Statement 1.4.4: Government will facilitate wiring of public institutional buildings and connection of electricity 
thereto, and devise schemes for the connection of electricity to low income households within 500-metre radii of distribution 
substations in rural areas.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure availability of 
electricity in all public 
Electrifying institutional 
buildings, such as schools and MNREM 2019-202354
institutions in rural areas and 
in low income households that 
are close to distribution 
substations.
hospitals using the Rural 
Electrification Fund .
MoLGRD
Devising schemes for the 
Rural Electrification Fund to 
connect low income 
households within 500m radii 
of distribution substations.
MNREM
MoLGRD
2019-2023
Policy Statement 1.4.5: Government will promote rural electrification programmes that create and strengthen equal 
opportunities for all segments of society.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure that rural 
electrification programmes are 
promoting the equal 
development of both men and 
women 
Developing Social and Gender 
Integration Plans by the Rural 
Electrification Agency, 
MAREP and contractors to 
address inward looking and 
outward looking social and 
gender issues across rural 
electrification functions. 
MNREM
MoLGRD
Infrastructure Development 
Contractors
By December 2019
Devising rural electrification 
interventions for low income 
households that deliberately 
target male, female, child and 
elderly headed households.
MNREM
MoLGRD
2019-202355
POLICY PRIORITY AREA 1.5: RENEWABLE ENERGY 
Broad Policy Objective: To establish a vibrant, reliable, incentivized and sustainable private sector-driven Renewable 
Energy Technology industry
Policy Statement 1.5.1: Government will strengthen the exploitation of Renewable Energy Resources.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To make the Renewable 
Energy Industry properly 
regulated and wellcoordinated.
Promulgating and regularly 
reviewing standards for RET 
products, especially Solar PV 
and Pico Solar Products.
MNREM
MoJ
MBS
MERA
By December 2019
Policy Statement 1.5.2: Government will promote use of Renewable Energy and local manufacture of appropriate RE 
products.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To increase access to modern, 
clean, affordable and reliable 
energy.
Expediting assessment and 
development of renewable 
energy resources such as 
geothermal, solar, wind and 
biomass. 
MNREM
Academic and research 
institutions 2018-2020
Establishing fiscal incentives 
for renewable energy using 
MNREM
MoF 
By December 201956
existing funds such as the 
Rural Electrification Fund.
MRA
Developing a strategy for 
public awareness campaigns 
on renewable energy 
technologies targeted at rural, 
urban and peri-urban 
consumers and focusing on 
availability, benefits, and 
suppliers. 
MNREM
MoE
MoLGRD
CSOs
By July 2019
Promoting RET products for 
vulnerable and marginalized 
groups.
MNREM
DoE
2019-2023
Policy Statement 1.5.3: Government will support small-scale renewable energy initiatives by communities or entrepreneurs 
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure the active 
involvement of communities or 
entrepreneurs in small scale 
renewable energy activities.
Developing appropriate 
regulations for specific smallscale technologies under the 
Renewable Energy Act. 
MNREM
MERA
ESCOM
MBS
Academic and research 
institutions
By December 201957
Reviewing the feed-in tariffs to 
ensure that all technologies 
including mini-grids are 
sustainably accommodated.
MNREM
MERA
ESCOM
By December 2019
Involving communities in 
community energy planning 
and implementation.
MNREM
MoLGRD
2019-2023
Equipping all stand-alone 
renewable source powered 
mini-grids and privately owned 
installations with Net Metering 
to ensure their continued use 
upon connection to the grid.
MNREM
ESCOM
Private Sector
2019-2023
Promoting competitive bidding 
for mini-grid concessions in 
order to achieve the best value 
for money.
MNREM 2019-2023
Policy Statement 1.5.4: Government will promote capacity building in all areas of RET programming, supply and services, 
as well as in entrepreneurship and management, taking into account gender and social issues.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To enhance RE capacity 
building and the quality of 
Developing and implement an 
inclusive and comprehensive 
MNREM
Academic and research 
By December 201958
RET products and services RE Capacity Building Plan 
that ensures that renewable 
energy interventions/services 
are suitable to the different 
needs of women and men and 
their subgroups.
institutions
RE suppliers and service 
providers
CSOs/INGOs
Devising incentives to increase 
numbers of well qualified male 
and female RET artisans, 
technicians, professional 
engineers, and entrepreneurs.
MNREM
Academic and research 
institutions By December 2019
Policy Statement 1.5.5 Government will build strong partnerships with the private sector and CSOs (including PPPs) in the 
development of improved RE technologies.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To promote the manufacture, 
distribution, use and financing 
of improved RE technologies.
Introducing financing schemes 
and incentives for the private 
sector to locally manufacture 
and distribute RE products.
MNREM
MoF
MoITT
2020 -2023
Expediting accreditation of RE 
manufacturers and suppliers 
and the certification of RE 
MBS
MERA 2020-202359
products.
Strengthening the capacity of 
CSOs and decentralized 
structures in RET 
programming and 
interventions.
MNREM
DoE
MoLGRD
CSOs/INGOs
2019-2023
PRIORITY AREA 1.6: DEFINITION AND MEASUREMENT OF ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support 
industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional 
electricity trading
Policy Statement 1.6.1: Government will adopt the Global Tracking Framework (GTF) for defining and measuring access to 
electricity.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure that statistics on 
access to electricity take into 
account all sources (including 
off-grid generation and PSPs). 
Adopting (and if necessary 
adapting) the Global Tracking 
Framework.
MNREM
ESCOM
NSO
By December 2018
Conducting surveys to 
determine percentages for all 
tiers
MNREM
ESCOM
NSO
2020 and 202260
Presenting access levels for 
each year in the GTF format
MNREM
ESCOM
NSO
2020 and 2022
PRIORITY AREA 2: BIOMASS
Broad Policy Objective: To ensure biomass is sustainably used and carbon emissions are reduced through the use of energy 
efficient technologies
Policy Statement 2.1: Government will build strong partnerships with the private sector and CSOs (including PPPs) to 
promote the manufacture, supply, use and financing of improved cook stoves, brick kilns, charcoal kilns and biomass 
briquettes and pellets.
Objectives Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To reduce consumption of 
firewood and charcoal and 
reduce carbon emissions
Promoting the creation of 
feasible business models for 
modern technologies for 
biomass technologies (e.g. 
improved cook stoves, 
charcoal kilns, etc.)
MNREM 2019-2023
Promoting incentives to CSOs 
to increase the uptake of 
modern biomass technologies.
MNREM
MoF
EPD
2019-202361
Promoting alternative 
technologies to charcoal in 
urban and peri-urban areas to 
reduce the demand for 
charcoal.
MNREM
CSOs
MoLGRD
MOF
DoF
2019-2023
Introducing incentives for the 
growth of industries in 
manufacturing and distribution 
of improved cook stoves, brick 
kilns, charcoal kilns and 
biomass briquettes.
MNREM
MoF
EPD
MoITT
By December 2019
Introducing customs duty and 
VAT incentives to promote the 
wide availability of improved 
locally made cook stoves.
MNREM
MoF
MRA
By December 2019
Enforcing of Banning of illegal 
charcoal production.
Forestry Department
MNREM
2019-2023
To reduce reliance on natural 
trees as the main source of 
charcoal.
Promoting growing of 
commercial trees e.g. 
bamboos, as an alternative to 
natural trees for charcoal 
MNREM
Forestry Department
2019-202362
production.
Policy Statement 2.2: Government will intensify training and nationwide promotional activities for improved cook stoves, 
brick kilns, charcoal kilns, and biomass briquettes.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
Increase uptake of improved 
cook stoves, brick kilns, 
charcoal kilns and biomass 
briquettes. 
Building and strengthening 
capacity in new biomass 
technologies. 
MNREM 
CSOs 
INGOs
2019-2023
Increasing public knowledge 
and utilization of improved 
biomass technologies and their 
economic opportunities.
MNREM 
CSOs 
INGOs
2019-2023
Developing and implementing 
a Biomass Energy 
Technologies Training 
Strategy.
MNREM 
CSOs 
INGOs 2019-2023
Policy statement 2.3: Government will ensure that low income and marginalized groups have equitable access to, control 
over and benefit from biomass technologies. 
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To empower low income and 
marginalized groups to 
sustainably use and benefit 
from biomass technologies in 
Strengthening targeted 
biomass interventions for low 
income and marginalized 
groups in urban and rural areas 
MNREM
MoLGRD
Town Assemblies
2019-202363
order to decrease the demand 
for charcoal. 
to access and control 
technologies
CSOs
Ministry of Gender
Policy statement 2.4: Government will entrust and empower local authorities to promote the utilisation of efficient biomass 
technologies.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To strengthen the role of 
decentralized structures in 
promoting the use of biomass 
technologies
Recruiting District Energy 
Officers.
MNREM By 2023
Strengthening district level 
capacity to implement 
sustainable programmes and 
projects related to biomass 
technologies.
MNREM
MoLGRD
CSOs
2019-2023
Include biomass programmes 
in District Implementation 
Plans (DIP).
MNREM
MoLGRD
EP&D
CSOs
2019-2023
Policy Statement 2.5: Government will promote the certification and labelling of all energy efficient commercial cook stoves 
that are sold as commercial products on the market.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure that consumers are Developing and enforcing MBS By December 2019 for 64
using energy efficient cook 
stoves of high standard.
standards on cook stoves sold 
as commercial products.
MNREM Standards;
2019-2023for Enforcement 
and monitoring 
Policy Statement 2.6: Government will encourage charcoal making communities to venture into alternative income 
generating activities.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure such communities 
move away from charcoal 
making in order to save trees.
Building linkages between the 
energy sector and economic 
empowerment initiatives that 
are implemented by other 
sectors in charcoal making 
areas.
MNREM
MoITT
DSW
CSOs
Ministry of Gender
2019-2023
PRIORITY AREA 3: PETROLEUM FUELS 
Broad Policy Objective: To ensure adequate production and supply of petroleum and biofuels at affordable prices
Policy Statement 3.1: Government will ensure that the country has adequate petroleum fuels, including paraffin, at all 
times to meet the demand of the country.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure security of liquid 
fuel supply and lower landed 
Maintaining a minimum 
reserve of 90 days’ supply of 
MNREM 2020-202365
cost of petroleum products for 
the country.
fuel MoF
NOCMA
OMCs
MERA
Promoting cost-effective, 
efficient and environmentally 
and socially responsive 
alternative conveyance 
methods such as pipelines and 
water barges to ensure lower 
landed cost of petroleum 
products
MNREM
MoT&PI
MITC
Department of Mines
2019-2023
Promoting exploration for 
petroleum for energy security
MNREM
Department of Mines
2019-2020
To ensure the uptake of 
improved paraffin-fuelled 
cooking and heating appliances 
that are affordable to low 
income households.
Providing customs duty and 
VAT incentives. 
MNREM
MoITT
MoFEPD
MRA
2020-2023
Policy Statement: 3.2: Government will promote the participation of the private sector in the oil market.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe66
To ensure efficiency in the 
downstream oil market.
Reviewing and enforcing 
legislation to adopt a system of 
bulk procurement of fuel. 
MNREM
MoF
NOCMA
OMCs
MERA
By December 2019 for 
reviewing legislation 
2020-2023 for enforcing 
legislation
Utilizing the Government fuel 
storage facilities as inland dry 
ports and common-user 
facilities.
MERA
NOCMA
Developers
2019-2023
To ensure the effective 
participation of Malawian 
nationals in the petroleum 
products market.
Developing and implementing 
guidelines for franchising of 
liquid fuel outlets to be 
adhered to by all OMCs. 
MERA
MoF
OMCs
By December 2019 for 
developing guidelines
2020-2023 for implementing 
the guidelines
Introducing incentives to 
contribute to economic 
empowerment of Malawians in 
the oil market, including 
ownership, operation and 
management of filling stations
MERA
MoF
OMCs 2020-2023
Policy Statement: 3.3: Government will promote deliberate planning that strengthens the equitable participation of men, 
women and marginalized groups in the oil market.67
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
Promoting planning that 
strengthens the equitable 
participation of men, women 
and marginalized groups in the 
oil market.
Introducing and/or 
strengthening youth and 
women mentorship and 
capacity building programmes 
in the oil market.
NOCMA
OMCs
2020-2023
Developing social and gender 
inclusion strategies for 
increasing equal opportunities 
in employment and addressing 
social and gender issues in the 
oil market.
NOCMA
OMCs
By December 2019
Policy Statement 3.4: MERA shall maintain the automatic fuel price adjustment system and apply it in a transparent 
manner.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure NOCMA, OMCs 
and dealers recover their cost 
for the sustainability and 
integrity of the industry.
Regulating fuel prices through 
use of a transparent and 
verifiable fuel price adjustment 
system.
MERA
MNREM
MoF
CAMA
2019-2023
PRIORITY AREA 4: BIOETHANOL AND OTHER BIOFUELS68
Broad Policy Objective: To ensure adequate production and supply of petroleum and biofuels at affordable prices
Policy Statement 4.1: Government will support, encourage and promote the production of bioethanol and biodiesel for 
blending or stand-alone use in vehicles, as well as cooking, lighting etc provided that such production does not threaten food 
security. 
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure sustainable adequate 
supplies of bio-ethanol and 
bio-diesel fuels in the country. 
Increasing the supply of bioethanol and bio-diesel.
MNREM
MERA
Biofuel producers
2019-2023
Promoting fiscal incentives for 
bio-ethanol and bio-diesel 
production.
MNREM
MoF
MRA
2019-2023
Promoting the use of bio-fuels 
through appropriate pricing 
incentives
MNREM
MoF
MERA
Biofuel producers
2019-2023
Implementing socially and 
environmentally responsive 
large scale bio-ethanol and 
MNREM
Biofuel producers 2019-202369
bio-diesel projects.
To build adequate capacity and 
skills to sustainably produce 
bio-ethanol and other biofuels 
in a manner that promotes 
inclusive development.
Increasing local capacity to 
produce bioethanol and 
biodiesel fuels without 
threatening food security, 
especially through the 
collaboration of farmers’ 
cooperatives, women farmers’ 
coalitions, and other 
marginalized groups.
MNREM
MoA
Biofuel producers
Farmers’ cooperatives
Women farmers’ coalitions
2019-2023
Engaging the National 
Commission for Science and 
Technology and academic and 
research institutions in 
discussions on biofuel 
mixtures and their usage in 
vehicles.
MNREM
MoA
Biofuel producers By December 2019
Promoting socially responsive 
research and development in 
the biofuels areas
MNREM
MOA
Biofuel producers
Academic and Research 
Institutions
2019-202370
Policy Statement 4.2: Government will promote equal opportunities for the participation of the citizenry in the biofuels 
industry including in building capacity in biofuel technologies. 
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To increase the pool of 
Malawian men and women 
that are involved in and 
knowledgeable about biofuel 
technologies.
Developing plans and 
strategies that facilitate the 
capacity building of both 
women and men in biofuel 
technologies and to increase 
women’s participation in the 
industry.
MNREM
Ministry of Gender
Biofuel producers
Academic and Research 
Institutions
By December 2019
Policy statement 4.3: GoM shall ensure that the production of biofuels does not threaten food security.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To sustain the production of 
biofuels without compromising 
food security interests. 
Promoting the growing and use 
of non-staple food crops as 
bio-ethanol and bio-diesel raw 
materials. Food crops and 
productive land shall only be 
used for biofuel production 
where there is an assurance 
that food security will not be 
impacted negatively.
MNREM
Biofuel producers 2019-2023
Intensifying public awareness MNREM 2019-202371
campaigns to ensure that 
smallholder farmers’ land for 
the cultivation of food crops is 
not used to grow biofuel 
feedstock.
MoAI&WD
Farmers’ associations
Policy Statement 4.4: In addition to continuing with the current 80:20 petrol: bioethanol blending ratio, Government will
promote the use of flex vehicles capable of running on 100% bioethanol and any other blending ratio.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To sustain petrol: bioethanol 
blending and reduce use of 
fossil fuels in motor vehicles.
Implementing a phased 
installation of bioethanol 
pumps in line with increased 
production of bioethanol.
MNREM
Filling station operators 2019-2023
Promoting awareness 
campaigns on the uptake of 
new technologies (e.g. flex 
vehicles).
MNREM
MoT&PI 2019-2021
Promoting importation of 
conversion kits for existing 
petrol powered vehicles.
MNREM
Vehicle Dealers
Bio-fuel producers
2019-2021
Policy Statement 4.5: In addition to continuing with the current 91:9 diesel to straight vegetable oil blending ratio, 
Government will promote the use of flex vehicles capable of running on 100% biodiesel and any other blending ratio.72
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To sustain diesel vegetable oil 
blending and reduce use of 
fossil fuels in motor vehicles.
Implementing a phased 
installation of biodiesel pumps 
in line with increased 
production of biodiesel.
MNREM
Filling station operators 2020-2023
Promoting awareness 
campaigns to ensure that there 
is uptake of new technologies 
(e.g. flex vehicles)
MNREM
MoT&PI 2020-2023
Promoting importation of 
conversion kits for existing 
diesel powered vehicles.
MNREM
Vehicle Dealers
Bio-fuel producers
2020-2023
PRIORITY AREA 5: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS, BIOGAS AND NATURAL GAS
Broad Policy Objective: To ensure availability of LPG, biogas and natural gas in sufficient quantities at affordable prices 
for industrial and domestic use 
Policy Statement 5.1: Government will ensure availability of LPG, Biogas and Natural Gas in sufficient quantities at 
affordable prices for industrial (electricity generation, heat) and domestic use.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure availability of LPG, Undertaking legal and MNREM By December 201973
biogas and natural gas in 
sufficient quantities at 
affordable prices for industrial 
and domestic purposes.
regulatory reviews to facilitate 
institutional reforms for 
investments in and utilization 
of LPG, biogas and natural 
gas.
MERA
NOCMA
MBS
Promoting tax and other fiscal 
incentives for large scale 
investments in LPG, biogas 
and natural gas.
MNREM
MoF
MRA
2020-2023
Implementing a phased 
program to accelerate the 
penetration of LPG and natural 
gas.
MNREM
MoF
MRA
Afrox
2020-2023
Providing customs duty and 
VAT incentives to promote the 
wide availability of small LPG 
cylinders and gas cookers, and 
make them affordable to low 
income households.
MNREM
MoF
MRA 2020-2023
Promoting use of LPG, Biogas 
and Natural Gas through fiscal 
MoF
NOCMA
2020-202374
incentives to financially viable 
companies to construct own 
storage facilities that meet 
prescribed minimum 
stockholding requirements.
MERA
Policy Statement 5.2: Government will implement programmes aimed at building the capacity of the LPG, Biogas and 
Natural Gas Industry
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To build expertise and ensure 
safety in the handling and 
utilization of LPG, biogas and 
natural gas.
Promoting socially inclusive 
and well trained LPG, biogas 
and natural gas suppliers and 
users.
MNREM
MERA
LPG Dealers
Industry
2020-2023
Conducting awareness on the 
safe use of LPG, biogas and 
natural gas.
MNREM
MERA
Min of Gender
MoI&CE, MoEST 
CSOs 
2020-202375
Promulgating Regulations and 
standards on supply and 
distribution of cylinders for 
LPG (such as safety 
regulations, quality of 
cylinders etc.).
MBS 
MoJ 
MERA
LPG Dealers
2020-2023
Implementing Regulations and 
standards on supply and 
distribution of cylinders for 
LPG (such as safety 
regulations, quality of 
cylinders etc.).
Policy statement 5.3 Government will promote an LPG, Biogas and Natural Gas industry that actively strengthens the 
participation and economic empowerment of local women, men and the youth in the industry.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To build expertise and increase 
the involvement of 
marginalized groups in the gas 
industry both as employees 
and entrepreneurs.
Developing plans and 
strategies to facilitate the 
capacity building of local 
women, men and the youth to 
be entrepreneurs in the 
industry.
MNREM
DoE
Ministry of Gender
LPG, Biogas and Natural Gas 
companies
By December 2019
Building the knowledge and MNREM 2020-202376
skills local women, men and 
the youth in LPG, biogas ad 
Natural Gas technologies.
DoE
Academic and Research 
Institutions
Devising plans, strategies and 
incentives to increase the 
employment of local women 
and the youth in the industry.
MNREM
MoITT
Ministry of Gender
LPG, Biogas and Natural Gas 
companies
By December 2019
Policy statement 5.4: Government will establish PPPs for the purpose of exploring and extracting Natural Gas and 
construction of the associated infrastructure
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To build expertise in local 
extraction, transmission, 
storage and distribution of 
Natural Gas.
Engaging private companies 
with expertise in the industry 
that are interested in 
establishing partnerships.
MNREM
Dept. of Mines
PPPC
2020-2023
PRIORITY AREA 6: COAL 
Broad Policy Objective: To ensure availability of LPG, biogas and natural gas in sufficient quantities at affordable prices 
for industrial and domestic use
Policy Statement 6.1: Government will promote and encourage the private sector to take a leading role in the coal industry 77
subject to regulatory and licensing requirements.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure the availability of 
coal in sufficient quantities and 
at affordable prices for both 
industrial and domestic uses. 
Empowering the private sector 
to intensify exploration for and 
exploitation of coal reserves.
MNREM
DoE
Dept. of Mines
2019-2023
Ensuring that pricing for 
locally mined coal is 
competitive.
MNREM
Dept. of Mines
Coal producers
2019-2023
Policy Statement 6.2: Government will ensure that the responsible regulatory institutions regulate the storage, 
transportation, importation, marketing, usage, and pricing of coal.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure that coal is stored, 
transported, imported, priced 
and marketed in line with set 
minimum standards.
Implement a systematic 
programme of inspection of 
coal storage facilities, 
combustion processes, and 
transportation systems
MNREM 
MERA
MBS
December 2019 for putting in 
place the programme
2020-2023 for implementing 
the programme
Devising mechanisms to 
monitor pricing and marketing 
operations 
MERA
December 201978
To eliminate monopoly in coal 
haulage and brokerage 
Putting in place competitive 
coal haulage and brokerage 
arrangements
MNREM
MERA
CFTC
December 2019
To ensure the coal supply 
chain does not impact 
negatively on the environment 
and the health of people.
Reviewing and enforcing the 
relevant legislation and 
ensuring safe, healthy and 
environmentally friendly 
operations in the supply chain 
MNREM/EAD
MoJ
DoI&WD
December 2019 for reviewing 
legislation 
2019-2023 for enforcing the 
legislation
Ensuring the coal production, 
transportation, utilization and 
waste disposal processes 
produce minimal pollutants
MBS
MoJ
EAD
CFTC
2019-2023
Policy Statement 6.3: Government will put sustainable measures and regulations in place to ensure that the mining, 
transportation, storage and utilisation of coal have minimal adverse environmental, health, social and safety impacts.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To create a competent 
mechanism/machinery for 
reducing the negative impacts 
of coal mining, storage, 
haulage and utilization on the 
environment, and on the health 
Putting in place all-inclusive 
capacity building programmes
MNREM
MoITT
MoLMD
2019-2023
Developing Environmental and 
Social Impact Management 
MNREM 2019-202379
and safety of its handlers, users 
and communities
Plans (or equivalent) to 
address environmental issues 
affecting the coal industry
Coal mining companies
Coal transporters
Coal users
Developing Social and Gender 
Integration Plans (or 
equivalent) to address inward 
looking and outward looking 
social and gender issues 
affecting the coal industry. 
MNREM
Coal companies
2019-2023
Policy Statement 6.4: Government will promote coal as a fuel for power generation and as an alternative for household, 
tobacco curing and other applications
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure security of 
electricity supply through 
environmentally friendly coalfired base-load generation. 
Implementing environmentally 
friendly coal-fired electricity 
generation projects.
MNREM/EAD 
MoJ
MoF
Lands Dept.
ESCOM
2019-2023
Conducting ESIAs and 
developing/implementing 
comprehensive impact 
MNREM/EAD
Lands Dept.
ESCOM
2019-202380
mitigation plans. Coal companies
Developing and implementing 
Gender sensitive Resettlement 
Action Plans and/or fair 
compensation packages. 
MNREM/EAD
Lands Dept.
ESCOM
Coal companies
2019-2023
To reduce reliance on fuel 
wood for household, tobacco 
curing and other applications
Promoting appropriate enduse technologies to facilitate 
use of coal in household and 
tobacco curing applications 
MNREM
MoAI&WD
2019-2023
Policy Statement 6.5: Government will, through the Environmental Affairs Department and MERA, ensure that all coal 
combustion installations abide by set minimum standards.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To minimise the adverse 
impacts of coal combustion on 
the environment and on the 
health and safety of coal 
handlers and users.
Implementing systematic 
inspection programmes for 
coal combustion installations.
MNREM
EAD
MERA
2019-2023
Supporting research into, and 
the development of, more 
efficient coal-combustion 
technologies.
MNREM
Academic and Research 
Institutions
2019-202381
Promoting the application of 
clean coal technologies, such 
as washing, gasification, 
liquefaction and fume 
capturing.
MNREM
EAD
Coal Producers
Coal Users
2019-2023
Policy Statement 6.6: Government will, through fiscal incentives, promote coal-dust briquetting programmes.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To minimise the adverse 
impacts of coal dust released to 
the environment.
Encouraging coal producers 
and entrepreneurs to engage in 
coal briquette production. 
MNREM
MoF
MRA
2019-2023
Policy statement 6.7: Government will encourage the private sector to deliberately develop the capacity of the youth and 
women to meaningfully participate in the coal industry.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To increase the involvement of 
marginalized groups in the 
coal industry both as 
employees and entrepreneurs.
Developing and implementing 
strategies that promote equal 
employment and 
entrepreneurship opportunities 
for men, women and youth in 
the industry.
MNREM
MoITT
Ministry of Gender
Coal companies
MoLMD
Academic institutions
By December 2019 for 
developing the strategy
2020-2023 for implementing 
the strategy82
POLICY PRIORITY AREA 7: NUCLEAR ENERGY
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support 
industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional 
electricity trading
Policy Statement 7.1: Government will build capacity in generation of electricity from nuclear energy
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To increase the energy source 
options available for 
generation of electricity by 
utilizing locally mined 
uranium.
Introducing Nuclear Science 
and Materials in programmes 
in public universities.
MNREM
MoEST
NCHE
By December 2020
Building capacity in nuclear 
energy in Government.
MNREM
DHRMD
2019-2023
Promoting Research and 
Development in Nuclear 
Science.
Tertiary education institutions
NCST 2019-2023
Establishing a socially and 
environmentally responsive 
uranium processing facility in 
the country.
MNREM
NCST By 2030
Developing and MNREM By 203583
commissioning the first 
nuclear power plant.
Private sector
Policy Statement 7.2 Government will promote nuclear energy programming that prioritises the aversion and mitigation of 
different potential health risks that the industry poses to workers and ordinary men, women, children and the environment.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To reduce the negative 
environment, health and social 
impacts of nuclear energy.
Developing and implementing 
Social and Gender Integration 
Plans by nuclear 
companies/projects to address 
inward looking and outward 
looking social and gender 
issues affecting the nuclear 
energy. 
MNREM
Nuclear companies
By 2030
POLICY PRIORITY AREA 8: DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT
Broad Policy Objectives (i): To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support 
industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional 
electricity trading
Broad Policy Objectives (ii): To ensure biomass is sustainably used and carbon emissions are reduced through the use of 
energy efficient technologies
Policy Statement 8.1: Government will promote the use of energy efficient technologies 
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe84
To save energy and reduce 
Greenhouse Gas emissions.
Enforcing a ban on 
importation, distribution and 
use of incandescent bulbs and 
promoting energy saving 
alternatives. 
MNREM 
MoJ
MoITT
2019-2023
Promoting energy saving 
electrical and biomass-fuelled 
devices.
MNREM 2019-2023
Promulgating regulations and 
standards for building designs 
and energy efficient devices.
MNREM 
MoJ
NCIC
Dept. of Buildings
Local Councils
December 2019
Providing duty and VAT 
waivers for solar water heaters.
MNREM
MoF
MRA
By December 2019
Supporting utility companies 
in the implementation of tariffs 
that encourage energy efficient 
use of electricity.
MNREM
MERA 2019-2023
Encouraging regular energy MNREM 2019-202385
audits conducted by certified 
auditors in public, industrial, 
and commercial buildings.
MERA
Encouraging research and 
development in energy 
efficient equipment, buildings 
etc.
MNREM
MoT&PI
NCIC
Academic and Research 
institutions
2019-2023
Promoting use of multiple 
sources of energy and energy 
efficiency in buildings (a limit 
can be set as to the size of the 
buildings).
MoT&PI
NCIC
2019-2023
Sensitising the public on safe 
utilisation and disposal of 
energy saving bulbs.
CAMA
MERA
MoI&CE
EAD
ESCOM
2019-2023
Promoting the design of 
buildings to take advantage of 
natural lighting, conditioning 
MoT&PI
NCIC 2019-202386
(cooling/ heating).
Policy Statement 8.2: Government will encourage electricity utility companies to implement Demand Side Management 
programmes.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To ensure efficiency in their 
service delivery to customers
Conducting public information 
campaigns to raise awareness 
among consumers.
MNREM
Utility Companies
2019-2023
Installing energy efficient 
measures in electricity 
connected households to help 
consumers reduce their bills, 
but also to reduce stress on 
overburdened utility systems.
MNREM
Utility Companies
2019-2023
Installing prepayment meters 
and implementing tariffs that 
will reduce non-payment 
problems and encourage 
energy-efficient behaviour by 
consumers.
MNREM
Utility Companies
2019-2023
Policy Statement 8.3: Government will encourage Civil Society Organisations and Private Sector players to promote 
Demand Side Management.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe87
To ensure users of electricity 
and biomass are aware of the 
benefits and disadvantages of 
the various sources of energy.
Structuring and implementing 
Energy Efficient initiatives.
MNREM
CSOs
2019-2023
Developing DSM awareness 
materials.
MNREM
CSOs
Electricity Suppliers
2019-2023
Conducting Information 
dissemination and awareness 
raising campaigns.
MNREM
CSOs
Electricity Suppliers
2019-2023
Policy Statement 8.4: Government will ensure that importers, retailers and low-income consumers have targeted 
information regarding affordable, modern and sustainable energy products.
Objective Strategy Responsibility Timeframe
To develop information 
packages regarding affordable, 
modern and sustainable energy 
products that suit and reach 
different audiences.
Developing and implementing 
a public outreach strategy on 
sustainable energy products 
targeting importers, retailers 
and low-income consumers.
MNREM
DoE
CSOs
Utility Companies
December 2019 for developing 
the strategy
2020-2023for implementing 
the strategy88
ANNEX 4: MONITORING AND EVALUATION PLAN FOR THE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2018
POLICY PRIORITY AREA 1.1: ELECTRICITY GENERATION
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support 
industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional electricity 
trading
Outcome 1: A well developed and efficiently managed energy sector. 
Outcome 2: An energy sector that is based on diversified energy sources.
Objective Output Performance 
Indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
Verification
Assumptions/ 
Risks
1.1.1 To 
harness other 
potential 
sources of 
power 
generation and 
expedite 
expansion of 
generating 
capacity.
All candidate 
generation projects 
identified and 
documented. 
An Updated 
Integrated 
Resource Plan 
(IRP)
1 1
Approved 
updated IRP 
document
-
Enabling environment 
for private sector 
investment in power 
generation in place.
An IPP 
framework 
reviewed
1 IPP framework 
reviewed after five 
years
1
Approved 
Reviewed IPP 
framework
-
Feasibility study 
reports for IRP 
candidate projects.
Number of 
feasibility 
study reports
produced
2 additional 
feasibility study 
reports by 2018:
Kammwamba; 
Mpatamanga; 
4
Approved 
feasibility study 
reports
Funds are 
available
Environmental and Number of 4 ESIA reports for 2 (ICF-CORE Approved ESIA -89
Social Impact 
Assessment 
conducted 
ESIA reports 
approved
above projects by 
2018
ESIA reports 
for Weed and 
Sediment 
Management, 
and MCCfunded 
Generation 
projects, 
November 
2010)
reports
Comprehensive 
Environmental and 
Social Impact 
Management Plans 
implemented
Number of 
approved and 
implemented 
ESMIPs
4 ESIMPs for above 
projects by 2019
1 (MCA-M 
ESIMP for 
Weed and 
Sediment 
Management 
Nov. 2014)
Approved 
ESIMPs
M&E reports
-
Gender sensitive 
Resettlement Action 
Plans and/or fair 
compensation 
packages developed
Number of 
approved 
RAPs 
4 RAPs for above 
projects by 2019
1 ((MCA-M 
RAP for Weed 
and Sediment 
Management 
Nov. 2014)
Approved RAPs -
Number of 
project 
affected 
persons fairly 
100% timely 
resettlement and/or 
disbursement of 
compensation
-
Project reports
M&E reports -90
compensated, 
disaggregated 
by sex
Power Purchase 
Agreements executed
Number of 
PPAs executed
3 PPAs by 2019:
Kam’mwamba; 
Northern Coal; 
Project Pamodzi
0
Executed PPAs
-
Implementation 
Agreements executed
Number of 
Implementatio
n Agreements 
executed
3 IAs for above 
projects by 2019 0
Executed IAs
-
New diesel power 
plants commissioned
Number of 
Diesel PPs and 
MW of 
capacity added
3DPPs (53MW) by 
2018:
• Lilongwe at 
Kanengo
(10MW)
• BT Mapanga 
(20MW)
• Kasungu 
(23MW)
37.05
MW 
Project 
commissioning 
reports
-
New hydropower 
stations developed 
Number of 
new 
hydropower 
stations 
developed and 
8 new hydropower 
stations totaling 
1092MW by 2023: 
• Lower Fufu, 
(261MW);
EGENCO’s 8 
HEPPs with 
total installed 
capacity of 
350MW
Project progress 
reports91
commissioned;
MW of 
generation 
capacity added 
• Mpatamanga, 
(309MW).
• Kholombidzo, 
(213MW);
• Songwe, 
(150MW);
• Mbongozi, 
(41MW);
• Tedzani (18MW)
• Chizuma 
(50MW); 
• Chasombo and 
 (50MW);92
Potential Coal, 
Geothermal, Natural 
Gas, Solar, Wind, 
biogas and 
agricultural waste 
(Co-generation) 
projects developed.
Number of 
projects
developed, 
disaggregated 
by resource.
3 CFPPs by 2023, 
total capacity 
520MW:
• Kam’mwamba 
(300MW)
• Northern Coal 
(200MW)
• Pamodzi Power 
Station 
(120MW)
At least 1 
Geothermal PP 
1 Natural Gas FPP
At least 6 Solar PV 
PPs by 
2023(160MW):
• GoM (3x5MW)
• Atlas (40MW)
• Global Power 
(45MW)
• Eagle Strategies 
(60MW)
3 Wind PPs 
2 Bagasse Cogen 
PPs:
• Illovo Dwangwa 
0
0
0
0.85MW
• 7MW
• 11MW
• 0.125MW
Project progress 
reports
Project 
commissioning 
reports
Project 
planning and 
agreements 
reached, 
pending 
launch; 
Financial 
support 
secured.
Availability of 
Financial 
support 93
(20MW)
• Illovo Nchalo 
(20MW)
• Biogas(0,75 
MW)
• Agricultural 
wastes(10 MW)
• 0MW94
1.1.2 To enact 
and implement 
enabling 
legislation for 
improved ESI 
governance 
and for 
attracting 
private sector 
investment in 
electricity 
generation
New Electricity Act 
fully enforced Unbundling of 
ESCOM fully 
operationalized 
2 operational entities 
(EGENCO & 
ESCOM) 2018 
0 ESCOM and 
EGENCO 
reports
-
1.1.3 To 
ensure 
increased 
security of 
power supply 
and benefit 
from regional 
power trading
Malawi 
interconnected with 
Zambia, Mozambique 
and Tanzania
MW added to 
generation 
capacity
Two 
interconnections by 
2023 with initial 
imports totaling 
80MW:
• ZAM-MAL from 
Lundazi 
(30MW)
• MOZ-MAL from 
Matambo 
(50MW)
0
0
Project progress 
reports
-
Songwe Power 
Station operational 
0 Project progress 
reports 
-95
by 2023, with 
150MW of capacity 
for Malawi
1.1.4 To create 
an enabling 
environment 
for the 
promotion of 
equal 
opportunities 
in generation 
functions and 
for robustly 
preventing and 
mitigating 
negative social 
impacts of 
electricity 
generation 
projects.
Social and Gender 
Integration Plans 
(SGIPs) or equivalent 
adopted by EGENCO 
and IPPs
Number of 
generation 
projects/operati
ons with SGIPs 
or equivalent
I SGIP for 
EGENCO, reviewed 
at least every two 
years
1 SGIP for each IPP, 
reviewed at least 
every two years
1 (EGENCO) Approved SGIPs 
or equivalent
SGIP reports
Assuming the 
SGIP is 
approved by 
EGENCO 
Board
ESIAs for all 
emerging projects 
developed
Number of 
ESIA reports 
for each 
resource
1 ESIA report for 
each commissioned 
project 1
Approved ESIA 
reports
Funding and 
the ESIAs on 
the ground.
Comprehensive 
socially responsive 
ESIMPs developed & 
implemented 
Number of 
ESIMPs for 
each resource
1 ESIMP report for 
each commissioned 
project 1
Approved 
ESIMPs 
Project reports -
Gender sensitive 
Resettlement Action 
Plans and/or fair 
compensation 
packages developed 
Number of 
approved 
RAPs 
addressing 
gender 
1 RAP for each 
commissioned 
project involving 
resettlement
1
Approved RAPs
Project reports
-96
and implemented dynamics and 
concerns 
relating to 
project 
affected 
persons (PAPs) 
Number of 
PAPs timely 
resettled/ 
compensated, 
disaggregated 
by sex
100% timely 
resettlement/disburs
ement of 
compensation 0
Project/ 
Compensation 
reports
Project reports -
Number of 
PAPs fairly 
compensated, 
disaggregated 
by sex
100% PAPs satisfied 
with compensation
0
Project/ 
Compensation 
reports -
POLICY PRIORITY AREA 1.2: ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support 
industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional electricity 
trading
Outcome: An Energy sector that promotes and supplies sustainable energy services for driving the country’s economic growth 
Objective Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/ 
Risks97
1.2.1 To 
ensure reliable 
and efficient 
power 
transportation 
from all 
sources to all 
customers.
All candidate 
transmission projects 
identified and 
documented
An updated 
Integrated 
Resource Plan 
(IRP)
1 1
Approved 
updated IRP 
document -
One company 
(ESCOM) to own all 
existing transmission 
assets and assume the 
roles of Single Buyer, 
System Operator, and 
Market Operator 
functional.
ESCOM fully 
operational 1 0
Incorporation 
documents -
New transmission 
lines constructed and 
operational
Cct-km of 
transmission 
line added
3 transmission lines, 
total circuit length 
370km by 2018:
• 400kV 
Phombeya –
New Nkula –
Nkhoma 
(228km)
• 132kV 
Chintheche –
Luwinga –
Bwengu 
(122km)
• 132 double cct 
2395km MCC Compact 
progress reports
-98
Nkhoma –
Bunda Turn Off 
(2x15km)
New grid substations 
constructed and 
operational (MCC 
funding - Compact)
MVA of 
transformer 
capacity added
3 grid substations 
totaling 450MVA by 
2018:
• Phombeya 
400/132 kV (200 
MVA)
• Nkhoma 
400/132 kV (200 
MVA)
• Bunda Turn Off 
132/66kV (50 
MVA) 745.5MVA
MCC Compact 
progress reports
New grid substations 
constructed and 
operational (WB 
funding - ESSP)
MVA of 
transformer 
capacity added
7 grid substations 
totaling 195MVA by 
2018:
• Dwangwa 
132/33/11kV 
(30MVA)
• Nkhotakota 
132/33/11kV 
(30MVA)
• Golomoti 
132/33kV 99
(30MVA)
• Nkula 66/33kV 
(30MVA)
• Fundi’s Cross 
66/33kV 
(20MVA)
• Chingeni 
66/33kV 
(20MVA)
• Kauma 66/11kV 
(20MVA)
• Kang’oma 
66/11kV 
(15MVA)
Existing lines 
upgraded
Cct-km of lines 
upgraded
3 lines totaling 
30.5km upgraded
(Lilongwe 66kV 
Ring): • Kanengo 
– Area 
48 66kV (6.7km)
• Area 48 –
Lilongwe A 
66kV (13.2km)
• Kanengo –
Barracks 66kV 
0 MCC Compact 
progress reports
-100
(10.6km)
Existing substations 
rehabilitated
Number of grid 
substations 
rehabilitated
5 substations by 
2018:
• Bwengu 
66/33kV
• Chintheche 
66/33/11kV
• Karonga 
66/33/11kV
• Bunda Turn Off 
66/11kV
• Liwonde 
66/33kV
0 ESCOM reports -
Transmission lines 
and substations to 
interconnect new IPP 
power stations with 
the transmission grid 
constructed in line 
with the IRP
Cct-km of 
transmission 
lines added
To be indicated once 
the distances from 
the IPP power plants 
are known 
0 Project progress 
reports
-
1.2.2 To 
ensure a level 
playing field 
in power 
trading and 
Grid Code, 
Market Rules,
and Tariff 
Methodology
promulgated
Number of 
documents in 
force
1 Grid Code, 1 set of 
Market Rules and a 
Tariff Methodology 
in force by June 
2018
0 Approved Grid 
Code, Market 
Rules and Tariff 
Methodology 
documents
-101
provide third 
party access to 
transmission 
lines for all 
generation 
companies.
1.2.3 To 
maximize 
positive 
impacts of 
transmission 
projects and 
promote equal 
opportunities 
between men
and women in 
transmission 
operations
Social and Gender 
Integration Plans (or 
equivalent) to address 
social and gender 
issues across all 
transmission 
functions developed 
and implemented by 
ESCOM and 
contractors.
No of SGIPs or 
equivalent
I SGIP for ESCOM, 
reviewed at least 
every two years
1 SGIP for each 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Contractor, reviewed 
at least every two 
years
1 Approved SGIP 
or equivalent
SGIP progress 
reports
-
ESIAs for all new 
transmission lines and 
substations developed
No of ESIA 
reports 
approved for 
each project
13 (3 transmission 
lines and 10 grid 
substations)- i.e.
1 ESIA report for 
each commissioned 
project 
1 (ICF-CORE 
ESIA Report 
for MCCfunded T & D 
lines, Nov. 
2010)
Approved ESIA 
reports
-
Comprehensive 
Environmental and 
Social Impact 
No of ESIMPs 
approved for 
each project
13 (3 transmission 
lines and 10 grid 
substations)- i.e.
1 (MCA-M 
ESIMP for 
transmission 
Approved 
ESIMPs
Project M&E 
-102
Management Plans 
developed & 
implemented 
1 ESIMP for each 
commissioned 
project
and 
distribution 
lines and 
associated 
substations, 
Nov. 2014)
reports
Gender sensitive 
Resettlement Action 
Plans and/or fair 
compensation 
packages developed 
and implemented
Number of
approved 
RAPs 
addressing 
gender 
dynamics and 
concerns
relating to 
PAPs 
1 RAP for each 
commissioned 
project involving 
resettlement
1 (MCA-M 
RAP for 
transmission 
and
distribution 
lines and 
associated 
substations, 
Nov. 2014)
Approved RAPs
Project M&E 
reports
-
Number of 
PAPs fairly 
compensated, 
disaggregated 
by sex
100% timely 
resettlement/disburs
ement of 
compensation
-
Project/ 
Compensation 
reports
Resettlement/co
mpensation work 
plans
-
Number of 
PAPs fairly 
compensated, 
disaggregated 
100% PAPs satisfied 
with compensation
- Project/ 
Compensation 
reports
-103
by sex
PRIORITY AREA 1.3: ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support 
industrialization, rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional electricity 
trading
Outcome 1: An Energy sector that promotes and supplies sustainable energy services for driving the country’s economic 
growth.
Outcome 2: An Energy sector that promotes and results in a high standard of living for all people in Malawi.
Objective Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/ 
Risks
1.3.1 To 
ensure that 
electricity is 
available to all 
customers 
while 
preventing and 
mitigating 
negative social 
impacts of 
distribution 
projects
New primary 
distribution lines and 
cables constructed 
and installed (MCC 
funding)
Cct-km of new 
lines and 
cables 
commissioned 
at 33kV and 
11kV
Northern Region, by 
2018:
• 29.2km of 33kV 
OHL
• 0.12km of 33kV 
UGC
• 0.78km of 11kV 
UGC 12,260km
Project progress 
and 
commissioning 
reports
-
Central Region, by 
2018:
• 35.45km of 
33kV OHL
Southern Region, by 
2018:104
• 2.50km of 11kV 
UGC
New primary 
distribution 
substations erected 
(Compact)
No. of new 
substations 
erected under 
MCC Compact
4 primary 
distribution 
transformers 
(35MVA) by 2018:
• 1x 33/11kV in 
Northern Region 
(Chintheche, 
5MVA)
• 2x33/11kV in 
Central Region) 
(Area 25, 
10MVA and 
City Centre, 
10MVA)
• 1x33/11kV in 
Southern Region 
(Ntonda, BT, 
10MVA)
- Project progress 
and 
commissioning 
reports
All contractors 
shall complete 
their projects 
within the 
Compact 
duration. i.e. by 
September, 
2018 
New primary 
distribution 
substations erected 
(ESSP)
Number of 
new 
substations 
erected under 
ESSP
1 primary 
distribution 
substation in 
Northern Region by 
2018: Katoto 
33/11kV (15MVA)
0 Project 
commissioning 
reports
Project and 
Funds on the 
ground105
2 primary 
distribution 
substations 
(30MVA) in 
Southern Region by 
2018:
• Balaka 33/11kV 
(15MVA)
• Bangwe 
33/11kV 
(15MVA) 
0 Project 
commissioning 
reports
Project and 
Funds on the 
ground
Robust socially 
responsive ESIAs for 
new distribution lines 
and substations 
projects developed
Number of 
ESIA reports 
approved for 
each project
1 ESIA report for 
each commissioned 
project 
1 (ICF-CORE 
ESIA report 
for MCCfunded T & D 
lines, Nov. 
2010)
Approved ESIA 
reports
Project and 
Funds on the 
ground
Comprehensive 
Environmental and 
Social Impact 
Management Plans 
for new distribution 
lines and substations 
projects developed & 
implemented
Number of 
ESIMPs 
approved for 
each project
1 ESIMP for each 
commissioned 
project
1 (MCA-M 
ESIMP for T 
and D lines 
and associated 
substations, 
Nov. 2014)
Approved 
ESIMPs;
Project reports
Project and 
Funds on the 
ground106
Gender sensitive 
Resettlement Action 
Plans and/or fair 
compensation 
packages developed 
and implemented
Number of 
approved 
RAPs 
addressing 
gender 
dynamics and 
concerns 
relating to 
PAPs 
1 RAP for each 
project involving 
resettlement
1 (MCA-M 
RAP for T and 
D lines and 
associated 
substations, 
Nov. 2014)
Approved RAPs;
Project reports
Project and 
Funds on the 
ground
Number of 
PAPs fairly 
compensated, 
disaggregated 
by sex
100% timely 
resettlement/disburs
ement of 
compensation
0 Project reports -
Number of 
PAPs fairly 
compensated, 
disaggregated 
by sex
100% PAPs satisfied 
with compensation
0 Project/ 
Compensation 
reports
-
1.3.2 To make 
the 
distribution 
system more 
reliable and 
capable of 
Distribution 
substations 
rehabilitated 
Number of 
substations 
rehabilitated 
under MCC 
Compact
9 x 33/11kV 
substations 
rehabilitated by 
2018:
• 1x33/11kV in 
the Northern 
0 Project progress 
reports
-107
delivering 
quality 
electricity
Region 
(Chintheche)
• 1x33/11kV in 
the Central 
Region (Area 
33)
• 7x33/11kV in 
the Southern 
Region (David 
Whiteheads, 
Limbe A, Limbe 
B, Thyolo A, 
Thyolo B. 
Zomba, 
Maldeco)
1.3.3 To 
promote use of 
electricity in 
households as 
a substitute for 
biomass and 
other fossil 
fuels in homes
Duty and VAT on 
domestic electric 
cooking and water 
heating appliances 
removed
% duty and 
VAT-free 
domestic 
electric 
cooking and 
water heating 
appliances 
100% of appliances 
duty and VAT free 
by June 2018
0% MRA reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
Lifeline tariffs 
enabling low income 
households access 
electricity introduced
Percentage of 
utility 
companies 
implementing 
100% 0% MERA and 
Utility reports
-108
lifeline tariffs
Percentage of 
connected low 
income 
households 
enjoying 
lifeline tariffs
50% of households 
by 2023
0% MERA and 
Utility reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
1.3.4 To 
ensure 
expedient 
connections to 
customers 
premises and 
increase in 
access to 
electricity
Policies facilitating 
expedient customer 
connections while 
allowing customers to 
procure transformers 
and other materials 
under a special 
arrangement with 
distribution licensees 
in place and 
implemented
Number of 
policies 
adopted and 
implemented
2 policies by 2019 1 Policy document Capacity 
Development 
of contractors
Number of 
customers 
procuring 
transformers 
and other 
materials, 
disaggregated 
by head of 
household 
where 
applicable
95,000 of applicants 
for new connections 
by 2019
95,000 of applicants 
for new connections 
by 2019
73,500 Procurement 
reports;
Stores and 
construction 
records;
Energy survey 
reports
Low network 
penetration 109
Percentage of
customers 
getting 
connected 
within 30 days 
from the 
purchase of 
materials, 
disaggregated 
by head of 
household 
where 
applicable
75% of applicants by 
30days by 2019
100% of applicants 
by >30days by 2021
75%
100%
Monthly reports
Energy survey 
reports
Availability of 
transport and 
labour
Policies facilitating 
the outsourcing of 
construction works by 
distribution licensees 
adopted and 
implemented
Number of 
policies 
adopted and 
implemented
2 policies by 2019 1 Policy 
documents
Capacity 
Development 
of contractors
Percentage of 
construction 
works 
outsourced
15% by 2021 0 Procurement and 
construction 
reports
Capacity 
Development 
of contractors
Percentage of
Maintenance 
works 
outsourced
10% by 2021 0 Procurement and 
construction 
reports
Capacity 
Development 
of contractors110
1.3.5 To 
deliberately 
address 
inequalities 
and improve 
access to 
services for all 
in distribution 
operations
Social and Gender 
Integration Plans to 
address social and 
gender issues across 
all distribution 
functions developed 
and implemented by 
ESCOM and 
distribution licensees. 
Number of 
SGIPs or 
equivalent
1 SGIP for ESCOM 
reviewed at least 
every two years
I SGIP for each 
distribution licensee, 
reviewed at least 
every two years
1 Approved SGIP 
or equivalent
SGIP 
implementation 
monitoring 
reports
-
PRIORITY AREA 1.4: RURAL ELECTRIFICATION
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support industrialization, 
rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional electricity trading
Outcome: An Energy sector that promotes and results in a high standard of living for all men and women in Malawi.
Objective Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/ 
Risks
1.4.1 To 
improve the 
management 
governance for 
Rural 
Electrification 
Rural Electrification 
legislation reviewed
Number of 
Acts reviewed
1 Act by 2019 1 Gazette
Rural 
Electrification 
Act
-111
1.4.2 To 
ensure 
reduction in 
cost of 
connection of 
electricity for 
rural and periurban 
settlements 
unable to meet 
the connection 
cost 
Provision of funding 
for infrastructure 
extensions targeting 
settlements with 
prescribed minimum 
populations made in 
the Rural 
Electrification 
legislation. 
Percentage of 
connected rural 
and peri-urban 
households 
that were 
previously 
unable to meet 
the connection 
cost in targeted 
settlements, 
disaggregated 
by household 
head
50% of households 
by 2023
26,200 MAREP reports Availability of 
funds
1.4.3 To 
ensure 
electricity 
reaches all 
rural 
settlements 
and villages, 
thereby 
increasing the 
population’s 
access to 
electricity.
Off-grid rural 
electrification 
financed from the 
Rural Electrification 
Fund 
Funds 
committed to 
off-grid rural 
electrification
30% of Rural 
Electrification Fund
by 2023
0 MAREP reports Availability of 
funds
No. of rural 
settlements and 
villages with 
access to off 
grid electricity, 
disaggregated 
by 
implementing 
336,800 by 2019 
673,600 by 2023
68,000 MAREP reports
Energy survey 
reports
MAREP 
funding on the 
ground; and 
assuming that 
Scaling up of 
Rural Access 
to Electricity in 
Malawi 112
partner of off 
grid projects
(SuRAEM) 
project rolls 
out
1.4.4. To 
ensure 
availability of 
electricity in 
all public 
institutions in 
rural areas and 
in low income 
households 
that are close 
to distribution 
substations.
Rural public 
institutional buildings 
wired and connected 
with electricity using 
the Rural 
Electrification Fund
Percentage of 
rural public 
institutional 
buildings 
wired and 
supplied with 
electricity, 
disaggregated 
by type of 
service
100% of existing 
buildings by 2023
To be 
determined 
through 
surveys 
MAREP reports -
Rural Electrification 
Fund Schemes to 
connect low-income 
households within 
500m radii of 
distribution 
substations developed 
and implemented.
Percentage of 
eligible 
households 
connected, 
disaggregated 
by household 
head
40% of eligible 
households by 2023
2% MAREP reports
Energy survey 
reports
Availability of 
Funds
1.4.5 To 
ensure that 
rural 
electrification 
Social and Gender 
Integration Plans to 
address social and 
gender issues across 
Number of 
SGIPs or 
equivalent
2 SGIPs (for Rural 
Electrification 
Agency and 
MAREP 
0 Approved SGIP 
or equivalent
SGIP 
implementation 
-113
programmes 
are promoting 
the equal 
development 
of both men 
and women
rural electrification 
functions developed
and implemented. 
respectively), 
reviewed at least 
every two years
1 SGIP per 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Contractor, reviewed 
at least every two 
years
monitoring 
reports
Rural electrification 
interventions 
deliberately targeting 
low income 
households developed 
and implemented
Percentage of 
low income 
households 
connected, 
disaggregated 
by type of 
household 
head
50% of qualified 
households by 2023
2% MAREP reports
Energy survey 
reports
Availability of 
funds
PRIORITY AREA 1.5: RENEWABLE ENERGY
Broad Policy Objective: To establish a vibrant, reliable, incentivized and sustainable private sector-driven Renewable Energy 
Technology industry
Outcome: Access to clean and sustainable energy for all people.
Objective Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/ 
Risks114
1.5.1 To make 
the Renewable 
Energy 
Industry, 
properly 
regulated and 
wellcoordinated
Renewable Energy 
legislation enacted
Number of 
Acts 
promulgated
1 Act by end 2019 0 Gazette -
Inclusive renewable 
energy utilization 
incorporated into the 
Integrated Resource 
Plan (IRP).
Number of 
IRPs with 
inclusive 
renewable 
energy 
utilization 
component 
2017-2035 
Integrated Resource 
Plan 2018 reviewed 
every five years
0 Approved 
reviewed 
Integrated 
Resource Plan
-
Standards for RET 
products, especially 
Solar PV and Pico 
Solar Products in 
force and regularly 
reviewed. 
No. of 
standards 
promulgated
1 set of standards by 
December 2019, 
reviewed every 5 
years
0 Gazette Availability of 
funds
Number of 
reviews of 
standards
1 review every 5 
years from 2019
0 Revised 
standards
Availability of 
funds
1.5.2 To 
increase 
access to 
modern, clean, 
affordable and 
reliable 
Assessment and 
development of RE 
resources such as 
geothermal, solar, 
wind, biomass cogeneration, and 
Number of 
renewable 
energy 
resources 
developed 
through 
5 by 2020 1 Research reports
RE reports
Availability of 
Funds on 
government 
side; and 
showing up of 
IPPs. 115
energy. hybrid systems 
expedited
research, 
disaggregated 
by resource 
Fiscal incentives for 
renewable energy 
using existing funds 
such as the Malawi 
Rural Electrification 
Programme Fund in 
force
Number of 
renewable 
energy players 
benefiting 
from approved 
fiscal 
incentives 
disaggregated 
by location, 
type, size and 
ownership.
3 0 List of approved 
incentives
MRA reports
RE reports
-
Strategy for public 
awareness campaigns 
on renewable energy 
technologies targeted 
at both rural, urban 
and peri urban 
consumers developed 
and implemented
Number of 
Strategy 
documents 
produced
1 document by July 
2019
0 Approved 
Strategy 
document
-
Number of 
outreach 
campaigns 
implemented, 
disaggregated 
by target 
audience
28 campaigns per 
target audience per 
year
1 Public outreach 
reports
Availability of 
Funding116
Percentage of 
energy 
consumers 
aware of 
different RE 
technologies, 
disaggregated 
by locality and 
sex where 
applicable
50% by 2021
100% by 2023
5% Energy survey 
reports
Availability of 
Funds,
1.5.3 To 
ensure the 
active 
involvement 
of 
communities 
or 
entrepreneurs 
in small scale 
renewable 
energy 
activities. 
Appropriate 
regulations for 
specific small-scale 
technologies 
developed under the 
Renewable Energy 
Act 
Number of 
Regulations 
promulgated
1 set of regulations 
by 2019
0 Gazette -
Communities 
involved in 
community energy 
planning and 
implementation
Number of 
community 
awareness 
campaigns/trai
nings, 
disaggregated 
by location and 
level of 
56 campaigns per 
year from 2019 to 
2023
14 Project progress 
reports and
Evaluation 
reports
-117
participation 
by women and 
men
Number of 
community 
operated 
mini/micro 
grids 
operational, 
disaggregated 
by location and 
level of 
participation 
by women and 
men
15 mini/micro-grids 
by 2021
7 Project progress 
reports
-
All stand-alone 
renewable source 
powered mini-grids 
and installations 
equipped with Net 
Metering 
Percentage of 
stand-alone 
mini-grids 
equipped with 
Net Metering
40% by 2021 0% Survey reports -
A system of 
competitive bidding 
for mini-grid 
concessions in place.
Criteria for 
awarding 
concessions 
established
1 guideline
document by July 
2019
0 Guideline 
document
-118
Number of 
mini-grid 
concessions 
awarded 
through 
competitive 
bidding, 
disaggregated 
by location, 
type, size and 
ownership. 
6 by 2021 0 Procurement 
documents
-
1.5.4 To 
enhance RE 
capacity 
building and 
the quality of 
RET products 
and services
Renewable Energy 
Capacity Building 
Plan developed and 
implemented 
Renewable 
Energy 
Capacity 
Building Plan 
that ensures 
that renewable 
energy 
interventions/s
ervices are 
suitable to the 
different needs 
of women and 
men and their 
subgroups 
1 plan by 2019, to be 
reviewed every 4 
years
0 Renewable 
Energy Capacity 
Building Plan
-119
made 
operational.
Number of 
training 
institutions 
implementing 
RET courses in 
accordance
with Capacity 
Building Plan, 
disaggregated 
by type of 
technology and 
qualification 
level.
4 by 20210 Capacity 
Building Plan 
implementation 
reports
-
Number of 
renewable 
energy 
stakeholders 
implementing 
Renewable 
Energy 
Capacity 
Building Plan. 
At least 4 by 20211 Capacity 
Building Plan 
implementation 
reports
-120
Percentage of 
RE consumers 
satisfied with 
RE products 
and services 
disaggregated 
by location, 
sex and 
technology.
75% by 2021 Subsector reports
Energy surveys
Incentives for 
increasing numbers 
of well qualified male 
and female (including 
those with 
disabilities) RET 
artisans, technicians, 
professional, and 
entrepreneurs 
introduced
Number of 
RET 
scholarships 
and bursaries 
to promote the 
participation of 
skilled women 
and people 
with 
disabilities in 
renewable 
energy, 
disaggregated 
by training 
institution
TBD 0 Sub-sector 
reports and
training 
institution 
records
-
Number of 120 graduates per 30 Sub-sector -121
RET graduates, 
disaggregated 
by sex, training 
institution and 
technology 
type
year reports and
training 
institution 
records
Number of 
RET 
technicians 
disaggregated 
by sex, and 
technology 
type 
100 per year, 
assessed annually 
from 2019
20 Sub-sector 
reports,
training 
institution data
and energy 
survey reports
-
Number of 
RET artisans, 
disaggregated 
by sex, 
institution/indu
stry and 
technology 
type
150 per year, 
assessed annually 
from 2019
20 Sub-sector 
reports and
energy survey 
reports
-
Number of 
trained RET 
entrepreneurs, 
disaggregated 
100 per year 0 Sub-sector 
reports and
energy survey 
reports
-122
by sex, 
institution, 
technology 
type and 
training type
Number of 
male and 
female staff 
funded for 
training in 
various RET 
courses, 
disaggregated 
by sex
4 per year from 2019 1 Training data -
1.5.5 To 
promote the 
manufacture, 
distribution, 
use and 
financing of 
improved RE 
technologies.
Introducing financing 
schemes and 
incentives for the 
private sector to 
locally manufacture 
and distribute RE 
products.
Number of RE 
manufacturers 
supported by 
financial 
schemes & 
incentives, 
disaggregated 
by technology 
type
4 0
List of approved 
schemes and 
incentives 
Sub-sector 
reports
-
Percentage of 
accredited 
100% by 2021 80% MERA reports -123
manufacturers 
& suppliers 
satisfied with 
accreditation 
process
Energy survey 
reports
Number of 
certified RE 
products per 
year
100 0 MBS reports 
Sub-sector 
reports 
Enforcement of 
the available 
RE standards
Percentage of 
consumers 
satisfied with 
quality of 
certified RE
products, 
disaggregated 
by sex where 
applicable
100% by 2023 5% Energy survey 
reports
CAMA reports
Effective 
enforcement of 
Renewable 
Energy 
Technology 
standards
Strengthening the 
capacity of CSOs and 
decentralized 
structures in RET 
programming and 
interventions
Percentage of 
district 
councils 
implementing 
RET 
programmes as 
part of their 
50% by 2023 32% Sub-sector 
reports;
DIPs
With technical 
support from 
DoE under 
UNDP 
supported 
projects.124
District 
Implementatio
n Plans
Number of 
CSOs 
supporting the 
implementatio
n of policy RE 
priorities, 
disaggregated 
by 
geographical 
location
500 by 2023 140 Sub-sector 
reports
With technical 
support from 
DoE and 
MERA
PRIORITY AREA 1.6: DEFINITION AND MEASUREMENT OF ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support industrialization, 
rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional electricity trading
Outcome: Access to clean, sustainable and affordable energy for all people
Objectives Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/ 
Risks
1.6.1 To 
ensure that 
statistics on 
access to 
electricity take 
Guidelines for 
measuring access to 
electricity using the 
GTF promulgated
Number of 
guideline 
documents
1 guideline 
document by June 
2019
0 Gazette -
Surveys to establish Number of 1 survey by 0 Annual survey -125
into account 
all sources 
(including offgrid 
generation and 
PSPs). 
tier percentages for 
each year conducted 
surveys 
conducted
December 2019 and 
ongoing 
reports
Statistics on access to 
electricity monitored 
using the GTF format
% of 
population in 
each tier of the 
GTF
80.0% by
2035, disaggregated 
by GTF tiers
• 35% Tiers 4 & 5
• 45% %Tiers 1,2 
& 3
9% Annual NSO 
reports
Special 
strategies in 
order to meet 
the targets as 
outlined in this 
policy are 
implemented.
PRIORITY AREA 2: BIOMASS
Broad Policy Objective: To ensure biomass is sustainably used and carbon emissions are reduced through the use of energy efficient 
technologies
Outcome: An energy sector that promotes and results in a high standard of living for all men and women in Malawi 
Objectives Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/ 
Risks
2.1 To reduce 
consumption 
of firewood 
and charcoal 
and reduce 
carbon
emissions
Development of 
feasible business 
models for modern 
technologies for 
biomass (e.g. 
improved cook 
stoves, charcoal 
kilns) promoted.
Number of 
effective 
business 
models being 
implemented, 
disaggregated 
by type of 
technology, 
financing 
3 by 2019, 
10% by 2021
15% by 2023
 2 Subsector reports Continued 
government 
and donor 
support on the 
promotion of 
improved/effici
ent biomass 
utilisation126
institution, 
location and 
implementer
Incentives for CSOs 
to increase the uptake 
of modern biomass 
technologies 
promoted.
Number of 
CSOs/INGOs 
benefiting 
from 
incentives and 
assisting 
communities in 
modern 
biomass 
technologies.
30 by 2021 20 List of approved 
incentives
Sub-sector 
reports
-
Incentives for the 
growth of industries 
in manufacturing and 
distribution of 
improved cook 
stoves, brick kilns, 
charcoal kilns and 
biomass briquettes 
introduced.
Number of 
entrepreneurs 
benefiting 
from 
incentives and 
involved in the 
manufacturing 
and 
distribution of 
modern 
biomass 
technologies 
100 by 2019, 
300 by 2023
70 List of approved 
incentives
Sub-sector 
reports
-127
disaggregated 
by type of 
technology, 
location and 
sex.
Number of 
community 
groups and 
entrepreneurs 
linked to viable 
markets 
through trade 
fairs and other 
marketing 
opportunities, 
disaggregated 
by sex/sex 
composition, 
location and 
type of 
technology. 
100 by 2019, 
300 by 2023
70 Sub-sector 
reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
Customs duty and 
VAT incentives to 
promote the wide 
availability of 
% of 
enterprises 
accessing VAT 
incentives for 
100% by 2021 0 List of approved 
incentives
Sub-sector 
reports
Assuming the 
incentives are 
approved by 
the 128
improved locally 
made cook stoves 
introduced & 
implemented. 
improved 
locally made 
cook stoves 
Government
Illegal charcoal 
production banned. 
Number of 
legislations 
banning illegal 
charcoal 
production 
2 by end 2019 1 Sub-sector and
Energy survey 
reports 
-
2.2 To reduce 
reliance 
natural trees as 
the main 
source of 
charcoal
Growing of 
commercial trees for 
charcoal making 
strengthened
Number of 
legal charcoal 
makers that are 
using 
alternatives to 
natural trees
50% by 2020
75% by 2023
1% Sub-sector and
Energy survey 
reports 
Related 
legislation and 
strategies 
implemented.
2.3 To 
increase 
uptake of 
improved cook 
stoves, brick 
kilns, charcoal 
kilns and 
biomass 
briquettes.
Capacity in new 
biomass technologies 
developed and 
strengthened
Biomass 
Energy 
Technologies 
Training 
Strategy 
1 by December 2019 0 Approved 
Strategy 
document
-
Number of 
people trained 
using Biomass 
Energy 
Technologies 
5000 by end 2019
and 55,000 per year 
up to 2023
0 Training reports -129
Training 
Strategy, 
disaggregated 
by sex and 
type of 
technology. 
Number of 
CSO 
community 
initiatives 
training rural 
men and 
women to 
make 
improved cook 
stoves using 
locally 
available 
materials, 
disaggregated 
by location and 
project 
beneficiaries.
5,000 by 2019
55,000 per year up 
to 2023
20 Sector reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
Utilization of 
improved biomass 
Number of 
people/househ
a. Distribute 
2,000,000 
300,000 Sector reports
Energy survey 
-130
technologies 
increased.
olds using 
improved cook 
stoves, brick 
kilns, charcoal 
kilns and 
biomass 
briquettes per 
year, 
disaggregated 
by household 
head, and 
location.
improved cook 
stoves by 2020
and 2 million by 
2023
b. brick kiln 
projects 
implemented by 
2023
c. 100 charcoal kiln 
projects 
implemented by 
2023
d. 50 biomass 
briquette projects 
implemented by 
2023
reports
2.4 To 
empower low 
income and 
marginalized 
groups to 
sustainably 
use and 
benefit from 
biomass 
technologies 
Targeted biomass 
interventions for low 
income and 
marginalized groups 
in urban and rural 
areas to access and 
control biomass 
technologies 
implemented.
Percentage of
low income 
and 
marginalized 
groups that 
have access to 
information on 
biomass 
technologies, 
disaggregated 
At least 80% of 
beneficiaries of 
biomass projects by 
2019
10% Sub-sector and
Energy survey 
reports 
-131
in order to 
decrease the 
demand for 
charcoal.
by location, 
sex, household 
head and type 
of technology
Percentage of 
marginalized 
groups that are 
able to make 
decisions on 
the type of 
technology to 
use, 
disaggregated 
by location, 
sex and 
household 
head 
At least 70% of 
beneficiaries of 
biomass projects by 
2019
10% Sub-sector and
Energy survey 
reports 
-
2.5 To 
strengthen the 
role of 
decentralized 
structures in 
promoting the 
use of biomass 
technologies
District level 
coordination and 
implementation of 
energy activities, 
including sustainable 
programmes and 
projects related to 
biomass technologies, 
Number of 
District Energy 
Officers, 
disaggregated 
by sex.
28 Energy Officers 
between 2019 to 
2023 (At least 40% 
and 60% women & 
men respectively)
0 District reports
Sub-sector 
reports
-
Number of 
biomass 
interventions 
50% of interventions 
by 2019
75% by 2021
32% District reports
Sub-sector 
reports
-132
strengthened. that are 
systematically 
coordinated 
and/or 
implemented at 
district council 
level 
100% by 2023
Percentage of 
district 
councils with 
biomass 
interventions 
in their DIPs
100% by 2023 32% Sub-sector 
reports
DIPs
Scaling up of 
mainstreaming 
projects
2.6 To ensure 
that consumers 
are using 
energy 
efficient cook 
stoves of high 
standard
MBS standards on 
cook stoves that are 
sold as commercial 
products on the 
market promulgated.
Percentage of 
commercial 
cook stove 
manufacturers 
complying 
with Standards
100% compliance, 
assessed yearly
0 Compliance 
reports
-
Percentage of 
male and 
female cook 
stove 
enforcement 
officers 
By 2020, not less 
than 40% and not 
more than 60% of 
either sex
0 Recruitment data -133
recruited
2.7 To ensure 
communities
move away 
from 
unsustainable 
charcoal 
production in 
order to save 
trees
Increased linkages 
between the energy 
sector and economic 
empowerment 
initiatives 
implemented by other 
sectors in charcoal 
making areas
Number of 
CSOs/sectors 
promoting 
alternative 
businesses for 
male and 
female 
charcoal 
merchants, 
disaggregated 
by business 
type and sex of 
beneficiaries
15 by 2019
50 by 2023
0 Sector reports
Energy survey 
reports 
-
Number of 
male and 
female 
charcoal 
merchants who 
have 
abandoned 
charcoal for 
other 
businesses
200 by 2023 1,000 Energy survey 
reports
-134
PRIORITY AREA 3: PETROLEUM FUELS (PETROL, DIESEL, PARAFFIN)
Broad Policy Objective: To ensure adequate production and supply of petroleum and biofuels at affordable prices
Outcome: A well developed and efficiently managed energy sector
Objective Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumption/ 
Risk
3.1 To ensure 
security of 
liquid fuel 
supply and
lower landed
cost of 
petroleum 
products for 
the country
Minimum of days 
fuel supply held at all 
times. 
Number of 
days of fuel 
cover for the 
country 
NOCMA: 60 days’ 
supply from 2019 to 
2023
30 days Monthly stock 
reports
-
Oil Marketing 
Companies: 30 days’ 
supply from 2019 to 
2023
15 Monthly stock 
reports
-
Cost-effective, 
efficient and 
environmentally and 
socially responsive 
alternative 
conveyance methods, 
such as pipelines and 
water barges 
implemented 
Number of 
new fuel 
conveyance 
methods 
introduced, 
disaggregated 
by technology
1 pipeline by 2035
Barging system by 
2035
0
0
Feasibility study 
and 
Project 
commissioning 
reports
-
Number of 
ESIAs 
conducted for 
fuel 
1 ESIA for each 
project
0 Approved ESIA 
report
-135
transportation 
technology
Number of 
comprehensive 
ESIMPs 
developed and 
implemented 
to mitigate and 
prevent 
negative 
environmental 
and social 
impacts 
1 ESIMPs for each 
project
0 Approved 
ESIMP
-
Number of 
Gender 
sensitive 
Resettlement 
Action Plans 
1 RAP per project 
involving 
resettlement
0 Project reports
M&E reports
-
Percentage of 
project affected 
persons fairly 
compensated, 
disaggregated 
by sex
100% timely 
disbursement of 
compensation
0 Project reports
M&E reports
-
100% PAPs satisfied 
with compensation
0 Project/ 
Compensation 
reports
-136
3.2 To ensure 
efficiency in
the 
downstream 
oil market
Legislation to adopt a 
system of bulk 
procurement of fuel 
reviewed and 
enforced
Number of 
Acts 
promulgated
1 by June 2019 0 Gazette -
Number of fuel 
cover days
90 days fuel cover 45 days fuel 
cover
Procurement 
reports;
Fuel Stock 
reports
• Review of 
Energy 
Laws 
regarding 
importation 
of fuel,
• Assuming 
current 
demand of 
1 million 
litres per 
day
In land dry ports 
established and 
operational.
Number of 
functional inland dry ports 
established and 
operational
3 by 2019 0 Project progress 
reports
-
3.3 To ensure 
the effective 
participation 
of Malawian 
nationals in 
the petroleum 
Guidelines for 
franchising of liquid 
fuel outlets developed 
for adherence by all 
OMCs developed and 
implemented. 
Number of 
Guidelines 
developed
1 by end 2019 0 Approved 
Guidelines
-
Percentage of 
OMCs 
100% compliance by 
end 2019
0 Compliance 
reports
-137
products 
market
adhering to 
guidelines.
Incentives to 
contribute to 
economic 
empowerment of 
Malawians in the oil 
market, including the 
ownership, operation 
and management of 
filling stations 
introduced
Percentage of 
Malawians, 
including the 
youth, 
accessing 
fiscal and other 
incentives to 
participate in 
the oil market 
as filling 
station 
operators, 
transporters, 
contractors 
etc., 
disaggregated 
by type of 
enterprise (and 
sex of business 
operator where 
applicable).
10% participation of 
Malawians by 2023
At least 40% 
participation of 
women and youth by 
2023
0% List of approved 
incentives
Sub-sector 
reports 
Energy survey 
reports
Incentives 
developed and 
approved by 
MoF
Percentage of 
Malawians, 
At least 40% 
participation of 
No data Sub-sector 
reports
-138
including the 
youth, 
employed in 
the oil market, 
disaggregated 
by sex and 
position. 
women and youth in 
management 
positions by 2023
Energy survey 
reports
3.4 To 
promote 
planning that 
strengthens the 
equitable 
participation 
of men, 
women and 
marginalized 
groups in the 
oil market
Youth and women 
mentorship and 
capacity building 
programmes in the oil 
market strengthened
Number of 
youth and 
women 
participating in 
mentorship 
capacity 
building 
programmes
20 annually, 
beginning 2019 
data not 
available
Sub-sector 
reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
Social and gender 
inclusion strategies 
for increasing equal 
opportunities in 
employment and 
addressing social and 
gender issues in the 
oil market developed 
and implemented
Percentage of 
OMCs with 
operational 
social and 
gender 
inclusion 
strategies
50% of OMCs by 
end 2019
75% by 2021
100% by 2023
data not 
available
Sub-sector 
reports
Company 
documents
-
3.5 To ensure Fuel prices regulated Legislation in 1 Act by end 2019 0 Gazette -139
NOCMA, 
OMCs and 
dealers 
recover their 
cost for the 
sustainability 
and integrity 
of the 
industry.
through use of the 
fuel price adjustment 
system.
place
A transparent 
and verifiable 
mechanism for 
calculating the 
price using the 
prescribed 
formula 
established.
1 0 MERA reports -
3.6 To 
increase the 
uptake of 
improved 
paraffin 
cooking and 
heating 
technologies 
Duty and VAT on 
improved and safe 
paraffin stoves 
removed
% duty and 
VAT-free 
improved and 
safe paraffin 
stoves
100% of appliances 
duty and VAT free 
by 2021
0 MRA reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
Awareness 
campaigns on 
improved paraffin 
cooking and heating 
technologies 
conducted
Percentage of 
household 
energy 
consumers 
aware of 
improved 
paraffin 
cooking and 
heating 
technologies, 
disaggregated 
50% by 2019
100% by 2021
0% Energy survey 
reports
Availability of 
Funds140
by locality and 
sex. 
PRIORITY AREA 4: BIO-ETHANOL AND OTHER BIOFUELS
Broad Policy Objective: To ensure adequate production and supply of petroleum and biofuels at affordable prices
Outcome: An Energy sector that promotes and supplies modern and sustainable energy services for driving the country’s 
economic growth
Objective Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/ 
Risks
4.1 To ensure 
sustainable 
adequate 
supplies of 
bio-ethanol 
and bio-diesel 
fuels in the 
country
Increased supply of 
bio-ethanol and biodiesel 
Number of 
litres of 
biodiesel and 
bio-ethanol 
produced 
annually
20 million litres by 
2019; 
460 million litres by
2035
18.5 million 
litres
Production 
reports from 
MERA
-
Fiscal incentives for 
production of bioethanol and bio-diesel 
raw materials 
established
Percentage of 
companies
benefiting 
from the 
incentives
100% compliance by 
MRA by 2019, 
assessed yearly
0 List of incentives
Energy survey 
reports
-
Favourable pricing 
mechanism for the 
bio-fuels raw 
materials that protects 
farmers and not 
Average price 
of feedstock 
for biofuels 
production
1 0 MERA Reports, 
Subsector 
Reports
-141
disadvantage the biofuel producing 
companies 
established
Socially and 
environmentally 
responsive large scale 
bio-ethanol and biodiesel projects 
implemented
Number of 
ESIA reports 
approved and
implemented
1 ESIA per large 
scale project
2 Approved ESIA 
reports
-
Number of 
Comprehensiv
e socially 
responsive 
Environmental 
and Social 
Impact 
Management 
Plans approved 
and 
implemented
1 ESIMP per large 
scale project
2 Approved 
ESIMPs
Project M&E 
reports
-
Number of 
Gender 
sensitive 
Resettlement 
Action Plans 
and/or fair 
1 RAP for each 
project involving 
resettlement
2 Approved RAPs
Project M&E 
reports
-142
compensation 
packages 
implemented 
Percentage of 
eligible project 
affected 
persons 
(PAPs) fairly 
compensated, 
disaggregated 
by sex
100% timely 
resettlement/ 
disbursement of 
compensation
0 Project reports -
100% PAPs satisfied 
with compensation
0 Project/ 
Compensation 
reports
-
4.2 To build 
adequate 
capacity and 
skills to 
sustainably 
produce 
ethanol and 
biofuels in a 
manner that 
promotes 
inclusive 
development
Local capacity to 
sustainably produce 
bio-ethanol and biodiesel fuels 
(especially through 
the collaboration of 
farmers cooperatives, 
women farmers 
coalitions and other 
marginalized groups) 
increased.
Number of 
companies, 
farmers’ 
cooperatives, 
women 
farmers’ 
coalitions and 
individuals 
producing biofuel raw 
materials 
1500 by 2023 300 Sub-sector 
reports
-
Number of 
women, people 
200 by 2019; 
500 by 2023
100 Energy survey 
reports
-143
with 
disabilities and 
youth directly 
economically 
benefiting 
from biofuels 
projects as 
farmers or 
entrepreneurs
Engagement with 
National Commission 
for Science and 
Technology and 
academic and 
research institutions 
on bio-fuel mixtures 
and their usage in 
vehicles
Number of 
engagement 
forums with 
NCST and 
research 
institutions per 
year
3 1 Meeting reports;
Subsector reports
-
Socially responsive 
research and 
development in the 
biofuels and 
bioethanol areas 
promoted
Percentage of 
R&D 
initiatives that 
apply both 
economic and 
social 
development 
75% by 2019
100% by 2021
1 Research reports -144
perspectives 
Number of 
R&D 
initiatives 
undertaken per 
year
2 2 R&D reports;
Subsector reports
-
4.3 To 
increase the 
pool of 
Malawian men 
and women 
that are 
involved in
and 
knowledgeabl
e about 
biofuels 
technologies 
and the 
biofuels 
industry
Biofuels training 
plan/strategy to 
enhance the skills of 
both women and men 
in biofuels 
technologies and to 
increase the 
participation of 
skilled women, 
people with disability 
and youth in the 
biofuels industry
developed
Number of 
plans/strategies
1 by December 2019 0 Approved 
training plan
-
Number of 
vocational and 
tertiary 
institutions 
offering 
biofuel 
industry 
related 
trainings from 
both economic 
and social 
development 
perspectives
4 by 2019; 
10 by 2023
2 Tertiary / 
vocational 
institution data
Energy survey 
reports
-
Number of 
women 
enrolled and 
graduating in 
40 by 2019; 
100 by 2023
0 Academic 
institution data
Energy survey 
reports
-145
biofuels 
courses 
Number of 
women 
employed in 
the biofuels 
industry, 
disaggregated 
by 
position/grade
20 by 2019; 
100 by 2023
10 Recruitment data
Energy survey 
reports 
-
Number of 
training 
institutions and 
projects with 
deliberate 
incentives for 
the 
participation of 
women people 
with 
disabilities and 
youth, 
disaggregated 
by type of 
institution or 
4 by 2018; 
10 by 2023 
0 Tertiary/ 
vocational 
institutions data
Project reports
Energy survey 
reports
-146
project and 
type of 
incentive
Percentage of 
bio-fuel 
companies 
implementing 
Social and 
Gender 
Integration 
Plans to 
address social 
and gender 
issues in the 
industry
SGIPs formulated by 
50% of biofuel 
companies by 2020, 
75% by 2023 
0 SGIP monitoring 
reports
Annual budgets
-
4.4 To sustain 
the current 
petrol: 
bioethanol 
blending and 
reduce use of 
fossil fuels in 
motor vehicles
A phased installation 
of ethanol pumps in 
line with increased 
production of ethanol 
implemented.
Number of 
filling stations 
with ethanol 
fuel tanks
200 by 2020 0 MERA reports -
Number of 
vehicles 
running on 
100% ethanol 
7,000 by 2019; 
10,000 by 2023
5 MERA reports -
Awareness 
campaigns to 
Number of 
campaigns 
30 per year, starting 
in 2019
7 per year Subsector reports
Transport reports
-147
promote uptake of 
new technologies 
intensified.
promoting
uptake of new 
technologies 
(e.g. flex 
vehicles)
4.5 To sustain 
diesel 
vegetable oil 
blending and 
reduce use of 
fossil fuels in 
motor vehicles
A phased installation 
of bio-diesel pumps 
in line with increased 
production of biodiesel implemented.
Number of 
vehicles 
running on 
100% biodiesel
100 by 2019; 
200 by 2023
0 MERA reports -
Number of 
campaigns 
promoting
uptake of new 
technologies
10 per year, starting 
in 2019
2 per year Subsector reports
Transport reports
-
PRIORITY AREA 5: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS, BIOGAS AND NATURAL GAS
Broad Policy Objective: To ensure availability of LPG, biogas and natural gas in sufficient quantities at affordable prices for industrial 
and domestic use
Outcome: An Energy sector that promotes and result in a high standard of living for all men and women in Malawi
Objective Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/
Risks
5.1 To ensure 
availability of 
Legal and regulatory 
reviews to facilitate 
Legislation in 
place
1 Act by June 2019 0 Gazette -148
LPG, biogas 
and natural 
gas in 
sufficient 
quantities at 
affordable 
prices for 
industrial and 
domestic 
purposes 
institutional reforms 
for investments in and 
utilization of LPG, 
biogas and natural gas 
implemented.
Number of 
companies 
registered in 
LPG, biogas 
and natural gas
10 by 2019
20 by 2023 
3 Gazette -
Tax and fiscal 
incentives for large 
scale LPG, biogas 
and natural gas 
investments 
introduced and 
implemented 
Percentage of 
companies 
benefiting 
from tax and 
other fiscal
incentives for 
supporting the 
initial stages of 
introducing 
and promoting 
LPG, biogas 
and natural gas 
100% compliance by 
MRA by June 2019
0 List of incentives
Energy survey 
reports
Subsector reports
-
Socially and 
environmentally 
responsive large scale 
LPG, biogas and 
natural gas projects 
implemented
Number of 
ESIA reports 
approved and 
implemented
1 ESIA per large 
scale project
3 Approved ESIA 
reports
-
Number of 
comprehensive 
Environmental 
1 ESIMP per large 
scale project
3 Approved 
ESIMPs;
Project M&E 
-149
and Social 
Impact 
Management 
Plans approved 
and 
implemented
reports
Number of 
gender 
sensitive 
Resettlement 
Action Plans 
and/or fair 
compensation 
packages 
implemented 
1 RAP for each 
project involving 
resettlement
3 Approved RAPs;
Project M&E 
reports
-
Percentage of 
PAPs timely 
resettled/ 
compensated, 
disaggregated 
by sex for 
infrastructure 
projects
100% timely 
disbursement of 
compensation 
0% Project reports-
100% PAPs satisfied 
with compensation
0% Project/ 
Compensation 
reports
-
Number of 
Social and 
1 per large scale 
project, reviewed at 
0 SGIP 
implementation 
-150
gender 
integration 
plans (or 
equivalent) to 
address inward 
and outward 
looking social 
and gender 
issues related 
to imports, 
storage and 
distribution 
developed
least every 2 years reports
Phased program to 
accelerate the 
penetration of LPG, 
biogas and gas 
implemented.
Number of 
infrastructure 
facilities for 
LPG and 
Natural Gas 
imports, 
storage and 
distribution 
10 by 2021 3 Project progress 
reports
-
Number of 
pilot projects 
being 
implemented 
4 districts piloted for 
3 years, and scaling 
up with 2 peri-urban 
(town assemblies) 
1 1 evaluation 
report for pilot 
phase
1 evaluation 
-151
in areas where 
biomass has 
diminished 
and/or where 
the cost of 
biomass for 
cooking is high 
districts per year report for every 
other phase
Number of 
users of LPG, 
biogas and 
natural gas, 
disaggregated 
by location, 
type of 
household 
head, type of 
industry/busine
ss
1,500,000 by 2021 100 Energy survey 
reports
-
Customs duty and 
VAT incentives to 
promote the wide 
availability of small 
LPG canisters and gas 
cookers that are 
affordable to low 
Number of 
households 
buying and 
using small 
LPG cylinders 
of up to 5 kgs, 
and small gas 
200,000 by 2021, 1,000 Energy survey 
reports
-152
income households 
adopted.
cookers 
disaggregated 
by location and 
household 
head 
Percentage of 
companies 
benefiting 
from tax/fiscal 
incentives for 
distributing 
small LPG 
canisters and 
gas cookers 
100% compliance by 
MRA by end 2019
0 Subsector reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
Shortages of LPG and 
natural gas minimized 
through fiscal 
incentives to 
financially viable 
companies
Number of 
companies that 
have own 
storage 
facilities that 
satisfy 
prescribed 
minimum 
stockholding 
requirements
3 by end 2019; 
10 by 2023
1 Subsector reports
Energy survey 
reports 
-153
5.2 To ensure 
safety in the 
handling and 
utilization of 
LPG, biogas 
and natural 
gas.
Socially inclusive and 
well-trained LPG, 
biogas and natural gas 
industry established. 
Number of 
industry 
players trained 
in safety, 
disaggregated 
by sex and 
type of 
institution/busi
ness.
30 by 2019; 100 by 
2023
3 Safety training 
reports
-
Number of 
LPG, biogas 
and natural gas 
related 
accidents, 
disaggregated 
by type of 
industry/busine
ss, location and 
sex of 
casualties.
0 per year 10 Occupational 
Health and 
Safety reports
-
Raising awareness on 
the safe use of LPG, 
biogas and natural gas
Percentage of 
households 
sensitized, 
disaggregated 
by household 
50% by 2020, 
100% by 2023
0 Subsector 
reports
-154
head and 
location.
Number of 
LPG/gas 
related 
accidents, 
disaggregated 
by household 
head and 
location and 
sex of 
casualties.
0 per year 0 Subsector reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
Regulations and 
standards on supply 
and distribution of 
cylinders for LPG 
(such as safety 
regulations, quality of 
cylinders etc.) 
promulgated and 
implemented
Number of 
regulations and 
standards
1 set of regulations 
and standards 
0 Gazette -
Percentage of 
suppliers and 
distributors 
knowledgeable 
about 
regulations and 
standards
100% by 2023 0 Subsector reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
5.3 To build 
expertise and 
Capacity building 
plan for LPG, biogas 
Number of 
capacity 
1 by end 2019 0 Capacity 
Building Plan
-155
increase the 
involvement 
of 
marginalized 
groups in the 
gas industry 
both as 
employees and 
entrepreneurs
and natural gas 
developed
building plans
Knowledge and skills 
local women, men 
and the youth in LPG, 
biogas ad Natural Gas 
technologies 
developed
Number of 
initiatives to 
build 
entrepreneurial 
capacity of 
local women, 
men and the 
youth in the 
industry, 
disaggregated 
by technology 
type 
4 per year,
commencing 2019
0 Capacity 
Building Plan 
implementation 
reports
Capacity 
building plan 
and Manual put 
in place;
Availability of 
Funds
Number of 
local women, 
men and the 
youth 
entrepreneurs 
in the industry, 
disaggregated 
by technology 
type
10,000 by 2023 200 Subsector reports
Energy status 
reports
-
Number of 
skilled local 
2000 by 2023 20 Subsector reports
Energy status 
-156
women, men 
and the youth 
in LPG, biogas 
ad Natural Gas 
technologies 
employed in 
the industry, 
disaggregated 
by technology 
type
reports
Incentives to increase 
the employment of 
local women and the 
youth in the industry 
developed
Number of 
scholarships/ 
bursaries for 
promoting 
women’s and 
youth’s 
participation in 
the industry, 
disaggregated 
by beneficiary 
and technology 
type
10 per year,
commencing 2020
0 Subsector reports -
5.4 To build 
expertise in 
local 
Public-Private 
Partnerships for the 
exploration, 
Number of 
partnerships 
established
1 partnership by 
June 2019; 2 by 
December 2020
0 PPP reports
Partnership 
-157
extraction, 
transmission, 
storage and 
distribution of 
Natural Gas
extraction and 
transportation of 
natural gas 
established
agreements
PRIORITY AREA 6: COAL
Broad Policy Objective: To promote a coal supply industry that is more efficient and competitive, and harnesses clean technologies 
that eliminate or greatly reduce harmful emissions
Outcome: An energy sector that is based on diversified energy sources
Objective Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/
Risks
 6.1 To ensure 
the availability 
of coal in 
sufficient 
quantities and 
at affordable 
prices for both 
industrial and 
domestic uses.
Exploration of and 
exploitation of coal 
reserves intensified 
Number of
coal 
prospecting 
and mining 
licenses
5 by 2020 2 Licenses -
Tonnes of coal 
mined per year
120, 000 by 2023 70,552.07 Production 
reports
-
Local coal for 
industrial and 
household use readily 
available and 
affordable
Price of local 
coal compared 
to imported 
coal
Cheaper local coal 
from 2019, assessed 
yearly
data not 
available
- -
Number of 5 by 2020 2 Sector reports -158
robust local 
coal suppliers
Energy survey 
reports
6.2 To ensure 
that coal is 
combusted, 
stored, 
transported, 
imported, 
priced and 
marketed in 
line with set 
minimum 
standards.
Regulations setting 
minimum standards 
for coal storage, 
transportation, 
importation, usage, 
marketing and pricing 
promulgated
Number of 
regulations 
implemented/e
nforced
1 set of regulations 
by end 2019
0 Gazette -
Systematic program 
of inspection of coal 
storage facilities, 
combustion 
processes, and 
transportation 
systems rolled out.
Number of 
periodic 
inspections and 
audits 
conducted, 
disaggregated 
by type
2 per year from 2019 0 Sector reports
Occupational 
Health and 
Safety 
Monitoring 
reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
Number of 
industry 
players 
complying 
with set 
minimum 
standards 
disaggregated 
3 by 2020 0 OHS Monitoring 
reports
-159
by type
Mechanisms for 
monitoring coal 
pricing and marketing 
established.
Percentage of 
coal importers, 
wholesalers 
and retailers 
compliant with 
established 
pricing and 
marketing 
system
100% compliance, 
assessed yearly
0 Sector reports
Compliance 
reports
-
6.3 To 
eliminate 
monopoly in 
coal haulage 
and brokerage 
contract 
arrangements
Competitive coal 
haulage and 
brokerage contract 
arrangements 
established
Number of 
players 
involved in 
coal haulage 
and brokerage 
contract 
arrangements
3 by 2020; 
5 by 2023
1 Sector reports -
6.4 To ensure 
the coal 
supply chain 
does not 
impact 
negatively on 
the 
environment 
Environment 
Management Act and 
Mines & Minerals 
Act reviewed, 
promulgated and 
enforced 
Number of 
industry 
players 
compliant with 
minimum 
environmental 
and health 
standards 
2 Acts reviewed by 
December 2019:
a. EMA
b. MMA 
0 Gazette -
100% compliance by 
2019
0 Sector reports
Energy survey 
reports160
and the health 
of people.
under the 
Environmental 
Management 
Act and Mines 
& Minerals 
Act
Minimum carbon 
dioxide emitted 
through coal 
production and 
combustion
Number of 
periodic, safety 
health and 
environmental 
audits on all 
coal processes.
1 per year, from 
2019
0 Audit reports
Energy survey 
reports
-
Number of 
power plants 
equipped with 
carbon capture 
technologies
5 by 2035 0 Carbon report by 
EAD
-
Percentage of 
industry 
players using 
modern coal 
technologies 
that have 
minimum 
carbon 
60% by 2020; 
100% by 2035
0 Periodic 
Technical reports
Energy survey 
reports
-161
emissions 
disaggregated 
by combustion, 
storage and 
transportation
6.5 To create a 
competent 
mechanism/m
achinery for 
reducing the 
negative 
impacts of 
coal mining, 
storage, 
haulage and 
utilization on 
the 
environment, 
and on the 
health and 
safety of its 
handlers and 
users
Comprehensive 
capacity building 
program for the coal 
industry 
Percentage of 
coal industry 
players 
implementing 
capacity 
building plan, 
disaggregated 
by type of subindustry and 
sex of trainees
60% by 2020; 
100% by 2035
0 Capacity 
building 
programme 
monitoring –
reports
-
Human resources 
recruited 
Percentage of 
male and 
female officers 
recruited to 
manage all 
aspects of the 
coal industry, 
disaggregated 
by position and 
institution 
By 2020, not less 
than 40% and not 
more than 60% of 
either sex 
10 Recruitment data -162
Environmental and 
Social Impact 
Management Plans 
(ESIMPs), or 
equivalent developed 
Number of 
ESIMPs 
developed
One ESIMP for each 
production, storage, 
haulage and 
utilization project or 
operation
0 ESIMP 
documents
-
Social and gender 
inclusion plans 
(SGIPs) promoted in 
order to consistently 
promote the socioeconomic 
development of 
marginalized groups 
within the coal 
industry
Percentage of 
coal companies 
developing and 
implementing 
Social and 
Gender 
Inclusion Plans 
SGIP formulated by 
50% of coal 
companies by 2019; 
75% by 2020 and 
100% by 2023, 
reviewed at least 
every two years
0 SGIP 
implementation/
monitoring 
reports
-
6.6 To ensure 
security of 
electricity 
supply through 
environmental
ly friendly 
coal-fired 
base-load 
generation
Bankable documents 
and investors 
available following a 
streamlined and 
transparent process
Number of 
bankable 
documents for 
coal power 
generation 
investments
3 by 2020; 
5 by 2023
0 Feasibility study 
reports
-
Number of 
executed 
Power 
Purchase 
3 by 2023; 0 PPAs -163
Agreements
ESIAs conducted and 
comprehensive 
impact mitigation 
plans in place and 
implemented
Number of 
approved ESIA 
reports 
3 by 2023; - Official ESIA 
reports
-
No. of 
comprehensive 
ESIMPs 
implemented
3 by 2023 1 Official ESIMPs -
Gender sensitive 
Resettlement Action 
Plans and/or fair 
compensation 
packages approved 
and implemented
No. of 
Resettlement 
Action Plans 
and/or 
compensation 
mechanisms 
implemented. 
1 comprehensive 
RAP for each new 
project
0 RAPs
Financial 
payment records
-
Percentage of 
project 
affected people 
timely resettled 
and/or 
compensated, 
disaggregated 
by sex
100% timely 
resettlement and/or 
compensated 
0 Compensation 
data
-
6.7 To reduce 
reliance on 
Appropriate end-use 
technologies 
Number of 
technologies 
3 0 Documentation 
on adopted 
-164
fuel wood for 
household, 
tobacco curing 
and other 
applications
facilitating use coal 
in household and 
tobacco curing 
applications adopted
adopted for 
household and 
tobacco curing 
applications
technologies
6.8 To 
minimise the 
adverse 
impacts of 
coal 
combustion on 
the 
environment 
and on the 
health and 
safety of coal 
handlers and 
users
Systematic inspection 
programmes for coal 
combustion 
installations 
developed and 
implemented
Number of 
inspection 
programmes 
implemented
1 for each coalburning installation 
or operation
0 Inspection 
programmes and 
reports
-
Research into, and 
the development of, 
more efficient coalcombustion 
technologies 
supported.
Number of R 
& D 
programmes 
formulated and 
implemented
3 0 R & D reports -
Application of clean 
coal technologies, 
such as washing, 
gasification, 
liquefaction and fume 
capturing, promoted
Number of 
clean coal 
technologies 
adopted
3 by 2023 0 Documentation 
on applied 
technologies
-
6.9 To 
minimise the 
Coal briquetting 
operations initiated 
Number of 
companies and 
10 by 2023 1 Availability of 
coal briquettes 
-165
adverse 
impacts of 
coal dust 
released to the 
environment
on a commercial 
scale
entrepreneurs 
engaging in 
commercial 
coal briquette 
production
on the market
6.10 To 
increase the 
involvement 
of 
marginalized 
groups in the 
coal industry 
both as 
employees and 
entrepreneurs
Strategies for 
promoting equal 
employment 
opportunities for 
men, women and 
youth in the industry 
implemented
Percentage of 
employees in 
the coal 
industry, 
disaggregated 
by sex, age and 
position
At least 40% 
participation of 
women and youth by 
2023
0% Subsector data -
Strategies for 
promoting equal 
entrepreneurship 
opportunities for 
men, women and 
youth implemented
Percentage of 
local 
entrepreneurs 
in the coal 
industry, 
disaggregated 
by sex, age, 
and type of 
enterprise
At least 40% 
participation of 
women and youth by 
2023
No data Subsector data -
PRIORITY AREA 7: NUCLEAR ENERGY
Broad Policy Objective: To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support industrialization, 
rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional electricity trading
Outcome: An energy sector that is based on diversified energy sources166
Objective Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/ 
Risks
7.1 To 
increase the 
energy source 
options 
available for 
generation of 
electricity by 
utilizing 
locally mined 
Uranium
Nuclear Science and 
Materials 
Undergraduate 
Program introduced 
and enhanced in 
some public 
universities
Number of 
programmes 
introduced
1 programme by 
2019, and 3 
programmes by 
2035
0 Programmes in 
place in public 
universities 
IAEA will 
technically and 
financially 
support the 
capacity 
building 
programmes
Capacity in nuclear 
energy built in 
Government
Capacity 
building plan 
in place
1 plan by end 2019 0 Approved 
capacity building 
plan
-
Number of 
officers trained 
in nuclear 
energy, 
disaggregated 
by sex
5 by 2019
20 by 2025
30 by 2030
50 by 2035
0 Capacity 
building plan
implementation 
reports
-
A socially and 
environmentally 
responsive Uranium 
processing facility 
established in the 
Bankable 
documents and 
investors 
available 
Number of bankable 
documents for 
nuclear power 
generation 
investments
1 by 2020 0 Feasibility 
study reports
Number of executed 2 by 2027; 0 PPAs167
country Power Purchase 
Agreements
3 by 2035
ESIAs 
conducted and 
comprehensive 
impact 
mitigation 
plans in place 
and 
implemented
Number of approved 
ESIA reports 
1 for each 
project
1 (Kayelekera) Official ESIA 
reports
No. of 
comprehensive 
ESIMPs 
implemented
1 for each 
project
1 Official 
ESIMPs
Gender 
sensitive 
Resettlement 
Action Plans 
and/or fair 
compensation 
packages 
approved and 
implemented
Number of RAPs 
and/or compensation 
mechanisms 
implemented. 
1 
comprehensive 
RAP for each 
new project
0 RAPs
Financial 
payment 
records
Percentage of 
project affected 
people timely 
resettled and/or 
compensated, 
disaggregated by sex
100% timely 
resettlement 
and/or 
compensation
0 Compensation 
data
100% PAPs 
satisfied with 
compensation
0 Project/ 
Compensation 
reports
Number of 
Uranium 
processing 
1 by 2027 0 Project progress 
reports 
A Uranium 
processing 
facility 
established in 168
plants the country
The first nuclear 
power plant 
commissioned and 
running 
MW of 
generation 
capacity from 
nuclear plant
100 by 2035 0 Project progress 
reports
IAEA 
authorization 
granted
7.2 To reduce 
the negative 
environment, 
health and 
social impacts 
of nuclear 
energy
Integration Plans by 
nuclear 
companies/projects s 
to addressing inward 
and outward looking 
social and gender 
issues affecting the 
nuclear energy 
developed and 
implemented
Number of 
coal companies 
developing and 
implementing 
Social and 
Gender 
Inclusion Plans 
SGIP formulated for 
each 
company/project, 
reviewed at least 
every two years
0 SGIP 
implementation/
monitoring 
reports
-
PRIORITY AREA 8: DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT
Broad Policy Objective (i): To strengthen the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) and make it more efficient to support industrialization, 
rural transformation, sustainable economic development and wealth creation, as well as regional electricity trading
Broad Policy Objective (ii): To ensure biomass is sustainably used and carbon emissions are reduced through the use of energy 
efficient technologies
Outcome: A well developed and efficiently managed energy sector169
Objective Output Performance 
indicator
Target Baseline Source of 
verification
Assumptions/ 
Risks
8.1 To save 
energy and 
reduce 
Greenhouse 
Gas emissions
Legislation amended 
to include banning 
importation, 
distribution and use 
of incandescent bulbs 
in place and enforced
Number of 
Acts amended
1 Act by December 
2019
0 Gazette -
Disappearance 
of 
incandescent 
bulbs from the 
market
0% by 2019, 
assessed yearly
100% 
existence (no 
ban)
Energy survey 
reports
-
Number of 
targeted 
campaigns to 
reach retailers, 
importers and 
low income 
electricity 
consumers
3 campaigns per 
target group per year 
(up to 2020)
0 Sub-sector 
reports
-
Energy saving 
devices promoted
Number of 
targeted 
campaigns to 
reach users of 
energy 
consuming 
3 campaigns per 
target group per year 
(up to 2020)
0 Sub-sector 
reports
-170
electrical and 
biomass 
fuelled devices 
Regulations and 
standards for building 
designs and energy 
efficient devices 
promulgated
Number of 
Regulations 
promulgated
1 set of Regulations 
by end 2019
0 Gazette -
Number of 
standards 
promulgated
1 set of Standards by 
end 2019
0 Gazette -
Energy efficiency 
assessment facilities 
established and 
operational 
% of imported 
devices 
assessed for 
energy 
efficiency
100% of all 
imported devices by 
2019 and ongoing
0% MBS assessment 
reports
-
Duty and VAT 
waived on electrical 
and solar water 
heaters 
% of devices 
imported duty 
and VAT-free
100% of all 
imported devices by 
end 2019 and 
ongoing
0% MRA reports -
Utility companies 
supported in the 
implementation of 
tariffs that encourage 
energy efficient use 
of electricity
Number of 
utility 
companies 
implementing 
energy 
efficient tariffs
All of Distribution 
companies, from 
2019 and ongoing
1 MERA and 
Utility reports
-
Regular energy audits Number of Once a year for each 1 Certified -171
conducted by 
certified auditors in 
public, industrial, and 
commercial buildings 
promoted
energy audits 
conducted per 
year
public, industrial, 
and commercial 
building, 
commencing in 2019
Auditors’ reports
Research and 
development in 
energy efficient 
equipment, buildings, 
etc promoted.
Number of 
institutions 
conducting 
energy 
efficiency 
research 
programmes 
3 institutions by 
2019; 5 by 2021
2 Institutional 
reports
-
8.2 To ensure 
efficiency in 
their service 
delivery to 
customers
Public information 
campaigns to raise 
awareness among 
consumers conducted
Number of 
public 
awareness
campaigns 
conducted, 
disaggregated 
by target group
56 in 2018, reviewed 
every year thereafter
0 Sector reports -
Energy efficient 
measures installed in 
households to help 
consumers reduce 
their bills, as well as 
reduce stress on 
% of electricity 
connected 
households 
with energy 
efficient 
measures 
50% by 2020
75% by 2023
298,109 Utility reports Customers will 
sustain or 
manage to 
replace the 
efficient bulbs172
overburdened utility 
systems 
installed Govt will ban
IBs
The local 
market will 
stock 
affordable, 
durable and 
high quality 
efficient bulbs 
Installing prepayment 
meters and 
implementing tariffs 
that will reduce nonpayment problems 
and encourage 
energy-efficient 
behaviour by 
consumers.
Number of 
prepayment
meters 
installed at 
customers’ 
premises
All by 2023 313,279 Utility reports Meters will be 
readily 
available in 
stock
Customers will 
not tamper 
with the meters
Custom will 
adjust 
consumption 
behavior 
accordingly 
No. of All by 2023 11 Utility reports Time of use 173
industrial users 
on Time of
Use tariffs
tariffs will 
remain 
attractive to 
Industrial 
customers. 
ESCOM will 
sustain Time of 
use tariffs
8.3 To ensure 
users of 
electricity and 
biomass are 
aware of and 
benefit from 
DSM
Energy Efficiency 
initiatives structured 
and implemented
Number of 
Energy 
Efficiency 
initiatives 
2 initiatives by 2019, 
reviewed every year 
thereafter
1 NGO reports;
Sector reports
-
Information 
dissemination and 
awareness raising
campaigns conducted
Number of 
Information
dissemination 
and awareness 
raising
campaigns 
conducted, 
disaggregated 
by target group 
2 campaigns per 
region by 2019, 
reviewed annually 
thereafter
0 NGO reports;
Sector reports
-
8.4 To 
develop 
information 
A public outreach 
strategy on 
affordable, modern 
Public 
outreach 
strategy on 
1 strategy 0 Approved 
Strategy 
document
-174
packages 
regarding 
affordable, 
modern and 
sustainable 
energy 
products that 
suit and reach 
different 
audiences.
and sustainable 
energy products 
targeting importers, 
retailers and lowincome consumers 
developed 
implemented
affordable, 
modern and 
sustainable 
energy 
products 
developed. 
% of importers 
knowledgeable 
about and 
importing 
affordable, 
modern and 
sustainable 
energy 
products
70% by 2020
100% by 2023
20% Energy status 
reports
Public outreach 
strategy on the 
affordable, 
modern and 
sustainable 
energy 
products are 
rolled out.
% of retailers 
knowledgeable 
about and 
selling 
affordable, 
modern and 
sustainable 
energy 
products
70% by 2020
100% by 2023
20% Energy status 
reports
Public outreach 
strategy on the 
affordable, 
modern and 
sustainable 
energy 
products are 
rolled out.
% of low 70% by 2020 No data Energy status -175
income 
consumers 
knowledgeable 
about and 
purchasing 
affordable, 
modern and 
sustainable 
energy 
products, 
disaggregated 
by household 
head or sex 
and age where 
applicable
100% by 2023 reports176
ANNEX 5: ENERGY MEASUREMENT AND CONVERSION TABLES
1. Prefixes for SI Units
PREFIX SYMBOL POWER
(10n)
PREFIX SYMBOL POWER
(10n)
Yetta Y 24 deci d -1
Zeta Z 21 centi c -2
Exa E 18 milli m -3
Peta P 15 micro µ -6
Tera T 12 nano n -9
Giga G 9 pico p-12
Mega M 6 femto f -15
Kilo K 3 atto a -18
Hecto H 2 zepto z -21
Deca D 1 yepto y -24177
2. Conversion Factors for Different Energy Sources 
FUEL TYPE NATURAL UNIT DENSITY 
(TONNES/M3)
CONVERSION 
FACTORS 
(HEATING VALUES)
Malawi Coal Tonne n/a 24.9 GJ/T 
LPG Tonne 0.54 45.5 GJ/T 
Gasoline Tonne 0.74 44.0 GJ/T 
Jet Fuel Tonne 0.83 43.2 GJ/T 
Paraffin Tonne 0.83 43.2 GJ/T/ 
35 MJ/Litre 
Diesel Tonne 0.87 42.5 GJ/T 
Ethanol Tonne 0.78 16.54 GJ/T 
Electricity GWh n/a 3600 GJ/GWh 
Wood m30.71 11.4 GJ/ m3
Charcoal Tonne n/a 33.1 GJ/T 
Biomass Tonne n/a 13.3 GJ/T 
Bagasse Tonne N/A 7.8 MJ/kg 178
3. Derived SI Units of Measurement 
DIMENSION UNIT SYMBOL
Area Square metre m2
Volume Cubic metre m3
Speed Metre per second m/s
Acceleration Metre per second squared m/s2
Frequency Hertz (Cycle per second) Hz 
Pressure Pascal Pa (= N/m2)
Volume Flow Cubic metre per second m3/s
Mass Flow Kilogram per second kg/s
Density Kilogram per cubic metre kg/m3
Force Newton* N (= kg.m/s2)
Energy Joule** J (=N.m)
Power Watt W (= J/s)
Energy Flux Watt per square metre W/m2
Calorific Value Joule per kilogram J/kg
Specific Heat Joule per kilogram 
Kelvin 
J/kg.K
Voltage Volt V (=W/A)
Notes:
* The force exerted by a mass of 1 kg free-falling under gravity 
(accelerating at 9.8 m/s2) equals 9.8 N (approximately 10 N)
** 1 J = 1 Ws179
4. Conversion of Non-SI Units for Energy
NON-SI UNITS FOR 
ENERGY
SYMBOL EQUIVALENT IN SI 
UNITS
Erg Erg 10-7J
Foot pound force Ft.lbf 1.356 J
Calorie Cal 4.187 J
Kilogram-force metre Kgf.m 9.8 J
British Thermal Unit Btu 1.055 x 103J
Horse power hour (metric) hp.hr 2.646 106J
Horsepower hour (British) Hp.hr 2.686 x 106J
Kilowatt hour KWh 3.60 x 106J
Barrel of oil equivalent B.O.E. 6.119 x 109J
Tonne of wood equivalent T.W.E 9.83 x 109J
Tonne of coal equivalent T.C.E. 29.31 x 109J
Tonne of oil equivalent T.O.E. 41.87 x 109J
Quad (Pbtu) - 1.055 x 1018 J
Terawatt-year TWy 31.5 x 1018 J