File Name: MYS-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Malaysia
Country Code: MYS
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 January–4 February 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
3 December 2021
Original: English
2117999X (E) 081221
First regular session 2022
31 January–4 February 2022, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Malaysia (2022–2025)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework.................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Malaysia (2022–2025)................................................................ 10DP/DCP/MYS/4
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework
1. Decades of sustained economic growth in Malaysia have eliminated absolute poverty 
as it was traditionally measured and enabled the country to progress to ‘high human 
development’ status. It has achieved a ranking of 62 among 189 countries on the 2020
Human Development Index.
1
2. The government of Malaysia has pledged to continue this progress in line with the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The current national development plan 
(Twelfth Malaysia Plan) 2021-2025 focuses on efforts to restart and rejuvenate economic 
growth, ensuring equal distribution of the nation’s prosperity, and to prioritize 
environmental sustainability. 
3. However, full achievement of the country’s objectives faces structural barriers. 
Income inequality continues to be a major concern, with the poorest 40 per cent of the 
population (B40) earning only 16 percent of the national income, while the richest 10 per 
cent earn more than 30 per cent.2 Women have higher rates of tertiary education, but the 
female labour force participation rate is 55.6 per cent, compared to 80.8 per cent for 
males.
3 The full participation in society of women, youth and people with disabilities is 
hampered by unequal distribution of wealth, structural barriers and gendered roles and 
perceptions.
4 Challenges remain in addressing environmental degradation, climate change 
and the transition to a more sustainable economy.5
4. The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated these challenges, reducing employment
and household incomes, social cohesion and access to public services, and 
disproportionately harming the most vulnerable and marginalized people. The pandemic 
has had a profound impact on Malaysia’s economy, causing the GDP to fall by 5.6 per 
cent in 2020.
6 Monthly statistics show the unemployment rate peaked at 5.3 per cent in 
May 2020, with informal sector workers hit hardest. Nonetheless, the pandemic has 
created opportunities for progress on some reform measures. The government has taken 
steps to address both the immediate disruptions caused by COVID-19 and more deepseated challenges. For example, the recent adjustment of the poverty line income will 
contribute to more effective targeting of poverty-eradication programmes going forward.7
5. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) is 
designed to support the government’s response to some of these challenges. It is aligned 
to the country’s national development framework, including the Shared Prosperity Vision 
2030, Sustainable Development Goals Roadmap of Malaysia, and the forthcoming 
Twelfth Malaysia Plan. Through its contribution to the UNSDCF, UNDP will support 
Malaysia in four outcome areas/pillars by 2025: 
(a) People: Vulnerable and at-risk populations living in Malaysia benefit from more 
equity-focused and high-quality social services as well as a social protection 
system that ensures all have an adequate standard of living; 
1 UNDP, ‘Human Development Report 2020’. 
2 Malaysia Department of Statistics, ‘Household Income and Basic Amenities Survey’, 2019.
3 Malaysia Department of Statistics, ‘Labour Force Survey 2019’.
4 Midterm review of the Eleventh Malaysia Plan. 
5
Ibid., pp. 5-14.
6 Malaysia Department of Statistics, ‘Malaysia Economic Performance Fourth Quarter 2020’.
7 Under the new measure, 5.6% of households would be considered poor in 2019, down from 7.61% in 2016. The previous methodology showed 
a poverty rate of just 0.4%. Source: The Malay Mail (10 July 2020), ‘Statistics Dept: Malaysia’s new poverty line income is RM2,208, over 400k 
households considered poor’DP/DCP/MYS/4
(b) Planet: Environmental sustainability and resilience are mainstreamed as priorities 
within the national development agenda, across all sectors and levels of society;
(c) Prosperity: Malaysia is making meaningful progress towards an economy that is 
inclusive, innovative and sustainable across all income groups and productive 
sectors; 
(d) Peace: Malaysia has strengthened democratic governance, and all people living 
in Malaysia benefit from a more cohesive society, strengthened governance and 
participation.
6. UNDP’s contributions to the UNSDCF will draw on the organization’s unique 
strengths to:
(a) Design options and advice that include policy choices and address trade-offs, 
including cost-benefit analyses, on cross-sectoral issues; 
(b) Use its projects as ‘living labs’ to test hypotheses and learn lessons that support
evidence-based solutions; 
(c) Bring together the best of the technical capacities of the United Nations country 
team members through joint United Nations initiatives; and 
(d) Leverage the large footprint of UNDP projects and partner networks to create 
synergies and achieve scale of impact. 
7. Cooperating closely with the country team, UNDP will lead efforts across the four 
UNSDCF outcomes, on multidimensional poverty, inequalities and gender 
mainstreaming; environmental sustainability and biodiversity conservation; transition to a 
green, inclusive and resilient economy; and improved governance. Applying the leave no 
one behind approach, UNDP will ramp up collaboration with United Nations entities, 
partnering with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) on urban poverty and on 
youth and volunteer engagement; with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) on 
gender equality; with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) on the green/blue 
economy and waste management; with the International Labour Organization (ILO) to 
promote decent work for workers; and with the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM) on migration issues.
8. In response to recommendations in the independent country programme evaluation
(2019) to strengthen in-house expertise for high-level policy and technical support, 
including for financing approaches for the Goals, UNDP will build on its track record of 
success in policy advocacy and innovation in Malaysia to: 
(a) Drive a robust policy research agenda through the newly established learning and 
insights unit; 
(b) Work with the government to design inclusive growth interventions at the macro 
and sectoral level; 
(c) Leverage partnerships for increased sustainable financing for the Goals, including 
by leading implementation of the first joint programme on integrated national 
finance frameworks supported by Joint SDG Fund;
(d) Strengthen local government capacity for inclusive planning and service delivery, 
and the expansion of livelihood opportunities for indigenous/local communities in 
the context of natural resource management.DP/DCP/MYS/4
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
9. UNDP’s offer to Malaysia will include integrated policy and legislation options and 
capacity-strengthening solutions, as well as knowledge products backed by sound data 
and technical assessments drawn from its global network to support progress towards 
national development goals. UNDP’s approach will reflect the relatively strong state 
capacity and well-defined national objectives.
10. Programme design will incorporate the following UNDP approaches: 
(a) Integrated/area-based programming, which will leverage UNDP’s in-house 
capacities and strong track record on integrated solutions to deliver results in a 
range of thematic areas; 
(b) ‘Future Ready Malaysia’ in line with UNDP’s ‘NextGen’ approach, whereby 
UNDP will use anticipatory approaches and leverage the private, financial and 
civil society sectors to develop innovative solutions; 
(c) ‘Malaysia and the World’ to enhance mutual learning and sharing of solutions 
based on best practices and lessons learned to scale up sustainable development 
results and deploy South-South cooperation where relevant as part of 
programme design. 
11. Programme implementation will employ the following modalities: 
(a) Developing proof-of-concept projects for testing new ideas and approaches; 
(b) Identifying policy insights distilled by the UNDP’s Learning and Insights Unit 
to improve evidence-based policymaking;
(c) Ensuring the availability of technical expertise through the UNDP Global 
Policy Network and partnerships with both governmental and nongovernmental actors in the global North and South.
12. As technical lead, UNDP played a key role in formulating the United Nations SocioEconomic Response Plan for COVID-19. The plan builds on UNDP’s offer for the 
response to COVID-19, which emphasizes strengthened social protection, green recovery, 
good governance and digitalization. UNDP will build internal capabilities to address 
gender inequality to ensure inclusion of gender analysis in programme design, 
implementation and monitoring and evaluation.
13. Aligned with the national commitment to the 2030 agenda, UNDP envisions a 
Malaysia where the well-being, empowerment and inclusion of vulnerable and 
marginalized groups including women and girls are ensured; where environmental 
sustainability is a key government priority; where the economy bounces back from 
COVID-19 to be more inclusive, resilient and greener; and where social cohesion is 
strong and civic participation is encouraged. Therefore, UNDP programming will focus 
on four strategic priority areas: people, planet, prosperity and peace.
Priority: People — Providing more equitable access to affordable, high-quality and 
comprehensive public services and social protection 
14. UNDP’s theory of change for this outcome area suggests that if a more efficient, 
effective and sustainable social protection system is in place; and if access to high-quality, 
equity-focused services can be strengthened; and if inclusive social norms and values are 
increasingly adopted, particularly regarding gender equality; then vulnerable and at-risk 
populations will be empowered and have more equitable access to services and social 
protection, contributing to human capital and productivity. Specifically, this will includeDP/DCP/MYS/4
greater access to health services, quality food, social security, clean water and clean 
energy.
15. Initiatives under this outcome area will contribute to national objectives under Goals 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 and 10; signature solutions 1, 2 and 6 will be applied.
16. UNDP will support the revision of the Multidimensional Poverty Index for Malaysia 
to include additional social and environmental factors affecting people’s well-being. The
revision will draw on the newly revised poverty line income to support the design of 
policies that address the roots of inequalities. 
17. UNDP will strengthen social protection by supporting state capacity to gather timely 
and disaggregated data to help ensure that programmes are able to identify and reach 
those most in need. UNDP will support the Malaysian Social Protection Council in 
streamlining procedures to improve the accuracy and efficiency of the social assistance 
system. Programming will draw on UNDP’s strong global network of experts and 
partnerships to identify the most effective use of data by agencies providing social 
services. This will complement the work on advocacy and delivery of social services by 
UNICEF and UNFPA.
18. UNDP will partner with the Economic Planning Unit (EPU) in the Prime Minister’s 
Department to strengthen the institutional and policy framework for access to social 
services and protection by vulnerable and marginalized groups. UNDP will support 
citizen access to services, including by raising awareness of the services available, 
addressing the digital divide and ensuring that service delivery is gender responsive. 
UNDP will continue to support the mainstreaming of gender considerations into 
policymaking, including through collection of sex-disaggregated data and genderresponsive budgeting. UNDP will also support the government to draft a blueprint for 
development of the indigenous peoples (Orang Asli) based on lessons from the Orang Asli 
micro grant facility, which addresses the interface between livelihood and nature 
conservation (UNSDCF outcome 2) and strengthen the Persons with Disabilities Act.
Priority: Planet — Mainstreaming environmental sustainability and resilience 
19. UNDP’s theory of change for this outcome area suggests that if national development 
transitions towards a less carbon-intensive and more resource-efficient economy; and if
natural resources, biodiversity and ecosystems are sustainably managed and protected and 
resilience to climate change and natural disasters is strengthened; then environmental 
sustainability and resilience will be secured and the well-being of people, including local 
and indigenous communities, will be safeguarded.
20. Initiatives under this outcome area will contribute to national objectives under Goals 
1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15; signature solutions 3, 4, 5 and 6 will be applied. 
21. UNDP will help Malaysia meet its international commitments (i.e. Paris Agreement 
and Montreal Protocol, Kigali Amendment) through integration of low-carbon 
considerations into national and subnational policies and planning, strengthening of 
climate data and the nationally determined contribution, and enhancement of 
environmental management systems and sustainable infrastructure. A gender action plan 
on climate change will be prepared to enhance gender-responsive climate actions. UNDP 
will replicate its low-carbon cities initiative in partnership with UNIDO, which will focus 
on sustainable transport, and the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UNHabitat), in the adoption of the New Urban Agenda. 
22. A green pathway to COVID-19 recovery is a cornerstone of Build Forward Better. 
UNDP will support the government as it integrates green and blue economy approaches, 
focusing on scaling up green economy initiatives through demonstration pilots and
litifl dlithdittid ttd tDP/DCP/MYS/4
ensure gender mainstreaming in these sectors. UNDP will also complement UNIDO and 
UNEP in supporting the integration of the circular economy and assist finance institutions 
and micro, small and medium-size enterprises (MSMEs) to adopt sustainable 
environment, social and governance principles through a variety of proof-of-concept 
initiatives related to responsible investment and sustainable consumption and production. 
23. UNDP will support strengthened legal frameworks for biodiversity and ecosystems. It 
will support the scale-up of conservation programmes and sustainable management of 
natural resources and biodiversity, ensuring attention to the interests and needs of local 
and marginalized communities and risks from emerging zoonotic diseases. UNDP will 
build on insights from past initiatives on conservation finance (e.g. payment for ecological
services) to develop new ways of incentivizing biodiversity conservation and sustainable 
natural resource management. 
24. UNDP will support sectoral climate change adaptation efforts by both government 
and the private sector. UNDP will also assist the government to strengthen disaster risk 
reduction efforts, incorporate risk-proofing considerations into infrastructure development 
and investment planning, and support climate change preparedness among vulnerable 
communities, including through gender-based risk assessments (outcome 1).
Priority: Prosperity — Promoting an inclusive, innovative and sustainable economy 
25. UNDP’s theory of change for this outcome suggests that if inequality is reduced 
through inclusive growth strategies and gender inequalities are addressed; if digitalization 
is accelerated in the economy and public sector; if businesses adopt corporate practices 
aligned to the Goals and international standards and principles; and if urban regions 
develop in ways that are competitive, sustainable and inclusive; then Malaysia will make 
meaningful progress towards an economy that is inclusive, innovative and sustainable. 
26. Initiatives under this outcome area will contribute to national objectives under Goals 
1, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16 and 17; signature solutions 1, 2 and 6 will be applied.
27. In the spirit of Build Forward Better for a sustainable and inclusive recovery, UNDP 
will work with partners in the private sector, civil society, international financial
institutions and beyond to unlock the potential of entrepreneurs to generate economic 
opportunities and develop digital/technical/vocational skills that match future market 
demands. UNDP will work to foster an enabling policy environment and business models 
to expand income opportunities in the green and digital economies. It will do so by 
expanding work opportunities for youth, households in the bottom 40 per cent of the 
population, micro entrepreneurs and workers in the informal economy/low-value services 
sector, with an emphasis on strategies to increase women’s labour force participation. 
UNDP will propose enabling policies for digital solutions while the United Nations 
Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) will provide technical support on financial 
inclusion.
28. UNDP will engage partners to enhance corporate practices to align to the Sustainable 
Development Goals and international standards, including in corporate governance and 
business integrity (outcome 4), as well as in integrating impact management and 
measurement tools and practices. UNDP will expand data capacity through a network of 
urban observatories providing location-specific data and analyses to help local authorities 
improve risk-informed, gender-responsive and evidence-based planning and policymaking 
(outcome 2). This approach, piloted at Iskandar Malaysia during the previous programme 
period, will be upscaled to support access and delivery of services (outcome 1) and 
contribute to strengthening local governance (outcome 4). 
29. In collaboration with UNCDF and UNICEF, UNDP is the technical lead of a United DP/DCP/MYS/4
financing framework. UNDP will develop a Goals roadmap (2021-2025), budgeting and 
costing guidelines for the public sector, and an investor map that identifies investment 
opportunities in the country aligned with the Goals.
Priority: Peace — Strengthening democratic governance and establishing a more 
cohesive and inclusive society 
30. UNDP’s theory of change for this outcome area suggests that if Malaysia strengthens 
inter-ethnic and cultural harmony and cohesion; if government institutions are more 
capable and effective in delivering public services; and if the system of checks and 
balances across branches of government is strengthened and government agencies are 
more inclusive, responsive and efficient; then all Malaysians will benefit from a more 
tolerant and cohesive society, greater inclusiveness and future-oriented governance, and 
more participatory decision-making. 
31. Initiatives under this outcome area will contribute to national objectives under Goals 
5, 10 and 16; UNDP signature solutions 1, 2 and 6 will be applied. 
32. UNDP will support the legal affairs division (BHEUU) in the Prime Minister’s 
Department in developing the National Action Plan on Business and Human Rights to 
uphold commitments by private and public institutions to implement the United Nations 
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. UNDP will also coordinate inputs 
from other United Nations organizations (for example ILO and IOM on migrant and
labour issues), sharing global and regional best practices and lessons learned. 
33. To foster inter-ethnic unity, cultural harmony and cohesion, UNDP will support the 
Ministry of National Unity in implementing the National Unity Policy and the Blueprint 
2021-2030. At the subnational level, UNDP will support state and local authorities to
localize the Goals, increase government responsiveness to citizens, and enhance
effectiveness of public service delivery (outcome 1). 
34. UNDP will help Malaysia to make political processes more inclusive by building the 
capacity of key institutions by sharing global lessons learned and best practices, including 
on women’s participation. Technical assistance to Parliament will include support for its
select committees and Secretariat. 
35. UNDP will build on its partnership with the judiciary to strengthen institutional 
capacities and expand access to justice. Programming will help improve access to justice, 
especially for remote communities and vulnerable and marginalized groups. 
36. UNDP will support local governments and city councils to align their development 
plans with the Goals and establish a robust monitoring and reporting systems. UNDP will 
also support data gathering at the local level through the ‘observatory’ approach 
mentioned above, including utilizing novel monitoring methods (outcome 3).
III. Programme and risk management
37. This country programme document outlines UNDP’s contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results 
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of 
managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country 
programmes is prescribed in the organization’s Programme and Operations Policies and 
Procedures and Internal Control Framework. 
38. The programme will be nationally executed in coordination with the EPU. If 
necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the 
programme to enable response to force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash 
transfers will be used to manage financial risks in coordination with other United NationsDP/DCP/MYS/4
organizations. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development 
effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
39. As recommended by the evaluation, annual and midyear reviews of the country 
programme will be undertaken in coordination with the EPU, implementing 
ministries/municipalities and other concerned stakeholders. These will guide UNDP in 
making programmatic adjustments, especially in response to changes in national policies 
or priorities. Project-level evaluations will identify achievements, challenges and capture 
recommendations and lessons for improvement.
40. The successful implementation of the country programme will depend on the 
management of key risks. The primary risks stem from social, economic, political, 
security, health and environmental issues that may influence national priorities and the 
financial sustainability of the country programme. In particular, widening gender gaps 
may pose a threat to national priorities supported by UNDP. The country programme 
incorporates tools for monitoring and mitigating these risks, as well as mainstreaming 
gender. Political risk and uncertainty remain high due to increased instability of governing 
coalitions at both national and subnational levels. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
41. The results and resources framework, aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan and 
UNSDCF, serves as the accountability framework, with programme outcome and output 
indicators. Additional indicators from the Twelfth Malaysia Plan may eventually be 
incorporated into the country programme’s monitoring framework. 
42. In addition to annual and midyear programme reviews, monitoring of project 
implementation will be based on progress reporting at six-month intervals conducted in 
collaboration with implementing partners. Regular update meetings will help ensure that 
EPU has current information on programme progress.
43. UNDP will lead the United Nations country team results groups for Planet and 
Prosperity, co-lead the Peace pillar and contribute to the People pillar under the UNSDCF. 
The UN INFO format for reporting will be adopted. In line with recommendations from 
past project evaluations, UNDP will use new tools for information gathering and analysis, 
such as user surveys, drone and remote sensing technology, and mobile apps for data 
crowdsourcing. Project design will emphasize frameworks with data capture and impact 
evaluation to support experimentation and proof-of-concept projects. UNDP will also 
strengthen national evaluation capacities by bridging data gaps on the Goals (including 
developing baselines for key indicators) and strengthening internal capacities to monitor 
longer term impacts. 
44. UNDP will implement a multi-year policy research and knowledge management 
agenda to inform programming through systematic engagement with national authorities, 
academic institutions, research bodies and think tanks. This will contribute to a research 
agenda involving the country team under the UNSDCF. 
45. The country office will continue to use the UNDP gender marker to ensure the share 
of programmes specifically supporting gender equality and women’s empowerment is in 
line with corporate polices.
8 UNDP will also adhere to its enterprise risk management 
policy and social and environmental standards, and to the United Nations disability 
inclusion strategy.
8 Fifteen per cent as measured by UNDP’s gender marker
Source: UNDP Gender Equality Strategy 2018-2021DP/DCP/MYS/4
46. UNDP will intensify efforts to broaden public awareness of UNDP results in support 
of national Goals objectives by using innovative formats and social media to reach diverse 
audiences. It will allocate at least 5 per cent of the programme budget, proportionately 
charged to projects, to cover monitoring, evaluation and communications expenses. DP/DCP/MYS/4
Annex. Results and resources framework for Malaysia (2022-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Twelfth Malaysia Plan pillars — Pillar 4, quality human capital; Pillar 5, inclusivity and well-being of Rakyat (the people); Pillar 7, social 
capital
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 1 – People. By 2025, poor, vulnerable and at-risk populations living in Malaysia benefit from more equity-focused and highquality social services as well as a social protection system that ensures all have an adequate standard of living.
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency 
and human development.
Cooperation Framework outcome 
indicators, baselines, targets
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme 
outputs 
Major partners / partnership
frameworks
Estimated cost by 
outcome (USD)
National indicator 1 / Goals 
indicator 1.3.1: Proportion of 
population covered by social 
protection floors/systems, by sex, 
distinguishing children, unemployed 
persons, older persons, persons with 
disability, pregnant women, work 
injury victims and poor and 
vulnerable people
Baseline: 0 
Target: 30% 
Source: Implementation Coordination 
Unit (ICU), Prime Minister’s 
Department – e Kasih*, Department of 
Statistics Malaysia (DOSM), Ministry of 
Women, Family and Community 
Development (MWFCD)
*A national poverty database owned by 
ICU.
Output 1.1: A more efficient, 
effective and sustainable social 
protection system is in place that 
provides increased protection 
against contingencies throughout the 
life cycle
Indicator 1.1.1: A coherent database 
with data disaggregated by sex, age
and disability to promote improved 
coordination and monitoring of social 
protection
Baseline: 0
Target: 1 
Source: ICU, DOSM
Indicator 1.1.2: Refined 
Multidimensional Poverty Index 
methodology adopted by the 
government to better capture 
multidimensional poverty
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Source: EPU, DOSM
Indicator 1.1.3: Percentage increase of 
vulnerable people accessing social 
protection schemes, disaggregated by 
Government
EPU, MWFCD, Ministry of 
Finance (MOF), ICU, Ministry 
of Youth and Sports, Ministry 
of Entrepreneur Development 
and Cooperatives (MEDAC),
Ministry of Rural 
Development, National 
Registration Department
(NRD), Ministry of Home 
Affairs (MOHA), Department 
of Orang Asli Development 
(JAKOA), state governments
United Nations organizations
UNICEF, World Health 
Organization, UNFPA, ILO, 
IOM
Civil society
Regular: $447,500
Other: $3,720,397DP/DCP/MYS/4
Baseline:
(a) Poor: 2.91 million B40 (DOSM 
2019)
(b)Persons with disability: 548,195 
(DOSM 2019)
(c)Elderly: 3.2 million (DOSM 
2020) 
(d) Indigenous communities: 209,342 
(JAKOA, 2020)
Target: 20% increase
Source: ICU, Department of Social 
Welfare (DSW),Ministry of Youth 
and Sports, JAKOA
Output 1.2: Social services are
strengthened to ensure universal 
access to high-quality, equity-
focused services that promote social 
well-being for all 
Indicator 1.2.1:Number of national/ 
subnational policy frameworks to 
support vulnerable groups (Orang Asli, 
undocumented and stateless persons, 
B40, persons with disability, youth, 
elderly people and women)
Baseline:5
Target: 10
Source: UNDP, EPU, ICU, DOSM
Indicator 1.2.2: Adoption and 
implementation of guidelines to 
improve access to government services 
by marginalized and vulnerable groups 
Baseline:0
Target:5
Source: UNDP, ICU, EPU, NRD, 
MOHA
Indicator 1.2.3: Percentage of
households in vulnerable groups with 
improved access to social services
Baseline:
(a) Poor people: 291 million B40DP/DCP/MYS/
4
(DOSM 2019)
(b)People with disability: 548,195 
(DOSM 2019)
(c)Elderly people: 3.2 million
(DOSM 2020) 
(d) Indigenous communities: 
209,342 (JAKOA, 2020)
Target: 10% increase in vulnerable 
groups with improved access to
services 
Source: DOSM, UNDP, ICU, EPU, 
MWFCD, JAKOA
Output 1.3: Increased adoption of 
inclusive practices, social norms and 
values, and rejection of harmful 
practices, particularly against 
women and girls; creation of 
demand for services
Indicator 1.3.1: Development of inclusive policies to promote, enforce 
and monitor gender equality and non-
discriminatory practices on the basis of 
gender and disability
Baseline:5
Target: 10 
Source: MWFCD, DOSM
Indicator 1.3.2: Development of policy measures that enable 
government to address pro-gender 
budget planning and/or gender-
responsive budgeting. 
Baseline: 0 
Target:1
Source: MWFCD DP/DCP/MYS/4
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Twelfth Malaysia Plan pillars – Pillar 2, green growth; Pillar 3, economic growth enablers
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 2 – Planet. By 2025, environmental sustainability and resilience are mainstreamed as priorities in the national development 
agenda, across all sectors and all levels of society
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions
National indicator 1 / Goals 
indicator 14.5.1: Protected area 
cover in Malaysia 2030 
Baseline: 13.2% terrestrial, 3.3% 
marine 
Target: 20% terrestrial, 10% marine 
National indicator 2 / Goals 
indicator 13.1.1: Formulation of 
national policy for disaster risk 
management 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 1
National indicator 3 / Goals 
indicator 9.4.1: Carbon dioxide 
emissions per capita
Baseline: 8.05 metric tonnes 
Target: 7.64 metric tonnes 
National indicator 4 / Goals 
indicator 7.2.1: Renewable energy 
share as per cent of total installed 
capacity (excluding large 
hydroelectric) 
Baseline: 6% 
Target: 20%
Source: Sustainable Energy 
Development Authority
Source: Ministry of Energy and Natural 
Resources (MENR)
Frequency: Irregular
Source: National Disaster Management 
Agency (NADMA)
Frequency: Annual
Source: World Data Atlas
Frequency: Annual
Source: MENR, Sustainable Energy 
Development Authority
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.1: National development is 
transitioning towards 
decarbonization and a resourceefficient economy through the 
adoption of green growth strategies 
and practices across all sectors
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of analyses/ 
frameworks/tools developed to 
promote environmentally sensitive 
budgets and financing frameworks
Baseline: 1 
Target: 3 
Source: MOF, MEW, MENR
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of green/blue 
economy and circular economy 
initiatives developed with national and 
subnational governments
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Source: EPU, state economic planning 
units, MENR, local authorities
Indicator 2.1.3: Number of genderresponsive climate change mitigation 
strategies implemented in line with 
nationally determined contribution 
(NDC) and/or climate change action 
plans
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Source: MEW, Biennial Report to the 
UNFCCC
Indicator 2.1.4: Reduction in use of 
ozone-depleting substances
Bl5158 dli
Government
EPU, MENR, Ministry of 
Environment and Water 
(MEW), Ministry of Housing 
and Local Government, 
Department of Environment 
(DOE), Department of Wildlife 
and National Parks Peninsular 
Malaysia, Forestry Department 
Peninsular Malaysia, 
Sustainable Energy 
Development Authority, 
JAKOA, Malaysian Green 
Technology and Climate 
Change Centre, DOSM, 
NADMA, state governments,
local authorities
United Nations organizations
UNEP
UNIDO
UNICEF
Others
Private sector
Civil society
Regular: $387,500
Other: $27,406,094 DP/DCP/MYS/
4
potential (tonnes) 
Target: 67.5% reduction in 2025
Source: DOE
Output 2.2: Natural resources, 
biodiversity and ecosystems are 
sustainably managed, adequately 
protected and conserved for long-
term economic and environmental 
sustainability
Indicator 2.2.1: Area of terrestrial 
protected areas created or under 
improved management for 
conservation and sustainable use
Baseline: 776,122 hectares
Target: 1,000,000 hectares
Source: MENR
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of integrated 
landscape management systems 
developed for sustainable land use 
practices
Baseline:1
Target:2
Source: MENR
Indicator 2.2.3: Number of local and 
indigenous communities benefiting 
from protection and/or sustainable use 
of protected areas/high conservation 
value /high carbon stocks forests 
Baseline: (2020):8
Target: (2025): 20 
Source: MENR
Output 2.3: Prevention, 
preparedness and resilience against 
climate change, natural hazards and 
disaster risks are strengthened, 
especially among indigenous, poor
d ik iiDP/DCP/MYS/4
Indicator 2.3.1: Number of sectoral 
climate change adaptation strategies 
implemented in line with NDC and/or 
climate change action plans, including 
risk-informed urban planning and 
disaster reduction strategies 
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Source: MEW
Indicator 2.3.2: Number of vulnerable 
persons (indigenous, poor, and at-risk 
communities) with increased 
preparedness and resilience against 
climate and disaster risks, 
disaggregated by sex
Baseline: 0
Target: 5,000 (50% women)
Source: UNDP/NADMA 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Twelfth Malaysia Plan Pillars: Pillar 1, sources of economic growth; Pillar 3, economic growth enabler; Pillar 5, inclusivity and well-being of 
Rakyat
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 3 – Prosperity. By 2025, Malaysia is making meaningful progress towards an economy that is inclusive, innovative and 
sustainable across all income groups and productive sectors
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive, and digital transitions
National indicator 1:
Level of inequality as measured by 
Gini coefficient
Baseline: 0.407 (2019)
Target: 0. 41 (2024)
National indicator 2:
Percentage wage gap* between men 
and women, at strata and education 
attainment categories
Baseline: 2018
Urban: 7.5%
Rural: 2.1%
No certification: 30.8%
SPM (secondary school) and below: 
Source: DOSM 
Frequency: Twice in five years
Source: DOSM wages and salaries 
report
Frequency: Annual
* Percentage wage gap: the difference 
between median monthly wage received 
by men and women in the same strata
divided by median monthly wage 
Output 3.1: Inclusive growth and 
decent work taps into new sources of 
economic growth and the future of 
work trends
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of digital 
economy initiatives as incomegeneration options for vulnerable 
populations (women, vulnerable 
youths, people with disability, rural 
communities) 
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Source: Malaysia Digital Economy 
Corporation (MDEC), DSW
Government
EPU, Ministry of Science, 
Technology and Innovation 
(MOSTI), Ministry of 
International Trade and 
Industries (MITI), DSW, 
DOSM, MDEC, Ministry of 
Communication and 
Multimedia, MEDAC, MaGIC, 
MOF, Bank Negara Malaysia, 
state governments, local 
councils
Private sector
Finance sector and other 
private corporations
Regular: $387,500
Other: $3,342,267DP/DCP/MYS/4
STPM (A level) equivalent: 14.9%
Diploma: 9.9%
Degree: 19.5%
Target:
Urban: 7.0%
Rural: 1.9%
No certification: 28.0%
SPM and below: 18.5%
STPM equivalent cert: 13.5%
Diploma: 8.0%
Degree: 17.5%
National indicator 3 / Goals 
indicator 12.7.1: Number of 
companies publishing sustainability 
reports
Baseline: 918 (with sustainability 
statement) (2020)
Target: 1,000 (2025)
National indicator 4: Value of 
SMEs’ contribution to the economy 
as a percentage of GDP
Baseline: 38.9% (2019)
Target: 45% (2025)
National indicator 5 / Goals 
indicator 11.a.1: Proportion of 
population living in cities that 
implement urban and regional 
development plans integrating 
population projections and resource 
needs, by size of city
Baseline: 75.6%
Target: 85%
Source: Bursa Malaysia
Source: SME Info
Source: DOSM / National 
Entrepreneurship Policy 2030 (DKN)
inclusive of youth, women and 
informal entrepreneurs supported by 
UNDP for enhanced capacity to 
engage digital economy and finance
Baseline: 0
Target: 300 (disaggregated by youth, 
women entrepreneurs)
Source: MDEC, MEDAC, Malaysian 
Global Innovation and Creativity 
Centre (MaGIC)
Indicator 3.1.3: Number of policy 
measures and strategies formulated for 
women’s economic empowerment in 
Malaysia
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Source: UNDP, government
Output 3.2: Adoption of corporate 
practices aligned to Goals and 
international standards of 
upholding principles of social 
justice, transparency, accountability 
and sustainability while promoting 
economic development
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of innovative 
financing initiatives for Goals
leveraging new private sector sources 
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Source: UNDP
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of policies
and legal and regulatory frameworks/ 
mechanisms for Goals financing
Baseline: 1
Target: 3
Source: MOF, UNDP
Idi323Nbf Sh
Civil society
United Nations organizations
UNCDF, UNIDO, UN-Habitat, 
UNICEFDP/DCP/MYS/4
South exchanges, dialogues and 
training based on Malaysian best 
practices and lessons learned towards 
achievement of the Goals
Baseline: 0
Target: 8
Source: UNDP
Output 3.3: Urban development is 
competitive, sustainable and 
inclusive and supports social and 
economic well-being for the 
population. 
Indicator 3.3.1: Number of urban 
areas with improved data-driven/riskinformed development planning
Baseline: 1
Target: 5
Source: UNDP, local councils
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of innovative 
solutions piloted in urban areas that
expand policy and development 
options
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Source: UNDP, local councilsDP/DCP/MYS/4
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Twelfth Malaysia Plan pillars: Pillar 6, institutional reforms
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 4 – Peace. By 2025, Malaysia has strengthened democratic governance, and all people living in Malaysia benefit from a 
more cohesive society, strengthened governance and participation 
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 – Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk
National indicator 1: Worldwide 
Governance Indicators for 
Malaysia
Baseline (2018):
Voice and accountability: -0.08
Political stability and absence of 
violence/terrorism: 0.24
Government effectiveness: 1.08
Regulatory quality: 0.68
Rule of law: 0.62
Control of corruption: 0.31
Target: Improvement on the scores
National indicator 2: Corruption 
Perception Index for Malaysia
Baseline (2019): 53/100 
(rank 51 globally)
Target: 55/100
National indicator 3: Proportion of 
seats held by women in Parliament
Baseline (2020): 15% 
Target: 18%
National indicator 4: Freedom in the 
World Index
Baseline (2019): 21 on political rights, 
31 on civil liberty 
Target: 24 on political rights, 32 on civil 
liberty
Source: World Bank
Frequency: Annual
Source: Transparency International 
Frequency: Annual
Source: Parliament of Malaysia
Frequency: Every five years
Source: freedomhouse.org
Output 4.1: Malaysia makes 
significant progress towards interethnic and cultural harmony and 
cohesion
Indicator 4.1.1: Number of policy 
measures, guidelines and action plans 
for social cohesion developed with 
UNDP assistance
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Source: UNDP, MNU
Indicator 4.1.2: Number of 
ethnic/faith/rights-based groups 
represented in intergroup or 
community dialogues/initiatives to 
develop shared values for a more 
cohesive society
Baseline: 0
Target: 20 (10 women-based groups)
Source: UNDP/ MNU
Indicator 4.1.3: The adoption of 
National Action Plan on Business and 
Human Rights 
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Source: BHEUU
Output 4.2: Institutions are more 
capable of undertaking inclusive 
political processes, are more people
centred and protect fundamental 
freedoms
Government
Ministry of National Unity 
(MNU)
State governments 
Court system of Malaysia
SUHAKAM
BHEUU
Parliament
Local City/ District Councils
Civil society
Youth/women/indigenous 
groups and community 
organizations
Labour unions
United Nations organizations
ILO
IOM
Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human 
Rights
Regular: $387,500
Other: $3,303,242DP/DCP/MYS/4
Indicator 4.2.1: Number of local 
councils with Goals-aligned 
development plans
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Source: UNDP
Indicator 4.2.2: Number of local 
councils engaging with citizens and 
civil society for local agenda setting
Baseline: 0
Target: 5
Source: UNDP
Output 4.3: System of checks and 
balances across branches of 
government is strengthened at 
national and subnational levels, core 
government functions are more 
responsive and efficient, and people 
have better access to services 
Indicator 4.3.1: Number of Members 
of Parliament and Parliamentary 
Secretariat officials participating in 
UNDP-led interventions on 
strengthening parliamentary operations 
and/or administration
Baseline: 0
Target: 30 (50% women)
Source: UNDP