File Name: MYS-NEP-2015-EN
Year: 2015
Country Name: Malaysia
Country Code: MYS
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2015
Start Year: nan
End Year: nan
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

NATIONAL
ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
ACTION PLANMinistry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 2
Table of Contents
Foreword ........................................................................................................................................4
1. Executive Summary.................................................................................................................5
2. Background.................................................................................................................................9
2.1 The Institutional Setup and Regulatory Framework on Energy Efficiency ...............10
2.2 Past and Current Initiatives on Energy Efficiency..........................................................11
2.3 Identified Barriersto Energy Efficiency.........................................................................14
3. A Plan for Energy Efficiency ..................................................................................................16
3.1 Energy Efficiency Potentials..........................................................................................16
3.2 The Guiding Principles of the Plan ................................................................................19
3.3 The Thrusts of the Plan.......................................................................................................20
3.3.1 Strategic Thrusts..........................................................................................................20
3.4 Targets and Impact of National Ten-Year Energy Efficiency Action Plan.....................21
3.5 Strengthening EE Legislation ..............................................................................................23
4. Strategic Actions...................................................................................................................24
4.1 Action 1: Establish a Dedicated Section for NEEAP in EC .................................................24
4.2 Action 2: Funding for Energy Efficiency ........................................................................26
4.3 Action 3: Government Led Initiatives ...........................................................................26
4.4 Action 4: Capacity Building ...........................................................................................27
4.5 Action 5: Research and Development ..........................................................................27
5. Key Initiatives........................................................................................................................29
5.1 Overview of Key Initiatives and Programmes...............................................................29
5.2 Key initiative 1: Promotion of 5-Star Rated Appliances................................................31
5.2.1. Programme : 5-star Refrigerators.........................................................................32
5.2.2. Programme: 5-Star Air-Conditioners....................................................................33
5.3 Key initiative 2: Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS).............................34
5.3.1. Programme: Promotion of Efficient Lighting........................................................34
5.3.2. Programme: High Efficiency Motors.....................................................................35
5.4 Key initiative 3: Energy Audits in Buildings and Industries ...........................................36
5.4.1. Programmes: Energy A u d i t s a n d M a n a g e m e n t in C o m m e r c i a l , 
Industrial a n d G o v e r n m e n t Facilities ............................................................................36
5.5 Key initiative 4: Promotion of Co-generations ..............................................................41
5.6 Key initiative 5: Energy Efficient Building Design..........................................................42Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 3
6. Costs and Benefits.................................................................................................................44
7. Monitoring of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan Progress.....................................46
7.1 Energy Efficiency Monitoring Framework.....................................................................47
7.1.1. Energy Efficiency Indicator....................................................................................47
7.1.2. Reporting the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan Implementation Progress........47
8.0 Impact...............................................................................................................................48
8.1. Economic Impact ..........................................................................................................48
8.2. Environmental Impact ..................................................................................................48
8.2.1. Final Electricity Energy Demand (FEED) and CO2 emission ..................................48
8.3. Social Impact.................................................................................................................48
List of Figures 
Figure 1: Economic growth rates and Energy growth rates..........................................................16
Figure 2: Final energy intensity and Industrial energy intensity. .................................................17
Figure 3: The electricity savings and percentage of savings by the National Energy Efficiency 
Action Plan ...................................................................................................................................21
Figure 4: Linkages of target and impact with major stakeholders................................................22
Figure 5: The organisational Structure of NEEAP Project Team.................................................25
List of Tables
Table 1: Key Initiaves...................................................................................................................30
Table 2: The cash-flow of National Energy Efficiency Action Plan............................................44
Table 3: Impact of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan..................................................49Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 4
Foreword
The proposed NEEAP contained herein incorporates the view of majority of the 
stakeholders and working group collated at the various stages of deliberations of the 
original NEEMP documents. This Report therefore only focuses on the final outcome of 
NEEAP. Invariably, it does not include all the process trails of the previous findings. 
Notwithstanding that, references of them are made from time to time when the occasion 
arises.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 5
1. Executive Summary
Malaysia is a developing country where its growing population and expansion of 
economic activities especially in the manufacturing sector have been the major drivers 
for the increasing demand for energy supply. Historically, the nation’s energy demand 
growth rates were higher than the growth rates of its Gross Domestic Products (GDP). 
The energy demand growth, especially the demand growth for electricity, was 
accelerated by the industrialisation process in the past two decades. The imbalance 
ratio between energy demand and GDP is indicative of the more energy-intensive 
economic activities driving the growth. In this regard, the need to promote efficientuse of energy in the country has become clear. However, the effort requires sound 
energy efficiency policies supported with good strategies and implementable 
programmes.
Since 2000, Malaysia’s energy intensity (energy/GDP) has been rising. This implies 
that over time Malaysia uses more energy to produce a unit of GDP and this provides
a compelling reason for Malaysia to improve its efficiency of energy use. Energy 
efficiency offers an effective and efficient energy policy instrument to address 
the energy supply security issue as well as energy-related environmental issue in
the country. At the same time, energy efficiency is also one of the ways that will lead 
the country to a sustainable energy path.
Energy efficiency improvement at demand-side is a crucial parts of the energy sector 
development as the demand dictates the energy supply and fuel consumption. Savings 
on the demand side will reduce the energy losses due to distribution and transmission 
of power, losses in power generation plants, and the energy use associated with 
extraction and transportation of fuels. In energy terms, saving one unit of energy in 
the demand side will save 3-4 units of primary fuels. In addition, investments in 
energy supply facilities such as power plants and grid can be deferred or postponed.
In this regard, the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, devised for the country, 
including Sabah and Sarawak, is focused to tackle issues pertaining to energy supply 
by managing demand efficiently. The Plan prescribes a path towards improving 
energy efficiency by pursuing the implementation of measures that are considered as
“harvesting the low hanging fruits”, as they are viable for the nation as well as the end
users. The plan is built upon the experiences and knowledge from past programmes
and projects, which were implemented by various institutions and agencies, but was
lacking in terms of a coherent framework to ensure sustainability in the longer term.
The lessons from the past experiences have given the understanding on the main Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 6
barriers that impeded the progress and success of past energy efficiency improvement 
efforts in Malaysia. The barriers can be categorised as:
 Low energy prices;
 Lack of finance for energy efficiency;
 Lack of overall national plan for Energy Efficiency;
 Lack of champion to drive Energy Efficiency; and
 Lack of consistency in embarking on energy efficiency.
Therefore, the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan presents the instruments for a 
successful implementation of energy efficiency strategies in the country for a period 
of 10 years which will address and mitigate those barriers.
The National Energy Efficiency Action Plan presents a strategy for a wellcoordinated and cost-effective implementation of energy efficiency measures in the 
industrial, commercial and residential sectors, which will lead to reduced energy 
consumption and economic savings for the consumers and the nation. However, it 
must be borne in mind that the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is only 
confined to electricity usage and does not cover the other aspects of the energy sector. 
The aim of the plan is to promote energy efficiency in order to meet the following 
policy direction:
In meeting the policy direction, the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan will be 
supported by 4 main thrusts that will drive the nation towards a sustainable energy 
path:
Thrust 1: Implementation of Energy Efficiency Action Plan;
Thrust 2: Strengthen Institutional Framework, capacity development and training 
for Implementation of Energy Efficiency initiatives
Thrust 3: Establishment of Sustainable Funding Mechanisms to Implement Energy 
Efficiency Initiatives; 
Thrust 4: Promotion of Private Sector Investment in Energy Efficiency Initiatives
“PROMOTE ENERGY EFFICIENCY TO ENSURE PRODUCTIVE USE OF ENERGY 
AND MINIMISE WASTE IN ORDER TO CONTRIBUTE TO SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT AND INCREASED WELFARE AND COMPETITIVENESS.”Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 7
The above 4 thrusts will help eliminate the existing barriers and ensure that energy 
consumers in the targeted sectors will be encouraged to adopt and adapt energy 
efficiency as a way of life and reap the benefits that energy efficiency could provide.
The National Energy Efficiency Action Plan contains 10 specific energy efficiency 
programmes covering 3 sectors to be implemented over a 10 years period. 
The programmes can be grouped into 5 key initiatives related to the design of the 
programmes. i.e:-
Initiative 1: Promotion of 5-Star Rated Appliances;
Initiative 2: Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS);
Initiative 3: Energy Audits and Energy Management in Buildings and
Industries; 
Initiative 4: Promotion of co-generation
Initiative 5: Energy Efficient Building Design.
The target of National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is to save electricity and reduce 
electricity demand growth. The effective and efficient implementation of the National 
Energy Efficiency Action Plan supported with sufficient resources will be able to save
52,233 GWh of electricity over the plan period against a business-as-usual (BAU) 
scenario. The corresponding electricity demand growth reduction at the end of the 
plan is 8 . 0 % . The electricity savings will eventually lead to a reduction in peak 
demand and the need to build new power plants in future. In other words, National 
Energy Efficiency Action Plan’s achievement will improve the electricity load profile 
by better management of peaking load in the power system. A straight-forward 
calculation of peak demand reduction from the National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan implementation will result in a total capacity saving of 2,526 MW. The fuel 
savings derived from the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan will also lead to 
less environmental impact and reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. The total 
reduction of greenhouse gas emission over the plan is projected to be 3 8 million 
tonnes CO2 equivalent. A total reduction of 88 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent will be 
achieved over the lifetime of the energy-efficient technologies adopted and adapted 
from the plan implementation.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 8
The effective and efficient implementation of the National Energy Efficiency Action 
Plan’s programmes requires an average governmental budget allocation of RM 54.3
million annually. The budget will cover the cost to administer and incentivise the 
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan’s programmes. The public expenditure on 
the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, a total of RM 543 million, will be 
leveraged by the private sector investments. A total of RM 5,781 million private 
sector investments will be induced over the plan. From this investment amount, the 
largest share will be spent on the adaptation of energy-efficient technologies.
The public and private expenditure on National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
programmes, amounting to a total of RM 6, 324 million, will result in a total direct 
monetary saving benefit of RM 18,518 million. The direct monetary benefit is the 
value of total electricity saved by the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, 
calculated based on the current electricity tariff. The other indirect benefits, i.e. 
capacity savings and greenhouse gas reduction are not included in the direct monetary 
benefit.
The cost-benefit ratio of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, which is 
calculated by dividing the direct monetary benefit with the public and private cost, is 
3.2. In other words, every RM 1 spent on the National Energy Efficiency Action 
Plan’s programmes will result in a saving of RM 34.20, while the cost-benefit ratio
based on the lifetime savings of energy-efficient technologies adopted and adapted
during the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is 7.4.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 9
2. Background
Malaysia is a progressive developing country. Its economic and social development 
has been growing fast with energy as one of the main inputs to drive them. Malaysia’s 
final energy consumption had increased from 13 million toe in 1990 to about 53
million toe in 2013, reflecting an annual average growth rate of 6.3%. The electricity 
consumption during the period grew at an annual average growth rate of 8.2% to
reach 116,087 GWh. At the same time, Malaysia’s GDP grew at an annual average
growth rate of 5.7%. Malaysia is determined to maintain its economic growth over
the next decade, but the growth in its energy consumption must be managed to ensure
the productivity and competitiveness of its economy.
In the process to accelerate its economic and social development, supported by its 
current position as a net energy exporter, Malaysia provides subsidies on energy-use 
for various levels of users. The energy subsidies amount offered to various energy 
users in the country has been growing from year to year, corresponding with the 
volatility of global energy prices and growing demand for energy. The subsidies 
amount has reached a worrisome level that the government expenditure capacity has 
been stretched beyond its ability and has taken the share of other developmental 
budget allocation. This situation has prompted the Malaysian Government to review 
its policies related to energy subsidies and to take action to manage energy subsidies 
with proper mitigation actions. In this regard, energy efficiency offers a sound
solution to mitigate the effects of the gradual removal of energy subsidies.
The need to drive its economic growth while maintaining productivity and 
competitiveness and also the compelling need to rationalise its energy subsidies have 
made energy efficiency as one of the key energy policy instrument for Malaysia. 
Energy efficiency will benefit the whole society as it encourages reduced overall costs 
for energy for the consumers and reduced subsidy payments from the government. 
These savings can be directed to more useful purposes in households, industries and 
other sectors of the society and increase the welfare of the nation. At the same time, 
Malaysia also can enhance its security of energy supply through a cost-effective 
approach by implementing effective energy-efficiency strategies and programs. 
Energy efficiency will help to reduce the burden of energy costs for the consumers but 
at the same time will ensure that the energy quality and quantity derived from the 
energy used are maintained. In addition, energy efficiency will serve as part of the 
nation’s strategy on climate change and the reduction in the emission of greenhouse 
gasses.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 10
2.1 The Institutional Setup and Regulatory Framework on Energy
Efficiency
The key agencies involved to promote energy efficiency in Malaysia are the
Economic Planning Unit (EPU) of the Prime Minister’s Department, the Ministry of
Energy, Green Technology and Water (MEGTW), Ministry of Works, Ministry of 
Urban Well Being, Housing and Local Government and the Energy Commission 
(EC). The role of MEGTW is to formulate and implement energy efficiency policy, in 
coordination with the EPU. The EPU’s main role is to allocate sufficient resources for 
the implementation of energy efficiency programmes. The EC, established under the 
Energy Commission Act 2001, is the regulatory agency for the electricity and the gas 
supply industry at the reticulation stage. The Commission’s main tasks are to regulate 
the electricity and gas supply industry at the reticulation stage from the technical, 
safety and economic aspects. EC also advises the Energy, Green Technology and 
Water Minister on all matters related to electricity and tariffs including energy 
efficiency promotion.
In promoting energy efficiency, MEGTW had enacted a number of legal instruments. 
The main legal instrument on energy efficiency promotion is the Electricity Supply 
Act (Amendment) 2001 or known as Act A1116. The Act empowers the Energy, 
Green Technology and Water Minister under the Section 23A, 23B and 23C of the 
Act to promote efficient use of electricity in the country. Subsequent to this 
amendment of the Act, MEGTW issued the Efficient Management of Electrical
Energy Regulations 2008. Under these regulations, all installations that consume or
generate 3 million kWh or more of electricity over a period of six months will be
required to engage an electrical energy manager who shall, among others, be
responsible to analyse the total consumption of electrical energy, to advise on the
development and implementation of measures to ensure efficient management of
electrical energy as well as to monitor the effectiveness of the measures taken. The EC
is empowered to enforce the Energy Efficiency Regulations.
In 1989, the Ministry of Energy, Telecommunications and Posts, the predecessor of 
MEGTW introduced the Guidelines for Energy Efficiency in Buildings. The 
Guidelines was developed as a Malaysian Standard, i.e. MS 1525 – Code of Practice 
on Energy Efficiency and Use of Renewable Energy for Non-Residential Buildings” 
in 2001. The code has been used as a guide in designing energy-efficient buildings in 
the country. The code was revised in 2007 and 2014 to incorporate the latest
technological developments. In 2012, the promotion of energy efficiency in new
commercial buildings was made mandatory by the amendment of the Uniform
Building By-Laws (UBBL). Section 38A of the UBBL requires new or renovated 
non-residential buildings with air-conditioned space exceeding 4,000 square metres toMinistry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 11
be designed to meet the Overall Thermal Transfer Value (OTTV) and the Roof 
Thermal Transfer Value (RTTV) of MS 1525. The section also requires those
buildings to be provided with an Energy Management System (EMS).
The latest regulatory instrument to promote energy efficiency improvement is the 
Electricity Regulations (Amendment) 2013. The regulations have been amended to
allow the implementation of Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS) on 
selected electrical appliances and lighting. Under the new regulations,
refrigerators, air-conditioners, televisions, fans and lamps (Fluorescent, Compact
Fluorescent, Light Emitting Diode and Incandescent) that enter the Malaysian market
or are sold to consumers must meet the minimum energy performance standards as
prescribed in the regulation. Furthermore, information related to MEPS of those 
products must be made available to consumers by labeling. Labeling of appliances
covered by MEPS will became a mandatory requirement. The regulation will pave the
way for the phasing- out of inefficient electrical appliances and lighting.
2.2 Past and Current Initiatives on Energy Efficiency
In the past 10 years, a number of energy efficiency initiatives had been undertaken by 
the Malaysian Government. Some of these initiatives were supported by the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Japan External Trade Organisation 
(JETRO), Energy Conservation Centre Japan (ECCJ) and the Danish International 
Development Agency (DANIDA). Those initiatives have led to capacity building in 
various aspects of energy efficiency in the country. It has also increased the awareness 
on energy efficiency among stakeholders, the private sector and energy users at large. 
The initiatives also paved the way for the enactment and formulation of energy 
efficiency regulatory instruments for some selected industries in the country.
Some of those key initiatives are:
1) Malaysian Green Technology Corporation, formerly Malaysian Energy Centre. A 
number of projects have been implemented in the areas of energy efficiency and 
renewable energy. Some of the most significant are:
a. Malaysian Industrial Energy Efficiency Improvement Project (MIEEIP) –
was a cooperative project between the Malaysian Government and UNDP 
with the aim of promoting energy efficiency within the industrial sector. 
The project focused on energy auditing of industries, demonstration 
projects, rating of high efficient equipment and increasing the awareness 
among industrial consumers on energy efficiency.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 12
b. Integrated Resource Planning – was a 4-year DANIDA funded project 
aimed at providing capacity building on methodologies for effective 
energy planning and forecasting, taking both supply and demand side 
initiatives into account.
c. GEO Building – the building where the present Greentech Malaysia is 
located is a demonstration building that had been designed with low 
energy features. The energy consumption of the building was designed to 
be 50kWh/m
2
/year - significantly lower than the average of 200
kWh/m
2
/year of typical office buildings. Furthermore, installation of 
photovoltaic systems brings the net electricity consumption down to about 
35kWh/m
2
/year.
2) Centre for Education and Training in Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
(CETREE) is a centre located in the campus of University of Science, Penang. At 
the initial stage, CETREE’s establishment was assisted by DANIDA. CETREE’s 
focus is to increase awareness on energy efficiency and renewable energy among 
school children and students. The Centre has developed curricula for primary and 
secondary schools and assisted universities in incorporating energy efficiency in 
their teaching courses. Furthermore, the centre organises events for schools on 
energy efficiency and renewable energy and their exhibition busses visits schools 
all over Peninsular Malaysia. The centre is funded by MEGTW for its operational 
and developmental expenses.
3) Fiscal Incentives for Energy Efficiency was introduced under the government 
financial budget in 2001. The aim is to promote energy efficiency projects and 
equipment by providing tax incentives. The tax incentives are in the form of 
waiver of import duty and sales tax on energy efficient equipment and accelerated 
capital allowances or pioneer status for investment in energy efficient 
technologies and projects. These incentives were enhanced over the years.
4) The Green Technology Finance Scheme (GTFS) was launched in January 2010, 
with a fund of RM 1.5 Billion to support investments in green technology projects, 
which, among others, include energy efficiency. The fund provides a 2% subsidy 
to the interest rates offered by commercial banks and a credit guarantee support 
for the loan capital. Under the 2013 budget, the Government increased the amount 
of interest subsidy by RM2.0 billion, making the total amount of green financing 
made available by the Government to RM3.5 billion.
5) Sustainability Achieved via Energy Efficiency Program or SAVE was a program 
designed under the Economic Transformation Program (ETP) of the Malaysian Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 13
Government in July 2011. The program was aimed to provide cash rebates for the 
purchase of energy-efficient refrigerators, air-conditioners and chillers. A total of 
RM 45 million was allocated under the program for the rebates and its 
promotional campaign activities throughout the country. The budget had covered 
the purchases of as many as 100,000 units of refrigerators, 65,000 units of airconditioners and 72,000RT capacity of energy efficient chillers for eligible 
domestic consumers and private companies. SAVE has helped to create a market 
for energy-efficient appliances and market penetration of those products.
6) Energy Performance Contracting (EPC) is an initiative started in Jan 2013 by the 
Malaysian Government to promote energy efficiency in government buildings. 
Under the EPC concept, government buildings are allowed to engage energy 
services companies (ESCO) to improve energy efficiency. The cost of investment 
to implement energy efficiency improvement will be provided by the ESCO, 
while the government buildings are allowed to pay the cost of investment by the 
ESCO from the savings made from the improvement efforts. The initiative will 
help create an ESCO industry in Malaysia as well as ease the government’s 
monetary burden on building energy bills.
7) Building Sector Energy Efficiency Project (BSEEP) was started in 2010 and will 
last until end of 2016. It is supported by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) 
and implemented by United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the 
Malaysia Public Works Department, (Jabatan Kerja Raya-JKR). The Project goal 
is to reduce the annual growth rate of Green House Gas emissions in the Malaysia 
building sector. BSEEP’s objective is the improvement of the energy utilization 
efficiency in Malaysian buildings, particularly those in the commercial and 
government sectors, by promoting the energy conserving design of new buildings 
and by improving the energy utilization efficiency in the operation of existing 
buildings through the removal of barriers to the uptake of building energy 
efficiency technologies, systems, and practices.
8) Industrial Energy Efficiency for the Malaysian Manufacturing Sector (IEEMMS) 
was launched in April 2012 and will be implemented within 5 years. It is 
implemented by United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) 
and SME Corporation Malaysia. The project aims to improve energy efficiency in 
the Malaysian manufacturing sector through energy efficient optimisation of 
energy and production systems and through the implementation of energy 
management system based on the ISO 50001 standard.
The above initiatives have all contributed to create a strong platform for 
implementation of energy efficiency, as institutions and human resources have been Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 14
developed and basic awareness in all parts of society has been spread.
2.3 Identified Barriers to Energy Efficiency
Although various initiatives have been undertaken to promote energy efficiency 
improvements, the outcome of the initiatives on the nation’s energy supply and 
demand is unclear. The initiatives have been spread and there has been a lack of 
synergy among the various projects, as well as a proper plan for the continuation of 
the activities after the project period. In this regard, a number of key barriers have 
been identified that prevented a wide-spread adoption of energy efficient practices. 
They are:
1) Low energy prices – The electricity and fuel prices have been kept below the 
actual cost of energy generation due to fuel subsidies. The prices are not 
reflecting the real cost of production and supply of energy. The low energy
prices prevent energy efficiency as the consumers are less concerned about the 
energy costs. Furthermore, energy efficiency investments are not made as the 
returns in terms of energy savings are small due to the low energy prices.
2) Lack of finance for energy efficiency – dedicated finance for energy efficiency 
from commercial lending institutions has been difficult to obtain, as the banks 
have not built sufficient capacity to deal with energy efficiency project 
evaluation and project finance schemes. Loans for energy efficiency projects 
are normally given based on collaterals from the applying companies and not 
based on the project feasibility. Similarly, there are no loan schemes for 
energy efficiency for individual consumers and the finance institutions will 
normally recommend traditional loan schemes such as e.g. term loans, credit 
card loans, if an individual wishes to purchase energy-efficient appliances.
3) Lack of overall national plan for Energy Efficiency – Energy efficiency has 
been a part of the Malaysian Development Plans, but there has not been any 
underlying road map or action plan for the implementation of energy 
efficiency. The activities are, therefore, driven by individual short-term 
projects, without a clear coordination among the activities and a clear medium 
term and long term objective.
4) Lack of champion to drive Energy Efficiency – Energy efficiency has been 
implemented by various agencies and institutions. But there has not been a 
clear authority in charge of ensuring that energy efficiency plays a central role 
in the nation’s energy planning. The planning is still very much based on 
demand forecast and supply planning, without taking into account energy Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 15
efficiency and demand side management.
5) Lack of consistency in embarking on the energy efficiency – most of the effort 
on promoting energy efficiency has been based on projects with limited time 
frame. Those projects have contributed to developing capacity in various 
institutions and a few energy efficiency initiatives have been implemented. 
But the activities have slowed down or been discontinued after the project 
funding is ended. The lack of a continuous annual government budget for 
energy efficiency activities has created a situation where activities are project 
based which tends to lead to too many starts and stops in the activities.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 16
3. A Plan for Energy Efficiency
3.1 Energy Efficiency Potentials
Energy plays an important role in Malaysia’s economic development. In 2013, 
Malaysia used 53 million toe of energy for its economic development and the wellbeing of its people. The usage of electricity as one of the final energy components was
123,076 GWh or 10.6 million toe. Figure 1 shows the economic growth rates pattern 
versus the energy growth rates patterns which are represented by the final energy 
demand and electricity demand. The energy demand growth tended to move in
tandem with the economic growth rate. The pattern has proved that Malaysia’s 
economic development was depending heavily on energy as one of the important
factor inputs.
Figure 1: Economic growth rates and Energy growth rates
According to the National Energy Balance Report 2013, the transport sector of 
Malaysia was the largest energy user. It accounted for 42% of the final energy 
demand in 2013. The industrial sector was at the second rank with the share of 25%. 
The increasing demand for transport energy in Malaysia is driven by passenger 
transportation sub-sector. Factors such as energy subsidies, rapid urbanisation and
growing private vehicle ownership are driving the increase in demand. Malaysia is 
taking concerted efforts to manage its transport energy demand by improving its mass Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 17
transit system, promoting the market penetration of efficient hybrid cars by tax 
exemption and having continuous awareness dissemination programmes. However, 
energy efficiency improvement on the transport sector is not covered in this Plan and 
will be addressed separately by the Government.
Malaysia’s economic development is supported strongly by the industrial sector. 
Figure 2 shows the relationship between the final energy intensity and industrial 
energy intensity. The values of both intensities show a strong relationship and they 
moved in tandem. The reduction in the both intensity values beginning from 2008 
was caused by the global financial crisis. The reduction in demand for industrial 
outputs resulting from the crisis affected the Malaysia’s industrial outputs as well. The 
reduction of energy intensities, which is often related to improvement of energy 
efficiency, in this case was caused by industrial activity reduction and to some extent 
by structural changes. The improvement is caused by non-energy components of
energy intensity.
Figure 2: Final energy intensity and Industrial energy intensity.
The potential of energy efficiency in the industrial sector is significant. The energy 
audits conducted during the Malaysian Industrial Energy Efficiency Improvement 
Project (MIEEIP) (about 50 audits for the eight industry subsectors) have found that 
potential energy savings in major industries in Malaysia can be from as low as 2% 
(for a glass company which was already very efficient) to 52% (for wood companies).Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 18
The 2% savings, however, could bring about high savings as the annual energy 
consumption was high. The highest potential energy saved had been found in the 
cement industry, which at 32.7% of the annual energy consumption of almost 15 
million GJ could yield a savings of 4.9 million GJ. The focus on industrial energy 
efficiency improvement should be on the adaption of energy-efficient equipment and 
processes, better management of energy at plant and organisational levels and human 
capacity development.
The commercial and residential sector’s energy use was small when compared to the 
other two sectors. But the sector has significant contribution to Malaysia’s economy. 
The sector’s energy use is mainly in buildings, which is for space cooling and to 
operate equipment in the buildings. Managing building energy use in Malaysia is 
relatively easier compared to buildings located in seasonal climates. In this regard, the 
buildings’ energy needs are quite stable and easily predictable. However, the major 
challenge in promoting energy efficiency in Malaysia is the enforcement of regulatory 
instrument due to the lack of human capital and relatively low tariffs for commercial 
buildings to embark on energy efficiency measures.
Malaysia’s commercial buildings, other than specific function buildings, on average 
have a Building Energy Index (BEI) of around 200 to 300 kWh/m
2
/year. However, the 
lesson learned from the showcase office building of the Ministry of Energy, Green 
Technology and Water (MEGTW) or known as Low Energy Office (LEO) proved 
that the BEI values for Malaysian office building could be lowered up to 100 
kWh/m
2
/year, with an additional capital investment of 5% against the total capital cost. 
The additional capital cost had a pay-back period of 8 years. In this regard, the 
improvement of energy efficiency in buildings could bring significant savings in 
electricity consumption and other benefits.
The energy efficiency improvements for the residential sectors will be focused on 
appliances. The market penetration of the energy-efficient appliances can be enhanced 
by providing incentives to the buyers. Regulatory measures to ban the importation and 
sale of inefficient appliances through the Minimum Energy Performance Standards 
(MEPS), has been introduced. Furthermore information on energy-efficient products 
to consumers will be widened by mandatory labelling for appliances under the MEPS.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 19
3.2 The Guiding Principles of the Plan
The National Energy Efficiency Policy is based on 4 principles in achieving 
energy efficiency by ensuring secure and sustainable energy and to achieve 
sustainable socio-economic growth in the country.These inter-related and 
mutually supporting principles are:
First
Sustainable Development
It is defined as meeting our current needs in a manner, that the needs of future 
generation are not compromised. The agenda for development of the society is 
that, economic growth does not lead to constraints for further growth in the 
future.
Second
Efficient Use Of Energy
The aim is to increase productivity and the comfort level of the society in a 
manner where the energy usage is controlled and not higher than necessary while 
reducing the waste. Waste is defined as both waste of fuel resources, waste 
products from energy generation such as pollution and greenhouse gasses as well 
as waste of money, from overspending on electricity and fuels.
Third
Increase Competitiveness And Welfare
Energy efficiency shall lead to an increase in the comfort and productivity for all 
parts of society. By reducing the use of energy, this will ensure that the 
expenditure for energy is kept at a low level, which will cushion consumers from 
any future increases in energy prices.
Fourth
Concerted Participation
Incorporate increase in energy demand consideration at all levels, and increase 
participation of stakeholders and major groups for effective implementation of 
Energy Efficiency initiatives.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 20
3.3 The Thrusts of the Plan
3.3.1 Strategic Thrusts
The National Energy Efficiency policy will serve as a guide to integrate the 
country's energy security issues in planning and implementation of the 
development programs in addition to promote sustainable economic growth and 
human capital development as well as environmental conservation. This policy 
complements other relevant policies and take into account all factors at various 
levels. Strategic thrusts that have been identified are :
Thrust 1: Implementation of Energy Efficiency Plan
An effective action plan has been identified as an important element to ensure 
continuous implementation of energy efficiency initiatives in the country. The 
action plan contains 10 specific programs to reduce energy consumption by 
consumer groups in the industrial, commercial and domestic (appliances) sector.
Thrust 2: Strenghten Institutional Framework, Capacity Development and 
Training for Implementation Of Energy Efficiency Initiatives
The thrust outlines the need to strengthen the Energy Commission in managing, 
monitoring and reporting the implementation of the initiatives designed under the 
National Energy Efficiency Plan as well as capacity building and training to 
stakeholders.
Thrust 3: Establishment Of Sustainable Funding Mechanisms To Implement 
Energy Efficiency Initiatives
To establish a financing mechanism by commercial financial institutions to 
support the ongoing efforts in promoting and implement energy efficiency 
activities and initiatives that have been planned.
Thrust 4: Promotion of Private Sector Invesment in Energy Efficiency 
Initiatives
Private sector cooperation and support is crucial to ensure the success of the 
energy efficiency initiatives objectives. The private sector plays an important role 
in the implementation of the energy efficiency projects through Energy 
Performance Contracting concept.3.4 Targets and Impact of National Ten-Year Energy Efficiency Action
Plan
The focus of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan strategies and programmes 
is on electricity use in the industrial, commercial and residential sectors. Therefore, 
the target of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is to save electricity and 
reduce the electricity demand growth. The effective and efficient implementation of 
the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, supported with sufficient resources, will 
be able to save 52,233 GWh of electricity over the plan period against a business-asusual (BAU) scenario. The corresponding electricity demand growth reduction at the 
end of the plan is 8.0%. The National Energy Efficiency Action Plan programmes 
will continue to produce savings beyond the plan period, owing to the lifetime of the 
energy efficient technologies adopted and adapted during the plan period. The 
cumulative lifetime savings of the technologies is estimated at about 122,543 GWh of
electricity. Figure 3 shows the electricity savings and percentage of savings by the 
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan.
Figure 3: The electricity savings and percentage of savings by the National Energy 
Efficiency Action Plan
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
6.0%
7.0%
8.0%
9.0%
-
1,000 
2,000 
3,000 
4,000 
5,000 
6,000 
7,000 
8,000 
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
GWh
Residential Commercial Industrial Percentage of GWh SavingsThe electricity savings will eventually lead to a reduction in peak demand and the 
need to build new power plants in the future. In other words, the National Energy 
Efficiency Action Plan achievement will improve the electricity load profile by better 
management of peaking load in the power system. A simple calculation of peak demand
reduction from the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan implementation indicates a
total capacity saving of 2,526 MW at the end of the Plan period.
This translates into savings in capital expenditure and the operating cost needed for the
construction of new power plants. At the same, Malaysia’s energy supply security 
position will be enhanced by easing the constraints on the energy supply
infrastructure. The fuel savings derived from the National Energy Efficiency Action 
Plan will also lead to less environmental impact and reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions. The total reduction of greenhouse gas emissions over the plan period is
projected to be 38 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent. A total reduction of 88 million tonnes
of CO2 equivalent will be achieved over the lifetime of the energy-efficient technologies
that are adopted and adapted from the plan implementation. The significant linkages of
the target and impact of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan with major
stakeholders is shown in the Figure 4 below.
Figure 4: Linkages of target and impact with major stakeholders3.5 Strengthening EE Legislation
The absence of a comprehensive legislation on EE is a barrier for successful 
implementation of EE measures in the nation. It is noted that most of the developed 
nations and even some emerging economies have specific legislation of their own on EE 
being their ingredient to successful reduction of energy intensity, albeit the extent of 
success rate varies.
Based on these exemplary measures from other economies, the revision of the Energy 
Supply Act 1990 should be done to accommodate EE legislations along with the revision 
of Energy Commission Act 2001, to further empower the EC as the agency responsible 
EE . The structure of the proposed revision in ESA 1990 shall comprise of key 
provisions such as measures for equipment, measures for consumers, sanction for 
breaches and non-compliance and others. The main objective of this action is to tap the 
potential of EE to be able to contribute to the sound development of national economy 
through implementing necessary measures for the efficient use of energy in factories, 
buildings, machinery, equipment and other necessary measures to comprehensively 
promote the efficient use of energy.4. Strategic Actions
This chapter outlines the content of the five strategic actions, which form the base for 
the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan. All of these are crucial for the proper 
implementation of the key initiatives and in achieving the desired impact of the 
interventions.
4.1 Action 1: Establish a Dedicated Section for NEEAP in EC 
The first action under the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is to establish a
section in the Energy Commission (EC) to act as the project team to administer and
implement National Energy Efficiency Action Plan programmes. This 
recommendation is based on the success factors of other countries and based on the 
recommendation from the working group, it is proposed that there should be a 
dedicated section in EC which has the semblance of EE&C system in Japan and India 
whose structures provide remarkable and continual success in implementation of 
EE&C measures. This department section can be further empowered by new 
provisions in the Electricity Supply Act 1990 which can be done over the plan period 
as the need arises. The section will be instrumental in implementing the energy 
efficiency programmes under the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan. The
section also will play a coordinating role with other relevant agencies on the
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan implementation. The main duties of the
section are to:
 Carry out effective and efficient implementation of the National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan programmes;
 Promote awareness on energy efficiency to various energy users;
 Disseminate information and knowledge through campaigns and programmes 
on energy efficiency;
 Monitor and evaluate the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
programmes continuously;
 Prepare progress report on the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
periodically; and
 Keep and maintain a database with necessary information and data on energy
use and energy efficiency gathered from the National Energy Efficiency 
Action Plan.The organisational structure of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan section is
shown in Figure 5. The section will be headed by a Project Leader. The Project Leader
will be assisted by 3 sectoral Programme Managers. The Programme Managers’ main
duty is to manage the activities within their sectors. The corporate functions related
to finance and accounting will be managed by a finance officer.
The officer will manage the funds for the operation of the team as well as fund 
allocations and disbursement to the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
programmes. The data management and monitoring unit function is to compile energy 
data and provide data analyses. The function includes the monitoring of the progress
of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan with a set of relevant indicators. 
The effective implementation of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is
dependent on how well its progress is monitored. Corrective steps on the
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan progress will be based on the monitoring
report. In this regard, the Unit will report to the Project Team Leader.
A major part of the communication and data management will be using information 
technology and information should to a great extent be made available on-line. The 
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan Project will have a web-portal with all 
relevant information regarding its activities in order to ensure easy access to 
information and material by the end-users. Internal information shall be made 
available on an intranet, where all relevant background information as well as budget 
and fund information is kept up-to-date. The dissemination and sharing of information 
using information technologies will be done by the Data Management and Monitoring
Unit through a Data and information Repository Centre will be established in the 
section for appropriate statistical data to be systematically collected, compiled, 
updated and disseminated. This Repository centre will address the grave concern on 
the lack of current and credible information necessary for energy economists and 
energy practioners to audit present scenario and forecast future energy economy
Figure 5: The organizational Structure of NEEAP Project Team4.2 Action 2: Funding for Energy Efficiency
In line with Thrust 3, the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan acknowledges that
new Energy Efficiency financing products need to be developed to unlock private 
sector funding. The success of any project depends on the timeliness and adequacy of 
the financial resources in meeting the budget requirement. The necessary funding for
the implementation of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan will be limited to
seed capital that will enable the private sector to invest in energy efficiency 
technologies and projects. Funding is budgeted for two main purposes: 
a) Administration of the plan including design of programmes and campaigns, and 
b) Incentives as catalyst to implement energy efficiency technologies and projects for 
the private sector.
Equally important is the fact that financial resources have to be managed and 
monitored by a dedicated department in order to achieve the expected outcomes.
Malaysia is at a critical stage of national development moving from a developing 
nation status to a high-income economy status, so unless the government and the 
people take up a tough step now to change towards a sustainable energy consumption, 
the nation will be facing uncertainty and it cost for energy supply as well as producing 
more CO2 to the atmosphere. Therefore, NEEAP must be implemented quickly with 
the financial supports not only from the government but also the private sector, 
community and NGOS. As long as good governance prevails in the NEEAP 
implementation process basing on the principles of Environmental economics, the 
investment by nation and the people will bring long term returns for both present and 
the future generations. 
4.3 Action 3: Government Led Initiatives
Although the major impact from energy efficiency is envisaged to be from the private 
sector, the role of government institutions and government-linked companies are 
crucial for the successful introduction of energy efficiency initiatives. The government
can, through circulars, direct its institutions to practice energy efficiency in its 
operations.
The government shall therefore be the pioneer in implementing internal policies for 
purchase of energy efficient 5-star energy labelled appliances and equipment, conduct
energy audits in large facilities and implementation of energy saving measures and 
also implement energy management practices. This will create a market
transformation towards energy-efficient technologies and practices, as suppliers will
be encouraged to make energy efficient technologies and services available in the
market. This effort by the government will enable the private sector to follow suit in a 
faster pace as the government will have been the ice-breaker in the market.4.4 Action 4: Capacity Building
Capacity building of individuals and organisations in energy efficiency will be part of 
the implementation of the energy efficiency initiatives, whenever training and 
education in specific areas and practices is required, for example in energy auditing 
practices and energy management. In addition, it is important that the educational 
institutions are producing candidates with relevant knowledge and qualifications in 
energy efficiency such as engineers, economists and technical people. Educational 
institutions will be encouraged to enhance the resources for energy efficiency training 
of students to meet the expected demand for such qualified personnel in the future.
Similarly, professional institutions will be encouraged to upgrade and train their 
faculty members in energy efficiency by introducing courses and workshops for 
engineers, architects, economists, accountants etc.
In order to “teach the people”, the NEEAP unit will need to build the capacity itself to 
train all segments of people involved directly or indirectly with EE. To a lesser extent, 
some of the training can be outsourced to other professional bodies and approved 
training centres of Ministry of human resource, Institution of Engineers Malaysia, 
SMIDEC, MAESCO and others. It is proposed that the international expertise to be 
explored to minimize learning curve and fast track-track the preparation of syllabi for 
a wide spectrum of courses, educational and examination materials and others. The 
unit will be tasked to increase EE training and professional and semi-professional 
development. Enhancing the resources and capacity of the unit to deliver and support 
EE will form an integral part of its skill development needs. Success will depend on 
the effectiveness of the change management across all levels of the mainstream 
activities. That being said, EE will not be easy in the Malaysian economy that has been 
dependent on subsidized fuel and government intervention. Lack of capacity building 
is one of the few root causes for the limited advancement of EE to date.
4.5 Action 5: Research and Development
Existing research institutions such as universities and private entities e.g. Sirim 
Berhad, manufacturers etc., will be encouraged to enhance research in the field of 
energy efficiency. This can be in areas of developing energy-efficient technologies as 
well as studying the impact of various energy efficiency practices and behaviours. As
the energy efficiency initiatives are targeting market transformation towards energyefficient technologies, it is critical that local manufacturers upgrade and develop their 
products to meet the highest degree of energy efficiency and play a major role in the 
market. This will not only enable them to market their products in Malaysia, but also 
improve the possibilities of exporting their technologies as energy efficiency is an 
important parameter for buyers in the developing and developed world.This is also in line with the government’s policy on developing a knowledge based
economy with the development of more intelligent and advanced, green technologies.
In this context, the government is looking into implementation of smart grid in the 
long term. It is also planning to have enhanced time of use tariffs. Such tariffs, 
together with the implementation of smart grids and the use of smart meters, will 
enable consumers to better understand their own energy needs and help them identify 
energy saving potentials and implement them in a more effective manner. It will also 
assist utilities to identify energy saving potentials in the transmission and distribution 
systems and implement them.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 29
5. Key Initiatives
The identified key energy efficiency initiatives presented in the section 2.4 is further 
elaborated in this section in terms of programmes to be implemented under the 
National Energy Efficiency Plan over a period of 10 years. The programmes are 
designed to ensure attention to the energy efficiency measures that are introduced for 
the consumers and provide the necessary incentives to kick-start the introduction of 
new technologies and processes.
The programmes will mainly be funded by the private sector, as the capital 
investments in energy-efficient measures are to be made by the consumers. The 
programmes will encourage and enable the consumers to implement the measures by 
promoting technologies and processes and removing market barriers such as additional
costs for energy-efficient technologies. As the market transformation towards new
energy efficient technologies takes place and more energy efficient technologies
become available the additional costs will be lowered, and this reduces or eliminates 
the need for incentives.
5.1 Overview of Key Initiatives and Programmes
The key initiatives to be introduced in the plan period are the following:
 Key initiative 1: Promotion of 5-Star Rated Appliances
 Key initiative 2: Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS)
 Key initiative 3: Energy Audits and Energy Management in Buildings and
Industries
 Key initiative 4: Promotion of cogeneration
 Key initiative 5: Energy Efficient Building Design
Table 1 details out the key initiatives and the programmes under each key 
initiative together with expected electricity savings that each of the measures will
result in.Table 1: Key Initiaves
Key Initiative Description Program Savings 
in 10 
years 
(GWh)
Public Fund 
(RM)
Private Fund 
(RM)
Promotion of 
5-Star Rated 
Appliance
 Star energy rating of 
appliances and 
mandatory labelling.
 Promotion of 5-star 
appliance
5-Star Refrigerator 
Campaign 
2,706 2,632,670 1,863,648,930
5-Star Air 
Conditioner 
Campaign 
7,014 2,632,670 2,005,537,380
Minimum 
Energy
Performance
Standards 
(MEPS)
 Review of MEPS
 Promotion of Efficient 
Lighting
 Development of MEPS 
for new equipments 
and appliances
EE lighting 
Campaign 
2,216 2,632,660 378,347,165
High Efficiency 
Motors
2,175 0 461,062,525
Energy Audits 
and Energy 
Management 
in Buildings 
and Industries
 Facilitating energy 
audits and 
implementation of 
energy saving 
measures and energy 
management initiatives
Energy Audit and 
management in 
Large Commercial 
Buildings
5,066 40,438,750 32,670,000
Energy Audit and 
management in 
Medium 
Commercial 
Buildings
1,916 49,579,750 49,071,000
Energy Audit and 
management in 
Large & Medium 
Industries
26,969 387,436,500 385,506,000
Energy Audit 
Government 
Facility
881 7,176,400 6,864,000
Cogeneration  Promotion of 
cogeneration through 
the removal of barriers 
Cogeneration in 
Industries and 
commercial 
buildings
3,276 0 572,000,000
Energy 
Efficient 
Building 
Design
 Incorporating Energy 
Efficiency in new 
building designs and 
constructions
Energy Efficiency 
in New Buildings
15 0 26,767,9505.2 Key initiative 1: Promotion of 5-Star Rated Appliances
Energy rating and labelling has been a key in the market transformation of household 
appliances towards more energy-efficient models. It has been successfully applied 
worldwide in Europe, USA, Japan, Australia, Thailand etc. for more than a decade 
and has resulted in significant improvements in the energy efficiency of the 
technologies. Energy labels allow the consumer to be informed about the energy 
consumption of the appliances they wish to purchase. As the purchase decision for 
electrical decision should be made on the basis of life cycle cost i.e. both the initial 
purchase cost and the operational cost for electricity, it is necessary to have the 
electricity consumption displayed on the products, so that the consumer can evaluate 
the cost and compare both the purchase price and operational cost of various models 
on display in the shops.
Labelling of the energy performance or energy 
rating can be applied to all types of energy 
consuming equipment.
Mandatory labelling has already been introduced 
for:
 Refrigerators
 Air-conditioners
 Ceiling and stand fans
 Televisions
The labelling can be expanded to more appliances during the plan period, as
experiences with the market transformation by labelling the above types of appliances
are evaluated.5.2.1. Programme: 5-star Refrigerators
A programme to promote 5-star refrigerators is proposed. The programme will be based
on promoting the existing 5-star rating and label for refrigerators, which was introduced
on a voluntary basis in 2005. The 5-star rated refrigerators are available in the market,
but their market share is still considered to be low, compared to conventional
refrigerators, which are rated as 3-star. The 5-star rated refrigerators are more than 25% 
more energy-efficient than the average 3-star refrigerators. As nearly all households in
Malaysia own a refrigerator and this is often the appliance that consumes the most
electricity, if the household is without air-conditioners, then there lies a high potential
for energy savings by introducing more energy-efficient refrigerators.
The programme will be targeting the sale of new refrigerators to transform the market 
into more efficient models.
Title 5-Star Refrigerator Campaign
Type Awareness and enforcement 
Design The campaign is a combination of the following:
1)MEPS and labelling enforcement programmes 
2) Review of the current MEPS value
3) Promotion of purchase of 5-star refrigerator through awareness enhancement
4)Awareness on the benefits of smart meter
Total 
Market
Total market is determined based on all residential consumers having one 
refrigerator each and this will increase annually with the increase in the number 
of registered consumers. 
Annual 
Market
The average lifetime of a refrigerator is assumed to be 15 years, and the annual 
market is about 700,000
Savings An average refrigerator consumes about 420 kWh/year for models between 150-
300 L. According to a ST survey this is the most sold size range in Malaysia. A 
5-star rated model is min. 25% more efficient than a 3-star rated model. This is 
0.25*420=105 kWh savings
Lifetime The savings are expected to remain the same over the average lifetime of the 
equipment i.e.15 years. 
Penetration Assuming that the campaign can start mid 2016 a penetration of 30% by active 
promotion of the rebate is expected. The penetration is expected to increase to 
90% of market in 2025 due to consumer demand and suppliers push. Full 
penetration is about 90% as there will be a demand for certain special purpose 
models, which are not 5-star.5.2.2. Programme: 5-Star Air-Conditioners
Air-conditioners are used in mainly residential 
and commercial sectors. The sale of airconditioners is growing as the economy grows 
and more and more consumers can afford to buy 
air-conditioners. For modern homes it is not 
unusual to have 3-4 air-conditioners installed. In 
order to ensure that the consumers are choosing
energy-efficient models, it is planned to introduce a mandatory energy label for airconditioners. The Energy Commission has prepared a star rating scheme for airconditioners and 5-star air-conditioners are at least 25% more efficient that conventional 
models. The programme will be designed to promote 5-star air conditioners.
Title 5-Star Air Conditioner Campaign
Type Awareness enhancement and enforcement
Design The campaign is a combination of the following:
1) Mandatory MEPS and labelling of all air conditioners in the market and 
enforcement
2) Promotion of purchase of 5-star through awareness enhancement 
programs
3) Improve the standards (wider range of capacity) and the MEPS value
4) Awareness enhancement on the benefit of smart meter
Total 
Market
Not determined
Annual 
Market
Based on the survey by SIRIM on 2014, sales is estimated to be 1,200,000 
units per year
Savings Average air conditioners are in the range of 8000-11000 BTU /hr
EER is about 2.9 W/W equal to EER 9.9 Btu/hr/W (Malaysian EER), 
so the consumption is about 1 kW per unit. 
Assuming an average use of 6 hours per day, 365 days x 6 hours x 1 kW ~ 
2200 kWh/yr Savings are determined by the difference between EER=9.5 to 
EER=11, which is about 15%. So annual savings are estimated to be 330 
kWh per unit.
Lifetime The savings are expected to remain the same over the lifespan of the air 
conditioner i.e. avg of 7 years
Penetration Assuming that the campaign can start mid 2016 a penetration of 30% by 
active promotion. 30% is about 360,000 air conditioners. The penetration is 
expected to be at maximum of 75% in 2026.5.3 Key initiative 2: Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS)
5.3.1. Programme: Promotion of Efficient Lighting
Lighting is an important electrical energy consuming appliance in homes. In the 
commercial sector, lighting account for about 15% to 20% of the total electrical energy 
used. Thus, improving lighting energy efficiency can result in substantial savings. The 
campaign will include the promotion energy efficient lighting (e.g: CFL, T5 and LED) 
through awareness enhancement programmes, the enforcement of Minimum Energy 
Performance Standards (MEPS) and labelling and the enhancement of awareness on the 
benefit of using smart meters.
Total 
Market
Total market is determined based on 6.7 million consumers in 2014 with 
the assumption of 10 lamps per household. 
Annual 
Market
Assuming each year, each household will change at least 1 T8 lamp, annual 
market is equal to total market i.e. 6,700,000 per year. 
Savings Average lighting such as T8 is assumed to be 40W. An EE lamp with similar 
lumen output is 30W. Power saving is therefore 10W. Assuming 2190 hours 
of use per year, the savings are 17.52 GWh for the 1st year (based on first 
year market penetration). Market penetration is expected to be 10% for the 1st 
year with increment of market penetration of 5% for every year.
Lifetime The annual savings are expected to remain the same over the lifespan of the 
lamp i.e. about 3 years. (As suggested by BSEEP and AWER)
Penetration Assuming that the campaign can start in mid-2016, a penetration rate of 10% 
by intensive promotion is expected. This is about 850,000 lamps. The 
penetration is expected to increase to 55% in 2025. 5.3.2. Programme: High Efficiency Motors
Motors are widely used in industrial processes and 
machinery, and can either be purchased as standalone motors or integrated in equipment. The 
Energy Commission has adopted the international 
CEMEP standard for energy rating of motors, which 
classifies motors in three classes according to the 
energy efficiency. The most efficient class is EFF1, 
followed by EFF2 and EFF3 as the lowest class. The 
CEMEP scheme is to be changed after the adoption 
of the latest IEC standard for motor performance
classifies the most energy efficient motors as IE3, whereas IE1 is the low efficient 
class. EU is currently in the process of implementing minimum performance 
standards for motors, which is expected to be minimum class IE2.
A mandatory minimum energy performance standard for motors will be based on the 
CEMEP/IEC standard and will define the minimum performance for motors to be 
minimum IE2/EFF2. This minimum standard is planned to be effective in 2020 and in
the period till 2019, awareness and promotion campaigns will be carried out to inform
the industries about the benefits of energy efficiency motors (IE2/IE3) motors and the
phasing out of low efficient types (IE1). Similarly, importers and manufacturers of
motors and equipment with integrated motors will be targeted for promotion and
awareness campaigns.
Title High Efficiency Motor Campaign
Type MEPS
Design The campaign is a combination of the following:
1) Mandatory labelling of motors in the market
2) MEPS phasing out IE1 motors -In order to regulate the motor equipment in 
industry sector, the MEPS regulation need to be amended to include industry 
equipment 
Total 
Market
Not determined
Annual 
Market
According to a survey conducted by International Copper Association Southeast 
Asia Ltd in 2014 the average sales of electrical motors is about 115,000 units 
yearly for year 2010 to 2013 with an annual market increase of roughly around 
10%. The current market share of IE1 or EFF2 motors is around 75%. This is the 
sale of stand-alone motors, not including motors sold as a part of equipment e.g. 
electrical pumps.
Savings A typical motor of 7.5 KW is assumed to be used about 3000 hours per year at 
about 70% load. The consumption is about 15MWh/year. The savings are about 
2% by going from IE 1 to IE2 (High efficiency motor) so the savings estimated is 
300 kWh/year.Lifetime The savings are expected to remain the same over the lifespan of the equipment i.e. 
10 years.
Baseline data will be based on the study conducted by International Copper 
Association (ICA)
Penetration As the MEPS is introduced in 2016 it is expected that 25% of the sales of IE1 is 
phased out in the 1st year. The 2nd year market penetration is expected to be 50% 
and 90% in the subsequent year. 
5.4 Key initiative 3: Energy Audits in Buildings and Industries
Energy audits include the mapping of a facility’s energy consumption in order to 
identify areas where energy efficiency can be implemented.
Often the energy audit will reveal no-cost measures such as energy wastages from 
equipment that is left on, but not being used or improvements in the processes that leads
to energy savings. The outcome of an energy audit is recommendations on energy
efficiency measures to be implemented and an evaluation of their costs and benefits.
Energy audits are typically done by external consultants with expertise in energy
auditing methods and the particular type of facility.
5.4.1. Programmes: Energy A u d i t s a nd Ma na g em en t in
C o m m e r c i a l, Industrial and G o v e r n m e n t Facilities
The energy audit programmes to be 
implemented will target the following types 
of facilities:
 Government Facilities
 Large Commercial Facilities
 Medium sized Commercial Facilities
 Large and medium sized Industrial 
Facilities
The programmes will offer free energy audits to the facilities on the condition that the 
facility owner will confirm that recommended energy efficiency measures will be 
implemented for an amount equal to or higher than the cost of the energy audit.
The number of energy audits to be conducted will depend heavily on the number of 
trained auditors. There is therefore a need to support the training of energy auditors, 
so that the resource base can be increased and the number of audits can be intensified.
The total requirement for auditors will gradually increase to 500 full-time auditors in
2020 and the work load will be maintained until the end of the plan.The energy savings that can be expected from
energy audits are at least 5% per year for 3 
years of the total energy consumption of the
installations concerned. Most of these savings are 
derived from eliminating energy wastages and
accelerated change of in-efficient equipment
which is beyond their economical and technical
lifetime. Larger energy efficiency projects are
not considered in the savings calculations but
will most likely also take place in many of the facilities which will significantly
increase the savings. Energy management is the day-to-day monitoring and
management of the energy consumption in a facility. Programmes will be initiated to 
mandate facilities to implement energy management by appointing an energy manager
and prepare energy management reports. The Efficient Management of Electrical
Energy Regulations 2008 already prescribes that large facilities need to implement
energy management and this will be expanded to cover medium sized facilities.
Furthermore, the energy management system requirements will be improved to ensure
that energy efficiency measures and practices are being continuously implemented and 
tracked.
For large government facilities, energy management will be compulsory by circular. 
This will allow the government to show leadership in energy efficiency as well as in 
implementing cost reduction measures. A part of the energy management will be 
procurement procedures ensuring that the government facilities are purchasing 5-star 
rated equipment.
The campaign for introducing the mandatory energy management will focus on 
providing guidelines and training to the energy managers to increase awareness of 
energy efficiency options available to their facilities. The energy management in 
facilities will also indirectly support other programmes in the national energyefficiency action plan such as the energy audit programmes and energy rating and 
labelling programmes as it is expected that the facilities with energy management will
demand energy-efficient technologies.Title Energy Audit and Management in Large Commercial Buildings
Type Consultancy and grants
Design The campaign will offer free energy audits to large commercial 
buildings, such as offices, hotels, shopping complexes etc. It is required 
that the building owner accepts to invest in energy savings measures with 
an amount equal to the cost of the audit. The campaign will be conducted 
over the period 2016 - 2025. Capacity building for the numbers of 
auditors required will have to be done.
The energy management in large commercial facilities will be conducted 
during the whole plan period Training courses and material will be 
prepared to create awareness about energy saving options and reporting 
will be required from the facilities. It will be marketed as an additional 
brand value for the facility
*EMEER 2008 amendment to impose mandatory saving
*Green Technology Financing Scheme (GTFS) and Green Investment 
Tax Allowance (GITA) will be the funding mechanism for ESCOs to 
finance and implement the Energy Savings Measures (ESM) based upon 
the result of the IGA. 
*ESCOs or In house team could apply for the grant
Total 
Market
The market is defined as commercial electricity customers with a 
monthly electricity bill exceeding 500,000 kWh. There are approximately 
600 consumers customers meeting this criteria, with a total consumption 
of this group to be 9.5TWh per year
Annual 
Market
The annual market will be determined by the number of audits that is 
realistic to be performed with the consultancy resources available. One 
consultant can audit about 10 GWh per year. In the first year it is 
expected that 475GWh (5% of 9.5 TWh) is audited requiring about 95 
auditors. Annual market penetration is expected to be at 10% every year 
with annual market increment of 1.1%. (NAPIC data)
Savings The amount of savings achieved from saving measures identified from 
implementing the Investment Grade Audit (IGA) are expected to be at a 
minimum of 15%. It will be implemented in a period of 3 years after the 
IGA. The savings will be spread evenly at 5 % annually accumulating to 
15% in the third year (1st year = 5% saving, 2nd year = 5% + 5% = 10% 
saving, 3rd year = 5% +5% +5% = 15% saving. The 5% savings is 
equivalent to 800,0000 kWh / year / facility. 
Lifetime The savings are expected to have an average lifetime of 10 years. Title Energy Audit and Management in Large & Medium Sized Industries
Type Consultancy and grant
Design The campaign will offer free energy audits to large & medium sized industries. It 
is required that the owner accepts to invest in energy savings measures with an 
amount equal to the cost of the audit. The campaign will run in the period 2016-
2025
1. Low Cost Energy audit encouragement:
 i. Large and medium sized Industry: Should have Self-funded low cost energy 
audits
2. Investment Grade Audit (IGA):
 i. Large and medium sized Industry: Conditional free IGA whereby the 
installations are obligated to implement an energy efficiency project with an 
amount equal or more than the funding or grant provided for IGA. 
 ii. Energy Saving Measures (ESM) implementation through EPC concept with 
the involvement of Energy Service Company (ESCO).
 iii. Green Technology Financing Scheme (GTFS) and Green Investment Tax 
Allowance (GITA) will be the funding mechanism for ESCOs to finance and 
implement the Energy Savings Measures (ESM) based upon the result of the IGA. 
Sustainable economic development is essential in Malaysia's long-term 
development plans and green technology has been envisaged as one of the 
emerging drivers of economic growth not only to ensure sustainable energy 
growth for the future through energy interdependent and promote efficient 
utilization, but also the sustainability of the country economically, socially and 
environmentally. The transformation of the economy to be driven by green 
technology have been spelled out as the main agenda under the National Green 
Technology Policy which was launched in July 2009 and various programmes 
have been implemented to promote the application and development of green 
technology including the establishment of the Green Technology Financing 
Scheme in 2010. The purpose of the Scheme that offers a 60% guarantee of the 
financing amount and a rebate of 2% on the interest/profit rate charged by the 
financial institutions, is to accelerate the expansion of green investments by 
providing easier access to financing from the private and commercial financial 
institutions. The Scheme which is available until 31 December 2015 or upon 
reaching a total financing approval amount of RM3.5 billion whichever is earlier, 
facilitates the growth of local green businesses and generates new markets and job 
creation.
3. Sharing of ESM success stories among the industry players.
The energy management in large and medium sized industries will be conducted 
during the whole plan period. Training courses and material will be prepared to 
create awareness about energy saving options and reporting will be required from 
the industries.
1. Include CPD point requirement for board of director to attend training for the 
public listed company.
2. To suggest to SME Corp to insert additional requirement for SME’s who areapplying for existing funding or financial assistance available from SME Corp to 
attend energy management training.
3. Introduce Non-monetary Incentives concept: Data sharing for industry for 
benchmark
4. Introduce Disincentive concept:
 - Publish name to shame delinquent parties
 - Increase the penalty for those who do not comply to the EMEER2008 
regulations
 - Introduce surcharge(to be put under EE fund) under EMEER2008 for those 
who do not achieve the % saving of the Specific Energy Performance Indicator
Total 
Market
The market is defined as large industrial consumers with a monthly electricity bill 
exceeding 500,000 kWh *(referring to EMEER 2008) per month. There are 
approximately 1500 customers meeting this criterion. The total annual 
consumption for this group is about 40 TWh/year.
As for medium sized industry, market size is approximately 3000 installations and 
the total annual consumption for this group is about 10 TWh/year, thus total 
consumption for large and medium sized industry is about 50 TWh
Title Energy Audit in Large Government Facilities
Type Consultancy
Design The campaign is to implement energy audits in large government buildings, 
such as institutions, offices etc. It is required that the owner accepts to invest in 
energy savings measures with an amount equal to the cost of the audit. The 
campaign will be be conducted from 2016-2025 * Investment Grade Audit. 
Green Technology Financing Scheme (GTFS) and Green Investment Tax 
Allowance (GITA) will be the funding mechanism for ESCOs to finance and 
implement the Energy Savings Measures (ESM) based upon the result of the 
IGA. 
Total 
Market
The market is defined as government consumers with a monthly electricity bill 
exceeding 500,000kWh per month. There are approximately 108 customers 
(based on EMEER 2008) meeting this criteria with total consumption of 
1800 GWh (Based on TNB Data for large government facilities)
Annual 
Market
The annual market will be determined by the number of audits that is realistic 
to be performed with the consultancy resources available. One consultant can 
audit about 10 GWh per year. In the first year it is expected that 90 GWh (5%) 
is audited requiring 18 auditors. The annual market penetration starts from 5%, 
peaks at 12% at the middle of the plan period and achieves saturation at 8% at 
the end of the plan
Savings The amount of savings achieved from saving measures identified from 
implementing the Investment Grade Audit (IGA) are expected to be at a 
minimum of 15%. It will be implemented in a period of 3 years after IGA. The 
savings will be spread evenly at 5 % annually accumulating to 15% in the third 
year (1st year = 5% saving, 2nd year = 5% + 5% = 10% saving, 3rd year = 
5% +5% +5% = 15% saving. The 5% savings is equivalent to 800,0000 kWh / 
year / facility. 
Lifetime The savings are expected to have an average lifetime of 10 years. 5.5 Key initiative 4: Promotion of Co-generations
Generating electricity and thermal energy using cogeneration can achieve thermal 
conversion efficiencies of over 80% as compared with conversion efficiencies of about 
over 50% to less than 30% in combined cycle gas turbines and open cycle gas turbines 
respectively. To promote an uptake of cogeneration, barriers such as the high top up and 
standby rates and the inadequacies in the natural gas supply for cogeneration will be 
addressed
Title Co-generation in Industries and Commercial Buildings
Type Removal of barriers
Design The cogeneration system's primary function is to meet the heating or cooling 
demand in the facility and power generation will be secondary. The systems 
must be fully cogeneration and can include thermal energy storage tanks
1.The programme is to promote cogeneration in industries and buildings.
2. This will be done by reducing barriers, including:
 a. Standby and top up charges
 b. Gas tariff pricing (TPA)
 c. Possible lack of Incentives
 d. Technical hurdles – lack of capability to locally manufacture some 
energy supply equipment which leads to higher investments
 e. Connection to the grid – implication on the reserve margin for the 
utilities
 f. Lack of awareness on benefits of cogeneration
3. To overcome the above barriers, a couples of key strategic measures need 
to be implemented, such as:
 a. Design of standby, top up and load connected charges that are co-gen 
friendly
 - Lowering the amount of charges
 - Non Firm standby charges (offering daily or monthly as used 
charges)
 b. Open bidding for special package of co-gen plants with special gas 
tariff pricing.
 c. Promoting the existing incentives such as low cost financing by 
MGTC and etc.
 d. Local manufacturers' capacity building
 e. Regulatory framework for grid-connected co-gen and sales of excess 
power
 f. Awareness enhancement on the benefits of co-gen 
Total 
Market
The market is facilities with high demand of heating or cooling. The 
preliminary market is only considered to be the supported projects in this 
programme. By the end of the plan period, it is targeted to have 100 
operating cogeneration plants.
Annual 
Market
It is envisaged that with the reduction of barriers and the increase in 
electricity tariffs in the country, about 12 MWe of cogeneration (about 12 
installations) will be installed per year in the country from the year 2017 
onwards.5.6 Key initiative 5: Energy Efficient Building Design
The commercial sector consumes about one-third of all electricity in the country and a 
large share of this is used in buildings for cooling, ventilation, lighting, appliances etc. 
The future increase in energy consumption in the commercial sector will come from 
new buildings. Therefore, a programme to ensure that these new buildings are designed
and built with consideration of energy efficiency is of high importance. Surveys have 
shown that new buildings are consuming energy around 200-250 kWh/m
2
/year,
which could be reduced to about 135 kWh/m
2
/year by applying the Code of
Practice MS1525:2014 on energy efficiency and use of renewable energy for nonresidential buildings.
At present the MS 1525:2014 is a voluntary code of practice and it is therefore purely 
up to the developers to use it. As many buildings are occupied by tenants or other
owners rather than by the developers, the building design often does not take energy 
efficiency into consideration as this might increase the building cost and the savings 
will not benefit the developer.
The programme is planned to 
enforce the provision of MS1525 
through the Uniform Building By Law 
(UBBL) with the cooperation and 
support from the Ministry of Urban Well 
Being, Housing and Local Government. 
Savings The savings are in terms of natural gas savings, as cogeneration will utilise 
the fuel more efficiently. The power generation will save power generation 
in central power plants. Distribution and transmission lossess are not 
considered. 1 MWe cogeneration plant is expected to generate 7 GWh/year 
(at the load factor of 0.8, GWh generated = 1 MW x 24hr x 365 days x 0.8 
load factor = 7 GWh / year). Thus the electricity savings are 7 GWh/year for 
1 MW capacity. The value of the savings is not the full tariff savings, but the 
tariff savings minus the additional fuel cost and O&M cost. So the tariff 
savings is about 50% of the tariff.Title Energy Efficiency in New Buildings
Type Awareness enhancement & incorporation into UBBL
Design The programme is to promote energy efficiency in new buildings. By 
enforcing building regulations on energy efficiency (such as MS1525) 
the energy consumption of new buildings will be lower than the baseline. 
Green Technology Financing Scheme (GTFS) and Green Investment 
Tax Allowance (GITA) will be the funding mechanism for ESCOs to 
finance and implement the Energy Savings Measures (ESM) based upon 
the result of the IGA. 
Total Market The market is defined by new commercial buildings including Office 
buildings, shopping complexes, hotels etc.
Annual Market The annual market is the annual increase in floor space for commercial 
buildings. The average annual market as of 2013 is 145,000 m2-year.The 
annual market growths is about 1% (BSEEP study).
Savings Based on MS1525 EE building consumes 136kWh/m2 -year and a 
regular building consumes 200 to 300 kWh/m2 - year, so average 
savings that can be achieved is (200-150 = 50) 50kWh/m2- year. 
Lifetime The savings are expected to have an average lifetime of 10 years. 6. Costs and Benefits
The effective and efficient implementation of the National Energy Efficiency Action 
Plan programmes requires an average governmental budget allocation of RM 54.3
million annually. The budget will cover the cost to administer and incentivise the 
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan programmes. The public expenditure on the 
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, a total of RM 543 million, will be leveraged
by private sector investments. A total of RM 5,781 million private investments will be 
induced over the plan. From this investment amount, the largest share will be spent on 
the adaptation of energy-efficient technologies.
The public and private expenditure on the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
programmes, amounting to a total of RM 6,324 million, will result in a total direct 
monetary saving of RM 18,538 million over the plan period. The direct monetary 
benefit is the value of total electricity saved by the National Energy Efficiency 
Action Plan, calculated based on the current electricity tariff. The other indirect
benefits, i.e. capacity savings and greenhouse gas reductions are not included in the 
direct monetary benefit.
The cost-benefit ratio of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, which is 
calculated by dividing the direct monetary benefit with the public and private cost, is 
2.9. In other word, every RM 1 spent on the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
programmes will result in a benefit of RM 2.90. The cost-benefit ratio based on the 
lifetime savings of energy-efficient technologies adopted and adapted during the 
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is 6.7. The overall “cash-flow” during the plan
period is summarized in Table 2. The cash-flow shows continuous gain from the sixth
year of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan implementation. The reason for
such pattern is because the energy savings from the early years of the plan are accrued 
in the later years of the plan.
Table 2: The cash-flow of National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
Funding Unit 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Total
Public 
Funding
RM 
(Million)
24 39 59 60 61 52 53 54 44 45 493
Private 
Funding
RM 
(Million)
207 303 493 496 596 628 672 755 791 840 5,781
Administrat
ion
RM 
(Million) 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 50
Total 
Payments
RM 
(Million)
236 347 557 562 662 685 730 814 840 890 6,324
Benefits RM 
(Million)
28 135 378 799 1,336 1,947 2,552 3,173 3,790 4,401 18,538
Cash Flow RM 
(Million) -208
-
212 -180 237 674 1,261 1,821 2,359 2,950 3,511 12,214At the end of the plan period, the Maximum demand is expected to be 2021 MW. This in 
turn translates to a reduction of 2526 MW in new generation capacity plant up. This 
means, the generation cost that can be avoided:
i. If in the case of coal plants, referring to generation cost of a 1000 MW 
coal power plant, which is RM 6 billion (based on the 2012 cost). Hence 
for a 2500MW coal plant, the avoided cost of new plant up is RM 15 
billion 
ii. Or in the case of gas power plants, estimated cost for a 1000 MW plant is 
RM 2.4 billion (based on 2013 cost). Which equals to RM 6 billion in 
cost avoided for a 2500 MW gas power plant.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 46
7. Monitoring of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
Progress
The implementation of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan requires effective 
monitoring by the Government. As the EC oversee the implementation of the National 
Energy Efficiency Action Plan and the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
Project Team executes the plan it is critical that the progress of implementation
is monitored periodically by the Data Management and Monitoring Unit of the National 
Energy Efficiency Action Plan Project Team. In this regard, the annual planning and
resources allocation for the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is prepared with 
clear indicators for the expected annual implementation target.
One of the key factors to promote energy efficiency improvement successfully is to 
understand how energy is being used, and ways in which energy can be used more 
efficiently. By understanding them, not only the energy efficiency improvement can 
be done with great success but it will also help to monitor and evaluate the 
performances in terms of energy efficiency improvements. To gain such an insight, an 
appreciation of the many complexities which make up economic and social activities, 
and the ways in which these interact is required.
Currently, the method used to monitor Malaysia’s energy efficiency status is by
judging energy intensity. The energy intensity value is a ratio between energy and 
economic values. Normally, the energy intensity is calculated by dividing Total 
Primary Energy Supply (TPES) by Gross Domestic Product (GDP). For Malaysia, our 
Energy Intensity (EI) in the year 2013 was 67.95 (toe/million, RM at 2005 prices). 
This implies that Malaysia’s energy efficiency status is decreasing despite the
continuous efforts undertaken to promote energy efficiency in the country.
Various strategies and actions have been taken to improve the status of energy 
efficiency in the country. However, the performances of those efforts to improve the 
state of energy supply and use in the country have remained unknown. The justification
of their performances by EI is not accurate because the EI value is not only influenced
by energy factors but also by non-energy factors such as economic structure, energy 
quality and activities.Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 47
7.1 Energy Efficiency Monitoring Framework
7.1.1. Energy Efficiency Indicator
One of the main challenges in executing energy efficiency strategies and action plans 
effectively and efficiently is to quantify the achievements from the available data. To 
make this happen, one of the useful tools in energy efficiency implementation is the 
energy efficiency indicators. In general, an energy efficiency indicator is a ratio to 
measure energy use against a unit of output. In the industrial sector, for example, the 
measures are normally energy use per Ringgit of production or energy per physical unit 
of production. In the building sector, energy intensity is expressed in terms of energy 
per square metre of floor space and in the transport sector; energy intensity is measured 
in terms of energy use per passenger-km or energy use per ton-km.
7.1.2. Reporting the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
Implementation Progress
The National Energy Efficiency Action Plan Project Team needs to report the 
progress of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan implementation as one of the 
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan’s main monitoring tools. In the reporting, the
actual progress against the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan targets will be 
communicated to stakeholders. Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 48
8.0 Impact
8.1. Economic Impact
The macro energy model for Malaysia forecasts the Final Electricity Energy demand 
(FEED) of Malaysia to keep growing. In order to reduce the FEED and subsequently 
CO2 emissions for the Residential, Commercial and Industry sectors, EE measures of 
varying targets and actions are recommended above. The reduction in FEED lowers 
energy intensity and leads to reduced CO2 emissions and intensity.
The overall impact of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is shown in Table 3 
8.2. Environmental Impact
8.2.1. Final Electricity Energy Demand (FEED) and CO2 emission 
Final Electricity Energy Demand in the year 2025 is expected to be reduced by 12,391 
GWh and the cumulative savings over 10 years from 2016 to 2025 is 52,233 GWh. In 
the case of CO2 emission, in the year 2025 the CO2 emission is reduced by 8,094
ktCO2eq. The cumulative reduction over 10 years from 2016 to 2025 is 34,886 ktCO2eq.
8.3. Social Impact
1. Increase awareness and involvement from the public and stakeholders in the 
development of the country's energy efficiency program;
2. Strengthening regulatory and enforcement on energy efficiency across the country 
to ensure continuous power supply; and
3. Improve management and human resource development to build human capital and 
experts in the field of energy efficiency. Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 49
Table 3: Impact of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
Summary
Item Unit 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Total Lifetime
Annual Savings GWh 87 386 1,101 2,286 3,783 5,475 7,161 8,909 10,653 12,391 52,233 122,543
Residential GWh 50 123 219 350 522 712 921 1,184 1,468 1,772 7,320 16,677
Commercial GWh 28 107 307 626 1,018 1,460 1,908 2,395 2,889 3,391 14,130 31,767
Industrial GWh 9 156 574 1,310 2,243 3,303 4,332 5,330 6,296 7,228 30,783 74,099
Cumulative Savings GWh 87 473 1,574 3,859 7,643 13,118 20,279 29,188 39,842 52,233 52,233 122,543
Demand Savings MW 14 63 179 373 617 893 1,168 1,453 1,737 2,021 2,021
Capacity Savings MW 18 79 224 466 771 1,116 1,460 1,816 2,172 2,526 -
Benefits RM (Million) 28 135 378 799 1,336 1,947 2,552 3,173 3,790 4,401 18,538 42,548
Public Funding RM (Million) 24 39 59 60 61 52 53 54 44 45 493 493
Private Funding RM (Million) 207 303 493 496 596 628 672 755 791 840 5,781 5,781
Administration RM (Million) 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 50 50
Total Payments RM (Million) 236 347 557 562 662 685 730 814 840 890 6,324 6,324
BCR 2.9 6.7
Cash Flow RM (Million) - 208 - 212 - 180 237 674 1,261 1,821 2,359 2,950 3,511 12,214 36,224
Total fuel savings TJ 964 4,225 11,932 24,534 40,204 57,609 74,600 91,892 108,796 125,289 540,045 1,266,995
Gas Savings TJ 443 1,943 5,489 11,286 18,494 26,500 34,316 42,271 50,046 57,633 248,421 582,818
Coal Savings TJ 395 1,732 4,892 10,059 16,484 23,620 30,586 37,676 44,606 51,368 221,418 519,468
GHG savings ktCO2eq 62 273 771 1,585 2,597 3,721 4,819 5,936 7,028 8,094 34,886 81,847
BAU GWh 117,110 121,431 125,885 130,474 134,830 139,206 143,326 146,992 150,657 154,142 1,364,053
NEEAP GWh 117,023 121,045 124,784 128,188 131,047 133,731 136,165 138,082 140,004 141,751 1,311,820
Savings Pct 0.1% 0.3% 0.9% 1.8% 2.8% 3.9% 5.0% 6.1% 7.1% 8.0% 3.8%Ministry of Energy, Green Technology and Water, 2015 50