File Name: NAM-CPD-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Namibia
Country Code: NAM
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 4-7 September 2018
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2023
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
3 July 2018
Original: English
1811003X (E) 060718
Second regular session 2018
4-7 September 2018, New York
Item 4 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Namibia (2019-2023)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Namibia (2019-2023) 10I. Programme rationale
1. An upper-middle-income country, Namibia has effected one of the fastest reductions in 
poverty on the continent, from 28.7 per cent (2009-2010) to 17.4 per cent (2015-2016),
1
due mainly to sustained political stability, sound macroeconomic management, and public 
commitment to social protection programmes. Namibia is a constitutional multi-party 
democracy, numbered among the top 10 most peaceful countries in sub-Saharan Africa.
2
Between 2012 and 2015, economic growth averaged 5.78 per cent3thanks to a booming 
extractives industry and growth in tourism. In 2016-2017, however, that rate dropped to 
1.1 per cent. The 0.640 Human Development Index rating is above average for countries 
in the medium human development group (0.631), and above the 0.523 average for subSaharan Africa.
4
2. Namibia ranks 5th out of 54 African countries on the Ibrahim Index of African 
Governance, 2016. The Transparency International Perception Corruption Index, 2017,
ranks it the fifth least corrupt country in sub-Saharan Africa. Namibia ranks first on the 
World Press Freedom Index, 2016. Despite this strong foundation, Namibia faces several 
persistent development challenges. It remains one of the most unequal nations in the world, 
with a Gini coefficient of 0.560.
5 Gender inequality is high: Namibia ranks 108th out of 
159 countries, with a Gender Inequality Index value of 0.474.
6 Compared to other uppermiddle-income countries, the lowest percentage of its population (55 per cent) has access 
to improved sanitation facilities; only 48 per cent (mainly urban) has access to electricity.
7
3. Robust economic growth since independence has neither led to adequate job creation,
nor has it been inclusive. Unemployment rates increased from 27.9 per cent in 2014 to 
34 per cent in 2016, with youth unemployment at 43.4 per cent;
8 disabled persons’
unemployment at 39 per cent;
9
and women’s unemployment at 38.3 per cent (29.8 per cent
for men).
10 Unemployment is highest in rural areas, at 39.2 per cent, compared to 
30.3 per cent in urban areas.
11 Poverty is concentrated in rural areas.12 Namibia is one of 
the driest countries 13 in sub-Saharan Africa, with high climatic variability due to 
unpredictable rainfall, translating into a fragile ecosystem that is vulnerable to shocks. The 
country faces persistent droughts and recurring floods in the north; desertification in the 
central, southwest and eastern regions; forest fires throughout the country; and sporadic 
disease outbreaks (such as cholera and hepatitis E). 
4. Inadequate capacities of communities to adapt to natural and economic shocks, such as 
fluctuating commodity prices and unemployment, reduce access to basic needs and 
services. Often, this results in resources for human development priorities being diverted 
to disaster response. In 2016-2017, 27.8 per cent of the population were food insecure, with 
rural communities, women and small-holder farmers the most affected.
14 As a small but 
open economy, reliant on its extractives sector and dependent on its trading partners, 
 
1 Namibia Household Income and Expenditure Survey, Namibia Statistics Agency,2009-2010 and 2015-2016
2 Global Peace Index, 2017
3 National accounts, 2016
4 Human Development Report, UNDP, 2016
5 Namibia Household Income and Expenditure Survey, Namibia Statistics Agency, 2015-2016
6 Human Development Report, UNDP, 2016
7 Namibia Household Income and Expenditure Survey, Namibia Statistics Agency, 2015-2016
8 Namibia Labour Force Survey, Namibia Statistics Agency, 2016
9 Census Disability Report, 2011
10 Namibia Labour Force Survey, Namibia Statistics Agency, 2016
11 Ibid.
12 In rural areas, 25.1 per cent; National Household Income and Expenditure Survey, 2015-2016, Namibia Statistics Agency, 2018
13 Annual precipitation in Namibia was 209.98mm in 2016; Climate Change Knowledge Portal, World Bank Group
14 Namibia Vulnerability Assessment Committee Results, 2016Namibia witnessed low growth (1.1 per cent) during the global slow-down of 2016-201715. 
The Government initiated austerity measures to contain the public debt level, which stood 
at 46.9 per cent of gross domestic product in 2017 – well above the 35 per cent limit.
16 In 
2017, Namibia launched its Fifth National Development Plan, integrating the Sustainable 
Development Goals under the theme “Working together towards prosperity”. The plan is 
built on four pillars: economic progression, social transformation, environmental 
sustainability, and good governance. It seeks to accelerate poverty eradication and 
inequality reduction to achieve inclusive, sustainable and equitable growth. 
5. Namibia ranks 111th out of 157 countries on overall performance towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals, 17 indicating a need to accelerate progress on all 17 goals
to address high levels of inequality and eradicate patterns of exclusion that perpetuate this 
divide.
18 Centralized decision-making, inadequate availability of relevant data, and limited 
citizen engagement have hampered service delivery.
19 Limited capacity of oversight 
institutions, accountability systems and policies have contributed to a perception of 
increasing corruption.
20 While Namibia ratified most of the international human rights 
conventions and treaties and has a robust legal framework for human rights, 
implementation and reporting remain inadequate. The universal periodic review 
recommended improved legislation and mechanisms to monitor the implementation and 
verification of reviews – with attention to the ratification of pending international human 
rights instruments.
6. Namibia is among the best African conservation successes: 44 per cent of the land mass 
is under conservation management, and community participation in natural resource
management brought about an increase of communal conservancies from 66 in 2012 to 92 
in 2016,
21 creating 5,808 jobs in 2014 and generating approximately $7.7 million to benefit 
local communities.
22 Yet utilization of other natural resources remains unsustainable owing 
to high demand; expansion of mining; and increased volumes of waste and pollution in 
ecologically sensitive areas. Illegal wildlife trade and human/wildlife conflict are growing 
challenges. Weak institutional capacity and inadequate coordination among institutions –
evidenced by limited implementation and enforcement of legislation and compliance with 
environmental regulations – remain critical challenges. About 20 per cent of urban 
households cook over fire, and 50 per cent rely on the daily use of woody biomass for 
thermal power, leading to air pollution and deforestation. Diversified renewable energy 
sources (biomass, solar, wind and hydro) are needed to improve the domestic and economic 
use of energy.
7. Improved harmonization of environmental policies, including credible data, will ensure 
the sustainable management of natural resources. The majority of the population is rural 
and vulnerable to economic and weather-related shocks, highlighting the need for increased 
resilience and enhanced ecosystem services. The economy is excessively dependent on the 
extractive industry, with inadequate investments in economic diversification activities. 
Jobs and skills mismatches have resulted from limited investment in technical and 
vocational training, perpetuating high unemployment impacting particularly women, 
youth, persons with disabilities and the marginalized. Weak implementation capacity for 
inclusive growth strategies impedes pro-poor income and livelihood activities.
 
15 Annual national accounts, 2016-2017
16 Africa Economic Outlook, 2017
17 SDG Index and Dashboards Report, Sustainable Development Solutions Network, 2017
18 Common Country Assessment, 2017
19 Institute of Public Policy and Research, annual report, 2017
20 National Corruption Perception Survey, 2016
21 Fifth National Development Plan
22 Ibid.8. The independent country programme evaluation, 2017 noted that UNDP has been 
effective in contributing to national development, policy support, strategic planning and 
community response, especially in sustainable environment23. It also noted that the country 
programme had laid a good foundation in mainstreaming gender through supporting the 
national agenda on gender advocacy at the ‘enabling environment’ level, and gendertargeted project interventions at the community level.
24 Namibia developed a road map and 
checklist to help implementing partners comply with gender-responsive budgeting.
However, the evaluation noted that a more focused programme design would increase
effectiveness and sustainability and achieve a better balance between planning and 
implementation support. Strategic partnerships will optimize resources and maximize 
results, including through partnerships with civil society and academia.
9. The 2017 partnership survey noted that, in the next five years, UNDP should leverage 
its comparative advantage and focus on policy advice to enhance sustainable development;
natural resources management with improved public participation, ensuring compliance 
with human rights25 and gender equality.
26 Leveraging its comparative advantage in the 
area of climate change, UNDP mobilized resources27 through ‘smart’ partnerships with the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF), the MDG Fund, and the Yahoo Japan Corporation. 
The UNDP capacity to support procurement and administrative oversight made it a
preferred partner for the Government in implementing the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria28 and working towards gender equality; and its convening power 
has led to a strong partnership with UN-Women. UNDP forged partnerships with academia 
to enhance its thought leadership, and is exploring partnerships with the Development Bank 
of Southern Africa, the African Development Bank (AfDB), and German Development 
Cooperation to accelerate achievement of the sustainable development goals.29
10. Leveraging past UNDP investments, this country programme is guided by the 
Strategic Plan, 2018-21. In line with the UNDP comparative advantage in providing policy 
advice and capacity-building, the country programme posits three pathways: diversified 
pro-poor employment; sustainable environment and resilience; and inclusive governance 
to accelerate achievement of Sustainable Development Goals and achieve inclusive and 
green growth and accountable institutions for poverty eradication and inequality reduction. 
Building on lessons learned, UNDP will focus its programme design on increased 
effectiveness and sustainability. It will pursue an integrated approach to strengthening
decentralized structures for participative citizen engagement to improve decision-making
and service delivery, and to increase resilience through skills development and inclusive 
growth strategies.
11. The country programme, premised on ‘leaving no one behind’, will target the most 
vulnerable and marginalized groups. The focus will be on increasing national capacities 
for disaggregated data collection, research and innovation delivered through partnerships 
with the National Statistics Agency, civil society, academia and the private sector. UNDP 
will facilitate an integrated platform to support achievement of the sustainable development 
goals by aligning policy advice with implementation and capacity-building among national 
partners. Recognizing that Namibia is an upper-middle-income country, UNDP will 
 
23 Independent country programme evaluation, 2017
24 Ibid.
25 Including the United Nations Business and Human Rights guidelines
26 Common Country Assessment, 2017
27 Ibid.
28 Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria project document
29 The latter are explicit partnerships based on in-country discussions addressing access to climate financing, promotion of renewable energy, and 
strengthening ecosystem and climate resilience.facilitate the transition from funding to financing through strengthened partnerships and 
South-South cooperation, establishing an integrated national financing framework.
Partnerships will target international financial institutions, national entities accredited to
the Green Climate Fund, and the Adaptation Fund. Opportunities will be explored with the 
private sector and academia.
30
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
12. The country programme is informed by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, other international and regional treaties, and commitments such as Agenda 
2063 of the African Union, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the Addis 
Ababa Action Agenda, the Paris Agreement on climate change, and other multilateral 
environmental agreements and human rights treaties. It will integrate these treaties and 
obligations into domestic policies and will support the national priorities articulated in the 
Fifth National Development Plan and the Blueprint on Wealth Redistribution and Poverty 
Eradication.
31 To address persistent poverty, inequality and vulnerability, especially in 
rural areas, the programme will use three complementary and integrated pathways: 
(a) diversified employment, pro-poor income and sustainable livelihoods for women, 
youth, persons with disabilities and marginalized populations (Strategic Plan, solutions 1
and 6); (b) sustainable environmental management and increased resilience to shocks and 
crises (Strategic Plan, solutions 3, 4, 5 and 6); and (c) effective, accountable and inclusive 
governance, promoting civic engagement and ensuring respect for human rights and the 
rule of law32 (Strategic Plan, solutions 2 and 6).
13. Good governance, including data, gender equality and sustainability, will be addressed 
across the three pathways, which define an integrated approach to strengthening
decentralized structures and local governance systems, and enhancing citizen engagement 
in decision-making to ensure inclusive growth strategies. To bridge information and data 
gaps and strengthen accountability, innovative solutions will be explored for disaggregated 
data generation and analysis, including on disability, through a rights-based approach, in 
partnership with the Office of the Ombudsperson and the Namibia Statics Agency. The 
programme will focus on poor women and youth, the marginalized, and people living with 
disabilities, especially in biodiversity-rich, sensitive and disaster-prone areas (Kavango 
East, Kavango West, Ohangwena, Omusati, Oshana, Oshikoto, and Zambezi) and wildlife 
corridors (Kavango-Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area, Ai-Ais-Richtersveld 
Transfrontier Parks, and the Skeleton Coast Park), where improved resilience to shocks 
and access to employment, water and clean energy are needed.
Sustainable, inclusive and green growth
Diversified employment, pro-poor income and sustainable livelihoods for women, youth, 
persons with disabilities and marginalized populations
14. Building on its support to developing the Blueprint on Wealth Redistribution and 
Poverty Eradication, UNDP will strengthen the institutional frameworks for inclusive 
growth strategies. It will introduce entrepreneurial and sustainable business models 
consisting of a comprehensive package of services and interventions to improve efficiency
and enhance the competitiveness and profitability of micro-, small and medium enterprises. 
The programme will leverage South-South cooperation through partners such as the 
Empretec Foundation, and will use the UNDP solutions exchange platform ‘SSMart’ to
create a pool of internationally accredited Namibian experts. 
 
30 Including the Namibia Chamber of Commerce Industry, the Emerging Tourism Enterprises Association, the University of Namibia, Namibia 
University of Science and Technology, and the International University of Management
31 Common Country Assessment, 2017
32 The marginalized population includes the San
the Ovatue and the Ovahimba15. UNDP will facilitate enterprise formation to ensure equitable income distribution 
among women, youth, persons with disabilities and marginalized populations, in 
collaboration with national partners, including private sectors and academia. This will be 
achieved in partnership with other United Nations organizations, such as the International 
Labour Organization, by supporting diversification of the economy through coordinated 
localized entrepreneurship skills, local content development, and business development 
support services. UNDP will ensure the sustainability of private sector growth and 
employment creation through micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises by supporting 
coordination between the Ministry of Industrialization, Trade and SME Development and 
the Ministry of Poverty Eradication and Social Welfare. UNDP will provide policy advice
and conduct research, exploring new strategies such as basic income grants for pro-poor 
interventions to reduce inequality. 
Sustainable environmental management and increased resilience to shocks and crises
16. This path to economic, social and environmental resilience is underpinned by 
investments in environment, sustainable natural resource management, climate change 
adaptation, and disaster risk reduction and management. The focus will be on building 
resilience through adaptation, and reducing disaster risk by strengthening the technical and 
functional capacities of inter-sectoral environmental coordination bodies. In scaling up 
policy implementation and systems UNDP will support the improvement of national 
coordination mechanisms such as the sustainable development advisory council and the 
parliamentary standing committee on natural resources. Ecosystem management and 
sustainable use of natural resources will be prioritized by strengthening the technical and 
institutional capacities of national and community-based entities. Programme actions will
integrate environmental, disaster risk reduction and climate change issues into national, 
subnational and sectoral development policies, strategies and programmes in the areas of
agriculture, biodiversity, energy, land, tourism, water, entrepreneurship, trade, and 
industrialization. Transformative interventions such as the Windhoek Managed Aquifer 
Recharge System and the Namibia Integrated Landscape Approach for Enhancing 
Livelihoods and Environmental Governance to Eradicate Poverty will be pursued so that
poor communities and marginalized groups living in and around biodiversity-rich and 
sensitive areas can benefit from ecosystem services. 
17. Development partners and donors, including the Green Climate Fund and the GEF,
will support these two initiatives. UNDP will promote effective design and uptake of 
financial resources for Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation. To advance climate 
change actions and accelerate national access towards climate finance, it will support the 
implementation of national policy instruments and frameworks through partnerships with 
other United Nations organizations, national partners, and regional and international funds. 
UNDP will expand the implementation and management capacities of non-governmental 
institutions and national climate financing recipients to meet international environmental 
and social standards. UNDP will work with the National Designated Authority, assisting
government and local authorities to access ‘sustainable energy for all’ financing from the 
Green Climate Fund to ensure universal access to modern energy services, double the rate 
of improvement in energy efficiency, and double the share of renewable energy in the 
national energy mix. To create synergies and integrated development, biodiversity offsets, 
corporate social investments and use of international and national environmental standards 
will be increased. 
18. UNDP will facilitate and work with national, regional and local institutions to build 
capacities for environmental justice and accountability mechanisms to expand South-South 
and triangular cooperation. UNDP will partner with academia, such as the University of 
Namibia Faculty of Law and the University of Oxford, through academic and professional 
exchanges. Regarding North-South cooperation in renewable energy technologies, 
research, innovation and intelligent surveillance for curbing the illegal wildlife trade, 
UNDP will build on innovations such as the partnership with the Yahoo Japan Corporation. New North-South partnerships, with the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research,
for example, will research crucial scientific questions in the fields of global climate change 
and sustainable development. 
Improved governance for accountable, responsive institutions and civic engagement
19. The next universal periodic review, in January 2021, will provide ample opportunity 
for UNDP to strengthen capacity of the Office of the Ombudsperson for general 
compliance with the review, and to monitor the National Human Rights Action Plan, 2015-
2019. The use of data and evidence for policy and decision-making is not internalized as a 
practice, and lack of availability of appropriate data compounds the challenge. In 
partnership with other United Nations organizations, the Namibia Statistics Agency, civil 
society organizations and academia, UNDP will prioritize enhancement of capacity and 
support better coordination of the national statistical system for a well-managed and robust 
data ecosystem. UNDP will support the oversight institutions in re-engineering data 
systems to harvest essential information from national and synchronized data platforms. 
UNDP will partner with the Office of the Prime Minister, under the Directorate: Public 
Service Innovation and Reform, the National Commission on Research Science and 
Technology, and academia, to address civic engagement through innovative processes that 
enhance inclusive policymaking. 
20. UNDP will provide support for establishing strong, well-managed data infrastructure 
and systems to promote transparency and accountability among all stakeholders. In 
partnership with the Millennium Institute Washington, the National Planning Commission 
and the Namibia Statistics Agency, it will facilitate evidence-informed sequencing of the 
sustainable development goals through integrated modelling.
33 This will support the 
Government and academia in undertaking such modelling in the future. The conditions for 
increasing institutional accountability, transparency and citizen engagement will be created 
through four interconnected outputs. 
21. UNDP interventions will: (a) leverage innovative solutions to strengthen citizen 
engagement in generating real-time data to improve participation, decision-making, and 
public service delivery; (b) scale up efforts to enable government institutions34 at national 
and regional levels to perform core functions for improved accountability, participation 
and representation; (c) streamline frameworks and dialogue processes towards the
effective, transparent engagement of civil society in engendered national development; and 
(d) support innovation at all levels for equitable access to public services. 
III. Programme and risk management
22. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contribution to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results 
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities 
of managers at country, regional and headquarters levels are prescribed in the Programme 
and Operations Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework. The 
programme will be nationally executed. Associated projects will use the most appropriate 
implementation modality to ensure effective and efficient delivery of nationally owned, 
sustainable results. With both macro and micro assessments, the Harmonized Approach to 
Cash Transfers will be used jointly with the United Nations system and national agencies,
both as a risk mitigation strategy and a capacity-building measure to strength national 
ownership and sustainability of the results. Direct implementation will be employed, where 
needed, to ensure timely and pertinent turnaround and UNDP accountability in complex 
programming situations and in response to partner requests. Based on demand-driven 
 
33 Data will be also collected from Question Sets – Washington Group on disability statistics, endorsed by UNDP and other United Nations organizations.
34 Such as the Anti-Corruption Commission
Parliamentthe Office of the Prime Ministerthe Ministry of Justiceand the Environmental Commissionservice provision and delivery, UNDP will provide support to national implementing 
partners, civil society and academia, in bridging immediate capacity gaps while ensuring 
that long-term capacity-building takes place for sustainability beyond this programme. 
23. Given recurrent emergency situations35 in the country, accelerated procedures will be 
adopted to provide rapid response to crisis situations, including new requests for UNDP 
support. In accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/9, all direct costs associated 
with project implementation should be charged to the concerned projects. Interventions 
will be scaled up or down depending on the availability of resources. UNDP will review 
structures and procedures to ensure they are ‘fit for purpose’ when implementing the 
programme, and agile enough to adapt to evolving contexts, United Nations reforms and 
the Strategic Plan, 2018-2021. UNDP will ensure that adequate human capacities, 
structures and management systems are in place to implement the programme successfully. 
Technical and functional staff capacity and requisite competencies will be developed 
through training, detail and exchange programmes. 
24. The country office will tap into UNDP global and regional business service centres to 
address strategic capacity needs while strengthening the capacities of national 
implementation entities to enhance delivery of the programme. UNDP has identified four 
risks to the proposed programme: (a) inadequate human and financial resources; 
(b) entrenched intersecting inequalities; (c) limited absorptive capacity; and (d) natural 
disasters (mainly droughts).
36 To address these, in collaboration with national stakeholders, 
a detailed risk mitigation plan will be developed during the preparation of programmes and 
projects to amplify national ownership. Elements of the risk mitigation plan will include: 
(a) strategic partnerships for resource mobilization, including government cost sharing, the 
Green Climate Fund, foundations, the private sector, and non-traditional donors;
(b) targeting of marginalized groups (c) institutional capacity-building for oversight 
institutions and through civic engagement to hold public institutions accountable for
service delivery; and (d) reducing vulnerabilities and building resilience under the 
environment programme and United Nations support to the Directorate of Disaster Risk 
Management in the Office of the Prime Minister.
25. The office will adopt and comply with the new UNDP social and environmental 
quality assurance standards. Fast-track procedures will be utilized for timely responses to 
crisis situations and emergency demands by enhancing a government early-warning system
in collaboration with the United Nations Emergency Humanitarian Focal Points Group. 
Programme risks will be monitored every six months as part of the programme review. 
Project risks will be captured and monitored quarterly. By leveraging the capacities of its
Regional Service Centre, UNDP will improve communication and the visibility of 
interventions; explore innovative funding mechanisms, including the Green Climate Fund
and the GEF; and adopt a more collaborative approach with the regional economic 
communities.
37 UNDP will reinforce in-kind contributions and technical exchanges
through strengthened South-South cooperation, and will advocate for government 
contributions to the programme. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
26. Results-based management will be key to UNDP support. UNDP will invest in a strong 
monitoring and evaluation system for this country programme. Its interventions and
indicators are aligned with the national priorities outlined in the Fifth National 
 
35 Including droughts, floods and disease outbreaks
36 Index for Risk Management, 2018
37 Such as the Southern African Development Community and the Southern African Customs UnionDevelopment Plan; the United Nations Partnership Framework, 2019-2023; the Strategic 
Plan, 2018-2021; ‘Vision 2030’; and the sustainable development goals. To the extent 
possible, UNDP will use national monitoring systems, including surveys and censuses
conducted by the National Statistics Agency, to monitor its contribution to national results. 
International good governance and regional commitment indicators will be used at the 
global level. In partnership with United Nations organizations and development partners,
38
UNDP will update the electronic monitoring and evaluation system of the National 
Statistics Agency to monitor the sustainable development goals. Through a joint United 
Nations programme, UNDP will support implementation of the strategic plan, 2017/18-
2021/22, of the Agency.
27. Collection and analysis of disaggregated data by sex, location, age, disability and 
socio-economic status are essential to ‘leaving no one behind’. UNDP will collaborate with 
academia, research institutions, civil society, and local and global think tanks, to collect 
and analyse socio-economic data to provide evidence for policymaking. It will contribute 
to strengthening data and information systems, including improving data quality, analysis,
and use, to monitor the progress of the Fifth National Development Plan, the sustainable 
development goals, the United Nations Partnership Framework, the country programme,
and United Nations human rights treaties, in collaboration with the Office of the 
Ombudsperson. 
28. The results and resources framework of the Strategic Plan will be the reference for
setting programme output indicators, complemented by others as necessary. UNDP will 
codify Namibia as a ‘good practice’, to be shared through the SSMart for sustainable 
development goals. The UNDP results monitoring system will be aligned with the UNPAF 
mechanism. The Programme Steering Committee will monitor progress annually towards 
achievement of results. At the project level, where feasible, the consolidated project 
steering committees will ensure regular monitoring of progress. A midterm evaluation will 
be conducted, and a final one during the last quarter of the fourth year of implementation. 
29. Evaluations will be selected, planned and conducted to measure progress on results,
and, for learning and accountability purposes, to allow informed decision-making for 
adjustments during the implementation phase. Gender markers will be used to track country 
programme budgets and expenditures so as to improve planning and resources allocation 
for gender equality. UNDP will implement the project quality assurance system and will 
develop capacities for gender-sensitive monitoring and evaluation. UNDP will allocate at 
least 1 per cent of its programme budget to data collection and monitoring and evaluation.
 
38 Including UNFPA, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the World Food Programme (WFP), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), and the 
World Health Organization (WHO)Annex. Results and resources framework for Namibia (2019-2023)
National priority or goal: Pillar 1. Economic progression (Fifth National Development Plan – NDP5)
United Nations Partnership Framework - UNPAF (or equivalent) outcome 1.1 involving UNDP: By 2023, institutions upscale efforts to implement 
policies for inclusive development and poverty reduction for vulnerable groups
Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) 1, 5, 8, 9, 10
Related strategic plan outcome: Outcome 1. Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions
UNPAF outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s)
Data source, frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs
Major partners / 
partnerships
frameworks
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome (in 
$ thousands)
1.1 Incidence of poverty,
by sex of head of 
household
Baseline: 19.2% (F),
15.8% (M) (2016)
Target: 10% (2022)
1.2 Youth unemployment 
rate, by sex 
Baseline: 49.2 (F) 37.5(M) 
2016
Target: 24.2% (2022)
1.3 Multi-dimensional 
poverty index (MPI)
Baseline: 45.5 (2013)
Target: 33.3 (2023)
1.4 National
unemployment rate, 
disaggregated by 
rural/urban and gender
Baseline: 34.0% 
(Rural: 39.2%;
Urban: 30.3%; F: 38.3%; 
M: 29.8%) (2016)
Target: 24% (No 
disaggregated data) 
Data sources: Namibia
Household and Income and 
Expenditure Survey, NDP5
Frequency: Every five years
Data source: Namibia Labour 
Force Survey
Frequency: Annual
Data source: Human 
Development Report (HDR)
Frequency: MPI was 
introduced in 2010 in the 
HDR, but data for Namibia 
was last collected and reported 
in 2013
Data source: Namibia Labour 
Force Survey
Frequency: Quadrennial
Output 1.1. Innovative measures in place to increase ‘vulnerable/disadvantaged’ women, 
youth, persons with disabilities (PWDs) and marginalized groups’ empowerment and 
participation in economic development processes (MITSMED).
Indicator 1.1.1. No. of entrepreneurship programmes, developed and running, targeting 
women, youth, PWDs, and other marginalized groups
Baseline: 0 (2017) 
Target: 4 (2023) 
Data sources: Monitoring reports
Indicator 1.1.2. No. of livelihood options created to empower ‘vulnerable/disadvantaged’ 
women, youth, PWDs and marginalized groups
Baseline women: 1 (2017) 
Target: 4 (2023) 
Data sources: Monitoring reports
Ministry of Poverty 
Eradication and Social 
Welfare (MPESW)
Ministry of 
Industrialization, 
Trade and SME 
Development 
(MITSMED)
Ministry of Finance 
(MOF)
Ministry of Higher 
Education, Training 
and Innovation
(MGECW)
German Development 
Cooperation (GDC)
Finnish Cooperation
Namibia Chamber of 
Commerce and 
Industry
University of Namibia
Namibia University of 
Science and 
Technology
International 
University of 
Management
FAO
Empretec foundations
Regular: 500
Other: 3,689
Output 1.2. (SDG 1, target 1b). By 2023, MITSMED, MOF, MPESW, MGECW and other 
Governing Council members enabled to create and implement innovative pro-poor and 
gender-responsive development policy frameworks and programmes for poverty eradication.
Indicator 1.2.1. No. of gender-responsive development policy frameworks (Strategic Plan
Integrated Results and Resources Framework – IRRF, output indicator 1.1.2.3) 
Baseline: 0 (2017)
Target: 2 (2023) 
Data source: Monitoring reports and evaluation report
Output 1.3. National institutions in charge of economic diversification (MITSMED) have the 
capacity to promote local content development and value addition to national resources.
Indicator 1.3.1. Mineral policy reviewed
Baseline: 0 (2017)
Target: 1 (2023)
Data source: MITSMED annual report
National priority or goal: Pillar 3. Environmental sustainability (NDP5)
UNPAF (or equivalent) outcome 3.1 involving UNDP: By 2023, vulnerable populations in disaster-prone and biodiversity-sensitive areas are resilient to SDGs 1, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17DP/DCP/NAM/3
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 3. Build resilience to shocks and crises
2.1 Hectares of land 
managed sustainably under 
a conservation, sustainable 
use or access- and benefitssharing regime (percentage 
of land covered under 
structured natural resources
management)
Baseline: 43.7% (2016)
Target: 45% (2023)
UNPAF indicator: 
Percentage of degraded 
land (proportion of land 
degraded over total land)
Baseline: 20%
Target: 18% (2023)
2.2 Annual revenue 
generated from Protected 
Areas and CBNRM
Baseline: NAD 147.4
million (2014)
Targets: NAD 296.3 
million (2022)
Data source: Namibian 
Association of CBNRM 
Support Organizations
Frequency: Annual 
Data sources: MAWF, Land 
Degradation Neutrality (LDN)
report
Frequency: Biennial 
Data sources: NDP5, National
Accounts 
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.1. Relevant policies, regulatory frameworks and institutions enabled to ensure the 
conservation, sustainable use, access and benefit-sharing of natural resources, biodiversity 
and ecosystems, in line with international conventions and national legislation.
Indicator 2.1.1. Natural resources that are managed under a sustainable use, conservation, 
access and benefit-sharing regime (SP IRRF output indicator 1.4.1.2) 
a) Indicator 2.1.1 a. No. of existing state-protected areas under improved management 
b) Indicator 2.1.1 b. No. of hectares burned by veld fires in conservation areas
c) Indicator 2.1.1 c. Regions assessed for trends in land degradation
d) Indicator 2.1.1 d. No. of shared water ecosystems (fresh or marine) under cooperative 
management
Baseline: a. 12; b. 3.7 million hectares; c. 1; d. 3; (2016)
Target: a. 20 (8 new ones); b. 1.3 million hectares; c. 1; d. 3; (2023) 
Data sources: Government gazettes, protected areas/national parks management plans, GEF 
tracking tools, reports of: Permanent Okavango River Basin Water Commission, OrangeSenqu River Commission, Orange-Senqu River Commission, and NDP5 implementation plan
Indicator 2.1.2. No. of gender-sensitive legal and policy instruments on natural resources 
and environment to improve access to and control over assets and services
Baseline: 3. 1996 Nature Ordinance Act, Community-Based Natural Resource Management
(CBNRM) policy, and National Climate Change Strategy and Action. Plan (NCCSAP) (2017)
Target: 4. National Adaptation Plan for Namibia (2023)
Data sources: Government Gazette, Environment Investment Fund (EIF), CBNRM, 
ministerial/sectoral reports, 
Indicator 2.1.3. No. of functional intra-governmental coordination mechanisms improved to 
achieve targets as set out in: LDN strategy (United Nations Convention to Combat 
Desertification); Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) (United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change); National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 
(NBSAP) 2; Convention on Biological Diversity 
Baseline: 1. NCCC (2017)
Target: 3. CBNRM for water, sustainable development council, or consolidated 
NBSAP/NCCC/LDN (2023)
Data sources: NBSAP, NCCC and sustainable land management/LDN reports/minutes;
CBNRM reports; sectoral annual reports; Sustainable Development Advisory Council; LDN, 
INDC reports; national communication reports
Ministry of 
Environment and 
Tourism (MET)
Ministry of 
Agriculture, Water 
and Forestry (MAWF)
Ministry of Poverty 
Eradication and Social 
Welfare (MPESW)
Ministry of Gender 
(MGECW)
MITSMED
MOF
GEF
Green Climate Fund
(GCF)
WFP
Regular: 500
Other: 45,000
Output 2.2. Scaled-up integrated and innovative action on climate change adaptation and 
mitigation across priority sectors that is funded and implemented.
Indicator 2.2.1. No. of national accredited systems in place to access, deliver, monitor, report 
on, and verify use of climate finance
MET
MAWF
Ministry of Mines and 
Energy (MME)
MOFBaseline: access, 2 (EIF and DRFN); deliver, 2; monitor, 0; report, 2 (biennial update report
and national communications – NCs); verify, 0 (2017)
Target: access, 3 (i.e., 2 baselines + 1 more target); deliver, 1; monitor, 1; report, 3, verify, 
1 (2023)
Data sources: EIF, DRFN, DBN annual reports; NCCSAP monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) report; Adaptation Fund board decisions; GCF board decisions; government notices
MGECW
MITSMED
Desert Research 
Foundation (DRFN)
EIF
Development Bank 
of Namibia (DBN)
GEF
WFP
FAO
2.3 Share of renewable 
energy in the mix
Baseline: 33% (2015)
Target: 70% of the energy 
mix from renewable 
resources by 2020
Data sources: Namibia INDC, 
NCCSAP annual report, NC4
Frequency: Biennial 
Output 2.3. Inclusive and sustainable solutions adopted by renewable energy technology 
suppliers and industries to achieve increased energy efficiency and universal modern energy 
access (especially off-grid sources of renewable energy).
Indicator 2.3.1. No. of new development partnerships, including South-South cooperation,
with funding for improved energy efficiency and/or sustainable energy solutions targeting 
underserved communities/groups and women
Baseline: 2a, underserved communities (2) (DBN/AfDB/GDC, nationwide, and EIF, GCFKunene); 2b, women (0) 
Target: 4a, underserved communities (2); 4b, women (2)
Data sources: EIF annual report, DBN report, NCCSAP M&E, MOF, MME and Namibia 
Energy Institute reports, UNPAF M&E, sectoral reports
MET
MAWF
MME
MOF
MPESW
MGECW
MITSMED
EIF
DBN
GEF
National priority or goal: Pillar 4. Good governance (NDP5)
UNPAF (or equivalent) outcome 4.1 involving UNDP: By 2023, government institutions at national and regional levels are accountable and transparent, 
engaging citizens in participatory decision-making processes SDGs 1, 5, 16, 17
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
3.1 Percentage of seats 
held by women in national 
parliaments (Strategic Plan
IRRF outcome indicator 
2.2.a; SDG indicator 5.5.1)
Baseline: 47% (2018)
Target: 50% (2023)
[Proxy] Corruption 
Perceptions Index
Baseline: 52 points (2016)
Target: 60 points (2023)
3.2 Ibrahim index 
measures/sub-indexes 
dealing with sustainable 
Data source: Parliament,
Frequency: Annual
Data source: Transparency 
International
Frequency: Annual 
Data source: The Mo Ibrahim 
Foundation
Frequency: Bi-annual
Output 3.1. Government institutions (e.g., ACC, Parliament, Office of the Prime Minister 
(OPM), Office of the Ombudsperson, Ministry of Justice (MOJ) at national and regional 
levels enabled to perform core functions for improved accountability, participation,
representation, and reporting.
Indicator 3.1.1. No. of institutions which have adopted (and report on) effective measures at 
national, regional and sectoral levels to mitigate corruption risks (Strategic Plan IRRF output 
indicator 1.2.3.1) 
Baseline: 1 national, 1 regional, 1 sectoral (2017)
Target: 4 national, 4 regional, 4 sectoral (2023)
Data sources: National Council and OPM annual reports
Indicator 3.1.2. No. of national and subnational institutions with effective, innovative 
mechanisms for civic engagement, including the participation of women and marginalized 
groups (Strategic Plan IRRF output indicator 2.2.2.4) 
Baseline: 2 (2017)
Target: 4 (2023) (national 2, subnational 2)
Anti-Corruption 
Commission (ACC)
Parliament
OPM
MOJ
Ombudsperson
MPESW
MGECW
MITSMED
MOF
NSA
Directorate of Public 
Service Innovation 
and Reform (DPSIR)
UN-Women
UNFPA
Regular: 946
Other: 3,612DP/DCP/NAM/3
economic opportunities and 
human development]
Baseline: 69.8 (2015)
Target: 80 (2023)
Data sources: OPM, DPSIR annual report
Indicator 3.1.3. No. of human rights cases/complaints investigated and resolved by the 
Office of Ombudsperson within the year of submission
Baseline: 3,749 (2016) (M 2,461, F 1,104, Groups 154, Unknown 30)
Target: 3,000 (2023) (M 1,461, F 104, Groups 0, Unknown 0)
Data source: Ombudsperson’s annual report
Output 3.2. Capacities developed across the whole of Government to integrate the 2030 
Agenda, especially gender equality, into development plans and budgets
Indicator 3.2.1. No. of sector plans and budgets at national and subnational levels that 
integrate the SDGs
Baseline: 0 (2017)
Target: 34 (2023) (Offices, 3; ministries, 23; agencies, 8)
Data sources: National and subnational budgets; sectoral plans; medium-term expenditure 
framework; SDG baseline indicator report (UNDP)
Indicator 3.2.2. Percentage of sectors with data collection/analysis mechanisms providing 
comprehensive disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the SDGs (Strategic Plan
IRRF output indicator 1.1.1.3) 
Baseline: 26% (2017)
Target: 100% (2023)
Data sources: National Planning Commission and National Statistics Agency annual report 
WFP
FAO
WHO