File Name: NPL-NEEP-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Nepal
Country Code: NPL
Category: NEEP
Document Title: National Energy Efficiency Strategy, 2075
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2018
Start Year: 2018
End Year: 2075
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

National Energy Efficiency Strategy, 2075
(Approved by the Cabinet Meeting of the GoN on November 19, 2018)
Government of Nepal
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and IrrigationMinistry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
National Energy Efficiency Strategy, 2075
(Approved by the Cabinet Meeting of the GoN on November 19, 2018)Article 51 (f) 3 of the constitution of Nepal has mentioned “ensuring reliable and affordable 
energy supply and proper utilization of energy by generation and development of renewable 
energy for the fulfillment of citizen’s basic needs.” There is a need for sufficient and reliable 
energy supply to achieve this goal. Nepal has been facing some complex but mutually interrelated 
energy challenges, such as, nearly one fourth of the total population still being outside the reach 
of modern energy sources; a wide gap between energy demand and supply; supply vulnerability 
and reduction in foreign currency reserves due to existing dependence on energy import. 
With economic, physical and social development, Nepal has aimed to achieve the sustainable 
development goals set by the United Nations and reach the level of medium income countries 
by 2030 A.D. Among the sustainable development goals, the seventh goal is aimed to ensure 
the accessibility of affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all whereas the 
twelfth goal is aimed to promote sustainable and accountable production and use. To achieve 
these goals, it is necessary to establish policy, legal and institutional framework that ensures the 
availability of affordable and reliable energy and its efficient use. The current fourteenth plan 
has also mentioned to establish policy and institutional framework to promote energy efficiency 
in Nepal1
. An integrated national energy policy incorporating energy efficiency and demand side 
management of energy as well as legal and institutional arrangements are yet to be established 
for promotion of energy efficiency.
In order to promote sustainable supply of biomass energy available from animal waste, human 
excreta, fuelwood, agricultural residue, trees, forest residues including any biodegradable matters 
and to improve the efficient use of such biomass energy, the government of Nepal has already 
developed and adopted the Biomass Energy Strategy 2073. This strategy has been prepared for 
the promotion of energy efficiency and demand side management of energy, energy conservation, 
for the sustainable development of primarily modern and improved energy sources including 
hydropower, solar energy, wind energy, coal, natural gas, LPG and other petroleum products 
except biomass energy (which is also called traditional energy). 
2 Past Efforts 
In Nepal, efforts like study and analysis related to energy efficiency can be found to have started 
since 1985 whereas during 1999 to 2005 AD , initiatives like energy audits of industries, energy 
efficiency related trainings and increase in public awareness as well as management of loans 
for energy efficiency in industries were carried out. After that from 2009 to 2011, initiatives 
like demand side management of electricity, energy audit, study of electricity load profile, 
preparation of policy suggestions for promotion of energy efficiency as well as replacement of 
traditional bulbs with energy efficient bulbs were done under Nepal Electricity Authority.
By giving continuation to past attempts, since 2010, the tasks like providing policy suggestions 
1 Generally, energy efficiency is defined as an efficient consumption of energy by using or re-using appropriate tools, technology or appliances related 
to energy consumption. Energy efficiency condition is measured by the amount of energy required to produce per unit goods or services, or increasing 
energy efficiency means reducing amount of required energy use for producing per unit goods or services through the application of various measureshuman resource development etc. have been implemented through Nepal Energy Efficiency 
Programme. Additionally, Industrial Energy Management Project under the Ministry of Industry, 
Commerce and Supplies has been conducting different training and awareness raising programs 
like energy auditing, energy auditor training the promotion of energy efficiency. In the process 
of establishing policy provisions, the government of Nepal has made a policy decision to supply 
electricity produced by sugar mills through cogeneration to the national grid as well as developed 
and approved the Biomass Energy Strategy, 2073.
3 Present Situation
There is a lack of awareness and publicity about the positive role energy efficiency can play for 
supply of sustainable, adequate and reliable energy supply in Nepal. Policy, legal and institutional 
frameworks have not yet been established to recognize energy efficiency as an additional source 
of energy and to remove potential barriers in energy efficiency promotion. Likewise, energy 
efficiency has not yet been fully integrated in overall energy system.
Nepal’s annual electricity consumption per capita in 2074 B.S. has found only 190-kilowatt hour. 
Nepal’s level of energy utilization is lower in comparison with those of other nations in South 
Asia. According to the recent financial survey for the fiscal year 2073/74 of Government of Nepal, 
there was 1.19 ton of oil equivalent2
 of energy consumed in Nepal for generating a gross domestic 
product of USD 1000. This means Nepal’s total energy intensity is seen to be almost double 
of that of South Asia. During the same year according to the survey, only about 22 percent of 
total energy consumption was fulfilled by modern energy sources. The ever increasing import 
of fossil fuels and also electricity has made the condition of energy supply and energy security 
extremely weak and vulnerable. Almost all the amount of foreign earnings received from Nepal’s 
commodity is being spent on energy import. Energy efficiency can be one of the measures to 
address current condition of energy poverty and over dependency on energy imports. 
4 Challenges and Opportunities
4.1 Challenges
Energy efficiency is a wide and interdisciplinary subject that affects various fields and stakeholders. 
Despite the fact that efficient use of energy can have an important contribution in the overall 
development of the country and can help in improvement of energy access and energy security, 
energy efficiency has not been able to enjoy adequate priority in Nepal. Although there exists 
an arrangement in Industrial Management Act, 2073 Chapter 5, Article 22 (1) “m” to exempt 
all tax on investment in devices or equipments that help in reducing energy consumption by 
increasing energy efficiency, such legal instrument is yet be implemented due to lack of necessary 
regulations, directories and other arrangements in place. 
Due to the lack of proper guidance for implementing energy efficiency program, various efforts 
and initiatives have not been able to maintain harmony and achieve expected successes. In the and sustainable results could not be achieved and energy efficiency could not be accepted as an 
important part of energy strategy. Due to the lack of necessary awareness, energy efficiency 
could not be considered as an integral part of overall energy system not only among the general 
consumers but also among policy makers and at the implementation level. Energy efficiency has 
so far remained in the shadow also because of the lack of an institutional set up with necessary 
resources, accountability and clear jurisdiction to address energy efficiency in Nepal. Nepal 
has been facing various types of challenges to implement and institutionalize energy efficiency 
initiatives, some of which are as follows:
4.1.1 To integrate with priority energy efficiency along with energy supply in the planning, 
implementation and management of the overall energy sector of the nation.
4.1.2 To establish a capable institutional structure and regulatory mechanism for implementing 
the energy efficiency programme by formulating appropriate policy, legal system and 
strategy.
4.1.3 To formulate policies related to existing finance, tax and energy tariff in order to make 
energy market energy efficiency friendly.
4.1.4 To increase access to financial resources for energy efficiency
4.1.5 To enhance the technology and technological capacity related to energy efficiency
4.2 Opportunities
The following opportunities exist for promotion of energy efficiency:
4.2.1 Promotion of energy efficiency can give attractive financial returns even with lower 
investment.
4.2.2 Energy conservation is relatively cheaper and more effective compared to energy 
generation.
4.2.3 Energy efficiency can assist in reducing trade imbalance in the country by reducing energy 
import.
4.2.4 Energy efficiency can create more employment opportunities by making energy market 
cheaper and more competitive.
4.2.5 Energy efficiency can increase the energy access.
4.2.6 Energy efficiency can help increase energy security by reducing energy import and energy 
deficiency.
4.2.7 Energy efficiency can help in achieving the goals of sustainable development, in reducing 
carbon emission and environmental imbalance and in minimizing the negative effects of 
climate change.As there is no arrangement of a separate strategy related to promotion energy efficiency so far, it 
is necessary to formulate such strategy. The present need is to include energy efficiency strategy 
in a comprehensive and integrated energy strategy and make the development, implementation 
and management of energy efficiency initiatives sustainable and effective. It is extremely 
necessary to have the energy efficiency strategy for establishing necessary legal and institutional 
structure required for implementation and monitoring energy efficiency programmes as well as 
for interagency coordination. Likewise, energy efficiency strategy will be required to formulate 
and implement strategic planning of integrated sustainable development initiatives.
6 Vision, Mission and Goals
6.1 Vision
To assist in energy security by increasing the energy access through efficient use of available 
energy.
6.2 Mission
To promote energy efficiency by effectively implementing energy efficiency programmes through 
establishing policy, legal and institutional frameworks.
6.3 Goals
To double the average improvement rate of energy efficiency in Nepal from 0.84% per year, 
which existed during the period of 2000 -2015 AD to 1.68% per year in 2030 AD.
7 Objectives
7.1 Support to economic growth by reducing energy intensity and increasing productivity
7.2 Reduce existing energy shortage, increase energy access and provide important 
contribution to energy security by efficient use of energy.
7.3 Create employment opportunities by creation, expansion and commercialization of 
energy efficiency market
7.4 Maintain environmental balance and bring positive improvements in health by efficient 
use of energy.
8 Strategy
8.1 Generate awareness on energy efficiency from the consumers’ level to policy makers’ 
level. (7.2; 7.3)
82 Establish policylegal and institutional frameworks for resources managementresources 8.3 Develop national standards for energy efficiency based on established international and 
regional standards as well as to develop equipments and means for measuring energy 
efficiency. (7.4)
8.4 Make services and production cost effective and competitive by reducing energy 
consumption needed for production of goods and services. (7.1)
8.5 Reduce energy import by energy conservation. (7.1; 7.2)
9 Working Principles 
The following action plans will be considered for the implementation of aforementioned 
strategies (the Strategy implementation action plan is included in the Schedule) : 
9.1 Generate awareness on energy efficiency from the consumers’ level to policy makers’ 
level.
9.1.1 Conduct public awareness campaigns related to energy efficiency by targeting 
household sector.
9.1.2 Conduct energy efficiency initiatives by targeting consumers of industrial, 
commercial and transport sectors.
9.1.3 Conduct energy efficiency initiatives for farmers about energy efficient equipments 
in agriculture and their uses.
9.1.4 Include subject materials related to energy efficiency into the curriculum of 
educational institutions and conduct activities related to energy efficiency.
9.1.5 Conduct activities related to energy efficiency in public and community 
organizations.
9.2 Establish policy, legal and institutional frameworks for resources management, resources 
mobilization, infrastructure development and human resources development required for 
energy efficiency.
9.2.1 Establish an energy efficiency entity for promotion, development and 
implementation of energy efficiency.
9.2.2 Strengthen the existing energy efficiency cell in the Ministry of Energy, Water 
Resources and Irrigation as well as formulate and implement various activities 
related to energy efficiency.
9.2.3 Carry out research and study on energy efficiency and demand side management 
as well as promote and develop energy efficient technologies also in collaboration 
with relevant ongoing projects.energy efficient technologies. Ensure energy efficiency during production, import 
or sales of technology and equipments. 
9.3 Develop national standards for energy efficiency based on established international and 
regional standards as well as to develop equipments and means for measuring energy 
efficiency. 
9.3.1 Carry out detailed study and energy audits of electrical and mechanical appliances 
in energy consuming various sectors and identify energy saving measures by 
developing energy performance standards.
9.3.2 Conduct activities that promote the use of energy efficient equipments in transport 
and industrial sectors and reduce air pollution and greenhouse gas emission.
9.3.3 Determine energy efficiency standards and label of equipments being used in 
energy consuming different sectors and ensure their compliance.
9.3.4 Ensure the human resources development and capacity enhancement needed for 
the production, commercialization and technology transfer of energy efficiency 
related goods and services through the use of energy efficient technologies.
9.4 Make services and production cost effective and competitive by reducing energy 
consumption needed for production of goods and services.
9.4.1 Institutionalize energy efficiency in Nepal through the development of National 
Energy Efficiency Action Plan.
9.4.2 Identify large-scale electricity consumers and conduct their energy audit.
9.4.3 Prepare necessary human resources for energy audits by conducting energy 
auditors’ training as required for various fields and by establishing an accreditation 
system of energy auditors.
9.4.4 Develop minimum energy performance standards for electrical and mechanical 
equipments being used in various sectors.
9.4.5 Conduct various activities related to energy audits in industrial, commercial and 
public sectors.
9.5 Reduce energy import by energy conservation.
9.5.1 Reduce energy imports by utilizing the energy saved through energy efficiency 
9.5.2 Carry out study and research on reducing peak demand and implement various 
programmes on demand side management of energy.According to the arrangement provided by the constitution of Nepal, the implementation of this 
strategy will be done through the participation of local, provincial and federal level stakeholders 
for the rational use of energy and for the promotion of energy efficiency as follows:
10.1 Sector-wise Implementation and Management
For the implementation of energy efficiency programmes, sectors will be identified in local, 
provincial and federal level based on energy consumption and appropriate energy efficiency 
measures for each sector will be implemented. Necessary framework conditions will be 
established in order to implement, regulate and monitor these measures. Energy efficiency 
standards and label of the equipment to be used in various energy-consuming sectors will be 
determined. Use of energy efficient machines, equipment, tools or goods will be encouraged. In 
order to ensure the quality assurance of such equipments as per the prescribed standards, they 
will be checked at the entry point in case of imported goods and at the very production point 
in case domestically produced machines, equipment, tools or goods will be checked for being 
as per the fixed quality criteria at the import point in case of imported goods and at production 
point for domestically produced machines, equipments, tools or goods.
10.2 Time-bound Implementation
For the implementation of energy efficiency, short-term, mid-term and long-term measures will 
be adopted in local, provincial and federal level. In order to address the current transitional 
phase of energy shortage, awareness raising measures on use of energy saving equipment and 
technology as a short-term measure will be encouraged. As a mid-term measure, in order to 
increase the use of energy efficient appliance and technology, appropriate arrangements of 
development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of a fiscal incentive mechanism will be 
established. As the long-term measures, necessary energy efficiency initiatives will be adopted 
in all energy consuming sector for the sustainable, reliable, efficient and quality use of available 
energy.
10.3 Stakeholders Participation
As per the arrangement of the Schedule (8) of the constitution of Nepal, electrical services fall 
under the shared jurisdiction of local, province and federal levels. Likewise, as per the Local 
Government Operation Act 2074 Article (11) Sub-Article (4) (c) (1), the electricity distribution 
service and electricity system management fall under the jurisdiction of local bodies. While 
implementing energy efficiency programmes or adopting energy efficiency measures, enabling 
environment for participation of and support from relevant stakeholders of all three levels 
created. In energy efficiency activities, proper coordination will be made among the government 
authority; the consumers; and the agency, firm or company that produce or import technology, 
goods or equipments.For the meantime, the implementation of energy efficiency will be made effective and result 
oriented through the issue of an executive order or directive. Additionally, existing energy related 
acts, rules and legal arrangements will be reviewed, necessary amendments will be made and 
required legal arrangements will be established.
12 Institutional Structure
An energy efficiency entity will be designated for the promotion, development and 
implementation of energy efficiency. Such entity will ensure the coordination among the 
relevant stakeholders; implement this strategy; develop a National Energy Efficiency Action Plan; 
implement the Plan; monitor and evaluate the implementation of the Plan as a regulatory body. 
In coordination and under the leadership of energy efficiency entity, separate energy efficiency 
strategy implementation and monitoring units will be established in all designated implementing 
agencies. 
13 Financial Aspect
The Government of Nepal will arrange necessary financial resources from local and national 
private, cooperative and public sector stakeholders to ensure additional financial and technical 
capabilities required for successful and effective implementation of this strategy. In addition 
to that, necessary financial resources will be managed by mobilizing financial and technical 
assistance available from national and international investors and international development 
partners3
. 
14 Research and Development
Emphasis will be given to necessary study, research, technology development and expansion 
as well as technology transfer for making energy efficiency programmes successful, affordable, 
effective, result-oriented and accessible to all. Cooperation and collaboration for applied 
research will be developed among the authorities implementing energy efficiency programmes, 
educational institutions and research agencies.
15 Monitoring and Evaluation
The main responsibility of monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of this strategy will 
stay with the Ministry of Water Resources, Energy and Irrigation. However, while doing so, the 
participation of the other concerned ministries, departments and all relevant stakeholders will obtained regarding the status of the set targets and implementation of this strategy. Apart 
from this, necessary arrangements will be made to annually publish the statistics including 
the investments made in energy efficiency; the savings made through these investments; and 
achieved returns on investments; etc. This strategy will be periodically reviewed and amended 
as per the necessity.
The following indicators for monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of this strategy: 
a) Annual records of energy efficiency improvements will be established and the 
progress in achieving the set goals will be monitored and evaluated by measuring 
the energy intensity 
b) Periodic monitoring and evaluation of the indicators related to the achievements of 
the Nepal’s sustainable development goal 7.3 related to the energy efficiency will be 
done 
c) In order to implement the 5-working principles as determined by this strategy, a 
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan will be formulated and regular monitoring and 
evaluation of the implementation status of the sectoral action plans based on the 
defined indicators Schedule : Energy Efficiency Strategy Implementation Action Plan
tegic Sector Activities Present Situation (2018) Goal (2030) Main Responsible 
Agency / Agencies 
Supporting Agency / Agencies 
Time Peri
enerate 
reness 
nergy 
iency from 
consumers’ 
 to policy 
ers’ level
1.1 Conduct public awareness campaigns related to energy efficiency by targeting residential sector.
Limited knowledge about energy efficiency and energy efficient appliances, limited knowledge on required investment and benefits of energy efficient appliances 
Every household made aware about energy efficiency and energy efficient appliances through various media
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation/ Nepal Electricity Authority
Nepal Television/ Gorkhapatra Sansthan/ Radio Nepal
Continuofrom 2018 A.D 
1.2 Conduct programs related to energy efficiency by targeting consumers of industrial, commercial and transport sectors.
Limited knowledge on energy efficient equipment and fuel efficient transport, lack of clear policy on energy efficiency in commercial sector
Industrial, commercial and transport sectors made aware about the use of energy efficient equipment and technology
Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies/ Nepal Electricity Authority
Department of Industry/ Department of Transport Management
Continuofrom 2018 A.D
1.3 Conduct programmes related to energy efficiency for farmers on energy efficient equipment and their uses in agriculture.
No programs conducted about energy efficiency in agriculture sector
Conduct programs to encourage farmers to use energy efficient equipment
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation/ Ministry of Agricultural, Land Management and Cooperatives
Department of Agriculture
Continuofrom 2020 A.D
1.4 Incorporate energy efficiency in the curricula of educational institutions and conduct energy efficiency programmes 
Lack of sufficient inclusion of energy efficiency, energy audit and energy management in the curricula 
Emphasize energy audit and energy conservation by including energy efficiency along with renewable energy in the curricula
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology/ Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
Department of Education / TU / other universities / schools
Continuofrom 2018 A.D
1.5 Conduct programs related to energy efficiency in public and community organizations.
No programs conducted about energy efficiency in public and community organizations
Conduct programs about energy efficiency in public and community organizations
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
Department of Education/ Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation/ Nepal Electricity Authority
Continuofrom 2018 A.Dtegic Sector Activities Present Situation (2018) Goal (2030) Main Responsible 
Agency / Agencies 
Supporting Agency / Agencies 
Time Peri
stablish 
cy, legal and 
tutional 
eworks 
esources 
agement, 
urces 
ilization, 
structure 
elopment 
human 
urces 
elopment 
ired 
nergy 
iency.
2.1 Designate an energy efficiency entity for promotion, development and implementation of energy efficiency.
Institutional, policy and legal framework for promotion and development of energy efficiency not yet established in Nepal
Designate an energy efficiency entity to adopt and implement energy conservation and energy efficiency measures 
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies /Department of Electricity Development
2018 A.D 2020 A.D
2.2 Strengthen the existing energy efficiency cell in the Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation as well as formulate and implement various activities related to energy efficiency
Energy efficiency cells have been formed in the Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation and as well as in Nepal Electricity Authority
Establish energy efficiency cells in all relevant ministries, government departments and other agencies 
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
Nepal Electricity Authority/ Department of Electricity Development/ Water and Energy Commission Secretariat
Every yea2018 A.D
2.3 Carry out research and study on energy efficiency and demand side management as well as promote and develop energy efficient technologies also in collaboration with relevant ongoing projects
Lack of sufficient incentives and financial assistance for research in energy efficiency
Provide financial and technical support for study, research and promotion in the field of energy efficiency
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation/ Ministry of Finance
Nepal Academy of Science and Technology/ Nepal Electricity Authority
Continuoufrom 2020 A.D 
2.4 Develop a system for commercialization & market expansion of energy efficient technologies. Ensure energy efficiency during production, import or sales of technology and equipment
Lack of sufficient infrastructure development for commercialization and market expansion of energy efficient service providers and energy efficient equipments
Provide energy audit services by commercialization and market expansion of energy efficient technologies
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation/ Nepal Electricity Authority/ Ministry of Finance
Nepal Academy of Science and Technology/ Nepal Bureau of Standards and Metrology/ Tribhuvan University
From 201A.D to 20A.Dtegic Sector Activities Present Situation (2018) Goal (2030) Main Responsible 
Agency / Agencies 
Supporting Agency / Agencies 
Time Peri
evelop 
onal 
dards 
nergy 
iency based 
stablished 
rnational 
regional 
dards 
ell as 
evelop 
pments 
means 
measuring 
rgy 
iency
3.1 Carry out detailed study and energy audits of electrical and mechanical appliances in energy consuming various sectors and identify energy saving measures by developing energy performance standards 
No national standards on minimum energy performance 
Develop national standards on minimum energy performance
Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies/ Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
Department of Industry/ Nepal Bureau of Standards and Metrology/ Nepal Electricity Authority
Continuoufrom 2020 A.D
3.2 Conduct activities that promote the use of energy efficient equipments in transport and industrial sectors and reduce air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions
Limited programs on reduction of air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions through energy efficiency
Reduce air pollution by developing an integrated energy efficiency strategy
Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies/ Ministry of Forest and Environment
Department of Industry/ Department of Transportation Management/ Department of Environment
Continuoufrom 2018 A.D
3.3 Determine energy efficiency standards and label of equipments being used in energy consuming different sectors and ensure their compliance
Lack of national energy efficiency standards and no system of verification of equipments with the label of regional and international standards 
Develop national energy efficiency standards, establish a system of verification of equipments with the labels of regional and international standards
Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies/ Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
Nepal Bureau of Standards and Metrology/ Nepal Electricity Authority
Continuoufrom 2019 A.Dtegic Sector Activities Present Situation (2018) Goal (2030) Main Responsible 
Agency / Agencies 
Supporting Agency / Agencies 
Time Peri
3.4 Ensure human resources development and capacity enhancement needed for production, commercialization and technology transfer of energy efficiency related goods and services through use of energy efficient technologies
Lack of necessary infrastructure for energy efficiency and energy audits; lack of enough skilled human resources
Develop necessary infrastructure and skilled human resources for promotion of energy efficiency and energy audits
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology/ Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation/ Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies
Department of Education/ Council for Technical Education and Vocational Training
Continuoufrom 2018 A.D
Make 
ices and 
uction cost 
ctive and 
petitive by 
cing energy 
umption 
ded for 
uction 
oods and 
ices
4.1 Institutionalize energy efficiency in Nepal through the development of National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
No institutional mechanism for monitoring of energy efficiency activities and energy audits in the country
Establish institutional mechanism in Nepal by development of National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
Department of Electricity Development/ Nepal Electricity Authority
From 201A.D to 20A.D
4.2 Identify large-scale electricity consumers and conduct their energy audits
Large electrical energy consumers identified but not formally institutionalized
Develop a system for regular energy audits of for large electricity consumers
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation / Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies
Department of Industry/ Federation of Nepalese Chamber of Commerce and Industries/ Confederation of Nepalese Industries
regular fr2018 A.D (Semiann
ally)
4.3 Prepare necessary human resources for energy audits by conducting energy auditors’ training as required for various fields and by establishing an accreditation system of energy auditors
Limited trainings conducted on energy audits and energy management but no system for accreditation of these trainings 
Make arrangements for regional and international level trainings on energy audits and energy management and their accreditation 
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation/ Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies 
Nepal Bureau of Standards and Metrology / Council for Technical Education and Vocational Training
Continuoufrom 2020 A.Dtegic Sector Activities Present Situation (2018) Goal (2030) Main Responsible 
Agency / Agencies 
Supporting Agency / Agencies 
Time Peri
4.4 Develop minimum energy performance standards for electrical and mechanical equipments being used in various sectors
No national standards on energy performance indicators of energy efficient equipments
Develop quality standards and minimum energy performance indicators of equipments used in different energy consuming sectors
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation/ Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies
Nepal Bureau of Standards and Metrology / Nepal Academy of Science and Technology 
From 201A.D to 20A.D
4.5 Conduct various programmes for energy audits in industrial, commercial and public sectors
Lack of policy and programmes for systematic and regular energy audits, though limited number of energy audits have been conducted
Conduct various programmes for energy audits in relevant areas including industrial, commercial and public sectors
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation/ Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies
Department of Industry/ Department of Electricity Development
From 201A.D to 20A.D
educe 
rgy import 
nergy 
ervation
5.1 Reduce energy imports by utilizing the energy saved through energy efficiency
The condition of energy shortages to exits to some extent; lack of energy efficiency and energy conservation assurances; lack of energy sufficiency 
Develop necessary mechanism and reduce energy import through energy efficiency and energy conservation
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation
Nepal Electricity Authority / Department of Electricity Development
From 201A.D to 20A.D
5.2 Carry out study and research on reducing peak demand and implement various programmes on demand side management of energy
Limited studies and research on energy efficiency and demand side management
Conduct study and research on energy efficiency and demand side management
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation/ Nepal Electricity Authority / Department of Electricity Development
Nepal Academy of Science and Technology/ Water and Energy Commission Secretariat/ Tribhuvan University
Semiannuregular fr2019 A.D Government of Nepal