File Name: NPL-NEEP-2014-EN
Year: 2014
Country Name: Nepal
Country Code: NPL
Category: NEEP
Document Title: Nepal Energy Efficiency Programme (NEEP)
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2014
Start Year: 2014
End Year: 2017
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Nepal Energy Efficiency Programme (NEEP)
Promotion and Realization of Energy Efficiency
Scenario
Understanding the significant role of energy in inclusive 
economic growth of the country, the Government of 
Nepal has been reiterating its commitment to energy 
sector reforms. Despite continuous endeavors together 
with support from Development Partners, Nepal’s energy 
supply and demand balance, particularly electricity 
remains in deficit. A comparison to international and 
regional data demonstrates not only the inadequacies in 
terms of access to energy and modern energy services 
in Nepal, but also very high energy intensity resulting 
from inefficiency in energy consumption patterns. 
Although there is a tremendous potential for hydropower 
generation, huge gap exists between demand and supply 
of electricity in the country. The gap becomes more 
critical during the dry season with long hours of load 
shedding affecting households, commerce, industries 
and the economy as a whole. The sluggish growth of the 
supply side together with inefficient energy consumption 
patterns has proven to be one of the major obstacles 
in the socio-economic development of the country. 
Dependency on imported fossil fuel as an alternative 
source for electricity generation has not only negatively 
affected competiveness of industries but also worsened 
the trade balance. 
Recognizing such an impasse, the government, recently, has 
started to put some impetus on the efficient use of energy. 
However, dearth of strategic and regulatory framework for 
energy efficiency has hindered the country in reaping the 
economic and ecological benefits of the untapped resource 
- energy efficiency. Political frameworks are not available 
even for the primary source of energy in the country - 
biomass.
Program Description
Significant international experiences demonstrate that 
the efficient consumption of energy not only results in 
tangible savings to end-users but also helps to ensure 
a stable energy supply while reducing environmental 
impacts. Recognizing this fact, Nepal Energy Efficiency 
Programme (NEEP) is being implemented to promote 
and realize energy efficiency in the country since 2010. 
The Nepali- German programme NEEP is implemented by 
the Ministry of Energy with technical assistance by the 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
(GIZ), acting on behalf of the German Federal Ministry 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ). After 
completing its first phase in June 2014, NEEP continues 
to support improving the efficiency use of energy in 
Nepal, in its second phase from July 2014 to June 2017.
The programme assists with the introduction of market 
based energy efficiency services for the private and 
public sector, backs the development and introduction 
of performance for biomass based improved cooking 
stoves for rural households and provides direct advice 
and expertise to the government for the establishment 
of policy and institutional framework to foster energy 
efficiency in the country.
Energy Efficiency Market 
Along with growing prominence of energy efficiency 
in the country achieved in the past through NEEP, the 
second phase of NEEP focuses on horizontal and vertical 
widening of the energy efficiency market. The Energy 
Efficiency Center (EEC) under the Federation of Nepalese 
©Uli Pfoertner ©NEEP ©Barbara Steinbauer ©FECOFUN
Main Facts
Objective:
To improve framework conditions for the planning 
and implementation of energy efficiency measures 
in Nepal
Volume of German contribution:
Up to EUR 4,000,000
Time:
July 2014 - June 2017
Lead Agency:
Ministry of Energy, Nepaland Industry in various districts continues to provide 
energy efficiency services not only to industrial sectors 
but also to energy intensive public infrastructure. In 
addition to energy intensive industries, the services 
are provided to small scale industries and municipal 
infrastructures. For this, NEEP closely collaborates 
with the Nepal Electricity Authority and the Town 
Development Fund. Along with raising awareness 
among the stakeholders, EEC provides trainings on 
energy efficiency both for energy auditors and energy 
mangers. Efforts are made towards creating conducive 
financial services with participation of local banks for 
encouraging investment in energy efficiency measures. 
Moreover, platforms are created with participation of 
industries, policy makers and academia for sharing 
their learning experiences. 
Clean Cooking
Three fourth of Nepal’s population still depends on biomass 
as the main source of energy for cooking and heating. The 
majority of them uses traditionally open fires or so called 
“3 stone stoves”. These are generally inefficient in terms 
of energy consumption and release harmful emissions 
affecting both human health and environment. Within the 
clean cooking component of NEEP, the Alternative Energy 
Promotion Centre (AEPC), together with the Renewable 
Energy Testing Station is promoting quality improvements 
for clean cooking stoves. For this purpose, AEPC has 
established minimum performence benchmarks on fuel 
competencies for testing stoves against these parameters 
and further facilitating the dissemination of the relevant 
information at the national and international level.
Policy Advice
The Policy Advice component of the project elaborates the 
significance of energy efficiency strategies. It is expected 
that the Energy Efficiency Strategy and Biomass Energy 
Strategy will be in place and be implemented within 
the next two years. Following the approval of the two 
strategies by the cabinet, the implementation, monitoring 
and evaluation of these strategies will be supported by 
the programme.The conceptualization and institutional 
set up of an energy efficiency entity within the Nepalese 
government structure is envisaged to mainstream the 
process of promoting energy efficiency in the country and 
to establish a much needed regulatory framework. The 
Nepal Energy Information System will be strengthened 
for establishing an energy information and management 
system that will support analysis and decision making 
in energy related initiatives. Additionally, the NEEP 
will emphasize on integrating Nepal’s energy efficiency 
interventions into the general framework of Sustainable 
Energy for all (SE4ALL).
Impacts
The improvement in the condition for planning and 
implementation of measures for efficient energy use will 
encourage harnessing the untapped resource – energy 
efficiency. The establishment of a political, strategic and 
regulatory framework for planning and implementation of 
energy efficiency together with enhancing the institutional 
capacity for the issue and the development of an energy 
efficiency market will not only position the efficient use 
of energy as an integral part of sector reforms but also 
benefit individual households, industries and commerce 
by mitigating the energy crisis. The rural population 
depending on biomass cooking stoves will benefit from 
improved quality of clean and efficient cooking stoves. 
Accordingly, NEEP will be contributing towards the 
global initiative of SE4All in achieving its objective - 
energy efficiency - through increasing productivity of 
resources that will foster economic growth, improve 
energy security and reduce costs for all citizens.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH
Nepal Energy Efficiency Programme (NEEP)
NTNC Complex
Khumaltar, Lalitpur
P.Box 1457
Kathmandu, Nepal
Tel: +97 (1) 5538129
Commissioned by:
cooking in clean (improved) cook stove ©FECOFUN