File Name: NRU-NEPF-2009-EN
Year: 2009
Country Name: Nauru
Country Code: NRU
Category: NEPF
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2009
Start Year: 2009
End Year: 2015
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

c of Nauru
Republic of Nauru
“Reliable, affordable and sustainable energy,
enabling the socio-economic development of Nauru”
Energy Policy Framework Energy Policy Frameworkc of Nauru
Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Environment
Tel: 444 3133 Ext 2213 
Fax: 444 3136
Email: min.cie@naurugov.nr
May 2009
There is no restriction on the quotation or reproduction of 
any part of this publication, provided that the 
source is acknowledged
May 2009c of Nauru
MINISTER’S FOREWORD MINISTER’S FOREWORD
I am pleased to present Nauru’s first National Energy Policy Framework. This blueprint sets 
out our national commitment to efficient use and effective application of energy resources 
across all sectors. It contributes immensely to realising our social and economic development 
aspirations that are stipulated in the Government’s 20 year plan - National Strategy for 
Sustainable Development. 
It is very timely that we adopt this framework because our energy consumption level 
continues to rise at an alarming rate and our dependence on fossil fuels has worked against 
our effort to lift standard of living on the island to acceptable levels. 
Some of the realities of inefficient use of energy that confront us daily are: rising fuel prices 
globally and locally; regular power shedding; limited local technical capacity essential to 
supporting energy services; lack of institutional capacity to drive change at all levels in our 
community; and not to mention damages to our environment. 
This policy framework is designed to assist us move towards a future where renewable energy 
resources provide a better alternative and consequently our dependence on fossil fuels is 
reduced; a future where costs of energy services are affordable thus allowing households 
equitable access to electricity and fuel supplies; a future where security and sustainability of 
energy supply are achieved; a future where our children and their children make a difference 
in global effort to achieving energy efficiency. 
Raising energy efficient levels on Nauru cannot be championed by Government only. We, as 
a community, need to stand together and work collaboratively in good spirit to reduce the 
burden of energy costs on our daily lives, improve household access to energy services, and 
most importantly ameliorate living conditions on the island. 
Our national effort will indeed be supported by the global community because we also 
contribute to global initiatives to reducing carbon emissions and essentially the impact of 
climate change on our vulnerable ecosystem. 
Let’s embrace this strategy before it’s too late. Let’s take it forward for our sake and for the 
wellbeing of our future generation. c of Nauru
ACRONYMS.............................................................................................................. 5
1.0 INTRODUCTION....................................................................................6
2.0 BACKGROUND.................................................................................... 7
3.0 OVERVIEW OF ENERGY SECTOR
3.1 Energy Supply............................................................................................................... 8
3.2 Energy Demand.......................................................................................................... 9
3.3 Renewable Energy Sources.................................................................................. 10
3.4 Regulations..................................................................................................................... 11
3.5 Problem Analysis......................................................................................................... 12
4.0 POLICY ISSUES
4.1 Power.................................................................................................................................. 15
4.2 Petroleum.........................................................................................................................16
4.3 Renewable Energy......................................................................................................17
4.4 Customers........................................................................................................................18
4.5 Finance...............................................................................................................................19
4.6 Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building............................... 20
4.7 Energy Efficiency and Conservation............................................................... 21
Table of Contentsc of Nauru
ADB : Asian Development Bank
ADO : Automotive Diesel Oil
AUD : Australian Dollar
CDM : Clean Development Mechanism
DPK : Dual Purpose Kerosene
EIA : Environment Impact Assessment
FSED : Forum Secretariat Energy Division 
GDP : Gross Domestic Product
GHG : Greenhouse Gas Emissions
GoN : Government of Nauru
HIES : Household Income and Expenditure Survey
HFO : Heavy Fuel Oil
kl : kilo-litre
kW : kilo-watt
kWh : kilo-watt hour
LPG : Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MW : mega-watt
NEPF : Nauru National Energy Policy Framework
NPC : Nauru Phosphate Corporation 
NSDS : National Sustainable Development Strategy 
NUA : Nauru Utilities Authority
OTEC : Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
PICs : Pacific Island Countries
PIEP : Pacific Islands Energy Policy
PIREP : Pacific Islands Renewable Energy Project
RE : Renewable Energy
RETs : Renewable Energy Technologies
ROC : Republic of China
Ronphos : Republic of Nauru Phosphate Corporation
SOPAC : Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission
ACRONYMS c of Nauru
The Nauru National Energy Policy Framework (NEPF) has been developed through a 
consultative process involving stakeholders from the public sector, private sector and 
civil society groups. The policy framework provides a guideline for the development 
of the energy sector in Nauru for the immediate future and mid and long term. It 
has been developed under an integrated planning approach, with the view that the 
energy policy is only one of the many policy instruments that is being put in place 
by the Government to ensure that the Nauru economy develops to its full capacity 
given the many challenges facing the country. The policy framework adheres to the 
principle of partnerships. It is therefore essential that the involvement of the private 
sector and civil society groups in the implementation of the policy framework be 
encouraged. The NEPF is driven by its vision statement: “Reliable, affordable and 
sustainable energy, enabling the socio-economic development of Nauru.”
10 INTRODUCTIONc of Nauru
Nauru is one of the smallest independent, democratic states in the world. It is a 
republic with a Westminster parliamentary system of government but with a slight 
variance as the President is both head of government and head of state.
Nauru is faced with serious economic challenges. Its once thriving phosphate industry 
has ceased operation thus depriving Nauru of its major lifeline revenue source. The 
local infrastructure, including power generation, drinking water and health services, 
has been adversely affected in recent years by the decline in income from phosphate 
mining. However, further explorations of the residual phosphate deposits have raised 
hopes that there may be potential to keep the phosphate mining for yet sometime. 
With fewer prospects in the phosphate industry, Nauru has to look at other alternative 
revenue sources to support its economic development. Unfortunately, for a country of 
the size of Nauru (21 km2
) with its limited natural resources, the options are not many. 
Some measures taken by the Government of Nauru (GoN) to improve its revenue 
earning power have been considered unusual. For example following the decline in 
phosphate revenue in the early 1990s the GoN declared itself a tax haven and become 
susceptible to money laundering activities. And since 2001, it has played host to an 
Australian offshore detention centre that holds and processes asylum seekers trying 
to enter Australia. Nauru now is highly dependent on donor support especially from 
Australia, Japan, New Zealand and Taiwan (ROC). It is important that Nauru develops 
and strengthens its partnership arrangements with the above countries to be able to 
meet the goals of its NSDS which has identified key areas to be targeted in order to 
achieve some degree of economic stability. The NSDS comprises of short term, midterm and long-term goals.
The NSDS has set a goal of reducing Nauru’s dependence on imported petroleum 
fuels through a number of strategies. One of these is meeting 50% of its energy needs 
through renewable energy by 2015. Achieving such a goal is essential to achieving 
socio-economic stability.
The reliability of the power supply in Nauru is highly essential to the achievement 
of other sector programme goals. For example the goal of supplying reliable water 
to all households cannot be achieved without a reliable power supply. Equally, an 
improved telecommunication and information system can only be facilitated by a 
reliable power supply system.
20 BACKGROUNDc of Nauru
For Nauru the most important energy sources are petroleum fuels and electricity. 
Nauru is heavily dependent on imported petroleum fuels. The petroleum fuels are used 
for electricity generation, transportation (land, sea and air) and for cooking. Currently, 
petroleum fuels are supplied via Australia. In 2006 the total amount of petroleum 
fuels imported was 6,000 metric tonnes that is just over 5 million litres (Diesel). Of 
this amount 71.25% is used for power generation and the rest for transportation and 
commercial users.
Nauru is fully electrified, i.e. the electricity grid runs around the island and everybody 
has access to electricity. Electricity is supplied by the newly formed Nauru Utilities 
Authority (NUA). In addition, the NUA is also responsible for water and imported fuels. 
The NUA inherited 15 MW of installed generation capacity from the Nauru Phosphate 
Corporation (NPC) but all were out of service. To meet the current demand Nauru 
is dependent on five rented containerized generators from the Government of 
Australia that have a combined capacity of 5 MW. Electricity is heavily subsidized by 
Government.
3.1 E 3.1 Ennergy ergy Supply Supply
30 OVERVIEW OF ENERGY SECTORc of Nauru
The demand for petroleum is on the increase and this is expected to continue growing 
given the efforts to revive the economy through the current National Sustainable 
Development Strategy (NSDS). The revival of the phosphate mining will increase the 
demand for petroleum fuels.
With the world market price for oil being so volatile, its impact on a weak and fragile 
economy such as Nauru will be profound. The rise in oil price affects the performance 
of all sectors of the economy whether it is the industry such as Ronphos, transport 
such as shipping, or social services.
Electricity demand in Nauru is in the range of 6 – 7 MW. With the current generation 
capacity of 4 MW, this is sufficient to meet the demand but load shedding is 
implemented on a daily basis due to fuel supply situation. Household electricity 
demand is the highest in any Pacific Island Country (PIC) stands at about 900 kWh1
per household per month. In fact the electricity consumption in Nauru surpasses the 
average household consumption of some developed countries. However, the current 
consumption level for household per month stands at 370kWh (average).
The proliferation of inefficient electrical appliances and use of air conditioners in 
almost every household in Nauru has exerted considerable pressure on the generation 
capacity resulting in frequent power outages. This is exacerbated by un-disciplined 
usage of electricity in the households due mainly to the current tariff structure: a 
cash payment of $5 per month with the rest paid for with Bank of Nauru cheques 
(effectively worth nothing since the Bank of Nauru is bankrupt) at a rate of AUD$0.30 
per kWh. Non payment of electricity bills is prevalent.
3.2 E 3.2 Ennergy ergy D Dem
eman
and
dc of Nauru
Nauru has a very good solar resource. Measurements taken show an average of about 
5.8 kWh/m2
/day. It can be seen that solar energy offers great potential for electricity 
generation to meet the future needs of the population.
The potential and feasibility of the local wind resource is not known; however, a wind 
mapping study was carried out in 2006. An on-site feasibility study on Top Side will 
be necessary to determine the appropriateness of developing wind as an energy 
source.
Biomass is restricted to the coastal areas and is comprised of shrubs. Woody biomass 
is scarce, therefore biomass as an energy source is limited.
Ocean-based energy resources such as wave, tides and OTEC (Ocean Thermal Energy 
Conversion) are highly dependent upon technology development from developed 
countries. The technologies for developing these resources have yet to be available 
on a commercial basis, although a 100 kW OTEC plant was trialed out in Nauru with 
some degree of success in the early 1980s.
3.3 R 3.3 Renewable enewable E
Energy nergy Sou Sources rcesc of Nauru
There is a lack of proper regulations governing the energy sector in Nauru. The provision 
of services such as electricity and imported fuels are governed by Government 
policies rather than legislation. Ministerial discretion is required in almost all areas 
and as a result Ministers get caught up in the day-to-day operation of Departments 
and the process often causes extensive delays. The Corporations Act which amongst 
other things deals with business operations and how these are regulated contains 
regulations that are vague and are problematic to interpret and implement. Under 
the Price Control Act 2004 the Government has powers to control excessive prices 
and charges. However, due to severe capacity constraints, efforts to ensure the 
implementation of this legislation are ad-hoc.
3.4 R 3.4 Regulations egulationsc of Nauru
The limited capacity in the energy sector and high dependence on imported 
petroleum fuels combined with escalating fuel prices and high per capita electricity 
use in Nauru are some of the challenges facing the GoN in developing a plan for the 
provision of reliable and affordable energy services. 
In addition, Nauru’s remoteness, poor financial management capacity, and absence 
of a practical renewable energy policy contribute to Nauru’s vulnerability to energy 
supply disruptions.
Energy sector planning in Nauru is being affected by the absence of a proper 
national energy sector framework. Although the GoN was assisted by the then Forum 
Secretariat Energy Division (FSED) in the early 1990s, the lack of Government support 
to facilitate its implementation has been a major drawback for energy sector planning. 
It is clear that without a national energy policy framework and an overall strategic 
plan, interventions can easily become arbitrary, inconsistent, haphazard, counter 
productive and focused on the short term.
3.5 3.5 Problem An Problem Anal
alysis ysisc of Nauru
Furthermore, the following general problems contribute to the lack of energy sector 
development: 
•	 Nauru has over the years suffered from poor economic management and low 
quality governance;
•	 Electricity is heavily subsidized down to a level that is clearly not sustainable. 
Customers historically have been getting free electricity so imposing a user–pays 
policy requires not only strong political will but also a general change in public 
attitude towards paying for services provided;
•	 Energy programmes and policies have been organized on an ad hoc basis 
without any centralized administration and governance. This has resulted in an 
inefficient implementation and operation;
•	 As there is a lack of appropriate regulations and legislation, implementation 
of energy efficiency and renewable energy programmes is not adequately 
supported; and 
•	 There is a lack of capacity to perform tasks such as providing the documentation 
needed for accessing international funding for project development.
The above problems are often interlinked and in Nauru these problems can be grouped 
into three categories: a) poor management and governance; b) the inadequate 
allocation of resources (human and material) to energy sector development and 
c) the lack of an institutional and regulatory framework that ensures an efficient 
management of the energy sector.c of Nauru
The Nauru Energy Policy Framework has been developed taking into consideration 
the following three fundamental issues:
i. Supply issues: The provision of adequate, reliable, and cost-effective energy 
supplies through the promotion of indigenous energy resources and bulk 
purchasing of fuel is critical to ensuring security of supply;
ii. Demand issues: The efficient utilization of energy and the discouraging of 
wasteful energy consumption is vital for a country that is so dependent on 
imported energy sources; and
iii. Environmental issues: Due to the fragility of the environment in the region 
environmental issues are always high on Governments’ agenda. Therefore 
it is important that the energy policy is targeted at minimising the negative 
environmental impacts of energy production, transportation, conversion, 
utilisation and consumption.
Bearing the above issues in mind, the following strategic policy areas have been 
identified as critical to achieving the overall vision of the NEPF – “Reliable, affordable 
and sustainable energy, enabling the socio-economic development of Nauru” 
i. Power
ii. Petroleum
iii. Renewable Energy
iv. Consumers
vFinance
40 POLICY ISSUES c of Nauru
Policy Statement: A reliable, affordable and safe power supply and services.
The provision of reliable and affordable power is essential for driving the Nauru 
economy. Currently, power is available on an intermittent basis because there is 
insufficient financial resources to provide for fuel for power generation. Due to a lack 
on ongoing maintenance of its permanent generators, Nauru has been reliant on 
rental generators since 20012
. Similarly, the transmission and distribution networks are 
in dire need of repair and upgrading but again, a lack of funds prevents this necessary 
investment. It is reported by the NUA that accounts receivable are very high and 
the NUA cash receipts represent only a small fraction of the cost of production. It is 
estimated that the losses in the operation of the power utility in 2005-2006 totaled 
AUD $6.36 million. 
Uncontrolled and undisciplined usage of electricity especially in households together 
with non-payment of electricity bills is a huge dilemma faced by the management in 
the daily operation of the power utility. Household electricity usage is the highest in 
all PICs, averaging about 900 kWh per month. The institutional arrangement together 
with the legal and financial framework needed for the effective and efficient operation 
of a power utility is lacking, which has led to poor performance of the utility over the 
years.
Strategies: 
1. Ensure a financially strong and robust “Utilities”.
2. Fair and equitable access to any subsidized basic supply of power to households with 
pre-payment meters.
3. Ensure an appropriate regulatory framework exists to govern the operation and 
management of Utilities.
4.1 4.1 Power Powerc of Nauru
Policy Statement: A reliable and safe supply of fossil fuels.
The primary energy source for Nauru is imported petroleum fuels, which are needed 
for power generation, transportation, and commercial and industrial uses. The power 
sector alone utilizes more than 80% of the total petroleum fuel imported; the rest is 
shared between transportation and commercial activities, e.g. fishing and a separate 
4 million litres of HFO per annum is imported for the phosphate industry.
Under a new arrangement to be put in place under the government restructuring 
programme, the importation and storage of petroleum fuels fall under the 
responsibility of the NUA. However, the Ministry of Finance is responsible for the 
purchasing of the fuel imported for public power supply – with funding currently 
derived from government budget and donors sources. The Ministry of Finance is 
also responsible for determining the wholesale market price of fuel sold on-island. 
There is enough storage capacity available to cater for the next supply schedule. For 
diesel storage, there is capacity available to store more than 11 million litres. Given 
the current demand needed for power generation of 600 kl per month, the storage 
capacity available would be able to cater for more than a year’s supply of 7.2 million 
litres.
The absence of regulations for standards governing the quality of imported fuel may 
lead to poor performance of NUA generators. Maintaining a national fuel quality 
standard can be a costly exercise for a small economy such as Nauru. Adopting the 
Australian national standard should be considered.
Strategies: 
4.2 4.2 Petroleum Petroleumc of Nauru
Policy Statement: 50% of energy used in Nauru comes from renewable sources 
by 2015.
As highlighted in chapter 3.3, solar is the only renewable energy source that has the 
potential to contribute significantly to Nauru’s energy mix. While wind and ocean 
based resources are available, their potential has yet to be assessed. Moreover, ocean 
based renewable energy technologies are still under development and are not 
considered as immediate options for Nauru.
Strategies: 
1. Encourage the use of renewable energy as an alternative source of power generation.
2. Build in-country capacity in renewable energy technologies.
4.3 R 4.3 Renewable enewable E
Enenergy rgyc of Nauru
Policy Statement: Universal access to reliable and affordable energy services. 
The different customer groups’ energy needs are a vital consideration to an effective 
energy policy framework. The customers’ expectations can range from a simple 
energy source for lighting in the home to high voltage electricity needed for an 
industrial process like mining. In Nauru, there are three major categories of customers: 
residential, government, and commercial and industrial. Energy services and the 
means by which they are provided to each different customer group will need to be 
addressed carefully by the energy policy framework.
Strategies:
1. Ensure the provision of electricity to all customers is financially sustainable.
2. Ensure that the different energy needs are equally addressed and promoted at all 
levels of society.
3. Ensure dissemination of relevant information to the public.
4.4 C 4.4 Customers ustomersc of Nauru
Policy Statement: Financial sustainability of the energy sector.
Finance is a fundamental problem in Nauru’s Energy Sector. Nauru Utilities Authority 
(NUA) faces significant financing constraints – at the core of which is the fact the 
organisation is not financially viable as long as it allows consumers (specifically 
households) to access unlimited free power, with funding provided by government 
and donors.
A schedule of planned load shedding was implemented in November 2006 as a tactic 
to limit the financial burden caused by non-recovery of electricity bills in the household 
sector. At the same time, a stringent disconnection policy for the non-payment of 
commercial electricity bills was implemented. However, until NUA introduces full 
cost-recovery through the introduction of prepayment meters for household power 
consumers (expected December 2008), the financial problems of NUA will remain.
Finance is also key to the implementation of any policy framework. For the NEPF to be 
effective, financial resources will have to be secured. The financial resources needed 
to implement the NEPF cannot be obtained entirely from donor agencies. Therefore 
the NEPF is designed to encourage the promotion of partnerships with the private 
sector through appropriate legal and financial mechanisms. The current absence of 
proper financial and banking systems in Nauru is a major challenge to enticing private 
sector investment.
Strategies:
1. Ensure a robust financial framework is in place.
4.5 F 4.5 Finance inancec of Nauru
Policy Statement: Efficient, robust and well resourced institutions for energy 
planning and implementation.
The policy framework highlights the need to build in-country capacity to allow 
sustainability of energy sector projects. Further, the policy framework has identified 
areas where capacity is most needed and offers suggestions as to how capacity can 
be built. The government agency tasked with formulating the energy sector plan 
must be well staffed with suitably qualified personnel and be provided with enough 
resources for proper functioning. International assistance may be required to build 
capacity within the government. The introduction of new technologies (namely 
renewable energy technologies) will require new skills; therefore specialized training 
will be necessary. Likewise, implementing and managing large energy projects in 
the country will require a broad knowledge base that extends beyond traditional 
management and technical skills, as well as a good understanding of the legal and 
financial systems necessary to make the project sustainable.
Strategies:
1. Ensure appropriate policies and legislations are in place.
2. Ensure an appropriate skill base is available.
3. An institutional structure that promotes accountability.
4. Encourage stakeholder partnerships.
4.6 I
4.6 Inst
nstitution
itutional 
al S
S
trengt
trengthen
hening
ing and Capa
 and Capacity
city Bu
Bui
i
l
ld
ding
ingc of Nauru
Policy Statement: An efficient supply and use of energy. 
As a first step towards achieving energy security, Nauru has to put in place measures 
– supported by policies and strategies – to make the production and use of energy 
more efficient. Strict measures should be put in place to discourage wastage. In 
addition, switching to locally available energy efficient appliances and technologies 
should be encouraged. It is important to undertake public awareness and education 
campaigns on the benefits of energy efficiency and conservation, as customers 
have had the luxury of free electricity for several decades. In the face of the current 
economic situation, where providing free electricity is no longer possible, customers 
need a clear understanding of the importance of paying their electricity bills.
Strategies:
1. Encourage at all levels the use of energy efficient appliances and equipment.
2. Promote energy conservation and efficiency at all levels of society.
3. Promote environmentally friendly and sustainable use of energy.
4.7 E
4.7 Ennergy ergy Effici Efficiency ency and and CConserv onservation ationc of Nauru
Republic of Nauruc of Nauru
Energy Policy Framework Energy Policy Frameworkc of Nauru
Republic of Nauru