File Name: NRU-NER-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Nauru
Country Code: NRU
Category: NER
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2018
Start Year: 2018
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

-Nauru Energy Road Map
2018 to 2020
Table of Contents
Minister’s Foreword ................................................................................................3
Executive Summary ...............................................................................................5
1. Nauru Overview .................................................................................................7
2. Government of Nauru’s Energy Vision ...............................................................7
3. Energy Outcomes ..............................................................................................8
4. NERM Targets ....................................................................................................8
5. Action Plans .......................................................................................................9
6. Activities by Lead Agency .................................................................................10
6.1 CIE .......................................................................................................11
6.2 NUC .....................................................................................................17
7. Implementation .................................................................................................21
8. Monitoring and Evaluation ................................................................................26
8.1 Annual NERM Progress Report ...........................................................30
Appendix A: Energy sector overview ....................................................................31
Appendix B: Activities completed .........................................................................35
Appendix C: Activities no longer a priority ............................................................43I am pleased to present this update of the Nauru Energy Road Map. The first Nauru Energy 
Road Map was endorsed in 2014 and since its adoption, implementation has been particularly 
good in the area of electricity supply. However, challenges posed by capacity issues, has limited 
progress in other areas. Institutional strengthening is being implemented across the board at the 
Nauru Utilities Corporation to address gaps, inadequacies and the various other challenges.
The purpose of this update is to reconfirm our national commitment to improving the 
sustainability of energy use through renewable energy and energy efficiency to contribute to a 
sustainable quality of life for all Nauruans.
Almost three quarters of the world’s energy needs today are met from fossil fuels and this 
increases greenhouse gas emissions and the impact of climate change on our vulnerable 
ecosystem, an ecosystem that is the foundation of our society, our economy, and our 
environment. Nauru imports all of the fossil fuels it uses which is a huge drain of scarce funds 
and this is not sustainable for the long term development of Nauru. Fortunately, Nauru has 
the blessings of the sun and installing solar photovoltaic systems can reduce our reliance and 
expenditure on fossil fuels.
Significantly improving the efficiency of our energy use offers even larger economic benefits and 
is considered a priority in the long term development strategy of Nauru.
Through the National Sustainable Development Strategy consultative process the Government 
of Nauru has set three ambitious targets to achieve by 2020. They are:
1. 24/7 grid electricity supply with minimal interruptions
2. 50% of grid electricity supply from renewable energy sources, and
3. 30% improvement in energy efficiency in the residential, commercial and 
 government sectors.
To ensure our social and economic development visions are achieved, Nauru must work together 
with our regional and international partners to accomplish the outcomes and targets set out 
under the National Energy Policy Framework and this updated Nauru Energy Road Map.
I call upon every individual, Government institutions, industries, the private sector and the 
international community to support and contribute to the implementation of Nauru’s Energy Road 
Map for our sake and for the wellbeing of future generations.
HonBaron Divavesi Waqa
Minister’s Foreword
Ekamawir Omop
AUD Australian dollar
CIE Department of Commerce, Industry and Environment
DoA Department of Agriculture
DoE Department of Education
DoF Department of Finance
DoJ Department of Justice
DoT Department of Transport
EU European Union
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GIZ Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GoN Government of Nauru
HFO Heavy Fuel Oil
HIES Household Income and Expenditure Survey
IPP Independent Power Producer
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency
kV kilovolts
kWh kilowatt hour
LPG Liquid Petroleum Gas
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MDG Millennium Development Goals
MW Megawatt
NBoS Nauru Bureau of Statistics
NEPF National Energy Policy Framework
NERM Nauru Energy Road Map
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NIANGO Nauru Island Association of Non-Governmental Organisations
NRC Nauru Rehabilitation Corporation
NSDS National Sustainable Development Strategy
NUC Nauru Utilities Corporation
OTEC Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
PAD Planning and Aid Division of the Department of Finance
PIFS Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat
PPA Pacific Power Association
PSC Project Steering Committee
PV Photovoltaic
RONPHOS Republic of Nauru Phosphate company
RPC Regional Processing Centre
SE4ALL United Nations Sustainable Energy for All initiative
SPC Secretariat of the Pacific Community
SPREP Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme
TWGEn Technical Working Group on Energy in Nauru
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Changegy p () pg p
the energy sector development agenda outlined in the:
• National Sustainable Development Strategy 2005 - 2025 (revised 2009), and
• National Energy Policy Framework of 2009.
The purpose of the Development Strategy and Energy Policy Framework as well as the
NERM is to enable the achievement of Nauru’s overall vision of:
A future where individual, community, business and government partnerships contribute to
a sustainable quality of life for all Nauruans.
This updated NERM 2018 to 2020 was developed in 2017/18 after a review of the NERM
2014 - 2020, consultations in Nauru on implementation progress to 2017 and is based on the
original document. The key changes include renaming the Action Plans, reducing the number of 
Activities to be implemented, ordering the Activities by Lead Agency and Time Frame, as well
as revising wording for some of the Activities and Expected Results. 
Nauru imports all of the fossil fuel it consumes. This is a significant component of the amount of
money leaving Nauru each year. This annual cost is also volatile due to its dependence on
global oil prices. Recent figures on fuel demand are shown below.
 
 
 
The NERM is the implementation plan for Activities to facilitate Nauru’s energy sector
development agenda. The main targets of the NERM 2014 - 2020 were that by 2020,
Nauru would have:
i) 24/7 grid electricity supply with minimal interruptions.
ii) 50% of grid electricity supplied from renewable energy sources.
iii) 30% improvement in energy efficiency in the residential, commercial and
 government sectors.
These targets are fairly broad and they haven’t been revised for this updated NERM. How they
 could be interpreted and measured is discussed in Section 8 Monitoring and Evaluation.
Sector 2015-16 2016-17
NUC diesel 9.24 9.44
Retail diesel 8.17 7.44
Retail petrol 4.35 4.10
Aviation 5.94 4.81
LPG* ~0.02 ~0.02
Total Ml pa 27.72 25.81
Source: Annual fuel demand calculated from monthly average demand by sector figures in ‘Nauru Annual Vital Report 2017’ extract 
provided by Department of Finance in email of 24 November 2017. * LPG figure estimated from 2014 NERM.
Table 1: Fuel Demand, million litres per year.• A reliable and safe supply of fossil fuels.
• Universal access to reliable and affordable energy services.
• An efficient supply and use of energy.
• A significant contribution from renewable energy towards electricity supply.
• Financial sustainability of the energy sector.
• Efficient, robust and well-resourced institutions for energy planning and
 implementation.
These outcomes remain the same for this updated NERM.
This updated NERM renames the six Actions Plans as follows:
• Capacity,
• Power,
• Renewables,
• Efficiency,
• Fuels, and
• Transport.
Each Action Plan has a range of Strategies. Each Strategy has multiple Activities with a variety 
of Lead Agencies. The NERM 2014 - 2020 listed its 110 Activities by Action Plan and Strategy.
For this updated NERM, the Activities have been listed by Lead Agency and Time Frame.
Activities reported as complete and no longer a priority are provided in the Appendices.
This updated NERM has also refined the monitoring indicators to assist with progress
assessments and reporting.
Acknowledgements
This updated NERM 2018 to 2020 is a publication of the Government of Nauru (GoN).
The development of the updated NERM 2018 to 2020 was facilitated by ITP Renewables and
supported by the UNDP via the Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade funded UNDP Regional Programme Activities.
In addition, numerous stakeholders contributed to this update including:
• Nauru, (CIE, NUC, DoF, DoA, DoE, DoJ, DoT, NRC, RONPHOS, Eigugu Energy,
 Bureau of Statistics), and
• international, (ADB, PPA, Australian High Commission, NZ MFAT, GIZ, SPREP,
 Vital Energy and IRENA).21km2.In 2016, the World Bank estimated a population of about 13,050 people. Nauru’s currency
is the Australian Dollar (AUD) and the per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2016 was
approximately $10,500 per year2.
Nauru faces economic, environmental and social challenges. Aid is an essential source of
funding for Nauru’s development including implementation of the NERM.
Nauru’s National Sustainability Development Strategy 2005 - 2025 (NSDS) outlines
the long-term plan for Nauru’s development. It was revised in 2009 and reviewed and updated
again in 2017/18.
The Nauru Energy Policy Framework3 (NEPF) was endorsed by the Government of Nauru
(GoN) in 2009. The NEPF outlines a policy framework that builds on the energy priorities
outlined in the NSDS.
Further background on Nauru’s energy sector is provided in Appendix A.
2. Government of Nauru’s Energy Vision
Nauru’s energy vision is documented in the energy sector goals of the NSDS:
‘Provide a reliable, affordable, secure and sustainable energy supply to meet the
socio economic development needs of Nauru.’
Figure 1: Nauru’s location, (from: www.dfat.gov.au).The energy sector outcomes for the NERM are outlined in the NEPF.
The outcomes are:
1. A reliable, affordable and safe power supply and services.
2. A reliable and safe supply of fossil fuels.
3. Universal access to reliable and affordable energy services.
 
4. An efficient supply and use of energy.
5. A significant contribution from renewable energy towards electricity supply.
6. Financial sustainability of the energy sector.
7. Efficient, robust and well-resourced institutions for energy planning and
 Wimplementation. 
These outcomes are fairly broad and have not been changed for the updated NERM.
4. NERM Targets
The NERM 2014 - 2020 was the implementation plan for the NSDS and NEPF and its original
targets for 2020 were:
i) 24/7 grid electricity supply with minimal interruptions.
ii) 50% of grid electricity supplied from renewable energy sources.
iii) 30% improvement in energy efficiency in the residential, commercial and
 government sectors.
These targets are fairly broad. They haven’t been revised for this updated NERM, but how
they could be interpreted, measured and reported is discussed in Section 8 Monitoring and
Evaluation.
To make progress towards these targets, the NERM 2014 - 2020 had six Action Plans and
19 Strategies. Each Strategy had a range of Activities and the allocation of Lead Agencies
to the Activities is shown in the following table.
 Lead Agency Activities
NUC 59
CIE 47
DoF 2
DoT 1
Statistics Office 1
Table 2: Lead Agency and number of Activities, (from NERM 2014 - 2020).py 
Policy Statement and Strategies from the NERM 2014 - 2020.
Capacity: Efficient, robust and well-resourced institutions for energy planning and implementation.
1. Establish appropriate policies, regulations and legislation for the energy sector.
2. Facilitate development of appropriate local skill base to meet ongoing demand in energy sector.
3. Improve governance and accountability in the energy sector.
4. Foster a culture of partnerships between public and private sectors including the community.
Power: A reliable, affordable and safe electrical power supply and services.
1. Upgrade assets.
2. Improve planning and management.
3. Improve supply-side energy efficiency.
4. Move toward full recovery of operating and maintenance costs.
5. Develop and safeguard NUC staff.
Renewables: 50% of electricity used in Nauru comes from renewable energy sources by 2020.
1. Phased implementation of large-scale solar.
2. Investigation and implementation of other renewable energy sources.
3. Build in-country capacity to operate and maintain solar PV systems.
Efficiency: An efficient supply and use of energy.
1. Data collection and analysis for preparation for Demand Side Management implementation.
2. Implementation of demand side energy efficiency.
3. Introduction of energy labelling and Minimum Energy Performance Standards.
Fuels: A reliable and safe supply of fossil fuels.
1. Establish an economically efficient, secure and safe National Fuel Terminal and fuel supply.
2. Investigate ways to reduce use or find alternatives to liquid fuels.
Transport: Policy to be developed as part of road map implementation.
1. Implementation of energy efficiency in transport.
2. Investigate substitutes to diesel and petrol for transport.6. Activities by Lead Agency
For this updated NERM, the information in the Action Plan tables has been reordered
by Lead Agency and forecast Time Frame.
Other key changes include the following:
• The Activity Importance column has been deleted as the three categories of
 Very High, High and Medium were considered to not be essential for implementation.
• The forecast Time Frame column has been updated and revised to calendar year
 quarters, (Q1 = January to March).
• Two additional columns have been added to the Activities table:
 - Funding source - to allow for the source of the Estimated Budget to be
 documented, if known. Dept refers to Departmental Budget and Aid refers to
a, yet to be specified, aid funder.
 - Notes - to provide further context, if available.
This information, for still relevant Activities, is presented in the following tables for CIE and
NUC.
Activities where stakeholders indicated that the Activity:
• was completed, are listed in Appendix B. The NERM 2014 - 2020 had only four
 Activities that weren’t led by CIE or NUC. These were all reported as complete,
 so they are listed in Appendix B.
• was no longer a priority, are listed in Appendix C.
In addition, some similar and synergistic Activities have been merged.
This new format for the Action Plans still allows for Activities to be linked back to their
Action Plan and Strategy through their identifying number. However, ordering by Lead Agency 
and forecast Time Frame is considered to be more user-friendly for planning, resourcing and 
implementation.2018 to 2020 12 Jan 2018
CIE Activity 
Lead Agency
(supporting 
agencies) 
Time Frame Expected results / outputs Estimated budget AUD ($,000) Funding source (if known) Notes 
Investigate options, develop and 
ement a framework for private sector 
s, businesses and residences) 
wable energy grid-connection and 
ant supporting instruments (e.g. 
metering).
CIE
(NUC, DoF, 
DoJ) 
Q2 2018 Appropriate framework 
developed and implemented. 
150 Aid NUC has made arrangement for netbilling. This Activity is discussed further 
in Section 7.2. Information for rooftop PV systems to bpublished on NUC’s website.
Develop and implement 
lation, operating and maintanence 
ng programs for the solar 
ovoltaic (PV) installations. 
CIE 
(NUC, DoE, 
Nauru 
College and 
other 
stakeholders) 
Q2 2018 Local persons capable 
of installing and O&M of solar PV plants. 
30 Aid Some level of PV training for NUC staff 
has been implemented. Further PV training opportunities to be developed i2018. 
Assess training needs and develop 
opriate training strategy for 
ndary and primary school teachers, 
agers, small businesses, 
nicians, tradespeople, etc. 
CIE
(DoE) 
Q2 2018 Training plan / 
strategies developed. 
30 Aid A national Training Needs and Gap 
Analysis covering sustainable energy
(and climate change adaptation) was 
undertaken in 2015/16 by the PacTVETproject. Training is further discussed in Section 7.3. 
Develop energy curriculum for 
ols focusing on energy efficiency 
renewable energy.
CIE
(DoE) 
Q3 2018 Increased knowledge 
base on energy. 
50 Aid Publish curriculum on appropriate 
website. 
Establish regular training in solar 
gy and other relevant renewables as 
as energy efficiency in a local 
ng institution. 
CIE
(NUC, DoE, 
Nauru 
College and 
other 
stakeholders)
Q3 2018 Course on solar energy 
available locally.
30 Aid $20k for setting up training course, 
$10k recurring annual cost. 2018 to 2020 11 Jan 2018 
CIE 
28 still relevant Activities where CIE is the Lead Agency as well as new Activities are listed below, in the order of their forecast Time Frame. CIE Activity Lead Agency (supporting agencies) Time Frame Expected results / outputs Estimated budget AUD ($,000) Funding source (if known) Notes 
 Develop detailed Monitoring and 
uation plan for the NERM. CIE Q1 2018 Monitoring and Evaluation Plan for Road Map developed and used. UNDP The Plan has been revised as part of t
updated NERM, see Section 8. CIE to report appropriate indicators in Annual Reports. 
 Carry out an assessment of the 
utional arrangements for the 
ementation of the NERM including 
mmendations for long term 
ementation. CIE (DoF) Q1 2018 Assessment carried out and appropriate recommendations made. UNDP NERM Coordinating Committee to take on the roles of the Technical Working Group on Energy and the Project Steering Committee. 
4 Support and facilitate the activities 
e NERM Coordinating Committee. CIE Q1 2018 and ongoing Appropriate support to meetings of the NERM Coordinating Committee. 10 Dept This Activity has been revised from the no longer required C3.4. The NERM Coordinating Committee should meet at least every 6 months. 
Recruit new staff to support the 
tion of the CIE Energy Unit including 
RM implementation. CIE Q2 2018 Established Energy position(s) filled. 20 Dept The CIE Energy Unit was formally established in July 2017. The Energy Unit consists of Director for Climate Change & Energy and an Energy Offic
(currently a vacant position). Recruitment of Energy Officer schedulfor 2018. 
 Establish a data collection system 
nergy and transport data (related to 
r databases as appropriate). CIE (DoT, NBoS, Our Airline and others) Q2 2018 Data collection system established. 30 Dept This Activity discussed further in Section 7.1. 2018 to 2020 14 Jan 2018
CIE Activity 
Lead Agency
(supporting 
agencies) 
Time Frame Expected results / outputs Estimated budget AUD ($,000) Funding source (if known) Notes 
 Undertake energy surveys/audits of 
s and commercial buildings.
CIE
(NUC) 
Q1 2019 Identify measures to 
reduce electricity use in hotels and commerce 
30 Aid Further details are provided in 
Section 7.5. 
Activity E1.4 could also be included in the Scope of Work.
 Undertake industrial energy audits
ONPHOS and NRC facilities. 
CIE
(RONPHOS 
and NRC)
Q1 2019 Measures to reduce fuel 
use at RONPHOS and NRC identified.
50 Aid This Activity could be combined with 
Activity E1.3. 
 Review of regulatory or policy 
ers (e.g. import duties) to efficiency 
renewables investments.
CIE
(NUC, DoF, 
Customs, 
DoJ)
Q1 2019 Changes that will 
enhance investment proposed. 
20 Aid Further details in Section 7.6.
 Carry out training in technical skills 
fficiency and renewables as 
ified in Activity C2.1. 
blish train the trainers programs in
ency and renewables for local 
hers, equipment operators, 
agers and technicians.
CIE
(NUC) 
Q1 2019 More people in key 
positions trained. Qualified local trainers. Training programs established. 
80 Aid This Activity has been merged with C2.
Undertake energy efficiency 
ns in Government Buildings.
CIE
(Govt 
Agencies)
Q2 2019 Efficiency actions 
undertaken. 
50 Aid This is implementing the 
recommendation of energy audits involving investments.
Carry out awareness raising on 
S and labelling to communities, 
nesses and government. 
CIE Q2 2019
and ongoing 
for 2 years
after 
mandatory 
MEPS and 
labeling 
introduced 
Communities, businesses and government are aware of MEPS and labelling.
60 Aid This Activity is discussed further in 
Section 7.7. 2018 to 2020 13 Jan 2018
CIE Activity 
Lead Agency
(supporting 
agencies) 
Time Frame Expected results / outputs Estimated budget AUD ($,000) Funding source (if known) Notes 
Prepare feasibility study to 
rmine the best approach to MEPS 
abelling. 
CIE Q3 2018 Best approach to MEPS 
and labeling determined. 
30 Dept If possible, join SPC’s Pacific Appliance 
Labelling and Standards (PALS) projecthat may assist with determining the optimal approach. 
Prepare and enact appropriate
ation for MEPS and labelling.
CIE
(DoJ) 
Q4 2018 MEPS and labeling 
legislation enacted. 
20 Dept Legislation could also include the 
implementation of other, relevant efficiency Activities. 
Introduce Minimum Energy 
ormance Standards (MEPS) and 
ing of high electricity consumption 
ances such as air conditioners, 
ers, refrigerators, etc. 
CIE 
(NUC, private 
sector and 
other 
stakeholders) 
Q4 2018 MEPS and energy 
labelling for select 
appliances introduced. 
50 Aid MEPS and mandatory energy labelling 
may require legislation, (this is Activity E3.4 above).SPC to be contacted for update on the Pacific Appliance and Labelling and Standards program. 
Training to customs and other 
rnment departments on MEPS and 
ng, including enforcement. 
NUC
(CIE) 
Q4 2018 Customs and other 
government departments trained on MEPS and labelling.
10 Dept The Lead Agency for this Activity has 
been changed to CIE from NUC. 
Develop a legislative and 
rnance framework for the energy 
or. 
CIE
(DoJ) 
Q1 2019 Overall Energy Act or 
other appropriate legislation in place. 
100 Aid While some stakeholders appear 
unconvinced that an overall Energy Act is required, the purpose of the Act is discussed in Section 7.4. This Activity is to be informed by the Legislative Gap Analysis Report due to be completed in Q1 2018. M 2018 to 2020 16 Jan 2018 CIE Activity Lead Agency (supporting agencies) Time Frame Expected results / outputs Estimated budget AUD ($,000) Funding source (if known) Notes 
4 Establish guidelines and financial 
entives for energy efficiency 
asures in construction or retrofitting of 
dings. CIE Q2 2020 Guidelines and financial incentives in place. 150 Aid Guidelines and incentives in other PIC
to be researched to assist with implementing this Activity. 
1 Study the feasibility of LPG, hybrid 
d electric (powered by renewable 
ctricity) vehicles, including buses. CIE Q4 2020 Feasibility of options established. 30 Dept or Aid Undertake desktop analysis as fuel prices rise to investigate if a feasibility study is worth commissioning.RM 2018 to 2020 15 Jan 2018
CIE Activity 
Lead Agency
(supporting 
agencies) 
Time Frame Expected results / outputs Estimated budget AUD ($,000) Funding source (if known) Notes 
.5 Assess feasibility of efficiency
chnologies, including cost benefit 
alysis and develop relevant financing 
tions for end users to make efficiency 
estments which are compatible with 
al institutional and financing 
uctures. 
CIE
(DoF) 
Q2 2019 List of efficient
technologies defined. Incentives and financing options for support investment into efficiency identified.
40 Aid This Activity is further defined in 
Section 7.8. 
NUC is already offering a 30% capitasubsidy for some a few appliances 
through the Low Carbon Fund, an initiative supported by IUCN, UNEP aGEF.
.8 Design and implement awareness 
mpaign to communities on energy 
ciency in transport.
CIE
(DoT) 
Q2 2019
and ongoing
10 Dept Recurring annual budget.
This Activity is discussed further in 
Section 7.9. 
.3 Undertake pre-feasibility studies for 
er renewable energy sources, such 
 waste-to-energy and OTEC.
CIE
(NUC) 
Q3 2019 Studies published on 
suitable website. 
200 Aid Study to focus on CIE’s interest in a 
waste-to-energy plant and NUC’s 
interest in OTEC technology developments. 
.3 Undertake a study of incentives to 
rease the use of bicycles and 
otorcycles for personal transport, as 
ll as car-pooling and other 
havioural changes to encourage ergy efficiency, and implement as propriate. This study could also 
sess options to discourage the 
portation of vehicles that have larger 
gines (e.g. through increased import 
ties, etc).
CIE
(DoT, DoF) 
Q4 2019 Options for incentives 
identified. If incentives are implemented, budget may need to be increased.
40 Aid This Activity has been merged with 
Activity T1.6 to focus on different registration fees for vehicles dependion fuel consumption and age. 
Applying import duties proportional to fuel consumption may be the role of Customs. Implementation is T1.7 by Q1 2020. 
.7 Implement appropriate options to 
courage the importation of vehicles 
h large engines.
CIE
(DoF, 
Customs and 
others)
Q1 2020 Options to discourage 
importation of vehicles with large engines implemented.
20 Dept See Note above for T1.3.2018 to 2020 18 Jan 2018
NUC Activity 
Lead Agency 
(supporting 
agencies) 
Time Frame Expected results / outputs Estimated budget AUD ($,000) Funding source (if known) Notes 
7 Carry out safe and environmentally 
nd disposal of retired generators and 
er old equipment that is replaced. 
NUC Q3 2018 Safe and 
environmentally sound disposal of equipment. 
200 Aid
1 Purchase and install new 
nsmission and Distribution (T&D) 
ipment. 
NUC Q4 2018 T&D equipment 
purchased and installed. 
2,000 EU New 11kV line through centre of islan
due to be built in 2018. 
6 Commission Meneng 1.0 MW solar 
system. 
NUC Q4 2018 New solar PV system at 
Meneng providing full output to grid.
3,300 NZ MFAT 
& EU
The tender for this project and a 300 rooftop PV system for the new jail cloon 28 Nov 2017. The ground-mounte
solar PV system is to be at least 1 MW 
with a fibre optic cable linking it to the diesel powerhouse control system. 
2 Undertake a survey of roof tops 
 parking areas to establish locations 
solar installations and locate land 
side for potential large scale solar 
nts.
NUC
(CIE) 
Q1 2019 Sites (roofs, power 
poles and parking lots) suitable for gridconnected solar identified.
10 NUC List of potential sites and suitable roo
areas’ approximate size to be publishon NUC’s website.NUC to promote potential of rooftop P2018 to 2020 17 Jan 2018
NUC
11 still relevant Activities where NUC is the Lead Agency as well as new activities are listed below, in the order of their estimated Time Frame.
NUC Activity 
Lead Agency 
(supporting 
agencies) 
Time Frame Expected results / outputs Estimated budget AUD ($,000) Funding source (if known) Notes 
1 Prepare and implement energy 
ciency campaign to residential 
tomers including financial incentives 
people to exchange less energy 
cient appliances for new, more 
cient ones.
NUC
(CIE) 
Ongoing Residential customers
consider energy efficiency and chose more efficient appliances. 
10 NUC This Activity has merged E2.1 and E2
Education resources to be published NUC’s website.Recurring annual budget. 
3 Review draft NUC Power System 
es and Regulations, update these 
cluding making electricity theft a crime 
d covering embedded generation from 
ewable energy sources) and enact 
al NUC Power System Rules and 
gulations. 
NUC
(CIE, DoJ) 
Q1 2018 NUC Power System 
Rules and Regulationsfinalised and enacted. 
40 UNDP, 
GIZ & EU 
This Activity is an expanded version othe original E2.3 and also incorporatethe original C1.2 Develop supporting regulations for the NUC Act. Some funding likley to be available from the 
Enabling the Implementation of the Nauru Energy Road Map project in 
2018. Updated Power System Rules and Regulations to be published on appropriate website(s).NUC Regulations 2012 are on the subordinate legislation part of the RONLAW website. It is proposed thathe NUC Power System Rules and Regulations replace these. 
2 Disseminate information on 
ciency measures, PV buyback tariffs
s metering and other information 
arding changes in the power sector 
and when appropriate. 
NUC
(CIE) 
Q2 2018 Information on PV 
buyback tariffs and metering as well as IPP policy and others disseminated. 
20 NUC The Lead Agency for this Activity has 
been revised from CIE to NUC. Information needs to be published on NUC’s website in an easy-to-understa
manner.2018 to 2020 20 Jan 2018
NUC Activity 
Lead Agency 
(supporting 
agencies) 
Time Frame Expected results / outputs Estimated budget AUD ($,000) Funding source (if known) Notes 
7 Install 7 to 10 MW solar PV system 
uding associated enabling equipment 
maintain grid stability. Associated abling equipment includes batteries, 
anced inverters and control systems, 
ud camera, frequency resisistors, 
acitors and/or low-load diesel 
sets to allow integration of high 
res of PV.
NUC Q4 2019 Further 7 to 10 MW of 
PV installed at the Meneng site with associated enabling equipment contributing output to the grid. 
>40,000 ADB, GCF
& others
Enabling equipment should be a requirement of the solar PV system tender, not separate. Advanced contrand communication systems as well asignificant other enabling equipment, such as batteries, will be required to maintain grid stability. Estimated budget is highly dependenon PV sizing and required enabling 
equipment which is dependent on loagrowth and forecasts. 
8 Install further large solar PV 
m(s) to meet the 2020 renewable 
ergy electricity supply target. 
e of additional solar PV farm(s) will 
pend on load growth to 2020. 
NUC Q1 2020 Additional solar PV 
farm(s) installed. 
Not yet 
estimated. 
Aid If 7 MW of additional PV is able to be 
added to the 11kV grid at the Meneng 
site as part of Activity R1.7, along wit
the other expected PV additions, this 
bring Nauru’s total PV to around 10 MThis will generate about 18 GWh per 
year. This is approximately half of 2016/17’s total generation.As the load is forecast to grow from nconnections, additional sites may neeto be tendered with the Meneng site t
reach the 50% by 2020 target. Locating almost all the PV at the Meneng site to meet the 50% target mnot be optimal due to potential netwoconstraints. 19 
NUC Activity 
Lead Agency 
(supporting 
agencies) 
Time Frame Expected results / outputs Estimated budget AUD ($,000) Funding source (if known) Notes 
5 Install 600 to 1000 kW of grid
nected solar PV without storage 
tomside on government owned 
dings, parking lots, etc. 
NUC
(CIE) 
Q2 2019 Rooftop PV - additional 
600 to 1,000 kW
installed.
1,800 to 
3,000
Aid This Activity is seeking to increase the 
total capacity of rooftop PV systems from ~200 kW in 2016 to a total of around 1 MW by mid 2019. Estimated budget has been revised down to $3/W. Installed cost of rooftoPV likely to be less than this but limite
competition makes accurate budget forecasting a challenge. Car park 
shading PV systems likely to be more expensive than rooftop PV systems, sfinal costs will depend on proportions each as well as individual PV system 
sizes and any roof upgrade requirements. 
5 Review opportunities for:
vings of electricity from water 
mping and reverse osmosis units, 
ack-up solar powered reverse 
mosis units in alternative locations, 
dditional water storage with 
culated water distribution, and
ducing leakages in the reticulation, 
very and storage systems /tanks. 
ry out feasibility study for most 
mising water sector opportunity and, 
vorable, implement. 
NUC Q3 2019 Opportunities for 
electricity savings, solar generation and reticulation in water 
production and distribution identified and implemented. 
150 Aid This Activity has merged E3.5, E3.6, 
R2.4 and P2.7. 
Publish studies on NUC website. This section provides further discussion of some of CIEs Activities with the aim of assisting with
their preparation and implementation.
7.1 Energy and Transport Database
Activity T1.9 is ‘Establish a data collection system for energy and transport data (related to other 
databases as appropriate).’ This Activity has an estimated, CIE Departmental budget of $30,000.
Setting up a spreadsheet to store key energy data and the NERM monitoring indicators is not
expected to be expensive. However, maintaining and populating this spreadsheet with key
historical data and ongoing data is expected to take resources and time. Improved data tracking
will assist in making CIE’s Annual Reports more informative.
7.2 Grid-connect PV Standards, Regulations and Guidelines
Activity C1.6 is ‘Investigate options, develop and implement a framework for private sector
(IPPs, businesses and residences) renewable energy grid-connection and relevant supporting 
instruments (e.g. net-metering).’
The installation, metering and billing requirements for rooftop PV systems need to be clearly
specified and published. A consultant could be engaged to review NUC’s draft requirements for
rooftop PV systems. The PV requirements need to be published on a website and be easy to 
understand as well as easy to find.
Several Pacific Island utilities have published Regulations and Guidelines for rooftop PV
systems. Further information is available from the Pacific Power Association and other
websites. For example, a useful document for installations is the Grid-connected PV Systems 
Installation Guidelines for the Pacific Islands published on SEIAPI’s website4. SEIAPI also has
prepared guidelines for the design of grid-connected solar PV systems.
IPPs usually refers to Independent Power Producers selling electricity to utilities from a ground 
mounted, large PV system through a Power Purchase Agreement. This is not seen as a priority
due to the relatively, small size of Nauru’s load and the need for complex, grid-integration
components for any further, large solar PV systems in Nauru.
In 2018, as part of the GoN’s (UNDP/GIZ/EU supported), Enabling the Implementation of the
Nauru Energy Road Map project, a review and update of the draft NUC Power System Rules
and Regulations, including drafting sections related to embedded renewable generation, will be 
undertaken. This will also include a review of existing, relevant technical international and
regional standards for solar PV and their relevance to the technical standards and requirements
for Nauru. This Activity has synergies with C1.1 ‘Develop a legislative and governance
framework for the energy sector.’
7.3 Training Strategy
Activity C2.1 is, ‘Assess training needs and develop appropriate training strategy for secondary
and primary school teachers, managers, small businesses, technicians, tradespeople, etc.’
This Activity has an estimated budget of $30,000.in 2015/16. It provides useful background information for developing the Training Strategy and 
contains two recommendations for climate change/disaster risk reduction training as well as one
for sustainable energy and energy efficiency training. This Activity could be combined with other 
Activities developing curriculum and building capacity and resources in the training sector.
7.4 Energy Act
Activity C1.1 is ‘Develop a legislative and governance framework for the energy sector.’
This Activity has an estimated budget of $100,000.
A specialist legal consultant could be engaged to consult with stakeholders and draft a possible 
Energy Act or a suite of Acts to clarify roles and implement Nauru’s energy development 
agenda. Funds for providing preliminary technical input towards preparation of energy sector 
legislation are likely to be available in 2018 as part of the GoN’s (UNDP/GIZ/EU supported)
Enabling the Implementation of the Nauru Energy Road Map.
 
In 2017, there appears to be several entities with responsibilities in the energy sector. These 
responsibilities do not appear to all be legally mandated.
The 2017 consultations and previous analysis indicates the following agencies and their key
energy sector roles:
i) Department of Finance (DoF), including the Planning and Aid Division (PAD),
 allocates annual budgets, provides oversight of the NSDS, regulates prices for
fuel,and coordinates development assistance, (NERM 2014 - 2020).
ii) CIE, carries out energy policy and planning functions, as well as climate change
 mitigation and adaptation policy, (NERM 2014 - 2020).
iii) NUC is the sole provider of grid electricity and water, (NUC ACT 20116).
iv) Vital Energy procures fuel and manages the fuel tank farm, (Petroleum Supply
 and Facility Management Agreement7).
v) Department of Transport, regulates the transport sector (NERM 2014 - 2020).
The NUC Act 2011 states the legal obligations of the utility for water and fuel. The NUC
Regulations 20128
 came into force on 18 October 2012. These Regulations are only 8 pages
long and are limited to the Advisory Committee and Recovery of Fees from Post-paid
Customers.
5
 http://prdrse4all.spc.int/sites/default/files/nauru_0.pdf
6
 The Nauru Utilities Corporation Act 2011 describes the functions of the corporation, see http://ronlaw. 
gov.nr/nauru_lpms/index.php/act/view/799
7
 The Agreement between GoN and Vital Energy is commercial in-confidence but was executed in June 2015. The Background
Wsection indicates that procuring fuel was part of the Request for Tender.Page 23 of the NERM 2014 - 2020 states, ‘A legislative framework is required which provides
 for an appropriate governance regime including consideration of an overarching Energy Act.
Having the appropriate legislation in place will be essential in improving the performance of the
energy sector. The legislation should also promote and encourage active participation of the
private sector and civil society.’
Page 24 of the NERM 2014 - 2020 NERM states, ‘There is no independent energy regulator in
Nauru, as this would not be a cost-effective option given the size of the country.’
Page 67 of the NERM 2014 - 2020 states, ‘National energy legislation will be important in
facilitating NERM implementation and in enabling good governance requirements to be met.
Thus development and adoption of national energy legislation is essential for the success of the
NERM implementation and overall development of the energy sector. Energy legislation should
define the role of the government, in terms of planning, developing, and coordinating energy
initiatives, energy sector regulation and creating a market where private sector and community 
stakeholders can engage effectively, for example, by the introduction of net-metering.’
In addition, there is no legislation in place to regulate the importation of energy consuming
appliances. An Energy Act may provide an opportunity to clarify responsibilities, improve
governance and reporting as well as implement Activities involving regulations. Several of the
NERM Activities are likely to require a legal framework to be fully implemented.
7.5 Energy Audits for Hotels, Commercial Buildings, RONPHOS and NRC offices
Activity E1.3 is ‘Undertake energy surveys/audits of hotels and commercial buildings.’ This
Activity has a revised, estimated budget of $30,000 from unspecified aid funding.
Page 51 of the NERM 2014 - 2020 states, ‘However the usage patterns of commercial entities
are quite different from those of residences and surveys/energy audits will need to be carried
out to determine energy use patterns. Unfortunately, the experience in other Pacific countries
has been that energy audits of commercial entities often do not result in significant investment
in energy efficiency measures by the audited businesses.
Therefore, audits should be provided only to businesses that specifically state their intent to
follow through with actual investments that are determined to have a payback that is less than a
pre-agreed upon time period. RONPHOS and NRC offices should also be targeted as these are
some of the bigger office spaces and also these are state-owned enterprises. It may be
reasonable for a nominal fee to be charged to businesses, RONPHOS and NRC for the audit if 
reasonable measures for efficiency improvement are found to be cost effective but no
investment results from the audit report.’
If $30,000 of aid funding is secured, it may be sufficient for a basic energy audit of several sites 
depending on how it is procured. An approach could be to request energy audit consultants to
undertake Type 1 Energy Audit9
 assessments of six of the most energy intensive sites and train
local staff in energy efficiency assessments.y gy py (gp) y 
renewable investments.’ This Activity has an estimated budget of $20,000 from unspecified, aid
funding.
This Activity could be implemented with the Energy Audit assessments to request the
consultants to develop a list of products and energy specifications for the GoN to consider
import duty reductions.
Research on existing import duties for efficiency and renewable investments would be useful 
background. The Marshall Islands’, Fiji’s and other Pacific Island Countries’ efforts at reducing
import duties10 could be examined for relevance to Nauru.
7.7 MEPS and Energy Labelling Information
Activity E3.3 is, ‘Carry out awareness raising on Minimum Energy Performance Standards
(MEPS) and labelling to communities, businesses and government.’ This Activity has an
estimated budget of $60,000.
If aid funding can be secured, this Activity could be implemented by commissioning a specialist 
communications consultant to upgrade NUC’s website, publish MEPS and energy labelling 
information online and hardcopy and promote this information through local partners.
As an alternative, CIE could consider developing an Energy Information website and brochures
to make available information for people seeking to reduce their energy bills. A variety of public 
engagement could be used to promote the website and the brochures.
There is also the Pacific Appliance Labelling and Standards (PALS) Program11 which supports 
establishment of Australian/New Zealand based MEPS and labelling in Pacific Island Countries.
Nauru could consider joining this SPC run initiative.
Considering MEPS and energy labelling of appliances is to be compulsory, most stakeholders
are likely to notice energy labelling when browsing shops selling labelled appliances. Thus this
Activity is to focus on the understanding of the financial implications of MEPS and energy
labelling which may require information brochures to be printed and made available at all points
of sale. Further information on the Australian Government’s approach is available from their
Energy Rating website12.
7.8 Efficiency Financing Options
Activity E1.5 is ‘Assess feasibility of efficiency technologies, including cost benefit analysis and 
develop relevant financing options for end users to make efficiency investments which are
compatible with local institutional and financing structures.’ This Activity has an estimated
budget of $40,000 from an unspecified, aid funder.
10 Further information available from: https://policy.asiapacificenergy.org/node/2869, and http://www.frcs.org.fj/wp-content/
uploads/2016/10/2016-2017-Incentives13OCT2016.p df
11 https://prdrse4all.spc.int/node/4/content/pacific-appliance-labelling-and-standards-pals-regulatory-meeting-13-15-
november-2017While low-interest loans appear to be an effective way of accelerating energy efficiency
investments, they often have low take up rates for a variety of reasons. However, they can be a
way for low income households to improve uptake of cost-effective, energy upgrades.
In addition, with support from the IUCN/UNEP/GEF Low Carbon Islands project, a Low Carbon
Fund (LCF) was launched in January 2017. The LCF provides an incentive for the private sector
(businesses and households) to switch towards energy efficient washing machines, fridges, and 
freezers. Specifically, the LCF provides a 30% capital subsidy when buying new efficient
appliances. Further information on this is available from the Low Carbon Islands website13.
7.9 Annual Transport Cost Information
Activity T1.8 is, ‘Design and implement awareness campaign to communities on energy
efficiency in transport.’ This Activity has an estimated budget of $10,000 Departmental.
With petrol being more than $2 per litre, the community already has a strong incentive to be
energy efficient with their transport needs. However, the generally short distances travelled may
mean the annual costs are not fully appreciated.
CIE could develop online and brochure information materials discussing the annual costs of
travelling an appropriate distance, say 5,000 kms, with a variety of transport options, including
the bus and electric vehicles. In addition, this information could include updates on the duties for 
importing vehicles depending on their fuel efficiency.
This Activity could also be combined with T2.1 ‘Study the feasibility of LPG, hybrid and electric
(powered by renewable electricity) vehicles, including buses.’
Collecting other countries’ transport information may provide useful background for progressing 
this Activity, for example the Green Vehicle Guide website14.
13 http://lowcarbonislands.org/news/lowcarbonfundlaunch/
14 wwwgreenvehicleguidegovaui) 24/7 grid electricity supply with minimal interruptions.
ii) 50% of grid electricity supplied from renewable energy sources.
iii) 30% improvement in energy efficiency in the residential, commercial and
 government sectors.
While some of these targets are fairly broad, they haven’t been revised for this updated NERM.
To allow for progress to be monitored, the following indicators (and data sources) could be
reported on:
i) Annual period of interruptions reported in hours (NUC Annual Reports).
ii) The per cent annual GWh of electricity generated from renewable energy sources 
 compared to the total GWh generated (NUC Annual Reports).
iii) Nauru’s annual GDP $/GJ of imported energy consumed (CIE Annual Reports).
In addition, the electricity consumption for each sector could be reported on an
estimated GJ/m2 floor area basis.
The first and second monitoring indicators are from the NERM 2014 - 2020 and have been
slightly reworded for clarity. The third monitoring indicator is new as the NERM 2014 - 2020 had
the efficiency indicator as ‘to be developed’. If the NERM targets are updated by the GoN,
consideration could be given to refining the targets to be consistent with financial year reporting, 
providing more detailed monitoring methodologies as well as documenting data sources and
where indicators are to be published.
These and other monitoring indicators, associated baselines and proposed targets are provided
in the following Monitoring Plan table. The Notes column indicates if the Monitoring indicator is
new or a more than minor revision of the NERM 2014 - 2020 Monitoring Indicator.M 2018 to 2020 28 Jan 2018
NERM Monitoring Indicator Baseline (Year) Relevant Targets Where Published Notes 
rice of electricity Residential:
first 200 kWh/month = 25c/kWh
>200 kWh/month = 50c/kWh
Others = 70c/kWh
(2017)
N/a NUC website
www.nuc.com.nr 
nnual GWh of electricity 
enerated from renewable 
ources and total generation in 
ach financial year 
RE 0.34 GWh, Total 31.74 GWh
(2015/16)RE 1.21 GWh, Total 34.72 GWh
(2016/17)
N/a NUC Annual Reports If 10 MW of PV in total is 
installed by 2020, this w
generate around 18 GWyear. While the renewable per 
of total generation is the indicator, the GWh per ytotals should also be proin the CEO’s statement iNUC’s Annual Report focontext.
UC specific fuel consumption 
Wh from diesel generation/litre) 
3.5 kWh/l (2011) 4.0 kWh/l by 2020/21 NUC Annual Reports This is a new target as th
NERM 2014 - 2020 targefuel efficiency was a 30% improvement by 2020 wmethodology for specifyithis documented. NUC’s Performance Indicator a3.6 kWh/l, (NUC Annual Report 2016).Two ‘fuel efficiencies’ wineed to be monitored anreported, overall fuel effiincluding PV generation fuel efficiency for just diegenerated electricity.M 2018 to 2020 27 Jan 2018
Table 3: NERM Monitoring Plan 
NERM Monitoring Indicator Baseline (Year) Relevant Targets Where Published Notes 
nnual hours of interruption per 
ustomer (reliable grid supply) 
568 hours of interruptions per customer (2015/16)
Less than 12 hours in 2020-21. NUC Annual Reports
Minutes of interruptions per customer to be reported in 
hours 
This new target is more consistent with NUC’s KPerformance Indicator aless than 700 minutes (Annual Report 2016). The previous NERM hatarget of 0.92. Convert System AveragInterruption Duration Ind(reported in minutes) to 
Wh from renewable sources / Wh total generated 
enewable generation per cent)
0.3% (2009)1.1% (2015/16) 0.3 / 31.7 GWh
3.5% (2016/17) 1.2 / 34.7 GWh
50% of electricity generation to come from renewable energy sources by 2020 
NUC Annual ReportsFinancial Year Energy Production and Sales section 
The GWh generated figshould also be reported the renewable generatiocent to provide context. 
nnual GDP/GJ of imported 
nergy consumed, or 
J/m2 consumed by residential, 
ommercial and government ectors (energy productivity) 
Estimated $125/GJ (2015/16)(baseline of area in square metres of sectors yet to be developed) 
30% improvement in energy efficiency by 2020 
CIE Annual Report,part of the Public Service Report 
This is a new methodolothe NERM 2014 - 2020 specify how to monitor tTarget. Other efficiency indicatospecific to residential, commercial and governsectors could also be developed. M 2018 to 2020 28 Jan 2018 
NERM Monitoring Indicator Baseline (Year) Relevant Targets Where Published Notes 
rice of electricity Residential: first 200 kWh/month = 25c/kWh >200 kWh/month = 50c/kWh Others = 70c/kWh (2017) N/a NUC website www.nuc.com.nr nnual GWh of electricity 
enerated from renewable 
ources and total generation in 
ach financial year RE 0.34 GWh, Total 31.74 GWh (2015/16) RE 1.21 GWh, Total 34.72 GWh (2016/17) N/a NUC Annual Reports If 10 MW of PV in total is installed by 2020, this wi
generate around 18 GWyear. While the renewable per 
of total generation is the indicator, the GWh per ytotals should also be proin the CEO’s statement iNUC’s Annual Report focontext. 
UC specific fuel consumption 
kWh from diesel generation/litre) 3.5 kWh/l (2011) 4.0 kWh/l by 2020/21 NUC Annual Reports This is a new target as th
NERM 2014 - 2020 targefuel efficiency was a 30% improvement by 2020 wimethodology for specifyithis documented. NUC’s Performance Indicator a3.6 kWh/l, (NUC Annual Report 2016). Two ‘fuel efficiencies’ wineed to be monitored anreported, overall fuel effiincluding PV generation fuel efficiency for just diegenerated electricity.M 2018 to 2020 29 Jan 2018 
NERM Monitoring Indicator Baseline (Year) Relevant Targets Where Published Notes 
UC generation labour 
roductivity 1.2 GWh/FTE (2011) N/a NUC Annual Reports Ratio of total electricity generation in GWh to th
number of full-time equiv
(FTE) employees who oand maintain the genera
plant. 
UC training expense as a % of 
ayroll 7.6% (2010) N/a NUC Annual Reports 
IE annual budget allocation from 
overnment budget $m $0.45m (2012/13) N/a Department of Finance, National Budget Disaggregate budget all
to energy activities, if fea
ystem losses 22.4% (2009) Less than 15% by 2020/21 NUC Annual Reports This is a new target as t
NERM 2014 - 2020 targ‘Total System losses’ wa30% improvement by 20with no methodology for specifying this documenThis appears to be repoas Electricity Loss. NUCPerformance Indicator aElectricity Loss is <20%(NUC Annual Report 20
on-technical losses 15.8% (2009) Less than 10% by 2020/21 NUC Annual Reports This is a new target as t
NERM 2014 - 2020 did not have a target for Non-technical losses. This appears to be repo
as Unaccounted EnergyNUC’s Key performance Indicator aim for UnaccoEnergy is <20%, (NUC AReport 2016).person figure does illustrate Naurus heavy reliance on imported fossil fuels.
This illustrates the many challenges to improving sustainability and realising Nauru’s energy vision 
of:
‘Provide a reliable, affordable, secure and sustainable energy supply to meet the socio economic 
development needs of Nauru.’
Energy Policies
A number of strategies, policies and legislation relevant to the energy sector have been introduced 
by the Government of Nauru. These include:
• National Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS) 2005 - 2025,
• Nauru’s Utility Sector - A Strategy for Reform,
• National Energy Policy Framework (NEPF),
• National Energy Road Map 2014 - 2020,
• Nauru Utilities Corporation Act (2011 and Amended 2016),
• Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) under the UNFCCC, and
• Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management Framework (RONAdapt).
Thus, there isn’t a lack of energy strategies and policies. Where Nauru could improve is in the 
areas of capacity and resources for implementation, reporting, legislation and enforcement. As 
the 2015 Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) states, ‘A number of development 
strategies and policy instruments as a response to climate change have been introduced by the 
Government since 2005 ’ and ‘However, Nauru’s accomplishment remains on paper and it
would require the necessary means of implementation through finance, capacity building and 
technology development and transfer to achieve tangible outcomes’.
An overview of three of the key energy sector components of Nauru’s energy development
agenda follows.
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution
The Republic of Nauru is fully committed to supporting successful outcomes from the annual 
Conference of the Parties (CoP) under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC). The Government of Nauru submitted its INDC15 in November 2015. This 
document states that Nauru’s INDC hinges on its:
 • NSDS 2005 - 2025, revised 2009,
 • NERM 2014 - 2020,
 • Second National Communication (SNC), submitted 2015, and
 • RONAdapt.Nauru is located just south of the equator and 1,287 km west of the International Date Line. Its
the smallest state in the Pacific with an area of around 21km2 and a population of about 13,050
people.
The Department of Commerce, Industry and Environment (CIE) carries out energy policy and
planning functions, as well as climate change mitigation and adaptation policy,
(NERM 2014 - 2020). Other agencies with energy sector responsibilities include Department of
Transport (DoT) and Department of Finance (DoF), the latter who manages the Government of
Nauru contract with Vital Energy for fuel supply and storage.
The Nauru Utility Corporation (NUC) is the government-owned utility responsible for public
electricity and water. Vital Energy operates the fuel tank farm and is responsible for provision of
fuel, (diesel, petrol and kerosene). LPG is sold by separate, private importers.
NUC’s main powerhouse is located in Aiwo. In 2016, it had eight diesel generators in various
states of operational capacity. During 2017, NUC installed and commissioned two new,
3.564 kVA generators.
Generation was reported as 31.7 GWh in financial year 2015/16 with sales at only 20 GWh. The
NUC Annual Report 2016 documents Losses at 35% with Unaccounted Energy 37% and
Electricity Loss 35%. The methodology for calculating these Key Performance Indicators is not
documented. However, it does illustrate the need to increase efforts to reduce unmetered loads
and network losses as well as improve power factors and transparency on this issue. More than
9.15 million litres of diesel and 80,000 litres of oil was consumed, (diesel generation only
~3.4 kWh / litre after power station use). The distribution system is a ring main and includes
11kV, 3.3kV and 415V sections.
The phosphate company, RONPHOS generates its own industrial power. The Australian 
Government’s Regional Processing Centres and the new jail generate their own power. The 
new, 11kV transmission line through the centre of the island, planned to be built in 2018, is
expected to connect these loads to the main-grid. This is expected to significantly increase the 
annual electricity consumption.
Nauru imports all of the fossil fuels it consumes. This is a significant component of the amount of 
money leaving Nauru each year which is also volatile due to its dependence on global oil prices. 
Recent figures on fuel imports and the Government of Nauru’s (GoN) excise are shown below.
Source: Annual fuel demand calculated from monthly average demand by sector figures in ‘Nauru Annual Vital Report
2017’ extract attached to Department of Finance in email of 24 November 2017. * LPG figure estimated from 2014 NERM.
Information on Compliance Integrity Program, Through Put Fee and Mooring Through Put Fee levies also provided by
Sector
NUC diesel
Retail diesel 
Retail petrol
Aviation
LPG*
2015-16
9.24
8.17
4.35
5.94
~0.02
2016-17
9.44
7.44
4.10
4.81
~0.02
Levy c/l
6
46
46
6
GoN $m
0.57
3.42
1.88
0.29
Total ML pa 27.72 25.81 Total $m 6.16
Table 1: Nauru’s annual fossil fuel imports (million litres per year) and fuel levies.Implement National Energy Policy Framework (NEPF) addressing:
i) cost effective, secure and sustainable procurement and supply of fuel,
ii) reliable and efficient energy supply and distribution,
iii) management of demand focussing on consumption efficiency and conservation, and
iv) increased use of renewable energy and other alternative forms of energy.’
There are some milestones associated with these strategies but they are mostly open to
interpretation due to the lack of specific baselines. The NSDS originally set a goal of meeting
50% of Nauru’s energy needs through renewable energy by 2015, which has been revised to
2020.
The 2017 review of the NSDS is expected to refine the performance targets and indicators to
more specific outputs.
National Energy Policy Framework
The Nauru National Energy Policy Framework (NEPF) aimed to provide a guideline for the
development of the energy sector in Nauru for the immediate future and mid and long term. It is 
dated May 2009 and is 24 pages.
The NEPF is driven by its vision statement:
‘Reliable, affordable and sustainable energy, enabling the socio-economic development of Nauru.’
The NEPF identified seven strategic policy areas as critical to achieving the overall vision of the
NEPF. These policy areas are listed below.
1. Power – a reliable, affordable and safe power supply and services.
2. Petrol – a reliable and safe supply of fossil fuels.
3. Renewables – 50% of energy used in Nauru comes from renewable sources by 2015.
4. Customers – universal access to reliable and affordable energy services.
5. Finance – financial sustainability of the energy sector.
6. Institutional – efficient, robust and well-resourced institutions for energy planning and 
 implementation.
7. Efficiency – an efficient supply and use of energy.
Each policy area has a range of strategies that all appear reasonable, However, their level of 
implementation since publication of the NEPF is variable. This highlights the importance of
clearly describing funding sources, tasks and responsibilities as well as monitoring indicatorsand is conditional on receiving adequate funding and resources.
National Sustainable Development Strategy
The National Sustainable Development Strategy 2005 - 2025 (NSDS) outlines Nauru’s energy 
vision as:
‘Provide a reliable, affordable, secure and sustainable energy supply to meet the
socio economic development needs of Nauru.’
The NSDS16 is 90 pages and was revised in 2009. It is also being reviewed and updated in 
2017/18. The NSDS illustrates the national level policy development and implementation
framework as per the following figure.
This figure highlights the importance of Department Operational Plans. Another figure in the 
NSDS on monitoring policy implementation highlights the importance of Department Annual
Reports.
16 htt
//ftit/ft/ttht/til/224/N%20NSDS%2020052025%20%20(2009)%20b20122014thdf
Figure 3: NSDS Policy Development and Implementation Framework.2018 to 2020 36 Nov 2017
Activity, 
reported as complete 
Organization 
Responsible 
(supporting 
organizations) 
Time 
Frame 
Expected results / 
outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
Carry out capacity planning exercise 
014 to 2020 including projected demand 
generation. 
NUC 6 months Power development 
plan developed.
NUC’s Strategic Plan was completed in 2014 ancompletes this Activity.
Establish process for long-term 
cial planning and develop first long
financial plan. 
NUC 1 year Process established.
Plans developed. 
NUC’s Strategic Plan was completed in 2014 ancompletes this Activity.
Develop annual procurement plan and 
tenance plan. 
NUC Every year Annual procurement 
and maintenance plan 
NUC’s Strategic Plan was completed in 2014 anoutlines the procurement and maintenance plan. 2014 NERM indicated that the procurement and maintenance plan should be updated every year the next revision of NUC’s Strategic Plan is scheduled for 2018. 
Undertake comprehensive technical 
ssment of generation, transmission and 
bution, including thermo-graphic 
ysis. 
NUC 6 months Report on generation & 
T&D assets 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been comple
Undertake comprehensive mapping, 
compilation, inventory, storage 
ing and maintenance planning for all 
ts. 
NUC 1 to 2 
years 
GIS database.Asset Inventory.Asset management plan. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been comple
Develop manuals for operation, safety, 
tenance and service for all key 
pment. 
NUC 1 to 2 
years 
Manuals prepared. NUC indicated that this Activity has been comple2018 to 2020 35 Nov 2017
pendix B: Activities completed 
ollowing Activities were reported as completed as part of the 2017 consultations. Most of the text below is taken directly from the 
M 2014 - 2020. However, the Notes column is new, to provide context and information on when the Activity was completed, if known.
Activity, 
reported as complete 
Organization 
Responsible 
(supporting 
organizations)
Time 
Frame 
Expected results / 
outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
Establish an Energy Unit within the 
artment of CIE 
CIE
(DoF, Public 
Service)
1 year Functioning Energy Unit The Energy Unit appears to have been establish
but is not yet fully staffed. 
 Establish position of Energy 
dinator within public service
CIE 1 year Position and annual 
salary integrated into national budget. 
CIE appear to have asked HR to commence pro
Carry out structural repairs to the NUC 
erhouse, including removal of the 
stos roofing and replacement. 
NUC 1 to 2 
years 
Roof and building refurbished. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been comple
Purchase and install of a new 
rator. 
NUC 1 year Generator installed NUC indicated that two new TDPS 3,564 kVA 
generators are expected to be fully commissioneend of Nov 2017. 
Carry out major overhaul of the newest 
ng generator. 
NUC 1 year Generator overhauled; 
working at full capacity. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been comple
Review the corporate governance of 
. 
NUC
(DoF) 
1 year Recommendations for 
corporate governance.
NUC’s Strategic Plan was completed in 2014 ancompletes this Activity.Activity, 
reported as complete 
Organization 
Responsible 
(supporting 
organizations)
Time 
Frame 
Expected results / 
outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
Develop and implement improved 
inistrative procedures including payroll, 
descriptions, workload planning and 
loyee leave and related entitlements. 
NUC
(with Public 
Service system) 
2 to 4 
years 
Appropriate administrative procedures implemented. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been complas NUC’s Strategic Plan was completed in 2014
Carry out a cost-of-service study for 
C across all three service areas of fuel, 
er and electricity, including water and 
tricity tariffs study (price, structure, etc). 
NUC 
(CIE, PAD)
6 months Cost-of-service defined 
for fuel, water and electricity. Electricity and water tariffs proposed.
NUC indicated that this Activity has been complas NUC’s Strategic Plan was completed in 2014
Carry out willingness-to-pay and 
dability studies (carried out in 
unction with the cost-of-service and tariff 
ies above). 
NUC
(with Govt)
6 months Better understanding of 
consumers’ ability and willingness to pay. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been compl
Establish separate business unit 
ncial information for water, electricity and 
services. 
NUC 1 year Separate business unit 
financial information available. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been compl
Improve accounting systems through 
gration of the asset registry and the 
ncial management information system. 
NUC 1 to 2 
years 
Improved accounting systems.
NUC indicated that this Activity has been compl2018 to 2020 37 Nov 2017
Activity, 
reported as complete 
Organization 
Responsible 
(supporting 
organizations)
Time 
Frame 
Expected results / 
outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
Develop asset security, disposal and 
luation policy. 
NUC 3 to 4 
years 
Policy developed. NUC indicated that this Activity has been comp
Collect baseline information and 
blish collection, storage, management 
back-up processes for all financial and 
s data.
NUC 1 to 2 
years 
Baseline information established Processes established. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been comp
0 Develop procedures for handling and 
itoring customer complaints and train 
. 
NUC 1 to 2 
years 
Procedure developed.Staff trained. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been comp
Establish a clear process for 
nciling the fuel supplied by the tank farm 
the fuel used by generating units. 
NUC 6 months Clear process 
established. New meters installed where needed. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been compas NUC’s Strategic Plan was completed in 2014 and the contract with Vital Energy was executed June 2015. 
Analyse fuel use data, identify 
ortunities to reduces losses and 
ement. 
NUC 1 to 2 
years 
Fuel losses reduced. NUC indicated that this Activity has been comp
Develop new project proposals for 
ovement of transmission and 
ibution line losses as more information 
 metering becomes available. 
NUC 2 to 3 
years 
Proposals submitted to appropriate funding agencies. Securing of new funding. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been comp
4 Implement further T&D loss reduction 
ects. 
NUC 3 to 5 
years 
T&D losses reduced. NUC indicated that this Activity has been comp2018 to 2020 40 Nov 2017 Activity, reported as complete Organization Responsible (supporting organizations) Time Frame Expected results / outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
Provide additional health and safety 
S) training and enforce all H&S policies 
practices. NUC 1 year Training provided. H&S policies implemented. NUC indicated that this Activity has been compl
Purchase sufficient personal protection 
pment for all staff. NUC 1 to 2 years Equipment purchased. Fewer accidents. NUC indicated that this Activity has been compl
 Prepare Solar Feasibility Study and 
nical standards and specifications for all 
es of solar installations. NUC (CIE) 6 months Location, specifications, grid connections and costs of all solar plants determined. NUC indicated that this Activity is completed as 
tender for next solar PV farm at Meneng has beissued by NZ MFAT to select panel members. Tenders closed 28 November 2017. This tender is expected to lead to the installatioleast 1 MW of ground-mount solar PV at the Mesite and rooftop PV for the new jail in 2018. 
 Develop regulations, standards and 
ment methods for private generation 
g solar energy sources. NUC (CIE) 2 to 3 years Incentives and information to support private investment in solar in place. NUC indicated that this Activity has been compl
for rooftop PV. What rooftop PV information is available on NUC’s website has not been able t
verified as NUC’s website has not been accesssince September 2017. 
Prepare tender documents and carry 
ender for first 600 to 1000 kW of grid- 
ected solar without storage. NUC (DoF, CIE) 1 year Contract awarded for installation of up to 1,000 kW NUC indicated that this Activity is completed as 
Masdar funded, Buada 500 kW solar PV system 
commissioned May 2016. 
Carry out a wind resource assessment 
feasibility study. NUC 1 year Determination of feasibility of wind power project. NUC indicated that this Activity has been compl
Feasibility study should be published on an appropriate website.2018 to 2020 39 Nov 2017
Activity, 
reported as complete 
Organization 
Responsible 
(supporting 
organizations) 
Time 
Frame 
Expected results / 
outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
Continue and strengthen prepayment
metering system, including: 
ove all residences and businesses to 
aid; 
eter all industrial and government 
ings;
heck systematically correct functioning 
eters; and 
velop measures to prevent meter 
ering. 
NUC
(CIE and other 
stakeholders) 
1 year All residences and 
businesses have pre-paid meters. Meter tampering reduced. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been comp
6 Develop and implement process to
e fuel purchasing responsibility from 
ernment to NUC. 
DoF 
(NUC) 
2 years Fuel purchase cost 
appears in NUC annual budget
DoF indicated this Activity was complete. Since 2015, NUC purchases diesel fuel from Vital Ene
Identify training needs across all units 
at all levels, develop a training plan and 
ement training programs. 
NUC 6 months, 
ongoing 
training 
Appropriately qualified staff. Improved staff retention. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been compas NUC’s Strategic Plan was completed in 2014
Develop and implement talent 
ification, apprenticeship and 
larship scheme for power sector.
NUC
(DoE, DoF, CIE) 
1 to 2 
years, 
ongoing
Appropriately qualified staff. Improved staff retention.
NUC indicated that this Activity has been compand is ongoing.. 
Design and implement a Performance 
agement System for lower level NUC 
 
NUC 1 to 2 
years 
Performance Management system implemented. 
NUC indicated that this Activity has been comp2018 to 2020 42 Nov 2017 Activity, reported as complete Organization Responsible (supporting organizations) Time Frame Expected results / outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
Carry out a feasibility study for the 
er of the fuel terminal operation and 
 fuel supply to a private sector operator. NUC (DoF) 6 months Feasibility study completed. DoF indicated that this Activity has been comple
If feasibility study is favorable, prepare 
uments for tender for private fuel 
inal operator and bulk fuel supplier. NUC (DoF) 1 year Tender related documents prepared. DoF indicated that this Activity has been comple
Undertake tender for a terminal 
rator and defined term (3-5 years) bulk 
supplier. NUC (DoF) 1 to 2 years Fuel Terminal operator contracted. Long term supply arrangement in place. Technical Service Agreement in place. DoF indicated that this Activity has been comple
The contract with Vital Energy was executed in 2015. 
7 Establish a fuel industry levy to 
port government administration and 
ulation of fuel operator DoF 2 to 3 years Fuel industry levy established. DoF indicated that three fuel industry levies hav
been introduced:  3cpl Compliance Integrity Program  3cpl Through Put Fee  40cpl Mooring Through Put Fee (NUC an
aviation exempt). 
 Using results of Activity T1.3, design 
implement a public transport system for 
ru. DoT (CIE) 3 to 4 years Public transport system designed and implemented. DoT indicated that this Activity has been comple
as public buses are available. 2018 to 2020 41 Nov 2017 Activity, reported as complete Organization Responsible (supporting organizations) Time Frame Expected results / outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
1 Carry out household energy use 
vey. Statistics Office (CIE, NUC, IUCN and UNDP) 3 months Characteristics of energy use in residences determined. UNDP indicated that this Activity has been completed. Survey is on restricted access here: http://prdrse4all.spc.int/data/nauru-2015-household-electr
appliances-lights-and-end-use-survey-datasets 
Procure the necessary software and 
yse pre-payment meter data to identify 
omers tampering with meters and to 
gorize customers as to energy use to 
w for targeted energy efficiency 
rams. NUC 6 months Software purchased. Pre-payment meter data analysed. NUC indicated that this Activity has been compl
6 Replace street lights to EE 
nologies combined with solar power. NUC 2 years EE street lights installed. NUC indicated that this Activity has been compl
Establish a technical service 
ement with a fuel testing laboratory to 
ple, test and certify jet fuel existing 
ks and new deliveries. NUC 3 months Certified, safe, quality compliant jet fuel. DoF indicated that this Activity is completed as 
contract with Vital Energy, executed in June 20
requires them to test and ensure fuel quality. 
Prepare fuel pricing template and 
ide training to NUC and DoF staff. NUC (DoF) 6 months Template developed. Staff trained. DoF indicated that this Activity is completed with 
Nauru Pricing Template supported by a fuel consulting firm. 
Carry out training and recertification of 
 at the fuel terminal including for shore 
ers, testing officers, terminal managers 
aviation refuelers and fitters. NUC 6 months Staff trained and certified DoF indicated that this Activity has been compleRM 2018 to 2020 44 Nov 2017
Activity, 
no longer a priority 
Agency 
Responsible 
(supporting 
agencies)
Time 
Frame 
Expected results / 
outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
R2.5 Investigate the potential for and identify 
uitable plants that can be used to green the 
Topside and provide appropriate biomass 
or future biofuels production.
CIE
(DoA, NRC) 
3 to 5 
years 
Level of potential determined and suitable plants identified. 
DoA and NRC indicated food production was a higher priority than biofuels. 
R2.6 Investigate the potential for biogas 
rom pigs (and other) for domestic cooking. 
CIE 2 to 3 
years 
Level of potential for biogas cooking identified
DoA indicated this was not a priority as they only had a small number of pigs. 
F1.8 Develop mechanism using the TWGEn 
or decisions on future capital works related 
o fuel supply. 
CIE
(TWGEn)
3 to 4 
years 
Mechanism established for decision making. 
DoF indicated that this was no longer required.
F2.4 Carry out a study on potential 
ubstitutes of petroleum (e.g. biofuel, 
biomass). 
CIE
(DoA, NRC) 
2 to 3 
years 
Realistic alternative fuel options for Nauru identified 
DoA and NRC indicated limited interest in biofuels due to lack of feedstocks and food being a higher priority. 
F2.2 Identify barriers to the increased use of LPG for cooking and design actions to 
emove those barriers (parallel with activity 
F2.1).
CIE 
(Various 
stakeholders) 
1 to 2 
years 
Barriers to increased LPG use for cooking identified and removed. 
CIE may not be able to influence the price of LPG. CIE and NUC indicated that this was no longer a 
priority. 
F2.3 Implement actions to remove barriers 
o use of LPG as identified in Activity F2.1
and F2.2.
CIE
(Various other 
stakeholders)
2 to 3 
years 
LPG use for cooking increased. 
This Activity may be beyond CIE’s capacity to influence. 
T1.1 Develop a policy statement and if appropriate, a target, for the transport sector with regard to energy related issues.
CIE 
(DoT) 
1 year Policy statement 
developed. Target agreed. 
DoT indicated that this was not a priority.M 2018 to 2020 43 Nov 2017 
pendix C: Activities no longer a priority 
the following 18 Activities, stakeholders indicated they were no longer a priority during the 2017 consultations. Similar to the previous Activity ta
t of this text below is taken directly from the NERM 2014 - 2020. However, the Notes column is new, to provide further context and information. Activity, no longer a priority Agency Responsible (supporting agencies) Time Frame Expected results / outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
3 Develop Petroleum Act. CIE (NUC, DoJ) 1 to 2 years Petroleum Act and relevant regulatory instruments in place. DoF indicated that a Petroleum Act was not a priority. 4 Support and facilitate the activities of 
 PSC and the TWGEn. CIE Ongoing Appropriate support provided to the TWGEn and the PSC. TWGen and PSC do not appear to be ongoing. This has been revised to NERM Coordination Committee in CIE’s Activities. 
7 Support capacity to collect and 
nage data and data sharing and 
orting. CIE Ongoing Support provided to energy data systems. Data to be collected as well as where it is reported is outlined in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, so doesn’t need to be a separate Activity. 
1 Develop private sector and community 
ategy, including engagement and multi- 
keholder partnerships. CIE (Private sector, civil society and others) 6 months to 1 year Private sector and community strategy developed. Strategy C4 is Foster a culture of partnerships between public and private sectors including the community. Stakeholders indicated it was unclear what the focus of this strategy was to be. 
2 Implement engagement and multi- 
keholder participatory activities as laid 
 in the strategy developed under 
ivity C4.1. CIE (Various stakeholders) 1 to 3 years Greater engagement of private sector and communities in the energy sector. Development of multi- stakeholder partnerships. See note for C4.1. If CIE wants to communicate and engage the community, a website may be useful.ERM 2018 to 2020 44 Nov 2017
Activity, 
no longer a priority 
Agency 
Responsible 
(supporting 
agencies)
Time 
Frame 
Expected results / 
outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
R2.5 Investigate the potential for and identify suitable plants that can be used to green the Topside and provide appropriate biomass for future biofuels production.
CIE
(DoA, NRC) 
3 to 5 
years 
Level of potential determined and suitable plants identified. 
DoA and NRC indicated food production was a higher priority than biofuels. 
R2.6 Investigate the potential for biogas from pigs (and other) for domestic cooking. 
CIE 2 to 3 
years 
Level of potential for biogas cooking identified
DoA indicated this was not a priority as they only had a small number of pigs. 
F1.8 Develop mechanism using the TWGEn for decisions on future capital works related to fuel supply. 
CIE
(TWGEn)
3 to 4 
years 
Mechanism established for decision making. 
DoF indicated that this was no longer required.
F2.4 Carry out a study on potential substitutes of petroleum (e.g. biofuel, biomass). 
CIE
(DoA, NRC) 
2 to 3 
years 
Realistic alternative fuel options for Nauru identified 
DoA and NRC indicated limited interest in biofuels due to lack of feedstocks and food being a higher priority. 
F2.2 Identify barriers to the increased use of LPG for cooking and design actions to remove those barriers (parallel with activity F2.1).
CIE 
(Various 
stakeholders) 
1 to 2 
years 
Barriers to increased LPG use for cooking identified and removed. 
CIE may not be able to influence the price of LPG. CIE and NUC indicated that this was no longer a 
priority. 
F2.3 Implement actions to remove barriers to use of LPG as identified in Activity F2.1and F2.2.
CIE
(Various other 
stakeholders)
2 to 3 
years 
LPG use for cooking increased. 
This Activity may be beyond CIE’s capacity to influence. 
T1.1 Develop a policy statement and if appropriate, a target, for the transport sector with regard to energy related issues.
CIE 
(DoT) 
1 year Policy statement 
developed. Target agreed. 
DoT indicated that this was not a priority.ERM 2018 to 2020 45 Nov 2017
Activity, 
no longer a priority 
Agency 
Responsible 
(supporting 
agencies)
Time 
Frame 
Expected results / 
outputs Notes (as per Nov 2017) 
T1.2 Design and implement programs to provide incentives and facilities to improve the quality of maintenance for personal transport (cars).
CIE
(DoT) 
1 year Improved maintenance 
and fuel efficiency of land vehicles. 
CIE and DoT indicated that this was not a priority.Agencies do not appear to have the capacity or resources to design incentive programs and facilities to improve vehicle maintenance.
T1.4 Undertake a study of public transport systems in Pacific Islands, with similar traffic patterns. 
CIE
(DoT) 
2 to 3 
years 
Study completed. DoT indicated it was unclear what such study will 
achieve. 
T2.2 Investigate the future potential of biofuel production on Topside for vehicles and small vessels.
CIE 3 to 5 
years 
Potential for biofuel identified. 
DoA, NRC and CIE indicated limited interest in biofuel production from new crops. 
P1.3 Purchase and install power quality equipment at the power station including AVR replacement and governor and upgrade of controls.
NUC 1 year Power quality 
equipment purchased and installed
NUC indicates this is no longer required as the new diesel gensets remove the need for this. 
R2.2 Prepare and implement wind generation project if determined to be economically feasible. 
NUC 5 years Wind project 
implemented. 
Average wind speed at 30m above ground at Anabar was reported as 4.2 m/s. This is unlikely to be sufficient to justify wind generation. The 2010 Wind Power Feasibility Report is available by formal request to SPC17. 
F2.1 Undertake a study to explore options for more economic supply of LPG. 
NUC
(CIE) 
1 to 2 
years 
Long term LPG supply options identified 
CIE indicated limited interest in facilitating increased LPG competition. 
http://prdrse4all.spc.int/node/4/content/nauru-wind-power-feasibility-study-wind-data-evaluation-after-12-months-anabarEU-GIZ ACSE
ADAPTING TO CLIMATE CHANGE AND SUSTAINABLE ENERGY