File Name: PAK-NEP-2016-EN
Year: 2016
Country Name: Pakistan
Country Code: PAK
Category: NEP
Document Title: National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Act
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2016
Start Year: nan
End Year: nan
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

REGISTERErTNo..@ L,-7ffi I
tEheGvdr- d ?elffirr
EXTRAORDINARY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
ISLAMABAD, FRIDAY, JULY I,2016
PART I
Acts, Ordinances, President's Orders and Regulations
SENATE SECRETARIAT
lslamabad, the 29th June, 2016
No. F. 9(10)/2016-Legis.-The following Act of Majlis-e-Shoora
(Parliament) received the assent ofthe President on 28th June, 2016 and is hereby
published for general information:-
Acr No. XXX oe 2016
An Act lo provide lar the establishment of instilutions and enuncialion of
mechmisms and procedures so as to provide for effective consemation and
efrcient use of energt
Wusnens the conservation and eflicient use of energy is pivotal for the
development of Pakistan;
AND wHEREAs it is expedient and imperative to establish institutions and
stipulate mechanisms and procedures for €ffective conservation and efticient use of
energy in Pakistan and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto;
(6t7)
Price: Rs. 20.50
ilIt is hereby enacted as follows:-
1. Sbort title, extent and commencement.-{ 1) This Act may be
called the National llnergy Efficiency and Con'servation Ac! 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole ofPakistan
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. Definitions.-ln this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the
subject or context,--
(i) "accre lited laboratory" means a laboratory designated by the Authority
or the Provincial Govemment and duly accredited by the National
Accreditation Body to carry out such procedures and tests as are
necessary for furtherance of the purposes of this Act;
(ii) "adverse energy and environment effect" means energy wastage and
discharge of air pollutants due to energy waste practiccs;
(iii) "agriculture and livestock sector'- means activities or practices related
to soil management. land preparation (illage, plowing etc), harvesting,
threshing, mechanized livestock and agriculture farming, livesock and
agricu ture farm irrigation and drainage, livestock and agriculture farm
management, livestock and agriculture farm produce transportation,
agro-chemicals management, livestock. plant and agriculture food
processing, preservation and value addition, bio-mass recycling,
rangeland and forest management, livestock and poultry management,
post hrrvest output management:
(iv) "Authrrrity" mearls the National linergy Efficiency and Conservation
Autho.'ity established under section 6;
(v) "Boart" means the National Energy Effrciency and Conserration Board
established under section 3;
(vi) "build.ngs sector" means all buildings including private domestic
housetold, commercial, industrial, public and community buildings;
(vii) "certified energy auditor" means any person to be certified and
designr ed by the Authority for carrying out energy audit in accordance
with the provisions of thisAct;(viii) 
designated agency means an agency designated as such by the Board
or a Provincial Govemment for the purpose ofthis Act;
(ix) "designated consumer" means a consumer designated as such by the
Authority for the purpose ofthis Act;
(x) "efticiency" means the ratio of€nergy output to energy input in respect
ofenergy consuming equipment, appliances or systems;
(xi) "ENERCON" means the National Energy Conservation Centre
(xii) "energy'' means conventionaI and non-conventional, altemate sources
ofenergy including petroleum, coal, natural gas, liquefied petroleum
gas or compressed natural gas and.electrical energy and may also
include such other new or renewable forms of energy as the Board
may, by notification in the official Gazette, specifo;
(xiii) "enerry audit" means an exarnination ofany energy consuming project
abouttle way the energy is generated, transmitted, distributed or used
there and identification of areas where energy waste can occur for
improving energy efficiency and where scope for improving energy
use efficiency may be possible;
(xiv) "enerry conservation" means reduction in energy consumption by
minimizing waste, orcurtailmentof enerry use or improving generation,
transmission, distribution or end use energy efiiciency to avoid waste,
creating additional energy supply at source and effecting a reduction
of undesirable emissions _to the atmosphere or air due to better fuel
combustion;
(xv) "Energy Conservation Tribunal" means the Tribunalconstituted under
Section l9;
(xvi) "energy use assessment" means a comprehensive review and analysis
to determine the appropriateness of energy use in any energy
consuming project;
(xvii) "energy waste" means amount of energy that remains unused or
discarded due to incomplete burning or combustion or due to use of
inefficient energy consuming equipment, appliance or due to pmcess
or inefficient operation, maintenance and management of a system;
(xviii) "G
t" 
thFdl G
t 
th(xix) 
industrial sector
 means small scale, medium scale and large scale
industy involv ing manufacturing making formulating ahering; repairing;
finishirrg, packing or otherwise treating any article or substance with a
view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal;
(xx)
(xxi)
"Managing Director" means the Managing Director of the Authority;
'National Accreditation Body" means the Pakistan Accreditation
Counc I or such body as may be notified for the purpose by the
GovenLment;
(:xii) "Natiornl Standards Body" means the Pakistan Standards and Quality
Contro Authority or such other body as may be notified for the purpose
by the (iovernment:
(>odil) "persor " means anaturalor legal person, firm, association, partnership,
society, group, mmpany, corporation, co-operative society, Govemment
agency, public body, non govemmental organization, community based
organization, village organization, local council or local authority and,
in the c rse ofa vehicle, the owner or other person having for the time
being the charge or control ofthe said vehicle;
(,o.iv) "pollution" means contam ination ofair, land or water due to discharge
of pol lu tants as a consequence of incomplete or inefficient combustion
of ene4gy resources that alters unfavorably the chemical, physical,
biological, radiation, thermal, radiologicalor aesthetic properties ofair,
water or aknosphere;
(xxv) "power recto/'means generation, transmission and distribution system
ofelectr icity;
(xxvi) "prescrrbed" means prescribed by rules or, as the case may be,
regulati rns made under this Act;
(xvii) "project" means any activity, scheme, proposal or undertaking in any
sector o'economy involving use of enerry;
(torviii)
0o<ix)
(xxx)
"regulations" means the regulations made under this Act;
"rules" lneans the rules made under this Act;
"sectors rfeconomy" include but not limited to power sector, induskial
ttt 
t
iltd litk (x;od) 
standards means numeric values for optimum level ofenerry units
required to produce a unit of output or desirable energy efficiency
levels assigned to any process, object, equipment or appliance either
for general applicability or for specific application established under
the provisions of this Act; and
(rcxii) 'transport sector" means road transport, railways, aviation and such
other means of transportation as the Board may determine.
3. Establishment of the Board.{l) As soon as may be after the
commencement of this Ac! the Federal Govemment shall, by notification in the
ofificial Gazette, establish a Board to be known as the Pakistan Energy Efficiency
and Conservation Board consisting of the following members, namely:-
(a) Federal Minister of the Division to which subject-m atter Chairman
of tlis Act stands allocated
(b) Federal Secretary ofthe Division to which subjectmatter ofthis Act stands allocated
(c) Federal Secretary Ministry ofFinance
(d) Federal Secretary, Ministry ofPlanning and
Development
(e) Federal Secrctary of the Division to which subjectmatter of Petroleum and Natural Resources stands
allocated
(f) Federal Secretary ofthe Division to which subjectmatter ofScience and Technology stands allocated
(g) Federal Secretary ofthe Division to which subjectmatter of Industries stands allocated
(h) Federal Secretary ofthe Division to which subjectmatter of Housing and Works stands allocated
(i) Federal Secretary ofthe Division to which subjectmatter of Climate stands allocated
O Secretary of the Designated Department,
Govemment ofthe Punjab
(k) Secretary of the Designated Department,
Wce Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member(l) Secretary of tht: Designated Department, Member
Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
(m) Secretary of tht, Designated Department, Member
Govemment of Balochistan
(n) Chairman, Oil and Gas Regulatory Authority Member
(o) Chairman, Natir,nal Electric Power Regulatory Authority Member
(p) one nominee fic m Chambers of Commerce and lndustry Member
(q) one person fior,Agriculture sector nominated Member
by the Federal (iovernment
(r) Managing Direc.tor of the Authority Member
(s) Five persons of known integrity and competence from Member
private sector o1'which three would be full time paid.
These Members shall have expertise in different sectors
defined in the A,:t, includingAgriculture and Livestock.
(2) A member of the Board other than at ex-offcio member, shall hold
oftice for a period of three years from the date of his appointment and shall be
eligible for reappointme nt but for not more than two terms.
(3) The headquarters ofthe Board shall be at Islamabad, but it may hold
its meetings anywhere ir Pakistan as and when deemed necessary.
(4) The Board shall hold not less than three meeting during a year and
may co-opt members fo:'particular meetings or generally as may be necessary.
(5) A meeting ofthe Board shall be presided over by the Chairman ofthe
Board or, in his absence, by the Vice Chairman or in his absence by any member
elected by the Board.
(6) The Board may make its own rules of procedure and conduct of its
business accordingly.
(7) A member ofthe Board, other than an ex-ofricio member, may at any
time by writing under hi; hand resign from his office, provided that no resignation
shall take effect until it llas been accepted by the Board.
(8) The preserLce of not less than one-third of the total members of the
Board shall be necessaq, to constitute a quorum for its meetings and its decisions(9) The Board may delegate any ofits functions, other than the making of
regulations, to any committee set up by it or to any of its members, subject to such
conditions, if an1,, as it may specifo. The recommendations of the committees shall
be submitted to the Board for approval.
( l0) The Board or any of its committees may invite any technical expert or
representative ofany Govemment agency or non-govemmental organization or other
person possessing specialized knowledge of any subject for assistance for the
performance of its functions.
(l I) The Board may recommend to the Federal Govemment or a Provincial
Govemment to establish advisory committees for various sectors for assisting the
Authority in the discharge of its functions.
( I 2) The Provincial Govemment may noti! a specifii public depanment
as focal point for the proper co-ordination, facilitation and enforcement of the
provisions ofthisAct.
4. Functions ard powers of the Board.-( I ) The supervision,
management ofthe affairs, and policy direction of the Authority shall vest with the
Board.
(2) The Board may, exercise all powers and do all acts which may be
exercised or done hy the Authority.
(3) The Board, or a Provincial Govemment with the concunence of the
Board. may establish any suitable structure or mechanism for enforcement ofthis
Act in consultation with National SundardsBody including energr efficiency sandards,
labeling. incentives, Frnes and other related requirements under this Act with effect
from the date to be determined by the Board.
(4) The Board may approve appropriate streogthening, restructuring,
capacity building, terms and conditions ofemployees and compensation orprotection
of service benefits IbTNEECA and its employees, to effectively car4r out the fimctions
under the provisions ofthis Act.
5. Organizstion of the Boad.{l) The Board may, for carrying out
its functions for promotion of energy conservation and efficienc1,, development of
energy efficient technologies, certification ofenergy efficient products and projects
and project management, may establish one or more organizations as it may consider
necessary.
(2) The organization established under sub-section (1) shall be subject to
control and supervision ofthe Board and shall functidn within the framework of this(3) An organization established under sub-section (l) shall perform such
- business as may be pres,cribed by regulations by the Board for the purpose.
6. Establishment of the Authority.-{l) As soon as may be after the
commencement of this Act, the Federal Govemment shall, by notilication in the
official Gazette, establir;h an Authority to be called the National Energy Efficiency
and Conservation Authr,rity.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession
and a common seal with powers, subject to the provisions ofthis Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both moveable and immoveable and shall have the
capacity to sue and be ;ued.
(3) The general direction and administration oftheAuthorig and is afairs
shall vest in the Maniging Director, who shall be appointed by the Federal Govemment
on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed. Managing Director shall be an
energy and environmental expert ofknown integrity, competence with at least ten
years ofrelated experience in handling energy projects. Managing Director shalI be
appointed for an initial term of three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment
upon satisfactory performance for similar temr uplo a maximum of sixty-five years
age. Subject to this Act the lUanaging Director may exercise all powers and do all
acs and things, which may be exercised or done by the Authority. The Managing
Director will serve as tlre Secretary ofthe Board and shall rcport to the Board and
seek its approval for all matters including its budget, plans and projects.
' (4) The Managing Director, officers, employees and servants of the
Authority shall, when at ting or purporting to act in pursuance ofany ofthe provisions
of this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder, be deemed to be public
servants within the me?ming of section 2l of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of
r160).
7. Powers and functions of Authority,---jThe powers and functions of
the Authority shall be k>-
(a) serve as s:le focal Federal authority for initiating, catalyzing, carrying
out and coordinating the implementation of all energ;.' conservation
programs in all sectors ofeconomy;
(b) administ(,f implement and enforce the provisions of this Act and the
rules and regulations made thereunder;
(c) prepare o;'update national enerry conservation policy for the approval() pp
go be made by the Board p
to the
provisions ofthis Act;
(e) recommend national energy efficiency standards to the Board and
after approval by the National Standards Body ensure implementation
of these standards;
(f) coordinate energy conservation policies and programs nationally and
intemational ly;
(g) establish protocols ofcoordination between relevant firnctionaries of
the Government and serye as the information house on energy
conservation and management;
(h) initiate demonstration and research and development programs in
support of its functions;
(i) establish infrastructure and take appropriate institutional development
and capacity building measures for effective implementation of the
provisions ofthis Act;
() establish systems and procedures for surveys, surveillance, monitoring,
inspection and audits to prevent the inefficient use ofenerry rcsources
and recommend implementation of specific energy conservation
measures;
(k) establish and maintain one or more laboratories as accredited
laboratories for conducting tests and analysis to help the Authority in
the performance of its functions and to conduct research in various
aspects of enerry conservation;
(l) seek information or data relevant to its functions from any p€rson or
organization for quantitative or technological analysis;
(m) recommend to the Federal Govemment or a Provincial Govemment
the adoption offinaacial and fiscal incentives or schemes for hchieving
energy conservation objectivesl
(n) initiate requests for foreign technical and financial assistance for the
purposes of this Ac! enter into arrangements with foreign agencies
and organizations for exchange of information and materials and
participate in international meetings and seminars;(o) obtain information or data relevant to the functions ofthe Authority
from ary person in such form as the Authority may specily;
(p) undeneke inquiry or investigation into enerry consen'ation issues, eidter
on its own accord or upon complaint from any person or on the advice
ofthe lloard;
(q) summr'n and enforce the attendance of any person or an officer,
emplol'ee, proprietot parlner, manager, dircctor or chief executive of
an entity and require him to supply any information or document needed
for the r:onductofan inquiry or investigation into any issue being carried
out pursuant to the provisions ofthisAct;
(r) direct rn initial energy use assessment to be carried out for any
upcoming project and subm itted to the Authority before commencement
thereol;
(s) carry ort energy audits either by itselfor direct any person to conduct
an enerry audit by any certified or designated energy auditor for any
facility, enterprise, factory, building or object for the purpose of
identil'ication of energy conservation issues and making
recomrrendations for corrective measures thereof;
(t) requesl for tests and analysis from its own laboratory or fiom any
other accredited laboratory of an equipmcnt, gadget, accessory or
hardware to measure its energy characteristics;
(u) prohibit manufacture, sale or import of equipment orappliances which
are not rnergy-emcient and ensure display ofsuch particulars through
labels c'n equipment or applialces as may be necessary;
(v) fix and realize fee, rates and charges for rendering any service or
providing any facility or information or data audit or assessment or
test can'ied out pursuant to the provisions of thisAct and the rules and
regulat, ons made thereunder;
(w) appoint such technical and legal experts and administative staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions on
such terms and conditions as may be prescribed; and
(x) perfomr any other function assigned to it by the Federal Govemment
or the Board including but not limited to-
(i) 
dt 
d itth
tiiflt 
fil(ii) facilitate, manage or designate authority for the appropriate
registration of energy auditing firms or individuals and
professionals;
(iii) direct, coordinate, renew and terminate the services of energt
auditors, relevant rainers and energy efficiency inspectors as
may be specified by regulations.
8. Indemnity.-No suit prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie
against the Federal or Provincial Govemment or officers thereof, Managing Director
or any member or officer or employee ofthe Authority or any person exercising any
power or performing any act carried or contemplated to be carried out in good faith
in furtherance ofthe provisions ofthis Act, as determined by the Board, or the rules
or regulations made thereunder.
9. Fund of the Authority.{l) There shall be formed a fund to be
known as theAuthority Fund, which shall vest in theAuthority and shall be utilized
by the Authority to meet charges in connection with its functions under this Act
irrcluding, inter al i4 the payment ofsqlaries and other remuneration to the Managing
Director, members, officers, employees, servants, experts and consultants of the
Authority.
(2) The Authority Fund shall be admi4istered in the manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) To the credit of the Authority Fund shall be placed,-
(a) initial seed money grant of one billion rupees by the Federal
Govemment, for the purpose of meeting expenses in connection
with the functions and operations of the Board and the Authority,
institutions and organizations under this Act, including payment
ofsalaries and other remunerations, payable to employees ofthe
Authority as well as consultants and advisers;
(b) revenue budget allocations by the Federal Govemment till such
time that an adequate Authority Fund is in place;
(c) grants made by the Federal Govemmenq whether annually or
otherwise;
(d) aid and assistance, grants, adyances, donations and other nonobligatory funds received from foreign governments, local or(e) levy that may be collected by the Federal Govemment for the
purposes of energy conservation and efficiency enhancement;
(f) corrtributions from private organizations and other persons;
(g) fees received under the provisions ofthisAct and the rules and
repulations made thereunder;
(h) income from investments and commercially viable energy
corservation programs; and
(i) receipts of the Authority from any other source
(4) The Authoritv may invest its funds in such profGearning projects, and
maintain saving accourts in such banks or financial institutions, as may be approved
by the Board.
(5) The accounts oftheAuthority shallbe audited by the Auditor General
of Pakistan.
10. Powers and functions of the Federal Government to facilitate
and enforce efficie:ot use of energy and its conservation.-The Federal
Govemment may, in consultation with the Authority and National Standards Body
(Where ever applicable):-
(a) specifutre normVspecifications for processes and enerry consumption
standards for any equipment, appliance which consumes, generates,
transmitr or supplies energy;
(b) specifo <:quipment or appliance or class ofequipments or appliances,
as the czse may be, for the purposes ofthis Act;
(c) prohibit manufach.ue or sale or purchase or import of equipment or
applianc,: specified rmder clause (b), unless such equipment or appliance
conforms to energy consumption standards:
Pro rided that no notification prohibiting manufacture or sale or
purchase or import of equipment or appliance shall be issued within a
period ol six months from the date ofnotification issued under clause (a):
Prol ided further tlrat the Federal Govemment may, having regardon equipment or appliance, and for reasons to be recorded in writing,
extend the said period of six months referred to in the first proviso by
a further period not exceeding six months;
(d) direct display ofsuch particulars on labelon equipment oron appliance
specified under clause (b) and in such mamer as may be specified by
regulations;
(e) speci!, having regard to the intensity or quantity ofenergy consumed
and the amount of investment required for switching over to energy
efficient equipments and capacity ofindusty to invest in it and availability
of the energy efficient machinery and equipment required by the
industry, any user or class of users of energy in the energy intensive
industries and other establishments as a designated consumer for the
purposes of this Act;
(0 alter the list ofenergy intensive industries specified by the Authority;
(g) establish and prescribe such energy consumption norms/specifications
and standards for designated consumers as it may consider necessary:
Provided that the Federal Govemment may prescribe different
norms and standards for different designated consumers having regard
to such factors as may be prescribed;
(h) direct, having regard to quantity ofenergy consumed or the norms and
standards ofenergy consumption specified underclause (a), the energy
intensive industries specified to get energy audit conducted by an
accredited energy auditor in such manner and intervals oftime as may
be prescribed by regulations;
(i) direct, if considered necessary for efficient use of energy and its
conservation, any designated consumerto get energy audit conducted
by an accredited energy auditor;
O specifr the matter to be included for the purposes of inspection;
(k) direct any designated consumer to fimish to the designated agency, in
such form and manner within such period, as may be prescribed, the
information with regard to the energy consumed and action taken on
the recommendation ofthe accredited energy auditor;
( l) direct any designated consumer to designate or appoint enerry manager
in charge ofactivities for efficient use ofenergy and its conservation
and submit a report in the form and manner as may be prescribed, on(m) prescribe minimum qualification for energy auditors and energy
managers to be designated or appointed under clause (l);
(n) directevery designated consumerto comply with enerry consumption
norms and standards;
(o) direct any designated consumer, who does not fulfill the energy
consumplion norms and standards prescribed under clause (g), to
prepare a scheme for elficient use ofenerry and its conservation and
implement such scheme keeping in view the economic viability ofthe
investrnent in such form, time and the manner as may be prescribed;
(p) prescribe enerry conservation building codes for efficient use ofenerry
and its conservation in the building or building complex;
(q) amend the enerry conservation building codes to suitthe regional and
local clin,atic conditions:
(r) direct ev,:ry owner or occupier ofthe building or building complex,
being a designated consumer to comply with the provisions ofenergy
conservation building codes for efficient use of energy and its
conservalion;
(s) direct, any designated consumer referred to in clause (r), ifconsidered
necessa4,, for efficient use ofenerry and its conservation in his building
to get energy audit conducted in respect of such building by an
accredited energy auditor in such manner and intervals oftime as may
be specilied by regulations;
(t) take all measures necessary to create awareness and disseminate
information for efficient use of energy and its conservation;
(u) arrange and organize training of personnel and specialists in the
techniques for efficient use ofenergy and its conservation;
(v) prescrih: penalties for the energy inefficient apparatus, appliances,
equipment, plant and machinery; and
(w) take stelrs to encourage preferential treatment for use of energy
efticient equipment or appliances:
Provided that the powers under clauses (p) to (s) shalt be
ith certifrcate.{l) The Federal Government may issue energl saving certificate to a
designated consumer whose enerry consumption is less than the prescribed norms
and standards in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed.
(2) The designated consumer whose energy consumption is more than
the prescribed norms and standards shall be entitled to purchase the energy saving
certificate to comply with the prescribed norms and standards.
12. Powers of the Federal Government to specify value of energr.-
The Federal Government may, in consultation withAuthorigv, prescribe the value of
per metric ton ofoil equivalent ofenergy consumed for the purpose of this Act.
. 13. Powers and functions of Provincial Governments to facilit{te
and enforce eflicient use of energy and its conservation.{l ) The Provincial
Governments ma1,, after approval of proposals to the effect thereoffrom the Board
and in consulmtion with theAuthority, by notification,-
(a) amend the enerry conservation building codesto suit the regionaland
local climatic conditions and may, by nrles made by it, speci! and
notif energy conservation building codes with respect to use ofenerry
in the buildings,
(b) direct cvery owner or occupier ofa building or building complex being
a designated consumer to comply with the provisions of the enerry
conservation building codes;
(c) direct, if considered necessary for efficient use of energy and its
consenation, any designated consumer referred to in clause (b) to get
enerry audit conducted by an accredited enerry auditor in such manner ' 
and at such intervals oftime as may be specified by regulations;
(d) establish or designate laboratories duly accredited and certified by the
Federal Government;
(e) collect data and information and maintain database; and
(f) direct, any designated consumer to firmish to the designated agency,
in such form and manner and within such period as may be specified
by rules made by it, information with regard to the enerry consumed
by such consumer.
(2) The Federal Govemment may establish a fund to be called the Energr
Conservation Fund for the purposes of promotion ofefficient use ofenerry and its(3) To the Fund shall be credited all gants and loans that may be made by
the Provincial Govemrnent or the Federal Govemment or any other organization or
individual for the purposes ofthisAct.
(4) The Fund shall be applied for meeting the expenses incurred for
implementing the provisions of this Act.
(5) The FunC established under sub-section (2) shall be administered by
such persons or authority and in such manner as may be specified in the rules made
by the Federal Goverrrment in respect thereof.
(6) The Provincial Govemment may, by notification in the ofticialGazette,
adopt or make rules frrr carrying out the provisions of this Act. which shall not be
inconsistent with the rules, if any, made by the Federal Govemment.
(7) the Provincial Governments shall nominate a specific department under
its control to coordinrte with the Authoriry and facilitate implementation of the
provisions of this Acr within its jurisdiction. The Authority upon receiving the
nomination fiom Prov incialCovernmen! may declare the nominated department as
the designatea agency. The designated agency may appoint as many inspecting
ofiicers as may be ne':essary fbr the purpose of ensuring compliance ofthis Act.
(8) Subject to any rules made under this Act, an inspecting o{ficer shall
have such powers as ;ested in him by the Board.
(9) The Federal Govemment or a Provincial Government rnay. in exercise
of their powers and p:rformance of their fr:nctions under this Act and tbr efficient
use of energy and its conservation, issue such directions in writing to any person,
officer, authority or u.ny designated consumer as they deem fit for furthering the
purposes of this Act arrd such person, offrcer or authoritSr or any designated consumer
shall be bound to comply with such directions.
Explanution;1he power to issue directions under this sub-section includes
the power to direct ir respect of-
(a) regulating the norms for process and energy consumption standards in
any indr"rstry or building or building complex; and
(b) regulat ng the energy consumprion standards for equipments and
applian:es.
14. Powerr of Provincial Government to make rules.{l) The
Provincial Govemm(int may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
i
t th
ii
f 
At 
ith 
if power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matten, ,lamely:-
(a) energy conservation building codes under section l3;
(b) the form, maaner and period within which information with regard to
energy consumption shall be furnished under section l3;
(c) the person or any authority who shall administer the Fund and the
manner in which the Fund shall be administered under section 13;
(d) the matters to be included forthe purposes ofinspection under section I5;
(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of
which provision is to be made, or may be made, by rules.
15. Powers of inspection.{l) The designated agency may appoint,
after the date ofcommencement ofthis Act, as many inspecting officers as may be
necessary for the purpose ofensuring compliance witlr enerry consumption standards
specified under section l0 or ensurc display ofparticulars on label on equipment or
appliance spccified under clause (b) of section l0 or for the purpose of performing
such other frrnctions as may be assigned to them.
(2) Subject to any rules made under this Act an inspecting ofFtcer shall
have power to-
(a) inspect aly operation carried on or in connection with the equipment
or appliance specified under clause (b) of section 10 or in respect of
which energr standards under clause (a) of section 10 have been
specified;
(b) enter any place ofdesignated consumer at which the energr is used
for any activity and may require any proprietor, employee, director,
manager or secretary or any other person who may be attending in ' 
any manner to or helping in, carrying on any activity with the help of
enerry-
(i) to afford him necessary facility to inspect-
(A) any equipment or appliance as he may require and which
may be available at such place;
(B) any production process to ascertain the energr consum6ion
- norms and standards;
(ii) to make an invantory ofsock ofany equipment or appliance
checked or verified by him;(iif to record the statement of any person which may be useful for, or
relevant to, for efficient use ofenergy and its conservation under this
Act.
(3) An insper:ting officer may enter any place of designated consumer,-
(a) where any activity with the help ofenergy is carried on; and
(b) where an y equipment or appliance notified under clause ( b) ofsection
l0 has b,:en kep! during the hours at which such place is open for
production or conduct ofbusiness connected therewith.
(4) An inspecting officer acting under this section shall, on no accoun!
r€move or cause to be n:moved from the place wherein he has entered, any equipment
or appliance or books :faccount or other documents.
16. Powers to issue directions.-The Federal Government or a
Provincial Govemment may, in exercise of its powers and performance of its functions
under this Act and for e ificient use ofenergy and its conservation, issue such directions
in writing as it deems lit for the purposes ofthis Act to any person, officer, authority
or any designated conr;umer and such person, offrcer or authority or any designated
consumer shall be bound to comply with such directions.
Erplanation.--For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the
power to issue directions under this section includes the power to direct-
(a) regulation ofnorms for process and enerry consumption standards in
any indu stry or building or building comple6 or
(b) regulati rn of the energy consumption standards for equipment and
applianr,es.
17. Procedure for conducting inquiry, inyestigatiotr and encrgy
eudit{l) The Auth:rity or a designated agency may on its own initiative or upon
a complaint require an'/ person to get energy audit carri€d out within the time stipulated
by such agency.
(2) The Aut hority or a designated agency shall bring the wastage ofenergi
into notice ofthat penon and give reasonable time to that person for taking corrective
measures thereof.
(3) After *,e expiry of the stipulated time, the Authority or a designated
agency shall require that person to get second enerry audit or such remedial measures() 
Act, he shall be subject to a fine, to be imposed by the Authority or a designated
agency, in accordance with section 18, after providing a reasonable opportunity of
hearing to that person.
18. lmposition of line.{l) Failure on part of any person to comply with
the pmvisions ofthisAct shall constitute an offence, utich shallentaila frne commensurde
with tlre gravity of offence, as determined by the Board from time to time.
(2) The amount offine imposed, in case ofdefault shall be recovered as
arrears of land revenue.
19. Energr Conservation Tribunals.{l) The Federal Govemment
may, by notification in the official Gazette, establish as many Eneryy Conservation
Tribunals as it consider necessary and, where it establishes more than one Energr
Conservation Tribunals, it shall speci$/ territorial limits within which, or the class of
cases in respect of which, each one of them shall exercise jurisdiction under this
Act.
(2) An Enerry Conservation Tribunal shall consist ofa Chairperson who
is, or has been, or is qualified for appointment as a judge ofa High Court to be
appointed after consultation with the ChiefJustice ofthe High Court concerned and
two members to be appointed by the Federal Govemment ofwhich at least one shall
be a technical member with suitable professional qualifications and experience in
the energy conservation field as may be prescribed.
(3) For every sitting ofthe Enerry Conservation Tribunal, the presence of
the Chairperson and not less than one member shall be necessary.
(4) Adecisionof an Enerry Conservation Tribunal shall be expressed in
terms ofthe opinion ofthe majority of its members, including the Chairperson, or if
the case has been decided by the Chairperson and only one of the members and
there is a difference ofopinion between thern, the decision ofthe Energy Conservation
Tribunal shall be expressed in terms ofthe opinion ofthe Chairperson.
(5) An Energy Conservation Tribunal shall no! merely by reason of a
change in its composition, or the absence ofany member from any sitting, be bound
to recalland rehear anywihess who has given evidence, and may act on the evidence
already recorded by or produced before it.
(6) An Enerry Conservation Tribunal may hold its sittings at such places
within its territorialjurisdiction as the Chairperson may decide.
(7) No act or proceeding of an Energy Conservation Tribunal shall be
invalid by reason only ofthe existence ofa vacancy in, or defect in fte constitution,
of the Enerry Conservation Tribunal(8) The temrs and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members
ofthe Energy Consen'ation Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
(9) An Energy Conservation Tribunal shall exercise such powers and
perform such functiorrs as are, or may be, conferred upon or assigned to it by or
under this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder.
(10) All contaventions under sections l7 and I E shallexclusively be riable
by an Energy Conservation Tribunal.
(l l) In all m rtters with respect to which no procedure has been provided
for in this Ac! the Energy Conservation Tribunal shall follow the procedure laid
down in the Code of(livil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of l90t).
(12) Any pelson aggrieved by any order or direction of the Authority or
any designated Provincial agency under any provision of this Act and rules or
regulations may prefer an appeal to the Energy Conservation Tribunal within thirty
days ofrhe date ofconrmunication ofthe impugned order or direction to such person.
( l3) An appt:al to the Energy Conservation Tribunal shall be in such form,
contain such particulus and be accompanied b1. such fee as may be prescribed.
(14) Any person aggrieved by any tinal order ofthe Energr Conservation
Tribunal passed under this Act may. u,ithin thirty days of communication ofsuch
order, prefer an appeal to the High Court concemed.
(15) The Energy Conservation Tribunal shall, preferably, dispose of the
appeal within a periorl ofninety days from the date of its filing. In case the Tribunal
fails to dispose of the same within the stipulated period, it shall decide within a
reasonable period, after recording reasons for such delays.
( l6) The En,:rry Conservation Tribunal may co-opt any additional member
to assist the Tribunal in technical matters.
20. Power to make rules.-The Federal Govemment may, by notification
in the official Gazettr:, make such rules for carrying outthe purposes of thisAct, as
approved by the Board.
21. Power to make regulations.-{ I ) The Board may, by notification in
the official Gazette, lnake regulations in consultation with the Authority to achieve
the purposes of this r\ct.
(2) Witholt prejudice to the provisions of suFsection ( I ), the regulations
may provide for i
talia th
powersand 
d
fitt
iti22. Delegation of powers,{ I ) The Authority may, by general or special
ordcr in writing, delegate to any of its officer, consultant, adviser, designated entity
or any other person such of its powers and functions under this Act and subject to
such conditions, as may be specified in the order.
23. Power to exempt {l) In case the Authority is of the opinion that it
is expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, by notification and subject to such
conditions as may be specified therein, exempt any designated consumer or class of
designated consumers from application ofall or any ofthe provisions ofthis Act:
Provided that the Authority shall not grant exemption to any designated
consumer or class of designated consumers for a period exceeding five years.
(2) After the expiry ofthe period specified in the proviso to sub-section
( I ), the designated consumer or class ofdesignated consumers shall not be entitled
for exemption for any further period.
24. Act not to be demgatory.-The provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to and not in derogation to the provisions ofany other law for the time being
in force.
25. Trensitionat-< I ) All existing officers, employees and servants of
the ENERCON, on the date of coming into force of thisAcq shall stand transferred
to the Authority, provided that all such officers, employees and servants shall have a
one time irrevocable option to be exercised within six months ofthe commencement
of this Act either to be absorbed as the employees of the Authority or retain their
status which was enjoyed in the ENERCON.
(2) If any officer, employee or servant exercises one time irrevocable
option to be absorbed against their respective positions he shall be deemed lo be
duly appointed under the relevant provisions of this Act on the date such offrcer,
employee or staff exercises the one time option and the terms and conditions of
services of such officer, employee or staffwill be governed by this Act and rules
and regulations made thereunder.
(3) All such officers, employees and servants who do not exercise the
option under sub-section ( I ) ofgetting absorbed in the Au0rority shall continue enjoying
the status as was enjoyed by them before the commencement of this Act.
26. Removal of difficulty.-Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions ofthisAct, the FederalGovemment may, by order in the official Gazette,
make such provisions, not being inconsistent with the provisions of thisAct, as maycommencement of thi'r Act.
27. Savings {l) All assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges
and all property, cash and bank balances, reserve funds, investment and all other
interess and rights in or ,rising out ofsuch property urd all debs, Iiabilities and obligations
ofwhateverkind ofthe ENERCON subsisting immediately before its dissolution shall
stand transfened to an,l vest in the Authority mnstituted under this Act.
(2) All debts, liabilities and obligations accrued or incurred or contracts
entered into, rights acquired and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with
or for, the ENERCOI{ shall be deemed to have been accrued, incurred, entered
intd acquired or engaged to be done by, with or fbr, the Authority.
(3) All suit; and other legal proceedings instituted by or against the
ENERCON before its dissolution shall be deemed to be suits and proceedings by or
against the Authority ,rnd shall be proceeded or otherwise dealt with accordingly.
(4) Any relbrence to the ENERCON in any statutory instrument or
document shall, unle';s the context otherwise requires, be read and construed as
reference to the Authority under this Act.
28. Repeal.-The Federal Govemment's Resolution No. S.R.O. 4(KE/86,
dated the 23rd Decenrber, 1986 is hereby repealed.
SYED MUSSARRAT ABBAS SHAH,
Acling Secretary