File Name: PAK-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Pakistan
Country Code: PAK
Category: CPD
Document Title: Country programme document for Pakistan (2023–2027)
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August to 1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
13 July 2022
Original: English
Second regular session 2022
29 August to 1 September 2022, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Pakistan (2023–2027)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Pakistan (2023–2027) ...................................................... 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework
1. Pakistan, the world’s fifth most populous country1in 2021, is a lower-middle-income country
aspiring to be among the 10 largest economies in the world by 2047.
2 A growing young 
population3 underscores the potential for rapid economic growth to reap a rich demographic 
dividend and leverage the geo-strategic location of Pakistan as a future regional hub for trade and 
economic activity. 
2. Pakistan has demonstrated an impressive policy, institutional and financial commitment to 
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, embracing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, and leaving no one behind by adopting the UNDP-supported Goals frameworks as 
part of its national development planning, ‘Vision 2025’.
3. The development trajectory of Pakistan is incremental, experiencing a decline in the incidence 
of ‘cost of basic needs’ poverty from 24.3 per cent (2015-2016) to 21.9 per cent (2018-2019).
While the COVID-19 pandemic aggravated socio-economic inequalities, increasing pressure on 
governance structures and the quality of public services,
4
the Government adopted a prudent 
policy response, while also protecting the most vulnerable, particularly women and youth.
4. Due to a disrupted growth trajectory5and increased debt burden, the fiscal space of the 
country for adequate development expenditure has decreased. Annual spending of 16 per cent of 
gross domestic product (GDP) until 2030 is needed to achieve Goals.
6
5. Income and multidimensional poverty vary across and within provinces. Rural-urban 
disparities persist; 54.6 per cent of Pakistanis in rural areas are multi-dimensionally poor,
compared to 9.4 per cent in urban areas. One-third of human development achievements in 
Pakistan are lost due to inequality.
7
6. More than a decade after the passage of the 18th constitutional amendment, in 2010, the 
provincial governments are picking up pace for devolved development. However, governance 
systems in Pakistan still face structural challenges, including procedural, legal and resource 
constraints and weak institutional and policymaking capacity. 
7. Pakistan has experienced significant growth in information and communications technology,
and there is increased policy demand to improve governance integrated with digitalization.
Although access to digital services is improving, only 45 per cent of the population own mobile 
phones, and only 17 per cent have access to the internet.
8
In post-COVID-19 Pakistan, a new 
digital social contract is emerging to find solutions that reshape and improve traditional service 
delivery through technology, reaching millions. Aligned with its global digital strategy, 2022-
2025,
9 UNDP is responding to the new development needs of Pakistan by curating an integrated 
policy and programme portfolio on digital transformation that addresses digital divides for 
inclusive development.
1 Population 225.2 million, according to the United Nations statistics http://data.un.org/en/iso/pk.html.
2 Pakistan Vision 2025.
3Growing at an annual rate of 1.8 per cent https://www.unfpa.org/data/world-population/PK.
4 COVID-19-Pakistan Socio-economic Impact Assessment and Response Plan, May 2020.
5 The World Bank, World Bank Country and Lending Groups 
https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups
6
International Monetary Fund estimate.
7 United Nations, Pakistan common country analysis, 2020-2021. In 2018, the inequality-adjusted Human Development Index
value stood at 0.384, representing a 31 per cent loss in its value. 
8 UNDP P
kitNtil HDlt Rt2020ThThPf IlitPPlPliDP/DCP/PAK/3
8. As one of the 10 countries in the world most exposed to climate change,
10 the vulnerability of 
Pakistan to climate change and natural hazards affects all aspects of sustainable development,
linked as it is to arid and semi-arid climatic conditions; rapid population growth associated with 
economic activity; weak public infrastructure; environmental degradation; water scarcity; and 
severe temperature and rainfall variations in a country that relies on monsoon rains and the 
glacier-fed Indus River Basin. Pakistan has adopted the UNDP-supported National Climate 
Change Policy and the Nationally Determined Contributions Framework, identifying high 
financial adaptation investment needs at $7 billion-$14 billion per year to curb the impact of 
climate change and decarbonize the economy. A whole-of-society approach is required to cope 
with environmental and climate emergencies. Integrated programming and development finance 
solutions are critical to enhancing climate resilience.
9. The gender gap in Pakistan widened by 0.7 per cent in 2021, ranking very low – 153rd out of 
156 countries on the Global Gender Gap Index, 2021.
11 Women constitute 48.7 per cent of the 
total population, yet are deprived of basic needs in health, education, financial and legal 
empowerment, and decision-making. Women’s participation in the labour force is as low as 21.7
per cent, compared to 82 per cent for men.12 The International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates 
that women’s empowerment can increase GDP by 30 per cent.
13 Yet Pakistan has closed only 31.6
per cent of the economic participation and opportunity gap, compared to 33.8 per cent in South 
Asia.
14
10. During its previous country programme, UNDP pursued a strategic mix of: (a) strong 
partnerships with the Government and United Nations organizations to advance the national 
development agenda15 and support state-building and greening Pakistan;
16 (b) thematic upstream 
policy work (national human development reports on youth (2018) and inequality (2020); the 
COVID-19 Socio-economic Assessment and Response Plan, 2020; and the Sustainable 
Development Goals Investments Report, 2021; (c) Institutional reforms and capacity-building in 
governance, electoral processes and access to justice mechanisms, and harmonization of 
fundamental rights mechanisms, including in in violence-affected areas (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and 
Balochistan); and (d) cross-cutting interventions for gender equality and innovation.
11. With its Goals integrator role and ‘six signature solutions’ (poverty and inequality;
governance; resilience; environment; energy; and gender equality), nationwide geographic 
footprint and enduring partnerships with the Government, civil society, the private sector and 
academia as its comparative advantages, UNDP is strategically positioned to support structural 
transformation. UNDP will leverage its trusted relationships with national, provincial and local 
entities and development partners to implement a sharpened development agenda aligned with 
national development priorities; the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework, 2023-2027; the Goals; and the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, by scaling up the 
gains achieved through change in three directions:
17 (a) structural transformation for green, 
inclusive and digital transitions; (b) leaving no one behind by centring human agency and 
development; and (c) building resilience to respond to systemic vulnerability and risk. Learning 
from the previous country programme and from new approaches applied during COVID-19, the 
signature solutions will be matched with evolving priorities by combining them with three 
powerful enablers: strategic innovation, digitalization, and development finance.
18
10 Germanwatch Global Climate Risk Index 2021: Long-term Climate Risk Index.
11 World Economic Forum. Global Gender Gap Report, 2021. 
12 World Bank Data, Pakistan, 2022.
13 IMF. Pursuing Women’s Economic Empowerment. Washington, DC. 2018.
14 World Economic Forum. Global Gender Gap Report, 2021. 
15 Sustainable Development Goals and youth empowerment programmes.
16 Support to a Clean and Green Pakistan initiative, and the 10 Billion Tree Tsunami programme. 
17 UNDP St
tiPl2022202512. The Accelerator Lab and Development Policy Unit of the country office are important 
platforms linking solutions to policy through a human-centred and gendered approach. As an 
effective partner for transformative change, UNDP will embed and mainstream these structural 
directions, signature solutions and enablers through innovation centred on systems thinking, 
portfolio logic, foresight and experimentation, and social innovation platforming to envision 
circular, green and inclusive futures. Flagship policy publications19 will generate innovative policy 
discourse with data. An integrated communications strategy will advocate for the Goals and 
promote policy dialogue through regional and international thought leadership.
13. UNDP will work with the United Nations country team, the United Nations Resident 
Coordinator and development partners to promote policy data, dialogue, and action. It will scale 
up and diversify partnerships for programme co-creation, innovation, effectiveness and impact.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
14. This country programme document envisions that all Pakistani people are educated and 
healthy, their well-being promoted and protected through economic opportunities, jobs and a 
climate-resilient future in a country where women and girls are safe and able to exercise their 
rights and to put their trust in and benefit from improved governance.
15. This country programme document is based on wide-ranging national consultations between 
UNDP and federal and provincial stakeholders. It derives from and contributes to the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2023-2027. It is aligned to the 
national priorities outlined in Vision 2025 and to the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025. It
contributes to four of the Framework outcome areas: governance; sustainable, inclusive and green 
economic transformation; climate change resilience and environment; and gender equality and 
women’s empowerment. Supported by enablers, UNDP will apply a portfolio approach,
triangulating structural transformation; leaving no one behind; and building resilience.
Governance transformation for a sustainable future (outcome 1)
16. The theory of change underpinning UNDP interventions under this outcome is that if
governance institutions become more agile, accountable, and future-ready, generating 
development finance to address complex developmental challenges such as inequality and climate 
change, and fostering women’s participation; if digital transformation increases equitable access to 
services; and if the rule of law and justice systems are more accessible, efficient and affordable; 
then the Government will be better able to respond to the needs of the most vulnerable and 
marginalized, and people’s trust in governance, justice and the rule of law will be strengthened. 
17. At the structural transformation level, UNDP will capitalize on previous achievements by: 
(a) supporting governance innovation, accountability and democratic processes for policy 
implementation and increased capacity to deliver inclusive services; (b) strengthening federal and
provincial governance mechanisms for rights-based development, including in the Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa merged districts and in Balochistan, to foster Pakistan-Afghanistan cross-border 
trade, economic activity and community engagement; (c) accelerating achievement of the Goals
by deepening the UNDP-supported horizontal coordination across sectors and public-private
partnerships, and across federal and provincial governments; (d) strengthening the rule of law and 
justice institutions for increased access to justice and enhanced capacities, through infrastructural 
and digital investments; and (e) strengthening local governance and protection systems through 
coordinated leadership, structures and mechanisms.
18. To leave no one behind and to build resilience, UNDP, in partnership with the United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), UN-Women, UNFPA and United Nations Volunteers (UNV), will 
build citizens’ voice and participation – especially of children, women and youth – in local 
governance, through gender-responsive governance initiatives, social protection, and improved 
gender justice. It will focus on increased capacity and representation of women in the rule-of-law DP/DCP/PAK/3
sector to deliver people-centred services and access to justice. UNDP will partner with the Joint 
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) to support Pakistan in achieving the goals of 
its national ‘AIDS Strategy IV’.
19. At the enablers level, UNDP will endeavour to scale up its partnership with Government 
towards ‘Goals Plus’, further expanding in Balochistan, South Punjab, Gilgit-Baltistan, urban 
Sindh, and Pakistan-Administered Kashmir; and – at the national and provincial levels –
supporting overarching Goals investments. Building on its digital programming pilots, UNDP will 
strengthen the emerging digital social contract of Pakistan by developing e-governance policy 
research and solutions; building capacities; and increasing access to connectivity for e-service 
delivery.
Sustainable, inclusive and green economic transformation (outcome 2) 
20. The UNDP theory of change contributing to this outcome is: if the enabling business 
environment and financing for development (including the technical and financial ecosystem) are
enhanced for job-rich economic sectors, and regional connectivity and Pakistan-Afghanistan 
cross-border development; and if access to basic services and financial and non-financial assets 
and services is improved to support productive capacities for sustainable livelihoods, 
employability for youth, girls, women, and other vulnerable groups; then people will benefit from 
a sustained, inclusive and green economic transformation.
21. At the structural transformation level, UNDP will facilitate mobilization of private-sector 
financing for the Goals through a mix of instruments, including blended finance models, Goals
investments, and the scaling up of private-sector partnerships. UNDP will encourage adoption of 
low-carbon, green, circular and inclusive practices while promoting business integrity and respect 
for fundamental rights, based on the UNDP-supported business and human rights framework of 
Pakistan. An enabling business environment, investment climate and financial ecosystem for jobrich economic sectors (industry, agribusiness, blue economy, tourism, creative and care 
economies) will be supported. With the International Labour Organization (ILO), UNDP will scale
up its successful private-public partnership models for youth employment in Sindh, Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan, supporting employability through digital skills development, ecommerce platforms, value-chain support, technical and vocational education, and support to 
entrepreneurship. 
22. To leave no one behind and to build resilience, UNDP will deepen its pandemic response for 
green recovery to mitigate and reduce socio-economic inequalities – which increased during 
COVID-19 in urban and rural areas – by focusing on economic empowerment and skills-building
of unemployed youth, women, vulnerable groups (especially otherwise-abled, ethnic, religious and 
gender minorities, migrants, and refugees) and low-income communities, to achieve inclusive and
resilient green economic growth. With the transition of Pakistan from recovery to long-term 
development in its underserved areas bordering Afghanistan, UNDP will work with the Office of 
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to ensure that humanitarian and 
resilience programming in these regions contributes to increased livelihoods, cross-border trade
and economic inclusion for regional stability. 
23. At the enablers level, UNDP will ensure that green economic recovery and growth initiatives
are aligned with the future of work predictions to support expanding the digital economy of 
Pakistan. UNDP will optimize its position as South-South development knowledge broker to 
ensure that Pakistan secures benefits from the exchange of innovative solutions, technologies and 
investment models. It will continue to promote the development impact of the China-Pakistan 
economic corridor, as well as enhance regional coordination on cross-border initiatives to support 
the recovery of border communities and businesses as hubs of regional connectivity between 
Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran and Central Asia. 
Climate change resilience and environment (outcome 3)
24. The UNDP theory of change underpinning interventions under this outcome area is that if
national stakeholders apply sustainable practices under a naturebasedriskinformed and gendernatural resource management, including for sustainable use of fresh marine and terrestrial 
ecosystems, are improved; if women are empowered as critical agents for climate action; and if
climate risk prevention, management systems, and climate financing instruments are enhanced;
then people will be more resilient and enjoy environmental, social and economic prosperity.
25. At the structural transformation level, UNDP will support the Government in its ambition to 
achieve the nationally determined contribution targets by focusing on resilience at the core of the 
development pathways; green economic policy and climate finance approaches; institutional 
strengthening; and field interventions to help Pakistan reduce its greenhouse gas emissions. UNDP 
will continue to partner with the federal and provincial governments to establish a climate fund 
under the Climate Change Authority, and to mobilize partnerships with bilateral donors and 
international financial institutions. It will mobilize grass-roots organizations for environmental 
protection and conservation of natural resources through the Global Environment Facility, the 
Green Climate Fund, the Adaptation Fund, and bilateral assistance. With the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO), UNDP will support efficient and sustainable use of freshwater, marine and 
terrestrial ecosystems, including the Indus River Basin, for resilient communities through 
improved health, livelihoods, and restoration and protection of coastal areas to foster a green-andblue economy and clean energy.
26. To leave no one behind and build resilience, UNDP will target areas with high levels of 
poverty and climate change risks by creating livelihoods and green employment opportunities, 
strengthening resilience, promoting climate change adaptation, preparedness, and emergency 
response systems, and working towards sustainable natural resource management. It will support 
the implementation by Pakistan of the planned ‘Living River Indus’ initiative to benefit the 
poorest and most marginalized, particularly women.
27. At the enablers level, UNDP will develop integrated programming by mainstreaming 
development linkages between climate change and key areas such as gender transformation, 
health, and clean-energy transition from coal to hybrids of hydro, wind and solar power. It will 
expand state-of-the-art early warning and mitigation measures to cover almost 100 per cent of the 
glaciated areas. It will collaborate with the private sector to reduce plastic packaging, promote 
recycling to establish ‘circular economy’ approaches, and support implementation of the 
hazardous chemical waste policy.
Gender equality (outcome 4)
28. The UNDP theory of change supporting this outcome area is: if gender equality-responsive 
institutions and policies are strengthened and equitable access to services, information and 
inclusion in decision-making is ensured; if vulnerable and marginalized women, girls, and 
transgender persons actively contribute to resilient and empowered communities; and if safe 
spaces and harassment-free environments are created and protection from gender-based violence 
and other harmful practices is assured; then women and girls in Pakistan, especially those at 
greatest risk of being left behind, will be empowered and reach their fullest potential.
29. At the structural transformation level, UNDP will support the Government in realizing the 
national and international commitments of Pakistan to gender equality and fundamental rights 
through policy planning, governance processes, institutional sex/gender disaggregated data,
advocacy and accountability, and gender mainstreaming across all the Goals. In partnership with 
UN-Women, UNDP will facilitate coordination and cooperation between the ministries of 
planning and human rights; the national commissions for status of women and human rights;
provincial entities; and civil society, academia and the media. UNDP will scale up pilot initiatives 
for socio-political and economic empowerment of women and girls in the merged districts to 
access services, act as community role models, and contribute to regional development. UNDP 
will continue to adopt participatory approaches and digital tools to understand gender behaviours 
so as to design meaningful, transformative, and inclusive gender-equality programming in 
Pakistan. 
30. To leave no one behind and build resilience, UNDP will target sectoral gaps and socioDP/DCP/PAK/3
transgender and other marginalized groups. It will apply a gendered cross-cutting approach in the 
other thematic outcome areas to ensure that women, girls and trans people are not just 
beneficiaries but genuine agents and leaders of change at all levels. 
31. At the enablers level, UNDP will build strategic linkages between women’s empowerment 
and the future of work, especially in new skills emerging because of automation. It will scale up
engagement with women-led social and digital enterprises, contributing to an enabling 
environment for women in technology and, more widely, women in business, by helping to train
women in essential digital skills for the future of work. UNDP will build dedicated programming 
on gendered digital transformation; economic policy; green growth; entrepreneurship; and sectoral 
leadership and decision-making. 
III. Programme and risk management
32. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the 
Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework.
33. The programme will be nationally executed in collaboration with the Government at all levels 
to ensure ownership and accountability for achieving development results, the Economic Affairs 
Division of the Ministry of Finance being the national coordinating authority. National execution 
may be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with 
other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications 
for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. In 
accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/32, all direct costs associated with project 
implementation will be charged to the concerned projects.
34. In line with the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures, different 
implementation modalities (national, direct and/or non-governmental organizations) will be used. 
UNDP support services for national implementation may be provided as required to reduce project 
management risks. Implementing partners will be selected based on comparative as well as 
collaborative advantage and capacities, and with a view to building sustainable impact. The multistakeholder project review boards will continue to be used as oversight mechanisms. UNDP will 
increasingly deliver on-demand services to the Government to enhance development effectiveness 
in addressing development challenges.
35. Drawing on lessons learned from the previous country programme, UNDP will mitigate 
programming risks such as: 
(a) Policy shifts affecting the development agenda due to political transitions expected 
during the 2022-2023 elections, which may lead to a change in the nature of demand for 
UNDP support. This will be mitigated by anchoring the programme in parliament-approved 
legislation, as well as deepening engagements at the provincial and district levels. 
(b) Insufficient funding, which demands greater national responsibility for financing 
development using domestic resources. UNDP will continue to work with the Government 
towards integrated national financing frameworks that align public and private financing with 
the Goals, as well as integrating them into national budgetary and tax frameworks and private
sector regulation.
(c) The length of time strategic engagements require will be managed by ensuring a strong 
field presence with co-location and regular communication at all levels to leverage policy 
dialogue. UNDP will apply its rights-based and social and environmental screening standards 
and principles to identify and manage the risks. (d) Vulnerability to climate hazards, which UNDP will address through early warning and 
risk management arrangements, will focus resilience and community engagement in 
managing natural resources. 
36. The estimated resource envelope of the country programme is $273 million, of which $8 
million comes from regular resources and $86.3 million from cost-sharing. The remaining $179 
million will be mobilized from national and international development partners and other 
resources, such as government, third-party, South-South cooperation and thematic trust funds.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
37. The country programme monitoring and evaluation framework is integral to the results of the 
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework. To facilitate data collection and analysis, 
UNDP will support efforts to strengthen federal and provincial statistical systems and reinforce 
results-based processes and performance monitoring mechanisms. Aligned with the UNDP
Strategic Plan and digital strategy, 2022-2025, the country office will strive to become a datadriven organization with greater capabilities of staff and partners to use digital technologies, tools 
and platforms for better performance and services. 
38. UNDP will use innovative real-time data collection and analysis and monitoring methods, 
including collective intelligence, micro-narratives, and user-generated feedback, to identify and 
better target those left behind; monitor progress towards development outcomes of the portfolio 
approach; and capture transformational results. The Sustainable Development Goals dashboard
will be further developed and filled with reliable, robust, disaggregated data to support accelerated 
progress towards the Goals. 
39. UNDP will strengthen monitoring and evaluation practices to generate disaggregated data 
through: (a) periodic reviews and midterm and final evaluations; (b) earmarking at least 5 per cent
of each project budget to data collection, monitoring and evaluation; (c) reviewing the results of
portfolio outcomes; (d) expanding the use of third-party monitoring and evaluation – especially in 
areas of limited access – to ensure results and accountability; and (e) maximizing capacities to 
generate and use national data systems. UNDP will adopt a gender-responsive and whole-of-office 
approach, ensuring that at least 25 per cent of the budget is invested in gender transformation. DP/DCP/PAK/3
Annex. Results and resources framework for Pakistan (2023–2027)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2025, Pillar 3. Governance, institutional reforms and modernization of the public sector; Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 5, 10, and 16
UNITED NATIONS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK (UNSDCF) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 1. By 2027, the people in 
Pakistan, especially women, children, the most vulnerable and marginalized, have increased access to fundamental rights, gender equality and fundamental freedom through inclusive, accountable, 
effective and evidence-driven governance systems and rule-of-law institutions at all levels of government, contributing to good governance and stability
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions. Signature solutions 2, 3 and 6
Cooperation framework 
outcome indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s)
Data source, frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines targets)
Major partners / 
partnerships /
frameworks
Estimated cost 
by outcome,
($)
UNSDCF indicators:
5.1. Government effectiveness, 
rule of law, political stability and 
accountability 
Baseline (2020): 
Government effectiveness: -0.5
Political stability: -1.85 
Rule of law: -0.7
Voice and accountability: -0.88 
Target (2027):
Government effectiveness: -0.3 
Political stability: -1.00
Rule of law: -0.5
Voice and accountability: -0.5
5.2. Proportion of total 
government spending on essential 
services, including health and 
education 
Baseline (2021): 
1.1% of GDP on health
2.3% of GDP on education
Target(2027): Increase by 4% 
https://databank.worldbank.o
rg/source/worldwidegovernanceindicators/preview/on
https://www.theglobalecono
my.com/Pakistan/wb_voice_
accountability/
Data source: Ministry of 
Planning, Development and 
Special Initiatives (MPD/SI) 
Frequency: annual
Data source: Prime 
Minister’s Office, 
Establishment Division 
(PMO)
Frequency: annual
Pakistan Bureau of Statistics 
(PBS)
Data source: Election 
Commission 
Frequency: annual
Output 1.1. Open, agile, accountable and future-ready governance 
institutions and systems in place to co-create and deliver solutions to 
accelerate transparent and equitable service delivery and SDG achievement.
Indicator 1.1.1 (Integrated Results and Resources Framework – IRRF 2.3.1).
Number of national institutions with strengthened public administration and core 
government functions for:
 (a) Improved service delivery
Baseline (2022): 10
Target (2027): 21
Indicator 1.1.2 (IRRF 2.1.3). Number of multi-stakeholder mechanisms to 
strengthen public sector agility, collaboration, and the co-design, public and 
private financing and delivery of solutions for sustainable development at:
Baseline (2022):
 (a) National level: 3
 (b) Subnational level: 1
Target (2027):
 (a) National level: 3
 (b) Subnational level: 1
Indicator 1.1.3 (IRRF 2.4.1). Number of:
 (a) Electoral management bodies with strengthened capacity to conduct 
inclusive, peaceful and credible elections 
 (b) Parliaments with improved capacities to undertake inclusive, effective, 
and accountable law-making, oversight and representation
Baseline (2022):
(a) 1 = Work started
(b) 2 = Work in progress
Target (2027):
(a) 3 = Work almost complete
(b) 3 = Work almost complete
United Nations country 
team: UN-Women;
United Nations Office 
on Drugs and Crime 
(UNODC); UNICEF;
World Food Programme
(WFP); ILO; UNHCR;
UNV; United Nations 
Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural 
Organization 
(UNESCO);
International 
Telecommunication 
Union (ITU); 
International 
Organization for 
Migration (IOM)
Ministry of Planning, 
Development and 
Special Initiatives 
(MPD/SI) 
World Bank,
International Monetary 
Fund (IMF), Asian 
Development Bank 
(ADB), Islamic 
Development Bank
(IsDB), International 
Finance Corporation 
(IFC), Economic and 
Regular 1,455,000
Other 116,807,072Data source: Provincial 
High Court 
Frequency: annual
Data source: MPD/SI
Frequency: biannual
Data source: National 
Database and Registration 
Authority (NADRA)
Frequency: annual
Output 1.2. Justice system is more accessible, efficient and affordable.
Indicator 1.2.1 (IRRF 2.2.3). Number and proportion of people supported 
who have access to justice
Baseline (2022):
Women: 6,000
Men: 18,000
Persons with disabilities: 100 
Target (2027):
Women: 17,500
Men: 30,000
Persons with disabilities: 600 
Output 1.3 (IRRF E.3). Public and private financing and investment 
mechanisms mobilized for climate solutions and achievement of the SDGs
Indicator 1.3.1 (IRRF E.3.2). Number of policies and regulatory and institutional 
frameworks developed and adopted by public and private actors to align private 
and public finance with SDGs
Baseline (2022):
(a) Policies: 1
(b) Regulatory frameworks: 1
(c) Institutional frameworks: 1
Target (2027):
(a) Policies: 2 
(b) Regulatory frameworks: 2
(c) Institutional frameworks: 2
Output 1.4 (IRRF E.1). People and institutions equipped with strengthened 
digital capabilities and opportunities to contribute to and benefit from 
inclusive digital societies
Indicator 1.1.6 (IRRF E.1.3). Number of people using digital technologies and 
services in ways that improve their lives
Baseline (2022):
Women: 15,000
Men: 15,000
Youth: 21,000
Persons with disabilities: 0
Target (2027):
Women: 35,000
Men: 35,000
Youth: 50,000
Persons with disabilities: 2,000
Social Commission for 
Asia and the Pacific 
(ESCAP), Department of 
Economic and Social 
Affairs DESA
PMO
PBS
Federal Board of 
Revenue 
Economic Affairs 
Department (EAD)
Ministry of Finance 
(MOF)
Provincial Finance 
Departments (PFD)
Ministry of Climate 
Change (MCC)
National Disaster 
Management Authority 
(NDMA)
Provincial government 
National and provincial 
assemblies
National and provincial 
SDG parliamentary task 
forces
Electoral Commission
Provincial social welfare
departments 
Provincial planning and 
development 
departments 
Education departments
Health departments 
Local government 
Civil society DP/DCP/PAK/3
organizations (CSOs)
NADRA
Ministry of Human 
Rights (MHR)
Supreme Court 
High courts 
Prosecutor General’s 
Office 
Attorney General Office NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2025, pillar II. Achieving sustained, indigenous and inclusive growth, and pillar V. Private sector and entrepreneurship-led growth; SDGs 1, 5, and 8
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 2. By 2027, people in Pakistan, especially those most marginalized and at risk of being left behind, will benefit from sustained, inclusive and green 
economic growth, through catalysing the medium, small and micro-enterprise (MSME) sector, which drives progress, creates adequate decent jobs for youth, adolescent girls and women, people with 
disabilities, and other vulnerable segments of society; promotes innovative and responsible MSMEs where gender barriers are addressed; and protects workers, including vulnerable and marginalized 
workers, from all forms of exploitation.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions. Signature solutions 1, 4, and 6.
UNSDCF indicators:
4.2. Proportion of informal nonagriculture employment, by sex 
(SDG 8.3.1)
Baseline: Total 72.4% 
Men 72.7%
Women 70.5%
(Labour Force Survey, 2018-
2019)
Target (2027): Total 60%
Men 60%
Women 60%
4.5. Proportion of small-scale 
industries with a loan or line of 
credit (SDG 9.3.1)
Baseline (2020-2021): 15.6% 
Target (2027): 12%
International Labour 
Organization database
(ILOSTAT)
https://ilostat.ilo.org/data/#
Global SDG indicators 
database 
https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/ 
indicators/database
https://www.pbs.gov.pk/ 
labour-force-publications
https://www.finance.gov.p
k/survey/chapters_21/%20
Overview.pdf
Data source: MPD/SI 
Frequency: annual
Data source: MPD/SI 
Frequency: annual
Output 2.1. Enabling business environment and financing for development 
(including technical and financial ecosystem) for job-rich economic and 
regional connectivity and cross-border development 
Indicator 2.1.1 (IRRF 1.3.1). Number of people accessing basic services 
Baseline (2022):
Total beneficiaries: 157,181
- Women: 67,881
- Men: 89,300
- Poor (income measure): 157,181 
- Youth: 103,179
- Persons with disabilities: 754
Target (2027):
Total beneficiaries: 386,681
- Women: 189,474
- Men: 197,207
- Poor (income measure): 386,681
- Youth: 255,209 (66% of total beneficiaries) 
- Persons with disabilities: 1856 (0.48% of total beneficiaries)
Indicator 2.1.2 (IRRF 2.1.3). Number of multi-stakeholder mechanisms to 
strengthen public sector agility, collaboration, and the co-design, public and 
private financing and delivery of solutions for sustainable development at:
Baseline (2022):
 (a) National level: 2 (Direct Aid Programme – DAP – and National Human 
Development Report – NHDR)
 (b) Subnational level: 3 (Urban Resilience & Development for 3 Cities -
(Karachi, Rawalpindi, Faisalabad)
Target (2027):
 (a) National level : 3 (DAP, NHDR, SDG Project Development Facility)
 (b) Subnational level: 7
Output 2.2. Access to basic services and financial and non-financial assets and 
services improved to support productive capacities for sustainable 
livelihoods, jobs employability for youth, girls/women, and other vulnerable 
groups
Indicator 2.2.1 (IRRF 3.3.2). Number of people benefiting from improved 
infrastructure for recovery in crisis or post-crisis settings:
UNCT: ILO, UNHCR, 
UN-Women, UNV, 
UNICEF, UNESCO, 
UNIDO, UNOPS, ITU, 
WFP, IOM 
World Bank, IMF, 
ADB, IsDB, IFC, 
ESCAP, DESA
MPD/SI
Planning and 
Development 
Department
EAD
MOF
PFD
Ministry of Climate 
Change (MCC)
NDMA
National Disaster Risk 
Management Fund
Provincial governments
CSOs
South-South 
Cooperation Assistance 
Fund – China
Regular: 5,084,000
Other: 37,770,639DP/DCP/PAK/3
Data source: MPD/SI 
Frequency: annual
Data source: MPD/SI 
Frequency: annual
Baseline (2022):
Total beneficiaries: 458,208
- Women: 224,522
- Men: 233,686
- Poor (income measure): 458,208
- Youth: 302,417
- Persons with disabilities: 2,199
Target (2027):
Total beneficiaries: 678,780
- Women: 332,657
- Men: 346,141
- Poor (income measure): 678,708
- Youth: 447,947 (66% of total beneficiaries) 
- Persons with disabilities: 3,258 (0.48% of total)
Indicator 2.2.2 (IRRF 3.3.1). Number of people benefiting from jobs and 
improved livelihoods in crisis or post-crisis settings:
Baseline (2022):
Total beneficiaries: 564,940
- Women: 276,821
- Men: 288,119
- Poor (income measure): 564,940
- Youth: 372,860
- Persons with disabilities: 2,712
Target (2027):
Total beneficiaries: 734,621
- Female: 367,310
- Male: 367,311
- Poor (income measure): 870,940
- Youth: 870,940
- Persons with disabilities: 4,181
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2025, pillar IV. Energy, water and food security. SDGs 5, 7, 8, 13, 14, 15, and 17
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 3. By 2027, people living in the Indus River Basin, particularly the most vulnerable, including women, girls, boys, persons with special needs and 
senior citizens, will have their lives positively impacted by improved water access and utilization, economic development, livelihoods, climate-resilient settlements, and prosperity.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. Building resilience to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk. Signature solutions 1, 3, 4, and 6.
UNSDCF indicators:
3.1. Existence of nationally 
determined contributions; longterm strategies; national 
adaptation plans; and adaptation 
communications, as reported to 
the secretariat of the
MCC Output 3.1. In line with international conventions and national policy 
frameworks, implementation mechanisms are strengthened to promote, 
manage and conserve natural resources
Indicator 3.1.1 (IRRF 4.1.2). Natural resources that are managed under a 
sustainable use, conservation, access, and benefit-sharing regime: 
(a) Area of terrestrial and marine protected areas created, or under improved 
management practices (hectares)    
UNCT: FAO, WFP, 
UNW, UNV, 
UNESCO, UN-Habitat
MCC
Forestry, Environment 
and Wildlife 
Regular 1,400,000
Other 56,659,438United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change 
(SDG indicator 13.2.)
Baseline: National climate 
change policy and its 
implementation framework 
Target (2027): Ecological 
restoration of Indus Basin 
included in all the policies at 
national and provincial levels 
and in the Climate Change Act
3.2. Degree of integrated water 
resources management 
implementation. 
(SDG indicator 6.5.1)
Baseline (2020): 56%
Target (2027): Up to 70%
https://www.sdg6data.org/c
ountry-or-area/Pakistan
Data source: MCC
Frequency: annual
Baseline (2022):
(a) 1,648,579 Ha of protected areas under improved management 
Target (2027):
(b) 1,749,321 Ha of protected areas under improved management
Output 3.2. Efficient and sustainable use of fresh marine and terrestrial 
ecosystems, including the Indus Basin, for resilient communities through 
interventions for improved health, livelihoods, green economy and clean 
energy
Indicator 3.2.1 (IRRF 4.1.1). Number of people directly benefiting from 
initiatives to protect nature and promote sustainable use of resources 
Baseline (2022):
Women (40%): 21,328
Men (60%): 31,992
Target (2027):
Women: (21,328+1,000) = 22,328
Men: (31,992+1,000) = 32,992
departments 
Meteorological 
Department 
Provincial Planning and 
Development 
Departments s
MOF
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2025, pillar I. People first: developing social and human capital and empowering women; SDGs 3, 5, and 16
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 4. Gender equality and women’s empowerment: By 2027, more women and girls at greatest risk of being left behind are able to benefit 
from and contribute to an environment in which they are empowered to exercise their fundamental rights, agency and decision-making power over all aspects, towards lives free from all 
forms of discrimination, violence and harmful practices. 
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development. 
Signature solutions 2 and 6
Strategic Plan/SDG 5.1.1.
Percentage of achievement of
legal frameworks in place to 
promote, enforce and monitor
gender equality and nondiscrimination on the basis 
of sex in the areas of: 
(a) Public life 
(b) Violence against women 
(c) Employment and economic
benefits
(d) Marriage and family
(UNSDCF indicator 2.1)
Baseline (2018):
(a) 50%
(b) 75%
(c) 10%
(d) 54.6% 
Global SDG indicators database at:
https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/ 
database – UN-Women
Ministry of Law and Justice/
United Nations-SDG indicator data 
Data source: National Commission 
for Status of Women, Ministry of 
Human Rights 
Frequency: annual
Output 4.1. Empowerment of women, girls, transgender persons and 
vulnerable and institutional leadership is promoted through genderresponsive policies, programmes, strategies and instruments through 
the provision of public and private financing and institutional 
development and strengthening.
Indicator 4.1.1 (IRRF 6.2.1). Number of measures to advance women´s 
leadership and equal participation in decision-making in: 
(a) Public institutions
(b) Elected positions, including parliaments
(c) Judiciary 
Baseline (2022):
(a) 2
(b) 3
(c) 1
Target (2027):
(a) 10
(b) 10
(c) 3
United Nations 
country team: UNWomen, UNICEF, 
UNHCR, ILO, FAO, 
WFP, UNESCO, 
UNHCR, IOM, ITU, 
UNIDO, UN-Habitat, 
UNODC, UNV
National Commission 
for Status of Women 
(CSW)
Provincial CSWs 
MHR
MOP/SI
Regular: 0
Other: 54,363,172DP/DCP/PAK/3
Target (2027): 
(a): 60%
(b): 85%
(c): 20%
(d): 65%
Data source: Ministry of Health
Frequency: annual
Data source: UNDP/UN-Women, 
Frequency: annual
Data source: National Commission 
for Status of Women, UN-Women, 
Frequency: annual
Output 4.2. Vulnerable and marginalized women, girls, and 
transgender persons actively contribute to resilient and empowered 
communities, and are able to operate in safe spaces and harassmentfree environments, protected from gender-based violence, violence 
against women and other harmful practices, and have equitable access 
to services and information.
Indicator 4.2.1 (IRRF 1.4.1). Number of people who have access to HIV 
and related services: 
(a) Behavioural change communication (BCM)
Number of women reached
Number of men reached 
(b) Antiretroviral treatment (ART)
Number of women reached 
Number of men reached
Baseline (2022):
BCM: women: 24,259; men: 42,641
ART: women reached: 8,321; men reached: 14,625
Target (2027):
 BCM: women: 50,700; men: 100,200
 ART: women reached: 17,219; men reached: 34,030
Indicator 4.2.2 (IRRF 6.2.2). Number of partnerships with women-led 
civil society organizations and other bodies and networks to advance 
gender equality and women’s leadership and participation 
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2027): 2
Indicator 4.2.3 (IRRF 6.3.3). Number of entities with strengthened 
capacities to implement legislation, policies, action plans and initiatives to 
prevent gender-based violence
Baseline (2022):
 (a) National entities: 3
 (b) Subnational entities: 0
Target (2027):
 (a) National entities: 4
 (b) Subnational entities: 12
Provincial planning and 
development 
departments
National and provincial 
SDG parliamentary 
task forces
CSOs
Ministry of Health 
Provincial AIDScontrol programmes
Community-based 
organizations 