File Name: PAN-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Panama
Country Code: PAN
Category: CPD
Document Title: Country programme document for Panama (2021–2025)
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 1–4 February 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
1 December 2020
Original: English
2016211X (E) 040121
First regular session 2021
1–4 February 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Panama (2021–2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management .................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Panama (2021–2025)………………………………………… 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025, will 
centre efforts towards the reduction of social, economic and territorial inequalities in Panama. 
The framework identifies key national priorities, processes and partners with whom the 
United Nations will work so that all people – especially those most in need – can realize their 
human rights and have access to quality social services and justice, living free from all forms 
of violence, including gender-based violence, with strong institutions to achieve sustainable, 
environmentally sound development, building on progress made and taking up the promise 
of leaving no one behind. The Framework envisions the United Nations system in Panama 
working at the intersection of inclusion, institutionality, resilience and human rights. 
Working with the United Nations country team, UNDP will bring its unique added value and 
comparative advantage in public policies for social and economic inclusion; inclusive, 
promoting participatory and efficient governance systems; policies and programmes for 
sustainable development and climate change; and violence prevention, access to justice, and 
citizen security; to contribute to the ambitious transformation envisioned in the Framework. 
The integrator role and new accelerator lab of UNDP will serve of these priorities. 
2. Over the past decade, Panama doubled its global domestic product per capita and reduced 
poverty from 23.1 per cent to 14.5 per cent between 2011 and 2018 (Economic Commission 
for Latin America and the Caribbean – ECLAC, 2019). The expansion of the Canal, the 
construction boom and extensive copper mining operations have been the main engines of 
economic growth. This growth has averaged 4.6 per cent over the last five years, making 
Panama one of the fastest-growing economies in the world. 
3. Since 2018, however, the fiscal deficit has grown, and the public debt – now estimated 
to reach 41.5 percent in 2020 (International Monetary Fund, 2020) has increased. 
Furthermore, the economic prosperity of Panama has not been shared among the population. 
Despite some improvements in income inequality, Panama remains one of the most unequal 
countries in the world, both in terms of regional disparities and population groups. Vulnerable 
groups such as women, indigenous and Afro-descendants, are disproportionately affected by 
income poverty and multiple deprivations, often lacking access to services and social 
protection. The femininity index of poor households increased significantly from 2008 to 
2018, moving from 112.5 to 123.2 at the national level. Multidimensional poverty is 4.5 times 
higher in indigenous regions than in the rest of the country. Average life expectancy for 
indigenous people living in the territories is 11 years lower than for the overall population, 
and the maternal mortality rate in indigenous women living in the territories is four times the 
national average for women (World Bank). Women and minorities are over-represented in 
the informal sector and self-employment, placing them in a situation of social vulnerability 
which has intensified with COVID-19.
4. Only 65 per cent of the population are covered by the social security system, while 
45 per cent of women do not have any coverage at all. With only 18.5 per cent of working 
women insured, compared to 25 per cent of men, women have less protection and greater 
vulnerability. Social programmes have benefited many households with monetary transfers 
(both conditional and unconditional) and direct social services; nonetheless, the lack of a 
beneficiary registry makes targeting difficult.
5. Despite efforts made to date, the implementation of policies for climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, biodiversity protection, integrated environmental management, 
and disaster risk reduction has been uneven. The environment and nature-based solutions 
have not been integrated in a consistent manner in development policy and planning in the 
public and private sectors, and there are few incentives for applying environmental 
sustainability and resilience standards. This reduces the resilience of actors and value/production chains to climate events and disasters, and increases economic 
vulnerability, as can be seen in the environmental degradation of the Panama Canal, one of 
the most important drivers of the economy. The use and management of natural resources 
such as water, the management of solid waste and biohazards, and the adaptation and 
mitigation of climate change, also impact the quality of life, affecting the vulnerable 
disproportionately. There are limited incentives for clean energy production and use. An 
agreement is needed between the public and private sectors on a common approach that 
recognizes the role of ecosystems and their services in achieving clean and resilient 
development – which, in turn, has the potential to boost local economies sustainably. 
6. Institutional weakness affects the capacity of the state both to implement public policies 
efficiently and to achieve a sustainable and inclusive development model throughout the 
territory. Although there is rule of law, low levels of citizen trust, high turnover in the civil 
service, and charges of corruption in the public and private spheres, all limit the substantive 
legitimacy of the state (National Human Rights Commission, 2019). This limits the capacity 
to drive reforms and progress towards new levels of development. Despite important 
advances so far, further efforts are needed to improve the criteria for resource allocation, 
monitoring of social programmes, and public policies oriented to reducing inequalities. 
7. This is the complex combination of priorities that UNDP will advance in the new 
programme. The theory of change calls for stronger institutions that provide for greater 
participation by all Panamanians which will result in more inclusive social services, enhanced 
human rights and more sustainable development and which will ultimately lead to greater 
shared prosperity. The theory of change is anchored in the national plans and vision. Panama 
committed to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable 
Development Goals in 2015. The country has since developed a national strategic plan, 
‘Panamá 2030, and presented its second National Voluntary Review in July 2020. The 
Government pledged to continue its efforts towards addressing the deep inequalities affecting 
the population, especially the most vulnerable, which have been heightened by the COVID19 pandemic. The Government Strategic Plan, 2019-24, identified five priority areas of 
intervention: good governance; rule of law; a competitive and job-generating economy; 
poverty and inequality reduction; and education, science, technology, and culture. 
8. A key shift in the theory of change of the new UNDP programme is that it recognizes 
the importance of local governance and local development in achieving transformative 
development results. The new framework and programme emphasize localizing the Goals 
and focus on addressing social, economic and environmental inequalities and governance 
challenges at the local level. UNDP has a unique role here due to its significant experience 
in methodologies and tools that strengthen planning, monitoring and evaluation systems for 
government management, including at the local level. UNDP has provided tools to integrate 
and localize the Goals in public policies to the Ministry of Social Development and other 
ministries. UNDP has strengthened institutional capacities for the National Information 
System, supported development initiatives aimed at vulnerable groups (indigenous, Afrodescendants, women, people with disabilities and youth), and advocated and provided 
technical assistance on climate change mitigation and adaptation measures and biodiversity. 
9. The independent country programme evaluation conducted in 2019 found that UNDP 
had been effective in achieving most output targets, producing positive results of varied 
scope, scale, and strategic importance.It found UNDP well positioned and valued in Panama 
as a strategic, reliable and inclusive partner. The evaluation noted that UNDP had not only 
complemented and made significant contributions to national priorities but had also 
succeeded in pushing for multidimensional approaches and behavioral change. This will be 
key to addressing the multidimensional challenges of the new programme. The evaluation 
highlighted that UNDP had shown a significant capacity for knowledge production, technical 
capacity-building, and supporting institutional change (for example, the National Human Development Report on Institutions, the Multidimensional Poverty Index, and the diagnostics 
on national care systems). Furthermore, UNDP supported public policy proposals through 
multi-stakeholder participatory processes accompanying their implementation (such as in the 
national dialogues on education and health), which evaluators identified as a key added value 
and area of expertise and strength. Those experiences led the Ministry of the Presidency to 
invite UNDP to facilitate an inclusive dialogue on national constitutional reform.
10. As the 2019 gender evaluation demonstrated, UNDP has worked continuously on 
mainstreaming gender equality and women’s empowerment in its programme and projects, 
opening up new niches for addressing gender inequalities, such as women’s economic 
empowerment and women’s participation in decision-making. Efforts to mainstream gender 
in programming have resulted in improved gender markers in the portfolio and the gold 
gender seal certification. UNDP used institutional tools such as the gender seal for both 
public and private sectors, as an important strategy to address barriers to gender equality and 
women’s empowerment in Panama. In line with the theory of change, in the next programme 
cycle, progress will be made to overcome structural barriers and root causes to effective 
participation; UNDP will provide strategic planning, capacity development, and a more 
comprehensive gender mainstreaming system to monitor transformational results.
11. UNDP will strengthen its integrator role to ensure more coherent United Nations 
development action through the Framework. That role has been demonstrated through the cochairing of the Sustainable Development Goals Task Force, which helped coordinate and 
integrate support of organizations to national efforts related to the Goals. UNDP provided 
assistance to the technical secretary of the Social Cabinet in developing the Multidimensional 
Poverty Index goals and in the preparation and consultation process of the National Voluntary 
Review. As integrator and technical lead for the socio-economic response to COVID-19, 
UNDP led United Nations efforts to analyse the socio-economic impact of the pandemic and 
its effects on women and vulnerable groups and to support development of the United Nations 
COVID-19 Response Plan.
12. UNDP will pursue innovative ways of addressing complex and multidimensional 
development issues. A UNDP Accelerator Lab will complement the UNDP offer and will 
help tackle development challenges through innovative problem solving. UNDP will help 
Panama better direct the attention of projects, initiatives, and investments to innovative 
solutions that accelerate the achievement of the Goals with a renewed focus on leaving no 
one behind. Given the strong footprint of UNDP in three of the four outcome areas, this will 
be a key asset in implementing the Framework.
13. UNDP will deepen South-South cooperation and knowledge management in 
implementing of the programme and will build on the experiences other countries. A key 
contribution will be the creation of a platform promoting South-South and triangular 
cooperation initiatives within the framework of the National Cooperation Plan “Panamá 
Coopera 2030”, and the sharing of country experiences in local citizen security plans, youth 
networks, and gender-sensitive social protection policies and care systems. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
14. The UNDP vision is to contribute to the efforts of Panama to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda. In doing so, the new programme will focus on 
three of the four framework outcomes by supporting public policies for inclusive and 
sustainable social and economic development; strengthening inclusive, effective and 
transparent governance processes and institutions; and supporting policies and intervention 
for sustainable environmental management, mitigation, and adaptation to climate change and 
resilience. Gender equality and human rights will be mainstreamed throughout the results 
areas. This country programme will go beyond the national level to prioritize interventions 
at the subnational level, building local capacity for governance and sustainable development. 15. This programme is closely aligned to the Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025. It is 
informed by the priorities emanating from the Government Strategic Plan, 2019-2024; the 
analysis elaborated together with United Nations organizations during the development of 
the common country assessment; and consultations with more than 150 key government and 
civil society stakeholders, organized with Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The programme is 
derived from and aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan, the signature solutions approach, 
and the regional strategy of strengthening effective governance through productivity, 
inclusion, and resilience. 
16. The programme will use a multidimensional and multi-stakeholder approach for 
achieving these results with our key partners. UNDP will build on strong collaboration and 
existing projects with over 15 local governments and 30 national government institutions
(including the Ministry of the Presidency, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Ministry 
of Social Development, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, the Ministry of Education, 
the Ministry of Labour, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Authority of the Panama Canal, 
the Ministry of Environment, the Secretary for Science, Technology, and Innovation, and the 
National Energy Secretariat). Increased collaboration with international financial institutions 
is envisaged in the coming years, especially partnering with them on the post-COVID-19 
recovery in areas where UNDP has strong added value ( social protection, education, small 
and medium businesses, gender equality, governance, water and coastal management, and 
the green/blue economy). 
17. UNDP will support integrated planning and institutional coordination at all levels 
(including national and local governmental institutions, the private sector, civil society, and 
academia). UNDP will strengthen the measurement of Sustainable Development Goals 
indicators, as well as the institutional systems and inclusive processes that generate evidenceand data-driven policy for sustainable development. UNDP will encourage the use of social 
innovation and new digital technologies to solve existing development problems and new 
challenges raised by the COVID-19 pandemic. Innovation and digital transformation will be 
important components of the UNDP strategy for supporting reform, addressing structural 
barriers, and responding to the needs of women and vulnerable groups in a manner that 
addresses their social, cultural, environmental, and economic reality in the territories where 
they live. This will enable a coherent strategy to support local-level achievement of the Goals. 
18. To address inclusive and sustainable economic and social development, UNDP will 
build on existing work and added value in economic inclusion, focusing on improving 
women’s and vulnerable groups’ access to labour markets and essential services, including 
access to justice and advocating for a more egalitarian society, free from gender, age, ethnic, 
racial, and sexual orientation discrimination. UNDP will promote a social protection system 
with greater co-responsibility for care tasks between women and men, as well as between 
households, the State, and the market. UNDP will work in partnership with UNFPA, the 
International Labour Organization, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the 
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), to 
establish an accessible and comprehensive social protection system that includes policies 
related to a national care system with localized services according to specific population 
needs. These efforts will ensure “leaving no one behind”, addressing the underlying drivers 
of exclusion and expanding essential services (including those related to education, health, 
security, and justice), making them adaptable to the characteristics of the individual 
territories. 
19. UNDP will work with UNESCO, UNICEF, and the Food and Agricultural Organization 
(FAO) to support the government in transforming the educational system, both formal and 
vocational. Each organization will contribute its unique expertise and added value. UNDP 
will support the educational system to ensure high-quality, competitive, inclusive, and resilient education that allows educational and employment trajectories for all, reducing 
educational inequality while generating human capital. UNDP will support the digital 
transformation of the educational system and the decentralization process required to adapt 
to the productivity needs of the labour market, including supporting efforts of Panama to 
include Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) in its education system. 
UNDP will promote academic and social inclusion through innovative methodologies and 
curricular content related to gender equality, environmental sustainability, and human rights.
20. UNDP will contribute to a more sustainable production and consumption model, 
including energy efficiency and renewable energy. It will work on local economic 
development to catalyse gender equity, sustainable human development, and the generation 
of livelihoods, establishing productive systems and value chains at the national and 
subnational levels that are sustainable and resilient to current or future economic, social and 
environmental crises. UNDP will promote the access of micro, small, and medium-sized 
enterprises for financial and non-financial services and encourage digitalization and the 
introduction of technology to improve their sustainable production, in collaboration with the 
Ministry of Industry and Commerce and the Authority for Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises.
21. UNDP will Panama in its efforts to make its governance institutions and processes more 
inclusive, effective, and transparent at the national and subnational levels. To support more 
equitable public investment focused on development results and based on territorial needs, 
UNDP will develop capacities for subnational governments to manage an effective transfer 
of competencies, contributing effective, decentralized policies and processes. UNDP will 
work with national counterparts, such as the National Authority for Transparency and Access 
to Information, to establish transparency and anti-corruption measures as well as more 
inclusive local planning and investment for women and vulnerable groups. UNDP will 
support integrated and strengthened governance systems and institutions at the national and 
subnational levels for more resilient, inclusive, and responsive public services (including 
justice) and management of future crises, boosting the use of innovative tools and digital 
solutions that close the gap in access to services. 
22. UNDP will support the protection of rights, access to justice, and conflict and violence 
prevention in close collaboration with other agencies. UNDP will continue to support 
accountability systems that, with access to accurate information, will enable the 
empowerment and greater participation of women, young people, and vulnerable groups in 
decision-making at national and subnational levels. This will strengthen democratic values 
and citizen awareness and reinforce social auditing in line with international and regional 
agreements, regulations and commitments. This access and space will facilitate an inclusive 
and expanded planning and decision-making process for sustainable local development that 
will bring the Government closer to the community and strengthen trust in the authorities.
23. Concerning climate action, UNDP will work on further integrating climate change 
strategies (national and international) into policy and regulatory frameworks for climate and 
ecosystem-based actions. To that end, UNDP will support the Ministry of Environment and 
other government institutions in fulfilling the commitments made in the nationally 
determined contributions and other multilateral environmental agreements, contributing to 
the reduction of environmental vulnerabilities and exposure to disasters and health crises. 
UNDP will support integrated water and coastal management to strengthen climate resilience, 
including good practices and lessons on green/blue economy supply chains. UNDP will work 
with the national and local authorities as well as the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP), the World Bank, UNICEF, the Global Environment Facility (GEF), international 
financial institutions, and other countries and partners to improve the policy, legal and 
institutional frameworks and capacities for developing nature-based solutions and climate 
change adaptation mechanisms that generate sustainable livelihoods for the population. The programme will build on the Climate Promise and the nationally determined contributions
support programme to strengthen outreach and behavioral change and promote 
environmental and climate change education.
24. UNDP will work transversally in the three outcome areas, leveraging innovation, 
technology, and digitalization to systematize processes and optimize efficiency, partnering 
with the Government Innovation Authority and other actors. To promote innovation and use 
of technology, UNDP will foster the development of differentiated solutions according to the 
individual needs of vulnerable and community groups. The programme will promote the 
establishment of gender equality standards and policies in the public and private sectors; 
comprehensive planning and institutional coordination at all levels; and the use of data and 
evidence to formulate sustainable development policy.
25. Given their desire to work in an integrated manner and build on their respective 
strengths, UNDP, UNFPA, UN-Women and UNICEF have agreed to promote, through their 
respective programmes, the necessary coordination mechanisms in to leave no one behind 
and to accelerate achievement of the Agenda 2030 objectives. The country programme will 
support Government efforts to achieve measurable results in terms of (a) management of the 
social protection system, with an emphasis on comprehensive care management; (b) skills 
development for adolescents and youth (education, employability, life skills, adaptation to 
climate change, prevention of adolescent pregnancy), and (c) prevention and precautions 
against all types of violence, including gender-based violence, suffered by adolescents, youth 
and women, within the framework of the provision of essential services.
III. Programme and risk management 
26. Risks that may affect the implementation of this programme are strategic, political, 
institutional, financial, and environmental. 
27. One of the main risks relates to the complex challenge of improving governance 
systems and access to justice. UNDP will support legal and institutional frameworks to 
facilitate the participation of people experiencing greater vulnerability and territories 
historically excluded from decision-making structures. Advocacy for civil service, effective 
participation, and accountability will continue.
28. Social and environmental risks include the possible collapse of essential services in the 
face of the COVID-19 crisis, and gender-based violence and social inequality during and 
after the pandemic. The economic revival in the early recovery phase of COVID-19 could 
focus only on economic and quick-profits “business as usual” solutions, ignoring naturebased solutions and the people who depend on them. UNDP will advocate making available 
state, private, and international organization planning and budget allocations that consider 
the people, nature, biodiversity and territories at risk of being left behind. It is expected that 
everyone will have access to basic social protection services, technical assistance, and 
financial resources during the COVID-19 recovery phase. The UNDP Social and 
Environmental Standards and Accountability Mechanism will be applied in the programme. 
To implement the grievance mechanisms, stakeholder mapping will be conducted to locate 
those who are lagging, create measures of inclusion, and strengthen local governance 
structures. This is particularly important to improve the access of indigenous peoples to 
information and timely, inclusive participation in relevant consultations and decision-making 
processes that may affect their livelihoods or the ecosystems on which they depend1.
29. A programmatic risk is the potential difficulty of mobilizing resources for a highincome country in a changing development cooperation scenario. To that end, the 
1 The programme will continue with the implementation of the Social and Environmental Compliance Unit action plan.partnerships and resource mobilization strategy will be redesigned, including alliances with 
state, private, and international actors.
30. An issues-based multidimensional approach will be adopted, with outputs under each 
thematic area complementing each other, and synergies sought in interventions that can 
impact multiple areas (such as opportunities for citizen participation). Operational synergies 
will be leveraged by combining various modalities of work depending on the objective (for 
example, capacity development, network promotion, mediation, research and 
communication). Programme implementation will adopt a networked approach that 
facilitates partnering with organizations and fosters collaboration among actors/projects and 
programme. A business continuity plan will ensure the continuity of the programme. 
31. Findings and recommendations of the independent country programme evaluation and 
other evaluations will be used as references for this cycle. Risks will be monitored through 
strict compliance with institutional requirements.
32. This country programme document outlines the contributions by UNDP to national 
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results 
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of 
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels for country programmes is 
prescribed in the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal 
Control Framework.
33. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable a response to force 
majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
34. The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan registers and facilitates oversight, and identifies the 
factors that limit or enhance the achievement of results. The plan combines the lessons 
learned from project and outcome evaluations with monitoring the realization of identified 
national priorities. It focuses on the identification of best practices as linked to the 
implementation of the programme.
35. UNDP will work with government agencies, especially the National Institute for 
Statistics and Census, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, and academia, to improve 
mechanisms and tools for generation of and access to data. UNDP will mainstream data 
generation into its projects. Dedicated efforts to improve the development of evidence, 
including support to the Ministry of Social Development to improve monitoring and analysis 
capabilities for effective implementation of public policies, and the partnership with the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Ministry of Social Development, in compliance 
with the ‘Panamá 2030’ plan, will continue. UNDP will contribute to strengthening the 
generation and availability of national development statistics. 
36. The programme disaggregates indicator data according to the most relevant criteria (such 
as gender, ethnicity, age and territory) for each intervention, based on the map of risks and 
resources methodology, and contributes to the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework. To improve evidence-based competencies, internal capacities for 
data collection and analysis will be strengthened, in collaboration with academic institutions, 
through training and the introduction of new analytical tools. UNDP will use its new 
Accelerator Lab to help monitor the progress of the programme. Collaboration with the 
UNDP Regional Hub will be extended to increase access to South-South cooperation.37. Innovation in tools and monitoring processes will provide a larger and better-quality pool 
of data and information, and will expand the possibilities of involving beneficiaries in its 
implementation through participatory statistics and visual data representation (such as maps 
and interactive sites) and the Social and Environmental Screening Procedure, continuously 
tracking every intervention. These methods will help develop the capabilities of partners to 
monitor their initiatives at the local level.
.Annex. Results and resources framework for Panama (2021-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Good governance, Rule of, law and order, Competitive economy that generates jobs, Fight against poverty and inequality, Education, science, 
Technology and culture, Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9,10, 11, 12, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 1. “By 2025, Panama favours economic, social, and environmentally sustainable and inclusive development: it 
ensures equitable access to essential quality services, livelihoods and ecosystem services for all people; it promotes inclusion, innovation, competitiveness, industrial development and 
entrepreneurship, with a territorial, human rights, intercultural, gender, and life-course approach, leaving no one behind”.
IRRF 1.1.1.3. Country has data collection/analysis mechanisms providing disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the SDGs
B: Yes (2020) T: Yes (2021) 
IRRF 2.1.2.1. Country has policy measures and institutional capacities in place to increase access to social protection schemes, disaggregated by target groups.
B: Yes (2020) T: Yes (2021) 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF 
DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines 
targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY 
OUTCOME (in thousands of $)
I: 1.2.2 Multidimensional poverty, by 
sex, location (urban/rural) 
B: 19% (2019) - men 19.5; 
women 18.6; urban 10.4; 
rural 37.8
T: 15% (2025) - men 15.; 
women 14.6 urban 8.4; rural 27
I: 1.4.2 Proportion of the
population living in
households with access to
basic services
B: 77 (2019) - men 76.8; 
women 77.8; urban 82.5; rural 66
T: 82% (2025) - men 81.8; 
women 82.8; urban 85; rural 76
Data source: Ministry of Economy and 
Finance (MEF), annual
Data source: Ministry of Social Development 
(MIDES), annual
1.1. Policies and strategic actions 
supported for the establishment of a 
social protection system to help 
improve the access of women and 
vulnerable groups to decent work 
and sustainable livelihoods
I: Number of institutions supported to 
design/implement policy measures 
and/or strategic actions to improve 
women’s and vulnerable groups’ 
access to decent work and sustainable 
livelihoods.
B: 3 (2020)
T: 10 (2025)
Data source: MITRADEL, 
annual
I: Number of policy measures and 
strategic actions that improve women’s 
and vulnerable groups’ access to 
decent work and sustainable 
livelihoods designed/ implemented in 
the territories.
B: 2 (2020)
T: 10 (2025)
Data source: UNDP, annual
Government:
MIDES
MEF
Ministry of Education 
(MEDUCA)
Ministry of Labour 
(MITRADEL)
National Institute for 
Women (INAMU)
National Institute for Skills 
Training and Human 
Development
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
(MIRE)
Local governments
Private sector
NGOs
Intercultural communities 
and indigenous groups
Civil society
Donors:
Global Fund, GEF, InterAmerican Development 
Regular
$326
Other
$59,8001.2. Local economic development 
processes promoted and 
implemented following an approach 
that fosters social and economic 
inclusion, innovation, 
competitiveness, gender equality, 
and environmental sustainability
I: Number of municipalities that 
implement gender-sensitive and
environmentally sustainable local 
economic development processes.
B: 0 (2020)
T: 10 (2025)
Data source: Municipalities, 
annual
I: Number of green/blue value chains 
supported to reduced poverty and 
improve resilience to shocks and crises 
(environmental, economic, and social)
B: 0 (2020)
T: 10 (2025)
Data source: UNDP, annual
1.3: Essential services (education, 
health, housing, water) are 
accessible and adaptable to the needs 
of the population at the subnational 
level
Reduction in performance gap in 
Spanish and Math test scores2between 
top and lowest ranking schools
B: 68.7% Spanish; 73.5% Math 
(2017)
T: 50% Spanish; 50% Math 
(2025)
Data source : MEDUCA test 
‘Crecer’
Bank, Corporacion Andino 
de Fomento, World Bank
Other partners:
UNFPA, UN-Women, 
UNICEF
2
Indicator measures third-graders’ test scoresNATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Good governance, Rule of law, Competitive economy that generate jobs, Fight against poverty and inequality, Education, Science, Technology and culture, 
SDGs: 1, 5, 8, 9,10, 11, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 2: “By 2025, Panama has participatory governance and inclusive, effective, transparent and fair national and 
local institutions at the service of the people, articulated among themselves and in alliance with non-governmental actors; with a territorial, human rights, intercultural, gender, and lifecourse approach and leaving no one behind”.
IRRF: 2.2.3.1 Country has strengthened institutions and systems supporting fulfilment of nationally and internationally ratified human rights obligations
B: Yes (2020) T: Yes (2021) 
IRRF: 2.2.3.3 Country has strengthened capacities for governance and oversight of rule of law institutions
B: Yes (2020) T: Yes (2021) 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
I: 5.5.1 Proportion of seats held by 
women in national parliaments and 
local governments
B: 12.6% (2019) 
T: 20% (2025)
I: 16.1.1 Number of victims of 
intentional homicide per 100,000 
population, by sex and age
B: 18.8 men, 1.9 women (2018) 
T: 15.0 men, 0.5 women (2025)
Data source: Electoral Tribunal, annual
Data source: Public Ministry, Annual
2.1. Modernized and strengthened 
institutions respond to people’s and 
territories’ needs and deliver 
efficient public functions at national 
and subnational levels
I: Number of technological and/or 
procedural solutions developed to 
improve public service delivery and 
other government functions at national 
and subnational levels.
B: 5 (2020)
T: 20 (2025)
Data source: UNDP, annual
I: Number of institutions (at national 
and subnational levels) that implement 
inclusive and gender-sensitive 
planning and participatory budgeting 
B: 4 (2020)
T: 20 (2025)
Data source: UNDP, annual
2.2. Spaces enabled for citizen 
participation, and interaction in 
decision-making and public policies 
and programme design, 
implementation and evaluation, 
especially for women and vulnerable 
groups
I: Percentage of women, indigenous 
people, and vulnerable groups involved 
in decision-making at all levels 
(disaggregated by gender, age, 
ethnicity/race, urban/rural).
B: 10% (2020)
Government:
Ministry of Presidency
MINGOB
MIRE
Ministry of Industry and 
Commerce (MICI)
Ministry of Public Safety
MIDES
MEF
Colon Free Zone
Ministry of Culture
National Assembly
Judiciary
Ministry of Agricultural 
Development
University of Panama
Local governments
Private sector
NGOs
Intercultural communities 
and indigenous groups
Civil society
Women’s political 
organizations
Donors:
Bureau of International 
Narcotics and Law 
Enforcement Affairs, 
Regular
$327
Other
$40,200T: 30% (2025)
Data source: UNDP, annual
I: Number of initiatives and/or 
mechanisms that promote access to 
reliable information and citizen 
participation 
B: 1 (2020)
T: 15 (2025)
Data source UNDP, Annual
2.3. Capacities of institutions and 
key actors enhanced to protect 
human rights and promote social 
cohesion 
I: Number of instruments/plans that 
facilitate access to justice, protection 
of human rights and/or to prevent and 
address all types of violence, 
especially gender-based violence at the 
national and sub-national levels
B: 5 (2020)
T: 20 (2025)
Data source: UNDP, Annual
Central American Regional 
Security Initiative, United 
States Embassy, 
Agencia Española de 
Cooperación Internacional 
para el Desarrollo en 
Panamá, European Union, 
Korea, Banesco
Other partners:
United Nations system 
World Trade Organization
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Good governance; Rule of law; Competitive economy that generates jobs; Fight against poverty and inequality; Education, science, technology and 
culture; SDGs 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 3. “By 2025, Panama is resilient and has implemented public policies for adaptation and mitigation of climate 
change, neutrality of land degradation, protection of biodiversity, integrated environmental management and risk reduction of disasters and health crises, with a territorial, intercultural, 
human rights, gender, and life-course approach”
IRRF: 2.1.1.1 Country has targets for low emissions and climate-resilient development
B: Yes (2020) T: Yes (2021) 
IRRF: 2.1.1.2 Country has national-level public-private partnerships to improve the enabling framework for economic diversification and green growth
B: Yes (2020) T: Yes (2021) 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2.Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
I: 14.5.1 Proportion of the
marine surface protected
B: 12.6% (2019) 
T: 15% (2025)
I: 15.2.1 - Area reforested by 
MiAmbiente and managers
B: 65.4% (2019) 
Data source: Ministry of Environment 
(MiAmbiente), annual
3.1. Government institutions and 
municipalities have improved 
institutional and legal frameworks 
and capacities to respond to climate 
change and ensure resilience to 
environmental vulnerabilities and 
emergencies
I: Number of national/subnational 
development and key sectoral
Government:
MiAmbiente 
Secretary for Science, 
Technology, and 
Innovation
Authority of the Panama 
Canal
Regular
$327
Other
$40,750T: 70% (2025) plans being implemented that 
explicitly address disaster and/or 
climate risk management, 
disaggregated by gender-
responsiveness
B: 10 (2020)
T: 20 (2025)
Data source: UNDP, annual
I: Number of financial incentives and 
grants provided for energy efficiency 
and renewable energy, including credit 
services, that are accessible to both 
women and men 
B: 0 (2020)
T: 5 (2025)
Data source: UNDP, annual
3.2. Integrated water and coastal 
management include climate 
resilience and good practices in 
green supply chains
I: Number of chemicals and waste-
integrated management initiatives 
implemented by the private sector in 
partnership with government and civil 
society
B: 0 (2020)
T: 10 (2025)
Data source: Private sector, 
annual
I: Rate of participation of men and 
women per district and sub-watersheds 
engaging in green value chains (blue/ 
green economy) over time and rates of 
dis-adaptation
B: 0% (2020)
T: 10% (2025)
Data source: MiAmbiente, annual
I: Number of institutional and/or 
private sector systems to catalysing 
investments in low carbon and resilient 
green urban development
B: 0 (2020)
T: 5 (2025)
Data source: MiAmbiente, annual
Institute for Scientific 
Research and High 
Technology Services
Ministry of Health
National Authority of Land 
Management
National Energy 
Secretariat
Local governments
MIRE
NGOs
Intercultural communities 
and indigenous groups
Productive organizations 
of the plural economy
Civil society
Donors:
GEF
Private Sector
Green Climate Fund
International Climate 
Initiative 
Other partners:
UNEP, FAO, United 
Nations Office for Disaster 
Risk Reduction, UN-
Women, UNICEF3.3. Improved national capacities for 
nature-based solutions and climate 
change adaptation for livelihoods 
advanced
I: Number of nature-based solutions
and resilient cross-sectoral livelihoods 
finance mechanisms developed and 
funds mobilized
B: 0 (2020)
T: 10 (2025)
Data source: MiAmbiente, annual
I: Number of initiatives for 
environmental and climate change 
governance, environmental citizenship, 
public advocacy, and Escazu Regional 
Agreement 
B: 0 (2020)
T: 10 (2025)
Data source: MiAmbiente, annual
I: Number of women participating in 
environmental climate change 
governance structures at the local 
level, trained and empowered in 
environment and climate change. 
B: 0 (2020)
T: 1,000 (2025)
Data source MiAmbiente, annual