File Name: PER-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Peru
Country Code: PER
Category: CPD
Document Title: Country programme document for Peru (2022–2026)
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 January–4 February 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
3 December 2021
Original: English
2118014X (E) 151221
First regular session 2022
31 January–4 February 2022, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Peru (2022–2026)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Peru (2022–2026)............................................................ 10I. UNDP within the Cooperation Framework
1. The UNDP country programme document is aligned with the long-term development plan 
of Peru – Vision 2050 – which mainstreams the Sustainable Development Goals, the State 
Policies of the National Accord, and the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework, 2022-2026.
2. While the socioeconomic indicators for Peru have improved significantly over the last three 
decades, structural inequalities and intertwined multidimensional vulnerabilities 
continue to limit human development. The system-bending effects of the coronavirus 
disease (COVID-19) have pushed this situation to perilous limits. This revitalizes the need for 
a debate regarding development trends, including their efficiency and sustainability for 
tackling structural exclusion, particularly for women, youth, indigenous people, informal 
workers, and migrants. 
3. In terms of poverty, Peru is internationally regarded as a success story,1 but in 2019, 34 
per cent of the population was at risk of falling into poverty if assailed by endogenous or 
exogenous shocks. COVID-19 increased monetary poverty from 20.2 to 30.1 per cent,2
particularly affecting women and urban areas, which account for 79.3 per cent of the 
population.3 This links to informality, which, in 2019, accounted for 72.7 per cent of labour, 
disproportionally affecting women (75.8 per cent of whom hold informal jobs).4 This 
combines with the 25.8 per cent wage gap in 15 out of 24 regions,5 women’s unpaid domestic 
and care work, and the pending care policy.
4. UNDP has built strong evidence to demonstrate that two conditions in the social policy 
framework contribute to this vulnerability. First, while improved basic services and social 
protection networks lift people out of poverty, they are limited by business-as-usual fiscal 
policies and minimal linkage with productive or training opportunities to further people’s 
access to decent work.
5. Second, existing programmes tend towards standardization, with insufficient cultural 
relevance and area-based targeting mechanisms, which, in a heterogeneous territory with 
uneven state density, limits social mobility.
6. UNDP has supported large-scale social protection initiatives; however, its substantive 
contribution has been bound to specific interventions, whereas the challenges are systemic by 
nature. UNDP is evolving to cooperate through administrative expertise, innovative tools, and 
insights, to cement linkages between social protection policies and decent work. 
7. In socioecological terms, due to its geomorphology and location, Peru is considered one of 
the countries most vulnerable to climate change and nature-related disasters.6 However, 
limited sustainable ecosystem management and climate change mitigation and adaptation 
measures have caused biodiversity degradation – which directly affects indigenous 
populations – and increased green-house gas emissions (40 per cent from deforestation).7 This 
perpetuates unsustainable production and consumption patterns, which are root causes of the 
environmental situation. 
8. Although UNDP has supported the national disaster risk management system, challenges 
remain for implementing the national policy, and existing instruments often do not consider 
territorial approaches. Furthermore, disaster risk management is not adequately integrated into 
territorial planning. This reduces people’s socioecological resilience and well-being.
1
International Monetary Fund, 2020
2 National Statistics and Information Institute, 2020
3
Ibid., 2017
4
Ibid., 2020
5
Instituto Peruano de Economía, 2020
6 Plan Nacional de Gestión del Riesgo de Desastres, 2021
7 Monitoring of the Andean Amazon Project
20189. Consecutive project evaluations throughout the 2017-2021 cycle highlight the success of 
the UNDP integrated approach to connecting people and planet, including its focus on 
sustainable livelihoods that are intimately linked to ecosystem services, and ensuring that Peru 
meets its international commitments. As the largest resident United Nations entity mandated 
to address the climate emergency and the environmental partner of choice – as mentioned in 
the independent country programme evaluation – ongoing learning at UNDP will ensure its 
role as a sustainable climate transformation leader.
10. With respect to the macro-, meso- and microeconomic pressures affecting 
productivity, although exports increased six-fold between 2000 and 2017,8 Peru relies on an 
undiversified productive matrix which tends towards intensive environmental pressures and 
vulnerability to exogenous shocks. Most productive agents lack the capacities or policy 
frameworks to transition towards more sustainable, competitive models. Value chains tend to 
be disjointed, with limited associativity, access to financial instruments or shared value 
between stakeholders. This is linked to informality, which in 2019 accounted for 83.5 per cent 
of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.9
11. Furthermore, existing public expenditure, commercial finances and development aid 
flows have little interconnection, generating mixed or even negative impacts on development. 
12. UNDP has a reputation for quality productive development projects with individuals and 
small-scale producers. Nonetheless, lessons learned have allowed for a more active role in 
multi-level reshaping of the production matrix. UNDP has been a leading voice within the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework design teams to ensure a 
shift towards including the link between the macro and micro dynamics of the production 
system.
13. Finally, underscoring these vulnerabilities, governance remains a critical pivot point, 
particularly since COVID-19 must also be understood as a governance crisis that has exposed 
institutional fragility, a precarious social contract, and the unequal exercise of rights. These 
challenges limit the capacity of Peru to drive reforms towards more inclusive, sustainable, and 
resilient development models.
14. Public administration, shaped by unfinished modernization and decentralization and a 
weak rule of law, struggles to effectively centre itself on people and their diversity.10 This 
limits access to timely, culturally appropriate policies and services, aggravated by regional 
disparities,11 while the most vulnerable experience particular barriers to exercising their 
rights.
12
15. This scenario, coupled with limited transparency and anti-corruption mechanisms, 
weakens public trust in institutions; 91 per cent of citizens perceive government authorities as 
corrupt.13
16. Citizens’ rights and participation in decision making are threatened by structural 
discrimination, based on gender, nationality, ethnicity and sexual orientation. This leads to 
exclusion (40 per cent would not hire migrants14); weak representation (only 14 per cent of 
congressional lists are led by women15); and violence (76 femicides by June 2021;16 high 
8 Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas, 2018
9 Ministerio de la Producción, 2019
10 World Bank, 2020
11 UNDP, 2019.
12 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 2014
13 Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática, 2021
14 Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, 2019
15 UNDP, 2020
16 Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations
2021levels of social conflict, 65 per cent socioenvironmental; 17 9 human rights defenders – mainly 
indigenous – murdered in 202018), among other dimensions. 
17. UNDP has expanded its democratic governability approach to an effective governance 
approach, recognizing the importance of a strong link between wide and inclusive 
participatory mechanisms and state modernization centred on people’s needs and their 
capacity as agents. This systems-based approach has been successful, for example, in tackling 
gender-based violence and migration at all levels.
18. This programme will capitalize on diverse insights:
(a) Since 2012, UNDP partnership surveys have recognized the positioning of UNDP 
in thematic expertise; tailored territorial presence in 21 of 24 regions; capacities for 
national integration of the Sustainable Development Goals; and innovation, making it a 
core partner for diverse stakeholders, including 109 multi-level public institutions and 
over 180 private, academic, civil society and emerging development change-makers.
(b) Its United Nations technical leadership mandate for COVID-19 socio-economic 
recovery, recognized by the independent country programme evaluation as important for 
providing innovative, rapid responses adapted to emerging needs, has showcased the 
ability of UNDP to adapt and provide specialized support for the hardest-hit populations, 
including basic services and green recovery for indigenous populations, gender-based 
violence solutions, and reactivation of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. 
(c) The UNDP Accelerator Lab is becoming a cornerstone for its added value within 
the development ecosystem. An oasis for experimentation, innovative partnerships and 
future-thinking, this cross-cutting unit is building a culture driven by curiosity, well 
suited to confronting uncertainty. 
(d) Finally, while UNDP has exerted itself to defy working in silos and to promote crosssector management, it must still strive for continuous improvement to unleash its full 
potential. While the UNDP partnership survey, 2020, recognized the transparency and 
quality of programme implementation, areas to improve include agility and value for 
money. UNDP will strengthen its search for programmatic and operational synergies, 
avoiding duplication of processes and increasing impact and efficiency.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
19. Defying business-as-usual, the UNDP issues-based, territorial vision, 2022-2026, has 
multidimensionality and systems thinking at its core. It will scale up commitment to “leaving 
no one behind” with a human-centred perspective that will permeate programme decisions. 
UNDP will go “beyond recovery”, from COVID-19 or future crises, with proposals for quick 
wins and long-term transformations that link urgent local needs to global systemic change, 
with the humanitarian-development-peace nexus at the fore. 
20. It will focus on reducing multidimensional vulnerabilities, both structural and those 
caused by crises, by accelerating human development and expanding people’s choices for 
a fairer, sustainable future. 
21. This holistic vision derives from the UNDP Strategic Plan, applying its signature 
solutions. It is grounded in the UNDP regional vision of a three-lane road that must advance 
simultaneously towards inclusion, resilience, and productivity, sustained by effective 
governance. 
22. This transformational programme has been co-created with over 150 public, private, civil 
society, and emerging development stakeholders, in consultation with the Resident 
17 Defensoría del Pueblo, 2021
18 IbidCoordinator’s office, the Ministry of Foreign Relations, the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF) and UNFPA. 
Culturally appropriate basic services, social protection, and the future of decent work 
23. If public institutions, in coordination with private and civil society sectors, strengthen 
their capacities to ensure comprehensive social protection, universal access to quality basic 
services and minimum income levels; then people will improve their well-being and increase 
their capacities to confront present and future challenges, which in turn will expand inclusion. 
People will then be better placed to confront emerging development needs, such as climate 
change adaptation and green incomes, and to accelerate productive transformation.
24. This is because innovative policies and instruments19 will broaden access to basic 
services and social protection, including care systems, reshaping them by strengthening their 
linkage to productive and employment policies and expanding fiscal space so that they can act 
as pathways to further development progress. 
25. UNDP global and local knowledge will bring strategic disruption to these frameworks. 
Working with the Ministries of Development and Social Inclusion; Production; Agricultural 
Development; Work and Labour Promotion; and Women and Vulnerable Populations, UNDP 
will promote experimentation for scale-up, accelerated through platforms composed of public, 
private and academic institutions – including think tanks and innovation labs – that integrate 
cutting-edge, evidence-based models. Working with the Ministry of Culture, it will continue 
ensuring cultural relevance through dialogue mechanisms, emphasizing indigenous 
populations.
26. In coordination with public and private technical education stakeholders, the 
International Labour Organization (ILO), the United Nations Education, Science and Culture 
Organization (UNESCO), the United States Agency for International Development, and the 
Development Bank of Latin America, UNDP will increase access to programmes for income 
generation and decent work. The focus will be on women, youth, and migrants, particularly in 
Lima, which concentrates most micro, small and medium-sized enterprises and people living 
under the poverty line. Proven economic reactivation models will be replicated across local 
governments, promoting equal wages for women and men. 
Climate change and disaster risk management to underpin green economy
27. If public, private and civil society stakeholders increase their value recognition of 
biodiversity and strengthen their capacities in nature-based solutions for conservation and 
disaster risk management; then socio-ecological resilience to climate change, disasters and 
humanitarian crises will be strengthened, with a positive impact on people, nature and 
ecosystems, including urban landscapes. This will guide green growth and promote a stronger 
relationship between the production matrix and the territory, and the sustainability of human 
development progress.
28. This is because UNDP will remain a key partner for the Ministries of Environment, 
Energy, Foreign Relations, Production, Agricultural Development, and Culture, and regional 
and local governments, to strengthen gender-responsive policy frameworks for sustainable 
biodiversity, nature and climate change management, which will, in turn, lead to more 
sustainable, nature-based livelihoods.
29. It will build on strategic positioning with vertical funds: the Global Environment Facility 
(GEF); the Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol; bilateral 
cooperation (Germany, Norway, Switzerland); the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP); and the United Nations Human Settlement Programme, to support the 
implementation and increased ambition of the nationally determined contributions and 
international commitments to reduce deforestation and land degradation. It will continue 
19 Instruments can be programmatic (strategies, plans, studies); normative (decrees, laws, resolutions); or financial (budgets, financing 
agreementsmicrocredits)exploring efficient energy and sustainable transport with partners, including the Ministries of 
Energy and Transport and Communications.
30. UNDP will contribute to consolidating the National Disaster Risk Management System, 
led by the Council of Ministries, supporting implementation of the national policy and 
instruments for disaster risk management and land planning. It will co-create investments, 
critical basic services and disaster-resilient livelihoods with the Bureau for Humanitarian 
Assistance/United States Agency for International Development, Swiss Development 
Cooperation, and the Directorate General of European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid 
Operations.
31. UNDP will continue acting as a pathway to support indigenous people’s agency, 
prioritizing indigenous women and youth; and the effective participation of civil society 
organizations in sustainable development policymaking. It will focus on (a) the Amazon, 
covering 60 per cent of Peru, given its global relevance for tackling climate change, 
safeguarding indigenous cultural heritage and territories, and sustaining nature-dependent 
livelihoods; (b) coastal marine areas, for their abundance of biodiversity, ecosystem services 
and economic activities; (c) Andean highlands, key to water security and ecosystem stability; 
(d) border watersheds, through South-South cooperation with Bolivia, Colombia and Ecuador; 
and (e) cities, to ensure sustainable urban development and efficient energy consumption. 
Inclusive, innovative and sustainable productivity and competitiveness
32. If public, private and civil society stakeholders strengthen their capacities to promote 
both horizontal and vertical integration that expands shared value generation; stimulates 
productive innovation and increases competitiveness and revenue; then this will accelerate 
the consolidation of a more diversified, competitive, innovative, sustainable, formal and 
inclusive productive matrix – aligned to the potential of each territory – facilitating the 
emergence of new, multi-stakeholder platforms and enterprises with sustainability at their 
core. This will increase people’s opportunities and maintain a positive relationship with the 
environment.
33. This is because, building on globally recognized green commodity platforms and 
territorial development models, UNDP will support multi-stakeholder, cross-sectoral 
platforms to combine resources and knowledge and co-create solutions that increase shared 
value generation and accelerate the transformation of the productive matrix of Peru. This will 
back the Ministries of Production, Environment, Agricultural Development, and Energy, and 
local and regional government leadership. UNDP will work with the United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization (UNIDO), UNEP, and the World Trade Organization (WTO) on 
ambitious green markets and investment policies, and with the Ministry of Transport and 
Communications to ensure digital transformation.
34. Productive innovation, a circular economy approach and digital disruption will ensure 
the new generation of enterprises and platforms increase stakeholder and planetary benefits; 
generate more sustainable revenues; and integrate into more profitable and sustainable 
markets. This will be backed with strategic investments from international financial 
institutions, GEF, and, potentially, the governments of Canada, Germany, the United Kingdom 
and the United States. UNDP will support the national sustainability ecosystem, including 
private sector associations and impact investment networks exploring groundbreaking green 
growth solutions. 
35. To de-risk green investment and experimental business models, UNDP will mobilize 
global capacities to continue exploring innovative financing mechanisms, particularly blended 
financing, public work for tax deductions, results-based payments, and carbon markets. 
36. UNDP will focus on territories where livelihoods are intensive in planetary pressures or 
have high levels of unexplored potential. Emphasis will be placed on the Amazon and nodes 
of commercial activity, including Lima and regional capitals, because of their interconnection 
with territories with high concentrations of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises and 
low human development index rankingssuch as the southern Andes and the coastal northEffective governance
37. If national and decentralized public institutions strengthen their capacities for efficient, 
effective and people-centred administration and spending; public, private and civil society 
stakeholders strengthen their capacities for innovative, open, digital governance and dialogue 
mechanisms to improve State-citizen relations, and civil society strengthens its capacities to 
promote horizontal, inclusive and active citizenship; then these three pillars of governance 
will ensure citizens exercise their rights equally through strengthened public institutions, 
access to justice, vertical and horizontal social cohesion, and the fight against gender 
inequality and all forms of discrimination. 
38. This is because UNDP and the Council of Ministries will develop people-centred, 
decentralized policies and instruments to accelerate the State modernization process. UNDP 
will tackle sector-specific challenges, including timely justice services – particularly for 
gender-based violence – with the Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations; the 
Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, Judicial Power, Public Ministry and the Korean 
International Cooperation Agency. In partnership with UNFPA, UNICEF, and United Nations 
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), UNDP will 
continue mainstreaming gender equality. 
39. UNDP will accelerate a transformation towards open, digital, inclusive public services, 
coordinating multi-stakeholder, multilevel policies to promote useful transparency, 
accountability, and citizen oversight. It will work with the Ministry of the Interior on citizen 
security policies. With the Council of Ministries, the Ministry of Energy, and civil society 
organizations, UNDP will strengthen inclusive, democratic political and social dialogue and
consensus-building mechanisms to reduce social conflict.
40. To guarantee inclusive citizenship, UNDP will support the judiciary, electoral bodies, 
the Ministry of Culture and civil society organizations to combat discrimination and promote 
the active political participation and representation of excluded groups. It will focus on 
women, indigenous populations and youth with the government of Spain; and migrants, the 
latter in alliance with ILO, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) through the United Nations refugee and 
migrant response plan, with the Ministry of Foreign Relations.
41. Finally, support to South-South and triangular cooperation will be mainstreamed, 
particularly with Andean countries, to tackle cross-border challenges including climate 
change, environmental degradation, and migration. UNDP will spearhead policies and 
services that connect diverse stakeholders, cutting design timeframes and budgets, and 
promoting open innovation. 
III. Programme and risk management 
42. Given the uncertainty of the development scenario in Peru, programme results are subject 
to multidimensional risks. UNDP will manage and mitigate possible negative impacts or turn 
them into opportunities for positive transformational change.
43. A long-term risk is the ongoing political instability Peru experienced throughout the last 
programme cycle. Tensions between executive and legislative powers, and frequent changes 
in government, can delay results implementation and resource mobilization. Wide recognition 
of UNDP as a development partner of choice will provide a strategic safety net; furthermore, 
this programme is designed to ensure both flexibility to adapt to national priorities and solidity 
to ensure long-term outcomes. 
44. The complex risk scenarios generated by the COVID-19 health and socioeconomic 
effects are both medium and long-term, and could combine with emerging shocks, including 
increased inequality, nature-related disasters, the climate emergency, effective governance 
weaknesses and the digital divide. Their urgency and volatility could distract from long-term UNDP programming and generate a relevance gap. To mitigate this, supported by its 
Accelerator Lab, UNDP has included multidimensional analyses of trends, future-mapping 
and positive risks within the programme, helping plan, monitor and adjust multiple pathways 
for response, recovery and long-term development goals, turning shocks into pivots for 
positive transformational change. 
45. Finally, the classification of Peru as a high-middle-income country, with increased direct 
government-to-government cooperation, poses a risk for development funding sustainability, 
which could scale down reach and results. The vibrant UNDP partnership and communications 
strategy will establish cross-sectoral, multi-stakeholder partnerships that increase trust and 
secure continuity, informed by its results-based knowledge management strategies. 
46. The UNDP Social and Environmental Standards and Accountability Mechanism will 
ensure human rights standards and sustainability. Stakeholder mapping will guarantee that the 
grievance mechanism reaches the most vulnerable. The UNDP business continuity plan is 
updated regularly to ensure continuity in case of sudden interruptions.
47. UNDP will make innovation, digital transformation and development financing core 
accelerators of its programme delivery. It will ensure synergies between multiple-impact 
solutions to break sectoral silos, acting as an open innovation network backed by its 
Accelerator Lab, country platforms and regional and global resources. Findings and 
recommendations from monitoring and evaluation – including the independent country 
programme evaluation – will guide the programme. All projects will include gender analyses 
and plans for achieving gender equality.
48. UNDP will strive for operational excellence, modernizing systems and structures to 
effectively and efficiently support the programme. It will seek continuous peoplemanagement, process flows and accountability improvement; plus compliance with financial 
regulations, including direct project costing and general management support. 
49. This programme will be overseen by the Ministry of Foreign Relations. An Executive 
Committee, composed of the Ministry of Foreign Relations, the Peruvian Agency for 
International Cooperation, the Council of Ministries, the Ministry of the Economy and Finance 
and UNDP, plus sectoral bodies, where relevant, will provide strategic orientation, monitor
results and support resource mobilization. UNDP will participate in the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework Executive Committee. 
50. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed 
in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control Framework.
51. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations entities to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned 
projects. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
52. To safeguard this programme and higher-level national results, UNDP will continue 
mainstreaming in-house and national partners’ knowledge management capacities, linking 
challenges to global practices and insights. 
53. Timely data and evidence, disaggregated according to target groups – particularly 
women – will be captured through participatory monitoring and evaluations in both UNDP accountability to stakeholders, examine intervention effectiveness before scale-up, and 
support partnership-building and resource mobilization by showcasing UNDP added value. 
54. UNDP will continue boosting national statistics and planning institutions, including the 
National Strategic Planning Centre and the National Statistics and Information Institute, to 
resolve existing data gaps, weak disaggregation, and reliance on proxy indicators for the 
Sustainable Development Goals; and promote data-driven futures scenarios for realistic 
planning that considers COVID-19 impact. 
55. This includes measuring private sector contributions through the UNDP Sustainable 
Development Goals Corporate Tracker; tracking municipal Sustainable Development Goal 
implementation through local voluntary reports; and specialized monitoring or opengovernance platforms, including for nationally determined contributions.20 Efforts will be 
coordinated with the United Nations planning, monitoring and reporting system and supported 
by the UNDP Accelerator Lab and Geographic Information Systems Cluster, who will explore 
low- and high-tech promising and experimental data sources, including artificial intelligence, 
the ‘Internet of Things’, and real-time monitoring, ensuring that UNDP thought leadership 
continues to flourish.
56. The UNDP gender marker will monitor gender gaps and guarantee at least 15 per cent of 
the programme budget for gender equality and women’s empowerment. A comprehensive 
evaluation plan will ensure systemic, independent midterm and final assessments of projects, 
and outcomes. Project monitoring, evaluation, communications and audit costs will be charged 
to project budgets and included in their documents and workplans.
20 Aligned to the adaptation and mitigation measures monitoring and evaluation system of the Ministry of EnvironmentAnnex. Results and resources framework for Peru (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2050, National Accord. Sustainable Development Goals 1, 5, 8, 10, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1. By 2026, people, increase their access to decent work and a comprehensive social protection system, including a social 
protection floor, which ensures universal access to health (including sexual and reproductive health), nutrition, food security, basic income security and the care system, through an integrated approach 
with special emphasis on gender and rights
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2. No one left behind
Cooperation Framework outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, target(s)
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines targets)
Major partners/partnerships
frameworks
Estimated 
cost by 
outcome 
($ thousands)
Incidence of total monetary poverty
Baseline (2020): 30.1%
Target (2026): 27.2%
National Household Survey 
(ENAHO), annually
Output 1.1. Public, private and civil society 
stakeholders strengthen their capacities to 
ensure comprehensive social protection, 
universal access to improved basic services, 
and minimum income levels, especially for 
people in situations of, or at risk of, 
multidimensional vulnerability or poverty
1.1.1. Number of policies or instruments 
designed or implemented to broaden access to 
quality basic services and social protection, 
including those linked to production, decent 
work or fiscal space (Integrated results and 
resources framework – IRRF1.2.1)
Baseline (2021): 1
Target (2026): 13
Source: UNDP, Ministry of Development and 
Social Inclusion (MIDIS), annually
1.1.2. Number of dialogue mechanisms 
promoting innovative instruments for social 
protection or access to basic services, with 
emphasis on people in situations of, or at risk 
of, multidimensional vulnerability or poverty
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 5
Source: UNDP, annually
1.1.3. Number of people who have access to 
opportunities that enable them to reach a 
minimum income floor and exercise their 
right to decent work, with emphasis on people 
in situations of, or at risk of, multidimensional 
vulnerability or poverty (IRRF1.3.3)
MIDIS
Ministry of Women and Vulnerable
 Populations (MIMP)
Ministry of Production (PRODUCE)
Ministry of Agricultural Development
 (MIDAGRI)
Ministry of Work and Labour Promotion
Ministry of Culture (MINCUL)
MINSA
Ministry of Transport and Communications
 (MTC)
ILO
UNESCO
United States Agency for International
 Development (USAID)
Development Bank of Latin America
Technical education stakeholders
Regular
$485
Other
$15,386Baseline (2021): Total 2,300, Women 1,300, 
Men 1,000, Migrants 1,550, Indigenous 0, 
Youth 0
Target (2026): Total 7,600, Women 4,400, 
Men 3,200, Migrants 2,000, Indigenous 250, 
Youth 300.
Source: UNDP, annually
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2050, National Accord. Sustainable Development Goals:1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 2. By 2026, the population and ecosystems, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability, strengthen their resilience 
as a result of institutions and communities improving policies and implementing effective mechanisms or instruments for environmental, climate change, and disaster risk management and humanitarian 
crises management, through an integrated approach with special emphasis on gender, rights, interculturality, life cycle and territory
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. Structural transformation
Total marine and terrestrial natural 
protected areas (hectares) 
(IRRF4.1.2)
Baseline (2021): 29,434,628.23
Target (2026): 48,774,545.99
Greenhouse gas emissions 
Baseline (2016): 205.29 MtCO2eq.
Target (2026): 186.51 MtCO2eq.
Percentage of institutional strategic 
plans that incorporate disaster risk 
management
Baseline (2018): 57%
Target (2026): 83%
Percentage of financial implementation 
of public investment in disaster risk 
management
Baseline (2018): 51%
Target (2026): 54%
Peruvian Service for Natural Protected 
Areas – SERNANP, Ministry of 
Environment – MINAM, annually
Greenhouse gases report, MINAM, 
every two years
National Survey of Disaster Risk 
Management (ENAGERD), annually
Output 2.1. Public, private and civil society 
stakeholders strengthen their capacities for 
conservation and value recognition of 
biodiversity and nature to ensure socioecological resilience and sustainable, 
inclusive and low-emission productive 
development
2.1.1. Number of policies or instruments 
designed or implemented for conservation, 
sustainable biodiversity, nature or climate 
change management
Baseline (2021): Total 17, National 1, 
Subnational 16
Target (2026): Total 116, National 28, 
Subnational 88
Source: UNDP, MINAM, annually
2.1.2. Number of actions supported that 
contribute to nationally determined 
contribution measures (IRRF1.1.2)
Baseline (2021): Total 0, Adaptation 0, 
Mitigation 0
Target (2026): Total 17, Adaptation 11, 
Mitigation 6
Source: UNDP, MINAM, annually
2.1.3 Number of people, who have improved 
their livelihoods through the conservation, 
value recognition and sustainable use of 
biodiversity or nature (IRRF4.1.1)
Baseline (2021): Total 0, Women 0, Men 0
MINAM
Ministry of Energy (MINEM)
Ministry of Foreign Relations
PRODUCE
MIDAGRI
MINCUL
MTC
Regional and local governments 
GEF
Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of 
the Montreal Protocol
Bolivia
Colombia
Ecuador
Germany
Norway
Switzerland
UNEP
UN-Habitat
National Disaster Risk Management
 System 
Presidency of the Council of Ministries
 (PCM)
USAID
Swiss Development Cooperation
European Civil Protection and
 Humanitarian Aid Operations
Regular
$485
Other
$66,751Target (2026): Total 196,700, Women 92,500, 
Men 104,200.
Source: UNDP, annually
Output 2.2. Public, private and civil society 
stakeholders strengthen their capacities to 
reduce the risk of disasters and promote 
resilience within each territory
2.2.1. Number of public, private and civil 
society stakeholders with policies or 
instruments designed or implemented for 
disaster risk management or territorial 
planning (IRRF3.1.1)
Baseline (2021): Total 18, National 13, 
Subnational 5
Target (2026): Total 131, National 24, 
Subnational 107
Source: UNDP, ENAGERD, annually
2.2.2. Number of policies or instruments 
designed or implemented to promote disaster 
risk management, including resilient 
investments, critical basic service and essential 
livelihoods (IRRF3.1.2)
Baseline (2021): Total 6, National 2, 
Subnational 4
Target (2026): Total 99, National 45, 
Subnational 54
Source: UNDP, ENAGERD, annually
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2050, National Accord. Sustainable Development Goals:1, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 3. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability and discrimination, improve their access to 
resilient livelihoods through the construction of a diversified, competitive, formalized, innovative, sustainable and inclusive productive matrix, with decent work and aligned to the potential of each 
territory, through an integrated approach with special emphasis on gender, particularly through the economic empowerment of women
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. Structural transformation
Informal employment rate
Baseline (2020): 75.3%
Target (2026): 66.1%
Research and development expenditure 
as a proportion of gross domestic 
product
Baseline (2019): 10%
Target (2026): 29.6%
Number of formal micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises 
ENAHO, annually
INEI, Ministry of the Economy and 
Finance (MEF), annually
National Superintendency of Customs 
and Tax Administration, annually
Output 3.1. Public, private and civil society 
stakeholders within the productive system 
strengthen their capacities for horizontal 
integration, with emphasis on the most 
vulnerable territories
3.1.1. Number of multi-stakeholder, multisector platforms that achieve horizontal 
integration for sustainable economic 
development or productive diversification 
(IRRF2.1.3)
Baseline (2021): 6
PRODUCE
MINAM
MIDAGRI
MINEM
MINCUL
MTC
Local and regional governments
UNIDO
UNEP
WTO
International financial institutions
GEF
Regular
$485
Other
$29,491Baseline (2019): 2,377,244
Target (2026): 4,927,242.03
Target (2026): 19
Source: UNDP, annually
3.1.2. Number of enterprises, businesses or 
other organizations that, through productive 
innovation, generate shared value at the social 
or environmental levels, directly benefiting 
women, indigenous and youth
Baseline (2021): 8
Target (2026): 165
Source: UNDP, annually
3.1.3. Number of policies or instruments that 
promote horizontal integration to generate 
shared value or productive innovation
Baseline (2021): 16
Target (2026): 22
Source: UNDP, annually
Output 3.2. Public, private and civil society 
stakeholders from the value chains that 
connect with vulnerable territories 
strengthen their capacities, services and 
incentives to promote vertical integration, 
with emphasis on women and people in 
situations of vulnerability
3.2.1. Number of enterprises, businesses or 
other organizations, with emphasis on those 
led by women, indigenous populations, youth 
and migrants, that access instruments to 
generate sustainable and resilient revenue 
(IRRF E.1.3)
Baseline (2021): 6
Target (2026): 1,328
Source: UNDP, annually
3.2.2. Number of enterprises, businesses or 
other organizations that access instruments to 
integrate with new, sustainable or more 
profitable markets, with emphasis on those 
with the potential to accelerate economic 
inclusion of women, indigenous populations, 
youth or migrants
Baseline(2021): 5
Target (2026): 80
Source: UNDP, annually
3.2.3. Millions of dollars of integrated
financing from public and private sources 
Germany
United Stated
Canada 
United Kingdommobilized towards strengthening sustainable 
value chains. (IRRF E.3.1)
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2026):58M
Source: UNDP, annually
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2050, National Accord. Sustainable Development Goals:5, 10, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 4. By 2026, people, especially those in greater situations of vulnerability and discrimination such as girls and boys, 
adolescents, youth and women, exercise their rights equally as a result of the strengthening of effective governance, social cohesion, access to justice and the fight against gender inequality and all forms 
of discrimination and violence based on gender, through an integrated approach
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. – Structural transformation
Proportion of ever-partnered women and 
girls aged 15 years and older subjected 
to physical, sexual or psychological 
violence by a current or former intimate 
partner in the previous 12 months, by 
form of violence and by age
Baseline (2020):
Physical violence: 8.3%, 
Sexual violence: 2%
Psychological violence: 34.5%
Target (2026):
Physical violence: 6.3%,
Sexual violence: 2%
Psychological violence: 37.7%
Proportion of the population over 18 
who, in the last five years, have felt 
mistreated or discriminated against
Baseline (2019): 12.6%
Target (2026): 3.6%
Level of trust in country institutions 
Baseline (2020):
- Office of Electoral Processes: 20.8%
- District Municipality: 14.8%
- National Elections Jury: 15.5%
- Provincial Municipality: 14%
- Office of the Comptroller General of 
the Republic: 14%
 - Judicial Branch: 11.9%
 - Public Ministry: 14.5%
 - Regional Government: 10.7%
Target (2026):
- Office of Electoral Processes: 27.1%
- District Municipality: 17.6%
- National Elections Jury: 18.7%
- Provincial Municipality: 20%
Demographic and Family Health 
Survey (ENDES), annually
National Household Survey 
(ENAHO), annually
ENAHO, annually
Output 4.1. National and decentralized 
institutions strengthen their capacities for 
efficient, effective, decentralized and 
people-centred public administration and 
public spending
4.1.1. Number of policies or instruments 
designed or implemented as part of the 
people-centred public administration 
modernization process or that promote 
decentralization (IRRF2.3.1)
Baseline (2021): Total 2, National 0, 
Subnational 2
Target (2026): Total 27, National 9, 
Subnational 18
Source: UNDP, PCM, annually
4.1.2. Number of policies or instruments 
designed or implemented to improve justice 
system services (IRRF6.3.3)
Baseline (2021): 14
Target (2026): 36
Source: UNDP, Judicial Power, annually
Output 4.2. Public, private and civil society 
stakeholders strengthen their capacities for 
open digital government innovation or 
dialogue mechanisms for vertical social 
cohesion and effective governance
4.2.1. Number of multi-stakeholder and multilevel policies or instruments designed or 
implemented that promote useful 
transparency, accountability, citizen oversight 
or digital government (IRRF 2.1.1)
Baseline (2021): 8
Target (2026): 18
PCM
MIMP
Ministry of Justice and Human Rights
MINCUL
Judicial Power
Public Ministry
MTC
UNFPA
UNICEF
UN-Women
Ministry of the Interior
MINEM
Electoral bodies
Civil society organizations
IOM
UNHCR
ILO
Platform for Refugees and Migrants
 Korean International Cooperation Agency
 Spain
Regular
$485
Other
$26,561- Office of the Comptroller General of 
the Republic: 22.5% - Judicial Branch: 14.6% - Public Ministry: 21.6% - Regional Government: 16.4%
Perception of the country's main 
problems: Corruption
Baseline (2019): 62.1%
Target (2026):49.7%
ENAHO, annually
Source: UNDP, PCM, annually
4.2.2. Number of instruments designed or 
implemented to promote inclusive and 
democratic political or social dialogue and 
consensus building processes (IRRF3.2.2)
Baseline (2021): 11
Target (2026): 54
Source: UNDP, National Accord, annually
4.2.3. Number of policies or instruments 
designed or implemented to promote citizen 
security
Baseline (2021):0
Target (2026):7
Source: UNDP, Ministry of the Interior, 
annually
Output 4.3. Civil society, with emphasis on 
populations in situations of vulnerability, 
strengthens its capacities to promote 
horizontal, inclusive and active citizenship, 
social cohesion and the full exercise of 
rights without discrimination
4.3.1. Number of public, private and civil 
society stakeholders with instruments 
designed or implemented to tackle 
discrimination, with emphasis on women, 
indigenous populations, youth and migrants 
(IRRF2.2.2; 3.4.1; 6.2.1)
Baseline (2021): Total 40, Focused on: 
Women 40, Indigenous 1, Migrants 10
Target (2026): Total 129, Focused on: 
Women 129, Indigenous 9, Migrants 20
Source: UNDP, annually
4.3.2. Number of political or social 
organizations or platforms strengthened to 
represent or provide services to populations in 
situations of vulnerability, with emphasis on 
women (IRRF 2.4.5)
Baseline (2021): Total 65, Focused on: 
Women 36, Youth 21, Migrants 10, 
Indigenous 10
Target (2026): Total 174, Focused on: 
Women 61, Youth 37, Migrants 20, 
Indigenous 43
Source: UNDP, annually