File Name: PER-NREP-2014-EN
Year: 2014
Country Name: Peru
Country Code: PER
Category: NREP
Document Title: PERU RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 2014
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2014
Start Year: 2015
End Year: 2050
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

PERU
RENEWABLES READINESS 
ASSESSMENT 2014Unless otherwise indicated, the material in this publication may be used freely, shared or reprinted, so long as 
IRENA is acknowledged as the source.
About IRENA
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that supports 
countries in their transition to a sustainable energy future, and serves as the principal platform for 
international cooperation, a centre of excellence, and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial 
knowledge on renewable energy. IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of 
renewable energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy in the pursuit of 
sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low carbon economic growth and prosperity.
Authors: Gauri Singh (IRENA), Alejandro Tapia (IRENA) and Sandra Chavez (IRENA)
About RRA
A Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) is a holistic evaluation of a country’s conditions and identifies 
the actions needed to overcome barriers to renewable energy deployment. This is a country-led process, 
with IRENA primarily providing technical support and expertise to facilitate consultations among different 
national stakeholders. While the RRA helps to shape appropriate policy and regulatory choices, each country 
determines which renewable energy sources and technologies are relevant and consistent with national 
priorities. The RRA is a dynamic process that can be adapted to each country’s circumstances and needs. 
Experience in a growing range of countries and regions, meanwhile, has allowed IRENA to continue refining the 
basic RRA methodology. In June 2013, IRENA published a guide for countries seeking to conduct the process 
in order to accelerate their renewable energy deployment.
For more information visit www.irena.org/rra or e-mail rra@irena.org
Acknowledgements
IRENA prepared this report in close collaboration with Manuel Luque (Consultant, Peru) and Luiz Barroso (PSR, 
Brazil). IRENA wishes to thank the following experts for their insights and constructive guidance during the peer 
review process: Daniel Bouille (Fundación Bariloche, Argentina), Hugo Lucas (ex-IRENA), Jaime Mendoza 
(OSINERGMIN, Peru), Jose Luis Rodriguez (Ministry of Energy and Mines, Peru), Gabriel Salazar (Latin American 
Energy Organization – OLADE, Ecuador) and Ricardo Vasquez (Ministry of Energy and Mines, Peru).
For further information or to provide feedback, please contact: 
MAtapia@irena.org or secretariat@irena.org
Disclaimer
While this publication promotes the adoption and use of renewable energy, IRENA does not endorse any 
particular project, product or service provider.
The designations employed and the presentation of materials herein do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the International Renewable Energy Agency concerning the legal status of any 
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.PERU
RENEWABLES 
READINESS 
ASSESSMENTFOREWORD
Over the past decade, Peru has experienced fast and sustained economic 
growth, which is expected to continue in the coming years. Yet this has 
produced an equally unprecedented increase in our energy requirements, 
with electricity demand growing at eight percent per year over the past 
few years. Energy, therefore, is a key element to sustain our economic 
growth. More than ever, we need safe and continuous supply, while also 
taking into consideration the social and environmental dimensions.
Over the past years, Peru has developed a legal and regulatory framework that promotes competition and investment in the sector, and more 
recently we have successfully developed mechanisms to promote the 
use of our vast renewable energy resources. Peru has been a pioneer 
of renewable energy auctions, and through this we have become one 
of the most important destinations for clean-energy investment in the 
region.
The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) we have undertaken has 
been instrumental in identifying further actions that need to be taken to 
fine tune the renewable energy auction process in Peru, particularly in 
relation to identifying ways to enhance our preparatory activities as well 
as further improve the design of the auction process itself. The RRA has 
also provided insight on how to better complement rural electrification, 
and on how to improve our on-going efforts to foster the development 
of biofuel in the country. As a strong supporter of IRENA’s mission, Peru volunteered to host the 
first RRA in Latin America. This has been a very stimulating process, 
and the RRA methodology has proven to be an effective tool to identify 
the barriers to further deployment of renewable energy technologies. 
We hope that the experiences we gained in this process can also be 
of benefit during future applications of the RRA methodology in other 
countries in the Latin America region.
Special thanks are due to all national and international organisations 
and stakeholders in Peru that took part in RRA preparatory activities 
and discussions. In particular, we are grateful to IRENA for mobilising 
this activity and producing the Peru RRA Report. 
Jorge Merino Tafur
Minister of Energy and Mines
Republic of PeruFOREWORD
Latin American countries are seeking, increasingly, to meet their fastgrowing energy needs through plentiful indigenous resources. But with 
the precise challenges and opportunities varying from country to country, the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) has set out 
to provide technical support adapted to each particular context. The 
Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) process involves a holistic 
evaluation of a country’s conditions and identifies the actions needed to 
overcome barriers to renewable energy deployment. This is a country-led 
process, with IRENA primarily providing technical support and expertise 
to facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders. 
Since 2011, nearly 20 countries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America 
and the Caribbean, Asia and the Pacific Islands have undertaken the RRA 
process, which generates knowledge of good practices and supports 
international cooperation to enable the accelerated deployment of 
renewable technologies. Peru, in keeping with its strong and consistent 
support of IRENA’s mission, is one of these pioneering countries and the 
first to conduct such consultations in Latin America. The RRA in Peru 
also marks an important milestone as the first such assessment to focus 
on a middle-income economy with a comparatively well-developed 
renewable energy sector.As the RRA highlights, Peru has taken ground-breaking steps in the 
development of renewable energy auctions and continues to strive to 
improve the process. Through greater coordination between government bodies and the private sector, moreover, infrastructure projects 
can be aligned with social and economic goals, while renewables can be 
promoted as an aspect of ongoing rural electrification.
IRENA would like to thank Minister Merino and his team for their patience 
and generosity in hosting this study. Their engagement and input have 
exceeded expectations, and we are grateful for their important contributions, which have resulted in valuable insights for further RRAs in the 
2014-2015 period. Additionally, this report will feed into other IRENA 
regional work, including the initiative to promote geothermal energy 
development in the countries of the Andes region.
We sincerely hope that the outcomes of these RRA consultations will 
help Peru to fulfil its aim to scale up renewable energy. IRENA stands 
ready to provide continuing support to Peru in implementing the actions 
identified.
Adnan Z. Amin
Director General, IRENA CONTENTS
Abbreviations VIII
List of Figures X
List of Tables X
List of Boxes X
Executive Summary XI
I. INTRODUCTION 1
 Background 1
 Energy sector 6
 Electricity sector 7
 Renewable energy 10
II. RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 15
III. POLICY AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 17
 Structural reform of the electricity sector 17
 Institutional set-up 17
 Regional and local institutions 18
 Power market structure 19
 Renewable energy policy 19
IV. RENEWABLE ENERGY POWER IN THE GRID 23
 Introduction 23
 Auctions 23
 Hybrid generation auctions 33
 Local Content Requirements 36
 International experience of technology-neutral auctions 37
 Integration of renewable energy into the grid 39
 Regional governments 43V. RURAL ELECTRIFICATION 45
 National Rural Electrification Plan 45
 Renewables for development 48
 Technical standards and quality assurance 49
VI. BIOENERGY 53
 Motivations for biofuel development 53
 Biofuel regulatory framework 53
 Biofuel stakeholders 54
 Biofuel business models 56
 Challenges to biofuel development 56
VII. RECOMMENDATIONS 61
VIII. REFERENCES 67
ANNEXES 72ABBREVIATIONS
ADINELSA Electrical Infrastructure Administration Company 
 (Empresa de Administración de Infraestructura Eléctrica S.A.)
BCRP Central Reserve Bank of Peru 
 (Banco Central de Reserva del Perú)
COES Committee for the Economic Operation of the Electric System 
 (Comité de Operación Económica del Sistema)
COFIDE Financial Development Corporation 
 (Corporación Financiera de Desarrollo)
DGE Directorate-General for Electricity 
 (Dirección General de Electricidad)
DGER Directorate-General for Rural Electrifi cation 
 (Dirección General de Electrifi cación Rural)
DGH Directorate-General for Hydrocarbons 
 (Dirección General de Hidrocarburos)
EU European Union 
FONER Rural Electrifi cation Improvement Project 
 (Proyecto de Mejoramiento de Electrifi cación Rural mediante 
 Fondos Concursables)
GART Offi ce for Tariff Regulation
 (Gerencia Adjunta de Regulación Tarifaria)
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GW Gigawatt
GWh Gigawatt-hour
IDB Inter-American Development Bank 
 (Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo)
IPP Independent Power Producer
IFC International Finance Corporation
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency
KfW Reconstruction Credit Institute 
 (Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau)
kV Kilovolt
kW Kilowatt
kWh Kilowatt-hours
MINAG Ministry of Agriculture of Peru 
 (Ministerio de Agricultura del Perú)
MINEM Ministry of Energy and Mines of Peru 
 (Ministerio de Energía y Minas del Perú)MW Megawatts
OSINERGMIN Supervisory Organisation for Investment in Energy and Mines 
 (Organismo Supervisor de la Inversión en Energía y Minería)
ProInversión Peruvian Investment Promotion Agency 
 (Agencia de Promoción de la Inversión Privada)
PPA Power Purchase Agreement
PUE Productive Use of Energy
PV Photovoltaic
RRA Renewables Readiness Assessment
SEIN National Interconnected Electric Grid
 (Sistema Eléctrico Interconectado Nacional)LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Map of the Americas, showing the geographic location of Peru 2
Figure 2 Peru: Gross domestic product, 2000-2011 (USD billion) 3
Figure 3 Peru: Total primary energy supply by fuel 5
Figure 4 Peru: Total fi nal energy consumption by sector 6
Figure 5 Existing power generation capacity by source 7
Figure 6 Electricity production by technology, 2012 8
Figure 7 Growth of power capacity and maximum demand 9
Figure 8 Map of Peru’s solar resources from the Global Renewable Energy Atlas 11
Figure 9 Map of Peru’s wind resources from the Global Renewable Energy Atlas 12
Figure 10 Electricity market in Peru 20
Figure 11 Flow chart - renewable energy auction design 24
Figure 12 Evaluation process for a wind project 25
Figure 13 Shared connections to the high voltage grid 42
Figure 14 Trends in annual domestic demand for liquid fuels in 2010 54
Figure 15 Ethanol production chain in Peru 55
Figure 16 Biodiesel production chain in Peru 57
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 Renewable energy potential 2012-2020 10
Table 2 Results of Peru’s fi rst renewable energy auction 27
Table 3 Results of Peru’s second renewable energy auction 28
Table 4 Diesel blending under the Regulation for Biofuel Commercialisation 55
Table 5 Average biofuel prices, 2012 57
Table 6 Biofuels production, import and export volumes – 2012 58
LIST OF BOXES
Box 1 Growth sectors 3
Box 2 Fiscal incentives for renewable energy 20
Box 3 Technical and fi nancial requirements 24 
Box 4 Payment process 26
Box 5 Financing renewable energy projects in Peru 51 
Box 6 Key aspects of Brazil’s biofuels programmes and lessons for Peru 59Executive Summary
The Republic of Peru is the third largest country in South America after Brazil and 
Argentina, with a great diversity of ecosystems, along with mineral and energy 
resources. With a population of 30.5 million and gross domestic product growing at 
a rate in excess of 6% per year over the past decade, Peru has been one of the more 
rapidly developing countries in the region. The Peruvian economy has expanded from 
USD 53 billion in 2000 to USD 197 billion in 2012, making it the 48th largest economy in the world. This economic expansion is expected to continue, mainly driven 
by investments in the mining and infrastructure sectors, as well as, increasingly by 
domestic consumption.
Oil and gas play a significant role in the overall energy matrix of Peru, accounting 
for over 70% of total primary energy supply. Hydro and thermoelectric power plants 
generate 98% of the electricity. Total electricity generation capacity in 2010 was in 
the range of 7 Gigawatts (GW). Most power plants are located in the centre of Peru, 
where historically most of the electricity demand was concentrated. However, in 
recent years, electricity demand has been growing quite rapidly in the north and 
south of the country, as these two regions are increasingly becoming the new poles 
of development. New generation and transmission capacity is being built to cover 
the increasing regional electricity demand. Transmission lines could be also further 
developed to integrate Peru with neighbouring countries, as there is potential for 
regional electricity trade. Peru has an electrical interconnector with Ecuador, and in 
the future could also extend an interconnection to Brazil.
High rates of economic growth have led to a substantial increase in energy demand, 
creating new opportunities to invest in energy infrastructure. The Ministry of Energy 
and Mines (MINEM) has calculated that electricity demand will grow at an average 
annual rate of 8.8% per year up to the year 2017. In order to keep up with these 
increasing energy needs, Peru has to step up investment in electricity generation be 
more than USD 5 billion by 2016. These investments are expected to bring an additional capacity of 4 300 MW, including 1 400 MW of hydro and 600 MW non-hydro 
renewables. 
Peru has vast renewable energy resources that remain largely unexploited. There are 
abundant solar, biomass, wind and geothermal resources, in addition to the substantial hydropower potential. Thus, in a context of increasing electricity demand, renewable energy could play a significant role, further securing the necessary energy to 
fuel the economic expansion while preserving the environment.Peru has started to promote investment in 
renewable energy, encouraged by a new 
economic development vision integrating 
social inclusion and environmental care. 
The decree for the promotion of investment in renewable energy generation 
(Legislative Decree No. 1002) sets a target 
of up to 5% of the national energy demand 
for 2008-2013 to be covered by renewable 
energy generation, without the inclusion of 
hydropower plants. This process has been 
facilitated by a well-defined legal structure 
based on the Electricity Concessions Law, 
which sets the legal framework for activities in the electricity sector, unbundling the 
generation, transmission and distribution 
utilities and enabling participation by the 
private sector.
Peru’s conditions for investment in the 
electricity sector and efforts to promote 
renewable energy technologies have been 
recognised in various publications, including Climate Scope, the annual report by 
the Inter-American Development Bank 
(IDB) and Bloomberg New Energy Finance 
(BNEF) that assesses investment climate 
for clean energy development. In the latest 
edition of this report, Peru was ranked 
fourth out of 26 countries in the Latin 
American and Caribbean Region.
Rapid and sustained economic development has resulted in a decrease in poverty. 
However poverty and lack of access to basic 
services such as electricity remain a challenge, particularly in rural Peru. Renewable 
energy technologies, with their modular 
characteristics, could have an important 
role in reaching isolated communities and 
providing basic services. The 2013-2022 
National Rural Electrification Plan produced 
by MINEM, in concordance with an Energy 
Universal Access Plan, establishes a policy 
for the sector with the aim is to raise the 
rural electrification rate from 87% to 95% 
by 2016. A tender for 5 00 000 solar photovoltaic systems for rural electrification was 
announced in 2013. Peru’s Renewables 
Readiness Assessment (RRA), conducted 
in cooperation with the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), has 
produced a holistic evaluation of the country’s conditions, and identifies the actions 
needed to overcome barriers to renewable 
energy deployment.
Peru has been one of the pioneers in 
the region in implementing renewable 
energy auctions, which have helped to 
promote biomass, wind, solar and small 
hydropower plants. The first two renewable energy auctions awarded almost 
1 400 gigawatt-hour (GWh)/year of renewable power from solar, wind and biomass 
and 281 MW from small hydro, attracting 
total investments of almost USD 1.5 billion. 
The results of a third auction process were 
recently announced; this resulted in the 
award of 16 hydropower projects with a 
total energy supply of 1 278 GWh/year. 
The first two auction processes successfully demonstrated that an auction-based 
mechanism could be utilised for transparent and efficient procurement of renewable energy, securing Peru’s participation 
in the global renewable energy market and 
contracting significant quantities of renewable electricity at competitive prices. Peru 
has taken significant steps in the development of renewable energy auctions and 
is currently one of the leading countries 
that have developed and held successful 
auctions. However, there are opportunities 
to further enhance planning and preparatory activities, as well as, the design of the 
auction process.To make Power Purchase Agreements 
(PPA) more bankable, more flexible terms 
of energy delivery could be considered, 
taking into account renewable energy 
generation characterised by intermittent or 
seasonal production. PPA contracts could 
be based on quotas for the supply of power 
based on the average of three years, while 
capacity building to equip local banks for 
technology risk assessment could help to 
ease renewable energy financing.
It might also be important to consider 
the centralisation of auctions, as large 
power rounds are likely to foster increased 
competition and international interest. 
Large power rounds could potentially lower 
tariffs and have a positive impact on local 
manufacturing. However, given the considerable amount of investment that would 
be required, such auctions could attract 
limited participation by domestic companies. In this context, it might be important 
to evaluate the trade-off between conducting one large auction round or spread this 
contracting over different auctions carried 
out at different times. 
Another issue to consider is the inclusion 
of additional scoring criteria, incorporating local-content requirements, allowing 
reinvestment and job creation by promoting a market for local manufacturing of 
equipment and components for renewable 
electricity generation. Based on international experiences, one option for future 
auctions could be to consider a technology-neutral approach, where independent 
power producers (IPPs) using different 
renewable energy technologies are eligible 
to participate in the same auction process. 
When adopting a technology-neutral 
approach, it is necessary to evaluate the 
trade-off between policy objectives (diversification of the energy mix, promotion of 
selected technologies) and how to enhance 
competition.
Combining different types of renewable 
resources in hybridisation strategies can 
achieve more effective management of 
resource and output variability. Peru could 
consider a portfolio of non-dispatchable 
resources with complementary production patterns: wind and small hydro; wind 
and solar; wind and biomass; biomass and 
small hydro. 
In terms of rural electrification, Peru has 
made remarkable efforts to improve its 
electrification rate. The national electrification rate has increased from 55% in 
1993 to 87.2% in 2012. The National Rural 
Electrification Plan 2013-2022 provides 
strategic direction to provide access to 
electricity to 6.2 million people in the next 
10 years. Peru is undertaking efforts to 
increase access to energy via auctions for 
solar photovoltaic systems, grid extension, 
mini-grids with hydro, solar and wind.
A final part of this report includes an evaluation of the biofuels situation in Peru. Given 
that domestic demand for liquid fuels has 
been steadily growing, particularly as a 
result of the increased pressure for public 
transport, biofuels could represent a renewable energy alternative to fossil fuels in the 
transport sector. 
The Regulation for Biofuel Commercialisation sets mandatory requirements for 
the blending percentages of ethanol (7.8%) 
with gasoline, and biodiesel (5%) with 
diesel (Diesel B5). To satisfy the increasing 
demand for biofuels, refining companies 
procured their supplies from national and 
international markets, price and availability 
of product being important parameters in 
the decision-making process.KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
As a result of the Renewables Readiness 
Assessment, the following recommendations have been made to foster the deployment and sustainable use of renewable 
energy resources in the country:
a) For the design of renewable energy 
auctions, it is recommended to undertake more effective long-term planning 
with clear long-term policy goals. This 
will provide a strong signal of intent, 
attract global IPPs and encourage 
equipment manufacturers to develop 
the local industrial base in Peru.
b) Fine tune the design of the renewable 
energy auction process to secure the 
participation of experienced developers and also mitigate the risk of aggressive bidding.
c) Consider the size of auction rounds, 
local-content requirements, hybrid 
systems and technology neutral 
auctions to reduce the administrative 
costs and maximise the benefits of the 
auction process.
d) In order to increase the intake of renewables into the grid, it is recommended 
to identify areas with high potential, 
and to conduct impact studies on the 
adoption of high shares of renewables 
in those part of the grid.
e) In the case of rural renewable energy, 
it is recommended to achieve greater 
coordination between actors, promote 
productive uses of energy throughout the system and conduct capacitybuilding activities on the ground.
f) For biofuels, it is recommended to 
provide an enabling policy framework, 
which facilitates setting up business 
models that promote local market 
development for biofuels.
g) Undertake periodic updates of solar 
and wind resource assessments. This 
information would facilitate decisionmaking and encourage accelerated 
deployment of renewable energy in 
Peru.I. INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
The Republic of Peru is on the western coast of South America. It 
borders Ecuador and Colombia to the North, Brazil to the East, Bolivia 
to the South-East, Chile to the South and the Pacific Ocean to the West 
(figure 1). Peru has an arid coast, mountainous highlands and tropical 
forest. It is the third largest country in South America after Brazil and 
Argentina, and extends over 1.28 million square kilometres (km2) with a 
large diversity of ecosystems, mineral and energy resources.
Peru has a population of almost 30.5 million, mostly concentrated in the 
capital city, Lima (Instituto Nacional de Estadística Informática, (INEI), 
2013). With a Gross National Income per capita of USD 5 580 in 2012, 
Peru has been at the forefront of economic development in the region 
(World Bank, 2012). It has consistently high gross domestic product 
(GDP) growth rates (6.3% in 2012). Over the last decade, the Peruvian 
economy has expanded from USD 53 billion in 2 000 to USD 197 billion 
in 2012, making it the 48th largest economy in the world (World Bank, 
2012). According to the Global Economics Ranking, Peru will have moved 
up to become 26th largest economy by 2050 (CNN, 2012).
Despite uncertainty in the international markets in 2013-2014, Peru is 
expected to maintain its position as one of the faster growing economies in the region and to grow at sustainable rates of 5.7-6.4% (Sociedad 
Agente de Bolsa, (SAB), 2013). This will be driven by an increasing 
domestic consumption and public and private investment, particularly in 
the construction and mining sectors.
Peru offers many investment opportunities and options. The mining, 
finance, communication, industry and energy sectors are the five main 
targets of foreign direct investment. They represented 87.2% of the 
stock in December 2011 according to the Peruvian Investment Promotion 
Agency (ProInversión), 2012. Box 1 gives an overview of high growth 
sectors.
Market-friendly policies with sound fiscal management and a commitment to macroeconomic stability have contributed to sustained 
economic growth. National statistics show that in 2011, the non-financial 
public sector boasted an economic surplus of 1.9% of GDP. Meanwhile, 
inflation is estimated to be steady at 2% in 2013-2014 (Banco Central de 
Reserva del Peru, (BCRP), 2013). Peru is also well positioned in the world 
market, since it has signed free trade agreements with major economies. Figure 1
Map of the Americas, 
showing the geographic 
location of PeruSource: Central Reserve Bank of Peru (BCRP)
Figure 2
Peru: Gross domestic product, 2000-2001 (USD billion)
Box 1
Growth sectors
Mining: Peru is consistently ranked as the top producer of gold, silver, zinc, lead and tin and 
is the second highest producer of copper in the region. Over the last decade, this sector has 
expanded substantially, and this has been one of the drivers of energy demand.
Agriculture: new irrigation and agricultural projects will double the 90 000 hectares 
currently farmed for the export of agricultural products.
Fishing: the cold Humboldt Current means Peru is home to one of the world’s greatest 
fi sheries. There is a trend towards product diversifi cation.
Natural gas: in 2011, natural gas production reached 11.4 billion cubic meters. Some areas 
with good oil and gas potential have not been explored yet (26.6 million hectares).
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) services: there are ICT Enterprise 
Solution centres in 15 574 locations, creating 29 665 direct jobs. Exports have tripled in fi ve 
years (Cámara del Pacifi co, 2012). GDP (USD billion)These include the United States, Canada, 
China and South Korea, as well as regional 
markets like the European Union (EU), AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation, and Andean 
Community of Nations. This allows Peru to 
increase its GDP growth through exports.
Global markets have recognised the 
economic achievements of Peru and its 
economic outlook. In 2013, Standard & 
Poor’s upgraded Peru to the category 
BBB+, due to the country’s improved 
capacity to register steady growth, and 
reduced vulnerability to external shocks 
(El Comercio, 2013a). 
In terms of the business environment, the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
Doing Business Report 2013 ranked Peru 
second in Latin America and 42nd worldwide out of 189 economies (IFC, 2013). 
The ranking aims to provide an objective 
measurement of business regulations and 
their enforcement, based on a number of 
different parameters.1
 According to the 
latest report, Peru has maintained its position as a good place for doing business 
with particularly high ratings for the investor protection parameter, for which the 
country was ranked 13th globally. 
ProInversión indicates that several 
economic groups from all regions of the 
world have operations in Peru. The main 
capital contribution sources are the United 
States, Spain and the United Kingdom. In 
2012, there was an increase of nearly 24% in 
private investment compared to the previous year, amounting to USD 42.8 billion 
(ProInversion, 2013). Investment flows are 
expected to continue increasing in the 
coming years in various sectors including 
mining, communications, energy, finance 
and manufacturing. Key sectors within the 
manufacturing industry include metalworking, construction materials and textiles.
High economic growth rates in Peru have 
led to a substantial rise in energy demand, 
creating new opportunities to invest in 
energy infrastructure. It is expected that the 
growth in electricity demand will increase 
fourfold by 2030 from 4 500 megawatts 
(MW) in 2011. An average growth in Peru of 
13% is expected during the first five years 
according to the Ministry of Energy and 
Mines (MINEM) in 2012. Electricity demand 
is driven by industrial sectors, which represent 55% of total demand. Electricity 
demand from these sectors is expected 
to continue growing in the coming years, 
mainly driven by the expansion of mining. 
These rapid changes in the electricity 
market have provided an opportunity for 
Peru to further diversify its electricity mix 
to create a sustainable, cost-effective and 
environmentally sound generation matrix. 
Renewable energy could play a significant 
role in this process as there are vast solar, 
hydro, wind, biomass and geothermal 
resources that remain largely unexploited. 
In recent years, Peru has started to promote 
investment in renewable energy, encouraged by a new economic development 
vision integrating social inclusion and environmental care into all productive activities. 
The Law for the Promotion of Investment 
in Renewable Energy Generation2 grants 
competitive advantages to projects for 
renewables. 
Peru was placed fourth out of 26 countries 
evaluated in the region in Climate Scope 
1 According to the IFC, the parameters include: the process, time and costs of starting a business, construction 
permit application, electricity connection, property registration, credit approval, investor protection, tax payment, 
cross-border trading, contract enforcement and debt restructuring.
2 Ley de Promoción de la Inversión en Generación de Electricidad con el uso de Energías Renovables (Law for the 
Promotion of Investment in Electricity Generation using Renewable Energy) (Legislative Decree 1002).2013. This is jointly published by the InterAmerican Development Bank (IDB) and 
Bloomberg New Energy Finance (BNEF). It 
contains an index assessing the investment 
climate for clean energy development. 
The best score for Peru in Climatescope
2013, where it came second, was in the Clean 
Energy Investments and Climate Financing 
parameter. This report also indicates that 
cumulative clean energy investment in 2012 
amounted to USD 1.22 billion, equivalent to 
the same amount of investment made in 
2006-2011. This consisted mainly of 
wind, solar and small hydro projects 
(Climatescope, 2013). 
Sustainable rates of economic growth 
over the last decade have had a positive 
impact on poverty reduction. However, 
in 2011 extreme poverty was at 6.3%, and 
was particularly concentrated in rural Peru 
and more specifically the Sierra region 
(INEI, 2013). 
Studies have shown a strong correlation between poverty levels and access 
to basic services including electricity 
(ESMAP and the German Society for 
International Cooperation, (GIZ), 2013). The 
present administration is making significant efforts to raise access to electricity in 
rural areas under the umbrella of its social 
inclusion strategies. As a result of their 
modular characteristics, renewable energy 
technologies (especially solar, small hydro 
and biomass) could play an important role 
in satisfying energy requirements in rural 
Peru. 
Source: International Energy Agency (IEA)
Figure 3
Peru: Total primary energy supply by fuel The 2013-2022 National Rural 
Electrification Plan in concordance with an 
Energy Universal Access Plan, produced by 
MINEM, has established a sectoral policy. 
Its aim is to raise the rural electrification 
rate from 87% to 95% by 2016. This means 
an average annual increase of 4.1%. For 
this, MINEM has announced tenders for 
500 000 solar photovoltaic (PV) systems 
for rural and isolated areas. 
ENERGY SECTOR 
Over the last decade, the rapid expansion 
of the economy has led to an equally rapid 
and sustained increase in the use of most 
energy sources. Figure 3 shows the trends 
in Peru’s Total Primary Energy Supply 
(TPES) in 1990-2010.
In 20 years, Peru’s TPES doubled from 
408 petajoules (PJ) in 1990 to 805 PJ 
in 2010. Fossil fuels (oil, natural gas and 
coal) dominate the TPES, accounting 
for 75%. This was followed by bioenergy 
accounting for 15% and large hydro for 9%. 
Other forms of renewable energy (including solar and wind) accounted for 0.03% 
(IEA, 2013). By sector, total final energy 
consumption (TFEC) is dominated by the 
transport industry and residential sectors, 
transport being the fastest growing sector.
Source: International Energy Agency (IEA)
Final Sector Energy Consumption in 2011
Figure 4
Peru: Total fi nal energy consumption by sector TFEC (PJ)Peru’s renewable energy resources are vast 
and diverse. However, the rapid increase in 
the use of natural gas since the Camisea 
Gas Project began, has had an impact on 
renewable energy technology deployment 
(IFC, 2011). 
However, this trend could change, given 
the priority accorded to energy diversification and the positive economic results 
of clean energy initiatives. These showed 
significant reductions in the costs associated with the use of these technologies in 
power generation.
ELECTRICITY SECTOR
The Peruvian electricity market has 
matched the country’s economic growth 
and development. According to MINEM, 
the total installed generating capacity 
connected to the National Interconnected 
Figure 5
Existing power generation capacity by source
Source: MINEM, 2012aElectric Grid (SEIN) in 2013 consisted of 23 
hydropower plants with a total capacity of 
3 270 MW and 32 thermal power stations 
with a total capacity of 5 260 MW (MINEM, 
2014). Figure 5 shows a breakdown of the 
main generation plants. 
As a result of the renewable energy auction, 
four solar plants with a total capacity of 
80 MW (Panamericana Solar, Tacna Solar, 
Majes Solar and Solar Distribution) were 
operating by 2013 according to Peru’s 
Supervisory Organisation for Investment in 
Energy and Mines (OSINERGMIN).
The power plants connected to SEIN represent 87% of the Peruvian market. The 
remaining 13% is produced by self-generation companies. They are not included in 
the overall figure, but are part of the total 
installed generating capacity.
The high level of concentration of power 
generation capacity in the centre of the 
country is shown in figure 5. Demand 
has increased rapidly, but the expansion 
of grid infrastructure has in the past not 
matched the power demand requirements. 
This means that transmission is at present 
operating almost at maximum capacity, 
particularly in the country’s southern and 
northern corridors. This adds to the challenges of raising power generating capacity in these areas, which are expected to 
become the new poles of development. To 
relieve this situation, investments in grid 
infrastructure are now under way. 
For example, the 513 km high voltage LimaTrujillo transmission line was commissioned in November 2012. In addition, the 
Private Investment Promotion Agency 
(ProInversión) is working on 2 561 km of 
new power lines of 500 kilovolts (kV) and 
1 482 km of 220 kV, respectively. This will 
cost USD 1 029 million (Sector Electricidad 
(Electricity Sector), 2012) and will improve 
transmission capacity in Peru. Problems 
related to the condition and stability of the 
grid are explained in detail in this report.
W
Source: ProInversión, 2013
Figure 6
Electricity production by technology, 2012According to the Committee of Economic 
Cooperation of the Electric System 
(COES), electricity generation in 2012 
amounted to 37 321 gigawatt-hours (GWh), 
6% higher than in 2011 (35 217 GWh). It 
was dominated by hydropower plants, 
accounting for 55% of total production 
(ProInversión, 2013). These plants depend 
on water sources such as rivers and lagoons 
fed by precipitation and glaciers, whose 
availability is reduced between May and 
November (the dry season). 
The accelerated retreat of Andes glaciers 
due to climate change could in the coming 
years become a new factor potentially 
reducing the availability of water resources. 
It is likely to become a key consideration in 
electricity planning (ESMAP, 2011). Most of 
the remaining electricity (43%) was generated by thermal sources. Finally, renewable energy provided the remaining 1.83%. 
Figure 6 presents the electricity production 
by type (ProInversión, 2013).
In 2003-2010, national power demand 
increased from 2 965 MW to 5 575 MW 
at an average annual growth rate of 
6.5% (MINEM, 2014). The rapid electricity demand increase, is accompanied with 
increased power generation capacity. 
According to figure 7, maximum demand 
increased by 88% in ten years, whereas 
generation grew only by 94.5%. MINEM 
has forecasted an average annual demand 
growth of 8.8% in 2013-2017 (Nicho, 
2013). For 2017, peak demand is expected 
to amount to 8 058 MW. This means an 
additional 500 MW power plants will be 
required every year for the next four years 
(MINEM, 2012a).
It is expected that in the next three 
years, electricity generation capacity will 
increase by 2.25 GW (COES, 2012a). This 
capacity will come from large projects in 
the pipeline, such as the hydroelectric 
plants Cerro del Aguila (502 MW), Cheves 
(168 MW), Quitaracsa (112 MW), and 
Installed Capacity (GW)
Diesel Residue Carbon Biomass Natural Gas Hydro Maximum Demand 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
9.0
8.5
8,0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
Source: MINEM, 2014
Figure 7
Growth of power capacity and maximum demandthe combined cycle thermoelectric power 
plants Fenix (534 MW) and Santo Domingo 
de los Olleros (196 MW) (MINEM, 2012b). A 
full list of future generation projects can be 
found in Annex 8.
As a result of its geographical location, Peru 
also has the potential to become a regional 
energy hub in future. Peru has an electrical 
interconnector of 220 kV with Ecuador. In 
October 2012, an interconnection agreement was signed by these two countries 
that will enable the construction of a 
500 kV interconnector between them. In 
future, Peru could also extend its national 
grid by 500 kV through an interconnection 
with Brazil (COES, 2012b).
Investment in electricity generation in 
Peru will have been raised to USD 5 billion 
by 2016. Capital invested in 2013-2016 
is expected to generate 4 300 MW of 
additional capacity. This could mean that 
the electricity supply could keep up with 
national economic growth. According to 
MINEM, new installed electricity capacity 
will include 1 400 MW hydro, 1 400 MW 
thermal, 800 MW cold reserve and 600 MW 
non-hydro renewables by 2016 (MINEM, 
2012b).
Two cold reserve power plants were 
commissioned in the third quarter of 
2013, adding 800 MW (Bessombes, 2013). 
Natural gas from the Camisea field has 
driven the development of gas power 
plants to an average annual rate of 16%. 
However, the limited supply of natural gas 
for power generation at present prices, 
coupled with limited pipeline capacity to 
transport natural gas from Camisea, could 
affect power supply. Renewable energy 
can help meet growing electricity demand 
in Peru. The country has over 2 5 000 MW 
of non-hydro renewable energy potential. This can be exploited to complement 
natural gas and large hydro generation to 
meet the projected growth in electricity 
demand. 
RENEWABLE ENERGY 
Peru has significant renewable energy 
resources, although very little has been 
used. There are abundant solar resources 
in the South, as well as on the coast and 
in the highlands. There are significant 
wind resources along the central, northern 
and southern coastlines. Large areas with 
geothermal potential have been identified 
throughout the highlands, with significant 
volumes in the volcanic area of the South. 
Peru also has massive water availability, 
and this could be further exploited for 
power generation. 
In the last decade, policies have been 
introduced to promote and implement 
renewable energy projects. International 
commitments, the need for a more diverse 
energy matrix and awareness of the need 
to manage climate change have driven 
these initiatives.
In 2010, MINEM called the first renewable 
energy auction for electric power generation, with successful results. A total of 
887 GWh/year were awarded to two 
biomass projects, three wind projects 
and four solar PV projects. In addition, 
contracts were awarded to 17 hydroelecTable 1 
Renewable energy potential
2012-2020
Hydropower(i) 69 445 MW
Wind(ii) 22 450 MW
Geothermal(iii) 3 000 MW
Source: 
(i)Directorate-General for Rural Electrifi cation 
(DGER)-MINEM, World Bank and Global Environmental Facility, “Peru Hydro Atlas”
(ii) DGER-MINEM, Peru Wind Atlas
(iii) Battocletti & Associates, Inc. (1999) “Geothermal 
Resources in Perutric projects amounting to 180 MW. In 2011, 
a second auction took place with equally 
successful results: 472 GWh/year were 
awarded to biomass, solar and wind and
680 GWh/year to small hydro. In 
August 2013, MINEM announced a third 
auction for 320 GWh/year biomass and 
1 300 GWh/year hydropower generation 
(OSINERGMIN, 2010, 2012, 2013b), the 
results of the third auction are presented 
in this report. OSINERGMIN has already 
set the price for future geothermal 
power auctions, which will be called by 
MINEM over the next four years. The 
following section outlines the renewable energy resource potential in Peru. 
The renewable energy resource atlas can 
be found in annex 1.
SOLAR ENERGY 
The solar atlas of Peru, figure 8, 
shows that the region with the highest 
solar resource is along the southern 
coast in Arequipa, Moquegua and 
Tacna. The annual average daily 
irradiation is around 250 watts per square 
metre (W/m2). 
Map of Peru’s solar resources from the Global Renewable Energy Atlas
www.irena.org/globalatlasWIND ENERGY
The following wind atlas, in figure 9, shows 
the wind resource at 80 metres. It has been 
estimated that Peru has a wind power 
potential of 77 000 MW,3 of which over 
22 000 MW can be exploited (Mendoza, 
2012).
Despite this significant potential, present wind energy supply at interconnected 
system level is very limited. To date, only 
two demonstration wind turbines have 
been installed by the state, and this was in 
the 1980s and 1990s. Nevertheless, nearly 
1 000 GWh/year of wind power will be 
added over the next few years as part of 
the auction process in Peru.
The National Rural Electrification Plan
for 2013–2022 includes small off-grid 
wind projects. A total investment of 
USD 38 million4 will benefit 167 
communities by 2022. 
3 Excluding off shore areas 
4 Peruvian Sol (PEN); PEN 106.4 million. Exchange rate PEN/USD= 2.78 
Map of Peru’s wind resources from the Global Renewable Energy Atlas
www.irena.org/globalatlasGEOTHERMAL ENERGY
Peru forms part of the Pacific Ring of 
Fire, characterised by frequent tectonic 
movements. The geothermal atlas can 
be found in annex 1. It shows the location 
of six areas with geothermal potential 
(Vargas and Cruz, 2010). Most geothermal 
potential is concentrated in Cajamarca, 
Huaraz (Ancash and La Libertad), Churin 
(in Lima, Pasco and Huanuco) and the 
Central zone (in Huanuco, Huancavelica 
and Ayacucho). It is also concentrated in a 
chain of volcanoes in Ayacucho, Apurimac, 
Arequipa, Moquegua and Tacna and finally 
Puno and Cusco.
At the request of MINEM in 2011, the 
Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA) completed a master 
plan for the development of 
geothermal energy in Peru. This plan 
evaluated 61 potential geothermal fields 
in the six regions. It concluded there 
was a geothermal potential of around 
3 000 MW (Mendoza, 2011). The study 
found that 13 of these fields have substantial power, amounting to approximately 
800 MW. By defining the power and 
location of geothermal fields, the master 
plan provided a guide for future project 
implementation. MINEM received requests 
for further exploration of 40 fields. Access 
has been granted to 14 of these because 
they met the requirements.
HYDROPOWER
Hydropower potential has been estimated 
at 70 000 MW, mostly concentrated in the 
Cuenca del Atlántico (Mendoza, 2012). The 
hydro atlas can be found in annex 1. Small 
hydropower plants connected to SEIN 
generated almost 500 GWh/year in 2012 
(ProInversión, 2013). During the first two 
renewable energy auctions, small hydro 
projects (under 20 MW) were awarded for 
a total capacity of 282 MW (OSINERGMIN, 
2012).
BIOENERGY
Peru currently produces first generation liquid biofuels and potential biomass 
resources for the production of second 
generation biofuels. The suitable crops for 
ethanol production in Peru are sugar cane 
and sorghum. Although oil palm, white pine 
nut, jatropha, castor bean, soybean, peanut 
and sunflower all have potential as biodiesel feedstock (SNV- Research Institute of 
the Peruvian Amazon (IIAP), 2007). 
In 2011, the Food and Agriculture 
Organisation (FAO) published the ‘State 
of the Art and Bioenergy News in Peru’. 
This report indicates that the only oilseed 
produced at commercial scale is the African 
oil palm, which is produced in certain 
areas of the Amazon. The white pine nut 
and castor bean are adaptable to various 
climatic zones, so it is expected that their 
production will increase to commercial 
scale. 
A National Plan for the Promotion of Oil 
Palm was established, aiming to increase 
production to 50 000 hectares by 2011. 
This level of production has been achieved 
and the plan is being updated and 
extended to 2020. Of the 50 000 hectares now under cultivation, approximately 
20 000 are owned by corporations and the 
rest by small producers, who cultivate on 
average five hectares per family.
Peru has the potential to install 177 MW in 
conventional biomass power plants and 
51 MW in biogas plants (Mendoza, 
2012). This is based on 2009 values for 
agro-industrial and forestry residues for 
bioenergy for electricity production. The 
installed capacity at the moment is almost 
28 MW (Mendoza, 2011). 
Meanwhile, 160 GWh/year of biopower 
was awarded during the first two renewable energy auctions (OSINERGMIN 2010, 
2012).Rio Urubamba, an Amazon tributary, winding through the Sacred Valley, Peru. 
Photo: World Water ForumII. Renewables Readiness Assessment
The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) is a holistic evaluation 
of a country’s conditions and identifies the action needed to overcome 
barriers to renewable energy deployment. The RRA includes all renewable energy services, including on-grid and off-grid electricity, biofuels 
for transportation and other applications such as heating and cooling. However, it is up to each participating country to determine which 
renewable energy sources and technologies are relevant and consistent 
with national priorities. 
The RRA methodology means completing a set of templates designed to 
capture the key concerns relating to present policy, regulations, finance, 
operations and maintenance. The existing business models for the development of renewable energy have a major bearing on the assessment.
The RRA is led by the particular country being assessed, which also owns 
the report emerging from the assessment. This sets the RRA apart from 
other assessment processes led by international organisations. IRENA 
offers its support during the RRA, but it is the action and insight evolving through a country-owned process that provides the key to rapid 
deployment. An RRA also facilitates a coordinated approach and priority 
setting. This can inform future bilateral and multilateral discussions with 
international and regional agencies, financial institutions and the private 
sector concerning the implementation of initiatives emerging from the 
RRA. 
With the support of IRENA, individual countries have access to a global 
network, giving them the capacity to follow up on initiatives and exchange 
experiences. Peru held the first RRA in Latin America and the first in a 
middle-income emerging economy. The process started with a literature 
review of research in the energy sector and successive discussions that 
were held with MINEM-Directorate General of Electricity in March and 
May 2012. This allowed the RRA director and programme manager at 
MINEM to identify key stakeholders, select service-resource pairs (e.g.,
electricity/solar) of relevance to Peru and match them to groups of 
stakeholders. The stakeholders were chosen from key 
government ministries, the private sector, 
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) 
and academia. A comprehensive outline of 
these stakeholders is provided in annex 2. 
The Peru RRA workshop and assessment 
took place on 16-17 July 2012. In this twoday workshop, stakeholders were brought 
together to discuss the status of the renewable energy sector. 
It is of particular importance to highlight and thank the following organisations for sharing their perspectives and 
insights during this workshop: MINEM, 
Ministry of Environment, Ministry of 
Agriculture, the Provincial Government 
of Puno, the Provincial Government of 
Arequipa, OSINERGMIN-Office for Tariff 
Regulation (GART), Financial Development 
Corporation (COFIDE), COES, Electrical 
Infrastructure Administration Company 
(ADINELSA), Financial Development 
Corporation (COFIDE), the Peruvian 
Renewable Energy Association, the 
National University of Engineering (UNI), 
Japan International Cooperation Agency 
(JICA), Development Bank of Latin 
America (CAF) and Scotiabank among 
others. Templates on the main barriers to 
renewables deployment in Peru summarising the workshop discussions can be found 
in annex 3. Further working party meetings 
and a technical visit to MINEM, the regulator OSINERGMIN and discussions with 
the private sector were conducted in the 
second semester of 2012 and first semester 
of 2013.
The RRA methodology has proved to be a 
significant tool that countries with emerging 
markets should use to assess requirements 
for deploying renewable energy. The RRA 
in Peru has yielded a number of outcomes, 
summarised in annex 5. It has provided 
a clear understanding of the renewable 
energy environment and allowed a range 
of stakeholders to get involved, become 
sensitised and to take ownership of renewable energy issues and concerns. It has also 
generated a range of necessary practical 
steps – not least the validation of rational 
and simple process and methodology. 
Transmission tower
Photo Courtesy: ShutterstockIII. Policy and regulatory framework
STRUCTURAL REFORM OF THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR
The electricity sector in Peru has been shaped by public sector investment and the active participation of the private sector. In the early 
1990s, Peru’s government issued a series of laws to promote private 
investment, highlighting the electricity sector as of national interest. The 
reform of the electricity sector started in 1992 with the promulgation of 
the Electricity Concessions Law,5 which sets the legal framework for the 
activities in the electricity sector. The general objective of this law is to 
promote a pricing system for greater economic efficiency by setting up 
a tariff for end-users. The tariff takes optimal usage of available energy 
resources into account. Generation, transmission and distribution utilities were unbundled as a result of this law. It also engaged the private 
sector in these commercial activities (OSINERGMIN, 2009). 
In 2006, the Law for Efficient Generation Development6 came into force 
to complement the Electricity Concessions Law. The Law for Efficient 
Generation Development aims to guarantee efficient electricity generation, reducing the vulnerability of the Peruvian electrical system to price 
volatility and long blackout periods. It also provides the assurance of 
a competitive electrical tariff to consumers. In addition, it establishes 
two new different types of transmission systems, one for supplementary transmission and one for guaranteed transmission (OSINERGMIN, 
2006).
INSTITUTIONAL SET-UP
Peru’s electricity market comprises a variety of stakeholders from the 
public and private sector. National and regional public entities interact to 
develop the necessary legal and regulatory framework for creating the 
right conditions for attracting private investment. MINEM is the cornerstone of the institutional framework for renewable energy in Peru. The 
electricity market framework consists of 57 public and private companies engaged in generation, transmission and distribution and a regulatory body, OSINERGMIN. In contrast to other countries in the region, it 
also includes a private entity that manages the national grid, COES. Of 
the 57 companies, almost half are engaged in generation, 10% in transmission and 40% in distribution (MINEM, 2012a). 
5 Ley de Concesiones Eléctricas (LCE) Law Nº 25844. D.S. 009-93-EM.
6 Law Nº 28832NATIONAL ENTITIES
As the policy definition body, MINEM7 
develops regulations and standards in the 
energy and mining sectors, including those 
related to renewable energy. The policy 
and regulatory guidelines for conducting 
auctions for renewable electricity generation are set by MINEM. The key constituent 
divisions within MINEM are as follows: 
Directorate-General for Electricity (DGE):8
Grants the rights to carry out electricityrelated activities. This includes the promotion of power projects, governance of 
central government policies on electricity 
subsector development, and proposals for 
Peruvian electricity standards. 
Directorate-General for Rural Electrification 
(DGER):9 Plans and promotes rural electrification activities in coordination with 
regional and local governments, as well as 
specialised private and public entities. 
Directorate-General for Hydrocarbons 
(DGH) :10 Provides authorisation for 
marketing biofuels.
Directorate-General for Energy-Related 
Environmental Affairs (DGAAE):11 Evaluates 
and approves environmental studies of 
energy projects.
Supervisory Agency for Energy and Mining 
Investment (OSINERGMIN):12 As the regulatory body, OSINERGMIN supervises and 
regulates activities in the energy and mining 
sectors, including the renewable energy 
market. The Office for Tariff Regulation 
(GART)13 part of OSINERGMIN, calculates 
and proposes electricity tariffs. These need 
to be in compliance with existing regulations and to ensure the efficient operation 
of electricity utilities at the lowest cost to 
the consumer. 
The Electrical Infrastructure Administration 
Enterprise (ADINELSA):14 As a coordination 
agency, ADINELSA provides rural electrification services, manages electricity infrastructure (i.e., wind power facilities) and 
assists local and regional governments in 
the electrification of remote communities.
The Committee for the Economic Operation 
of the Electric System (COES):15 COES 
coordinates the operation of the national 
grid at minimum cost in the short, medium 
and long term. In addition, COES plans the 
development of SEIN transmission lines 
and manages the short-term market. COES 
is a technical entity comprising the owners 
of generation plants and transmission 
systems, whose installations are interconnected. The objective is to coordinate their 
operations at least cost, guaranteeing reliability of electrical energy supply and best 
use of energy resources.
REGIONAL AND LOCAL INSTITUTIONS
According to the Law for the Promotion 
of Investment in Renewable Energy 
Generation, MINEM is the national authority responsible for promoting projects that 
use renewable energy resources. 
Nevertheless, regional governments can 
also promote the use of renewable energy 
resources within their territory. Regional 
governments are responsible for formulating, implementing, evaluating, monitoring 
and managing energy plans and policies 
within their own boundaries, in line with 
national policies and sector plans. 
7 Ministerio de Energía y Minas (MINEM)
8 Dirección General de Electricidad.
9 Dirección General de Electrifi cación Rural.
10 Dirección General de Hidrocarburos
11 Dirección General de Asuntos Ambientales Energéticos.
12 Organismo Supervisor de la Inversión en Energía y Minería.
13 Gerencia Adjunta de Regulación Tarifaria (GART)
14 Empresa de Administración de Infraestructura Eléctrica.
15 Comité de Operación Económica del Sistema Interconectado NacionalIn addition, they are responsible for granting generation concessions for plants with 
an installed capacity of 500 kilowatts 
(kW) - 10 MW.16 This includes renewable 
energy generation concessions and leading 
regional rural electrification programmes, 
under the National Rural Electrification 
Plan. 
Finally, regional governments are responsible for land use planning. This includes the 
identification of suitable areas with high 
potential for power generation outside 
environmentally fragile zones. 
For local government, the Municipalities 
Organic Law17 aims to promote comprehensive and sustainable development of the 
community, enhancing public and private 
investment. This covers investments in 
renewable energy, as well as employment, 
ensuring the rights and equal opportunities of the population are fully exercised 
in accordance with national, regional and 
local development. 
POWER MARKET STRUCTURE 
The electricity market is the commercial 
interface between electricity generation, 
transmission and distribution utilities that 
supply electricity to final costumers.
In the case of Peru, it is composed of four 
units: the spot market, free market, regulated market and auction market. Figure 10 
displays the interaction between the four 
units.
Generation companies have the option to 
sell electricity either to other generation 
companies or to distribution companies. In 
the first case, the energy and power transactions may occur within the spot market. 
Here, electricity rates are defined as equivalent to marginal cost values, which vary 
every 15 minutes in accordance with the 
dispatch of the national system. 
A second option is to sell it into the 
free market based on free negotiations. 
The free market applies to transactions 
between generation and distribution 
companies as well as distribution to final 
customers. Maximum power demand 
from a free customer is 200 kW. Where 
users have maximum power demand of 
200 kW-2.5 MW, they can choose between 
the free or regulated market. 
In the regulated market, generating companies negotiate and sign contracts with 
distribution companies at a given price 
ceiling set by OSINERGMIN. Distribution 
companies can then sell electricity to 
customers with power demand of under 
2.5 MW at rates and conditions existing in 
the regulated market. Finally, electricity 
purchase and sale in the auction market is, 
as the name indicates, set through auctions. 
This market is only accessible to generation companies selling electricity awarded 
to distribution companies in the auctions.
RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY
Two legal instruments set the legal framework for the renewable electricity sector. 
These were Legislative Decree No. 1002 for 
the Promotion of Investment for Electricity 
Generation with the use of Renewable 
Energy18 and the Regulation for Electricity 
Generation with Renewable Energy.
The first of these establishes the promotion of renewable energy resources as a 
national priority. It promotes the connection of renewable electricity to the national 
grid, SEIN, through regular auctions. It 
also sets a five-year rolling target share 
16 For projects under 500 kW, concessions are not required, article 2 and 3 of Law Decree N° 25844.
17 Law Nº 27972
18 Defi ned as biomass, wind, solar geothermal, tidal and hydro (when the installed capacity is up to 20 MW).of energy demand to be met by electricity from non-hydro renewable energy 
resources.19 
This decree was complemented by the 
Regulation for Electricity Generation with 
Renewable Energy20 of the same year. 
This regulation determines the administrative procedure for announcing renewable 
energy auctions and granting concessions 
for the development of renewable power 
generation. It also sets the requirements 
for submitting, evaluating and awarding bids, as well as marketing procedures 
and renewable energy generation tariffs.
Renewable energy benefits from fiscal 
incentives are summarised in box 2.
Peruvian Technical Standards (NTP) 
provides standards on renewable energy 
equipment for solar collectors, solar PV 
systems up to 500 watt-peak (Wp) and 
technical standards for biofuels. The 
Regulation for Biofuels Marketing21 sets 
out the national requirements for biofuels 
marketing and distribution. It relates to 
quality standards for these products and 
the scope and functions of relevant institutions participating in the biofuels market.
1
2
6
4 3
3
5
5
Intermediate 
Customers
Generation
Companies
Spot Market
(Based on system 
opration)
Supply over 
1000 kW to 2500 kW
Free Customers
Regulated or Public Electricity
Service Customers
Supply from
1000 kW to 2500 kW
Supply from
200 kW to 2500 kW
Supply under
200 kW 
Free Market
(Based on free 
negotiation)
Regulated Market
(Based on regulator 
calculation)
Auction Market
(Based on auctions)
Distribution
Companies
Price
Market
Final 
Customer Market
Figure 10 
Electricity market in Peru
Source: MINEM, 2012a
Box 2
Fiscal incentives for 
renewable energy
Electricity generation through hydro, 
wind, solar, geothermal, biomass 
and ocean technologies are subject 
to an annual maximum accelerated 
depreciation of 20% on income tax. 
Accelerated depreciation applies to 
machinery, equipment, installation and 
operations and maintenance (O&M) 
necessary for grid-connected renewable 
energy plants. 
Renewable energy generators are 
entitled to early recovery of Value Added 
Tax (VAT) for the sale of electricity 
(MINEM 2012a). 
19 This excludes hydroelectric power stations
20 D.S. 050-2008-EM. The new Regulation was approved for D.S. N° 012-2011-EM
21 D.S. 021-2007-EMSolar PV Plant in Peru
Photo Courtesy: MINEM PeruSatellite picture of Lima city
Photo Courtesy: Earth Observatory NASAIV. Renewable energy power in the grid
INTRODUCTION
Peru has made significant steps in promoting renewable energy in the electricity market with the aim of diversifying its electricity mix and reducing its dependence on fossil fuels. Renewable electricity can help meet rapidly growing electricity demand, which is forecast to increase at an average annual rate of almost 9% 
(Nicho, 2013). Furthermore, the Law for the Promotion of Investment in Renewable 
Energy Generation (Law no. 1002), sets a target of up to 5% of the national energy 
demand to be covered by renewable energy generation 22 between 2008-2013 
(MINEM, 2012a).
Following the reform of the electricity sector in 2006, auctions were adopted in Peru 
as the preferred mechanism for introducing cost-effective electricity rates to users.
The country is therefore already familiar with auction processes. It has perfected it 
for large hydropower and combined cycle natural gas power plants, and has now also 
introduced this mechanism for renewable energy. 
Peru aims to promote biomass, wind, solar and small hydro using technology-specific 
auctions. The first two renewable energy auctions awarded nearly 1 400 GWh/year 
of renewable energy power to solar, wind and biomass and 281 MW to small hydro. 
This attracted a total investment of almost USD 1.5 billion. In 2013, Peru announced 
the third renewable energy auction. This covers 320 GWh per year of biomass and 
1 300 GWh per year of small hydro (OSINERGMIN, 2013b).
AUCTIONS
Peru is fine-tuning the auction design and process for renewable energy technologies 
by incorporating lessons learnt into the next round. There are ongoing discussions 
on the size of auction rounds, hybrid generation systems, local content requirements 
22 Renewables energy resources are defi ned as biomass, wind, solar, geothermal and ocean, 
 but exclude hydropower over 20 MW.(LCR), and other considerations. The first 
two auctions were aligned to meet the 
targets set by the government and aim 
to introduce power from different renewable energy technologies into the grid. 
Independent Power Producers (IPPs) were 
invited to bid for power from biomass, 
wind and solar and also to set up small 
hydro plants. 
PROCESS
The renewable energy auction process 
involves three key entities, MINEM, 
OSINERGMIN-GART and COES. Their interaction is displayed in figure 12.
MINEM defines the structure of the auction, 
the quantity of energy requested and the 
allocation of that amount among the various renewable energy technologies (i.e., 
the ministry sets a cap according to technology). The allocation takes the recommendations of the system operator, COES, 
into account in relation to the status of grid 
infrastructure and the variable power injection points in the grid.
The regulator OSINERGMIN-GART is responsible for conducting the auction and 
determines the price cap for each techOSINERGMIN-GART
-
Figure 11 
Flow chart - Renewable Energy auction design
Box 3
Technical and fi nancial 
requirements
To participate in the auction process, 
bidders have to comply with strict 
technical requirements. These range 
from providing evidence of renewable 
resource investigations lasting at 
least one year, compliance with COES 
standards and equipment specifi cations 
and pre-feasibility studies. 
Bidders are also required to submit 
various fi nancial guarantees. They 
include a bid and a performance 
bond calculated per MW of capacity 
contracted and installed. This is to 
ensure that successful bidders sign the 
PPA, as well as installing the capacity in 
line with the agreed time schedule. In 
case of delays to the start of commercial 
operations of the plant, an automatic 
increase of 20% to the performance 
bond will be requested (IRENA, 2013a), 
provided the delay has not occurred 
due to accident or force majeure.nology. The price set takes a number of 
factors into consideration, such as the type 
of technology, project cost, cost of capital 
and reasonable rate of return. Box 3 presents a summary of the technical and financial requirements for participating in the 
auction process.
A typical renewable energy auction process 
in Peru takes approximately four months. A 
detailed schedule is presented in annex 6.
EVALUATION, AWARDED CONTRACT 
AND REMUNERATION 
A steering committee composed of two 
members from the regulator and one from 
MINEM evaluates bids. The auction documents provide detailed procedures for 
contract award and selection. Contracts 
are awarded by economic merit, ranked 
according to how far they fall short of 
the auction price cap, until demand for 
the specific technology is met. Figure 12 
provides an example of a bid evaluation 
process for a wind project.
Renewable projects have a guaranteed 
annual income. This is defined as net energy 
deliveries to the grid (up to the maximum 
awarded energy amount) multiplied by the 
tariff awarded in the public auction. Box 4 
describes the payment process. 
Finally, winning projects are granted priority of dispatch and access to transmission lines and distribution networks. This 
is important to ensure revenues. Power 
Purchase Agreement (PPA) contracts last 
20 years. 
Project 1
Awarded Project 2Awarded
Project 3
Not 
Awarded
Wind power required
Remaining energy
Supply 
(MWh)
(kWh)
Maximum Price 
(OSINERGMIN)
MWh
kWh
MW
Bids
Adjudication tariff
STEPS:
2°
 The maximum price is published 1°
 Envelopes are opened and projects are 
 sorted by price offer, from lowest to highest, 
 with those that exceed the maximum price 
 being discarded 5°
4°
 The committee verifies that MWs allocated 3°
 do not exceed the power limits on the 
 Toolbar Offer 
 If MWh offered are less than the energy 
 required all bids are awarded
 If the MWh offered exceeds the Energy 
 Required, a partial adjudication is evaluated 
 where the price offered is lower than the 
 maximum price.
Figure 12 
Evaluation process for a wind project
Source: Molinelli, 2011HIGHLIGHTS OF THE FIRST TWO 
RENEWABLE ENERGY AUCTIONS
FIRST AUCTION
In 2009, OSINERGMIN issued a notification for the first auction. This consisted 
of 1 314 GWh/year to be provided by 
the following technologies: biomass 
(813 GWh year), wind (320 GWh/year) and 
solar (181 GWh/year). In addition, auctions 
for small hydropower stations,23 amounting to 500 MW, were also announced. 
Table 2 provides a summary of the results 
of this initial round by renewable energy 
technology.
In the initial round, projects finalised for 
contract covered 68% of the total energy 
required from wind, biomass and solar 
energy. In the case of renewable energy 
from small hydro, only 32% of the total 
tendered capacity was awarded.
The initial first call was declared partially 
unmet. A decision was made to move 
forward with a second call for the capacities not covered in this initial round. This 
call included biomass (419 GWh/year), 
solar (9 GWh/year), as well as 338 MW of 
energy from small hydro. 
Through this second call a total of 19 
companies with 27 projects presented their 
proposals, but only one small hydro project 
for 18 MW was awarded. The projects were 
disqualified since the prices offered were 
greater than maximum price caps set by 
the regulator. 
Bid prices for awarded projects for at least 
two technologies, solar and wind, were 
much lower than the ceiling prices. Average 
prices for solar bids were USD 0.22 per 
kilowatt hour (/kWh) - 18% lower than the 
ceiling price of USD 0.27/kWh. Wind prices 
were at an average of USD 0.08/kWh - 
which represented a 28% discount on the 
ceiling of USD 0.11/kWh.
The auctions in Peru took place at a time 
when the prices of solar technology across 
the world had started declining. There 
was oversupply in the wind sector (REN21, 
2012). Strong competition in the electricity sector and the position of the contracting utilities also provide a relatively sound 
explanation for the deep discounts on solar 
and wind. By contrast, the hydro projects 
were contracted at an average price of 
USD 0.06/kWh with a minor variance 
Box 4
Payment process
The payment fl ow every month is 
as follows: the renewable project 
will receive payment for the energy 
delivered to the grid priced at the 
hourly short-run marginal cost of the 
system, plus fi rm capacity remunerated 
at the contracted price.
An ex-ante estimation is then made 
of the required subsidyi
 to comply 
with guaranteed annual income 
(auction-based tariff ). This is done by 
OSINERGMIN for a given tariff year and 
published together with the annual bus 
bar tariff s. This subsidy is paid out of 
the excess charged to the users of the 
transmission network.
To conclude, there is also an annual 
ex-post adjustment to compensate 
generators for the diff erences between 
expected and actual payment received 
from the electricity market for the 
energy delivered. A penalty is imposed 
where there is a shortfall in energy 
produced. The fi nal price to be paid is 
the price awarded minus any penalty. 
i Known as “Prima” In Spanish and calculated 
as: subsidy = energy delivered (awarded tariff – 
marginal cost) 
23 Small hydro is defi ned as less than 20 MWbetween different bids. Hydro is a wellknown technology with many companies 
operating in the market at similar prices.
In the case of wind energy, an additional 
251 GWh/year was awarded during 
this auction. Wind energy prices were 
very competitive and the quota for 
biomass was not covered. Thus wind 
energy bids offering a price below the 
biomass cap were contracted. This first 
auction attracted investments of nearly 
USD 1 billion. Total investments for nine projects in biomass, solar and wind amounted to 
USD 675 million while investments on 
17 hydroelectric projects attracted investments of nearly USD 303 million. 
Many interested parties from all over the 
world visited the data room of this auction, 
reflecting the interest in investing in Peru 
and more specifically its renewable energy 
market. In the case of wind energy, competition was strong with a much higher 
number of candidates bidding for capacity/energy than was actually available. 
All biomass projects were awarded to 
national companies. In the wind and solar 
auctions, international companies outbid 
the national companies. In the case of 
small hydro projects, all awards were won 
by national companies, two of which were 
joint ventures with foreign partners.
In February 2010, the process concluded 
with a total of 887 GWh/year awarded to 
two biomass projects, three wind projects 
and four solar PV projects. In addition, 
contracts were awarded to 17 hydroelectric 
projects amounting to 180 MW. Detailed 
results of this tender process are presented 
in annex 7.
This was the first renewable auction in 
Peru, thus as a learning process it was very 
important in that it kick-started the auctionbased mechanism to promote renewables 
in Peru. The auction mechanism resulted in 
efficient prices, with outcomes 24% lower 
than cap prices and tariffs below international prices. 
SECOND AUCTION
A second auction took place in August 
2011 for 1 300 GWh/year for the following 
technologies: wind (429 GWh/year), solar 
(43 GWh/year), biomass (593 GWh/year) 
and waste-to-energy (235 GWh/year). 
Additionally, 681 GWh/year was auctioned 
for small hydropower.
Although the total auctioned energy 
requirement was of the same order of 
magnitude of that registered in the first 
auction, there were significant changes 
in the composition of energy required by 
Table 2 
Results of Peru’s fi rst renewable energy auction
Biomass Wind Solar Total
Energy required (GWh/year) 813 320 181 1 314
Energy awarded (GWh/year) 143 571 173 887
Percentage awarded 18% 178% 96% 68%
 Small Hydropower
Power required (MW) 500
Power awarded (MW) 162
Percentage awarded 32%
Source: OSINERGMIN, 2010technology. The amount of wind power 
auctioned increased by 23% while the 
amount of small hydropower decreased by 
78% compared to the first auction.
Three projects with a total of 
473 GWh/year were awarded to the 
following technologies: biomass 
(14 GWh/year), solar PV (43 GWh/year) 
and wind (415 GWh/year). In addition, 
seven projects were awarded to hydroelectric power stations for a total of 
680 GWh/year with commercial start-up 
planned for 31 December, 2014. However, 
the total energy contracted from these 
technologies (1 152 GWh/year), represented 
only 60% of the total energy available for 
auction. Table 3 summarises the key results 
of the second auction by technology. For 
more information refer to annex 7.
The second round of auctions has 
attracted investment of nearly 
USD 0.5 billion. Successful biomass, wind 
and solar contracts will result in investment of nearly USD 229 million. The 
seven successful small hydro projects 
are estimated to bring in investment of 
USD 227 million. 
The outcome of the second auction can be 
considered satisfactory. It met the objective 
of promoting renewable generation and 
consolidating the auction-based renewable energy framework in Peru. Although 
a significant amount of energy was not 
supplied, offers submitted were competitive compared to the international tariff, 
but in some cases not competitive enough 
to win the Peru bids.
In the case of solar, the average tariff 
contracted was USD 0.12/kWh, very 
competitive compared to the international tariffs at that time. In the case of the 
Brazilian wind auctions carried out that 
same year, the price outcome was nearly 
USD 0.08/kWh, whereas in Peru the average wind energy tariff was contracted at 
USD 0.07/kWh. Unlike the first auction, this 
second auction did not automatically call 
for a new round of bids. This was not found 
to be very useful in the first auction and 
also led to market distortion.
Prices between the first auction in 
2009/2010 and the second in 2011 fell by 
11% for hydro, 14% for wind, 9% for biomass 
and 46% for solar PV. Peru has acquired 
solar PV in particular at the most competitive price compared to global trends. 
It has also acquired wind generation for the 
very attractive price of USD 0.07/kWh in 
line with that obtained in the Brazilian wind 
auctions, the biggest in South America.
Table 3 
Results of Peru’s second renewable energy auction
Biomass Wind Solar Total
Energy required (GWh/year) 828 429 43 1 300
Energy awarded (GWh/year) 14 416 43 473
Percentage awarded 2% 97% 100% 36%
 Small Hydropower
Power required (MW) 681
Power awarded (MW) 680
Percentage awarded 100%
Source: OSINERGMIN, 2010THIRD AUCTION
The third renewable auction awarded 16 
small hydropower projects amounting 
211 MW. These projects were contracted 
at an average price of USD 0.06/kWh to 
supply 1 278 GWh/year.
LESSONS LEARNT
Both auction processes were successful in 
the following respects:
• Consolidating the renewable energy 
regulatory framework in Peru and showing that the auction-based mechanism 
provides credible, transparent and efficient renewable energy procurement. 
• Including Peru in the renewable energy 
map worldwide, attracting the interest of a wide and diverse number of 
potential investors.
• Attracting inward investment to the 
renewable energy sector in the region 
of USD 1.5 billion.
• Contracting significant quantities of 
renewable energy (more than 10% of 
the system peak demand in the first 
auction alone), clearly moving towards 
fulfilling the government’s goal to 
introduce renewable generation in its 
electricity mix.
• Contracting electricity at competitive 
prices, reducing prices for all technologies - 11% for small hydro, 14% for wind, 
9% for biomass and 46% for solar PV.
On the other hand, design improvements 
are necessary for future auctions to be 
successful. Two important considerations 
include: 
• Definition of a clear long-term policy 
goal for renewables in order to ensure 
continuity and end the stop-and-go 
cycles. This would then provide a strong 
signal of intent and attract IPPs and 
equipment manufacturers to develop 
the local industrial base in Peru.
• Improve the process design so that it 
reduces the risk of aggressive bidding. 
An interesting practice followed in 
Indian solar auctions, is the increase in 
bid guarantee compared to the benchmark price as the bids become more 
aggressive, thus ensuring that bidders 
remain realistic. 
By April 2013, 19 of the 27 renewable energy 
projects were connected to the grid. This 
includes all four solar projects (80 MW), 
the two biomass projects (27 MW) and 13 
hydroelectric projects (98 MW). 
However, eight projects from the first 
bid process are still under construction, 
including all three wind projects and 
five small hydro projects. All these projects have obtained an addenda to their 
contracts with the respective extension 
(see annex 8). 
Peru has now called a third auction for 
renewable energy resources. A series of 
key findings on the design of the auction, 
bankability of PPAs, large lots, local content 
requirements, hybrid and technology 
neutral auctions are presented in the next 
section. This is to maximise the amount 
of renewable energy awarded in this and 
future auction processes.WAY FORWARD AND 
FINDINGS FROM THE RRA
The discussions during the RRA process 
pointed to the need for a clear long-term 
policy goal for renewable energy in the 
Peru energy mix. Everyone agreed that the 
auction process had been quite successful. But a clear signal supported by a longterm vision and implementation plan is 
required if large international IPPs are to 
include Peru in their investment strategy. It 
is important to announce an implementation plan in advance that will enable potential investors to engage in project development activities24 and provide an element 
of certainty and continuity.
Consultations must be held to formulate 
the National Renewable Energy Plan, as 
mandated by the Law for the Promotion 
of Investment in Renewable Energy 
Generation. This will help foster renewables in Peru on the basis of a long-term 
vision. Renewable energy targets, mandatory goals for renewable integration and 
long-term plans for renewable penetration 
in Peru are critical if serious investors are 
to build foundations in Peru. An implementation plan defining modalities would also 
prepare the ground for investment. 
IMPROVING THE DESIGN
For the auctions to be successful, the 
design has to incorporate elements on the 
one hand that provide checks and balances 
in terms of incentives and penalties. On the 
other, they should not provide unnecessarily harsh or impractical penalties that 
discourage serious operators. Power generation finance in Peru occurs through project finance (where the project’s revenues 
should be enough to ensure repayment 
of the debt with some debt service coverage ratios). It is essential not only that the 
auctioned product is properly designed, 
but that rational bidding, with risk-adjusted 
offers, is also observed in the auction.
In an attempt to maximise the probability of 
winning the auction, some bidders are often 
excessively aggressive in their offers. They 
do not price the contract in the proper way 
by considering the relevant risks. Aggressive 
bidding creates a mismatch between 
revenue and risks, which makes financing 
difficult. A document issued by MINEM or 
OSINERGMIN-GART containing some kind 
of guide for auction participants might 
help. It would clearly set out the risks and 
obligations of the contract and communicate to investors the relevance of correct 
pricing. It would also facilitate financial 
closure. As in India, auction clauses could 
be introduced that increase bid guarantees 
as the bids become more aggressive. This 
would act as a deterrent to over-adventurous bidding. In Peru, bidders are required 
to deposit a bid bond for USD 20 000/MW 
of capacity installed. This acts as a guarantee preventing delays (IRENA, 2013a).
Penalties for project abandonment or delay 
need to be defined in order to reinforce 
meeting project deadlines by successful 
bidders. To foster new generation, it is very 
important to have the proper mechanisms 
in an auction-based framework to anticipate 
potential problems and avoid failure. Peru 
correctly applies project completion guarantees. These penalties are financial, and 
they do not physically provide the energy 
failed projects would deliver. Security of 
supply can be threatened depending on 
the volume of voided projects and on how 
late notice is given by the investor. Hence, 
it is also important to introduce a provision in the general regulatory framework 
of auctions in Peru or in the auction tender 
24 For example, one of the conditions for participating in the auctions is a resource 
 assessment of at least one year.documents. This allows the regulator to 
unilaterally terminate the contract over a 
relatively short time frame (for example, 
one year) if some very basic project development landmarks have not been reached. 
This mechanism would allow the system to 
swiftly rearrange a contract for the missing energy. For reference, annex 11 presents 
a high-level overview of the qualification 
prerequisites for generation auctions in 
Brazil.
The lengthy Environmental Impact 
Assessment approval process also created 
delays in project implementation. RRA 
participants pointed out that even when 
an environmental licence was obtained on 
time, companies have faced delays in project implementation. This arose from environmental licensing requirements for transmission lines that have to be constructed 
as part of the project. One alternative to 
mitigate this risk is to request the environmental licence of each candidate generation project in the auction as part of the 
qualification process. 
Announcing the auction bidding process 
at least one year in advance should allow 
companies to plan their participation in 
renewable energy auctions more effectively. 
It should also allow them to undertake in 
depth the necessary resource assessments 
and due diligence. This will mean participants can take all the steps necessary to 
prepare their projects in advance and thus 
reduce potential technical and any financial delays once project implementation 
begins.
Working closely with local government 
could help to speed up the process.
Companies implementing renewable energy 
projects in the field could potentially face 
lack of clarity on land tenure. Sometimes 
the real estate property ownership and 
the property boundaries are not clearly 
registered. In that case, the challenge for 
regional governments will be to draw up 
the real estate cadastre for their region. 
It might also be important for regional 
governments to consult with local stakeholders (local authorities, communities 
and civil society) in areas where renewable energy projects may be constructed. 
This will secure their understanding of the 
benefits of such initiatives and thus obtain 
their support. 
MAKING THE PPA MORE BANKABLE
Renewable energy generation is in most 
cases a non-dispatchable resource with 
variable or seasonal production. The most 
recent global climate change scenarios 
show that renewable energy generation 
could be adversely affected. It might therefore be relevant to consider more flexible 
energy delivery terms. One suggestion is 
to consider power supply quotas under 
current PPA contracts based on the threeyear average and not on a single year. 
For example, in the case of the Brazilian 
wind energy auctions, the product offered 
defines quotas based on production over 
four years with some annual deviation 
limits. 
The number of years selected can be related 
to the storage capacity of the hydroelectric 
system, since it will be the primary resource 
balancing renewable production at a small 
cost to the consumer. Local banks capacity building for technology risk assessment 
was highlighted during the workshop. It 
has an impact on the ease of financing 
renewable energy projects. 
Most renewable energy technologies are 
new to the market. It is therefore important to communicate best practice to local 
banks and financial institutions on how to 
assess renewable energy project performance parameters and technology risks. This could potentially smooth finance 
flows to this sector. Clear communication 
of the product characteristics and relevant 
penalties, allowing banks to perform a 
proper risk analysis, is also of benefit to 
finance.
In cases of underproduction, variable 
renewable energy resources — mainly solar 
and wind — could compromise security of 
electricity supply. Limiting electricity sales 
of wind or solar projects to a percentile 
of certified production for each project is 
one way to reduce this effect. For example, 
Brazil limited wind power sales to half of 
certified project production in 2009-2012.
As a result, projects claimed very high 
capacity factors from 45% to 60% that 
might not be reached. Since 2013, the 50% 
threshold for wind plants has been changed 
to 90% of certified production.
LARGE POWER AUCTION ROUNDS
Higher transaction costs arise from organising and promoting several auction rounds 
with the same process. One suggestion 
raised during the RRA discussions was to 
hold larger auctions. This could reduce 
transaction costs and create economies of 
scale, fostering development of local manufacturing. Discussions centred around the 
merit of larger auction rounds and relevant 
international experience.
Large power auctions seem to be more 
efficient at fostering increased competition 
and at attracting more bidders, including 
international ones. They could also contribute to the standarisation of the renewable 
energy auction process. For example, in 
Brazil regular auctions for energy supply 
are held centrally every year and are based 
on demand forecasts provided by distributors. The government does not interfere 
with demand forecasts and the auctioneer 
pools the different forecasts. This result is 
an auction which allows for economies of 
scale by contracting large projects, leading 
to lower project costs and thus tariff bids. 
After the auction, successful bidders sign 
bilateral energy contracts with each distribution company.
In general terms, auctioning large power 
rounds for renewable energy generation could lead to tariff reductions. This is 
because large power rounds would allow 
larger projects to be contracted, and these 
are more efficient per MW installed. In 
addition, large power auction rounds could 
catalyse investment in local component 
and equipment manufacturing.
While large power auction rounds could 
lower tariffs and have a positive impact 
on local manufacturing, they could 
also adversely affect the participation 
of Peruvian companies. This is due to 
the considerable amount of investment 
required. Making local partners a condition for participation by large international 
companies is one mechanism successfully 
employed in many countries. This may lead 
to large-scale deployment and promote 
participation of local investors, but it 
could be perceived as a barrier and keep 
away large players. A preferential tariff for 
companies with Peruvian partners is one 
variation of this approach. This has also 
already been used in other countries.
Large power rounds may require largescale environmental impact assessments. 
This could have an impact on completion 
and commercial operations, given the 
present limited geo-referential information 
on land tenure. Large power round assessments should also take SEIN bar capacity 
and available grid capacity in both power 
lines into consideration. COES puts forward 
its plans on a biannual basis for transmission lines with a ten-year horizon, and this 
also needs to be taken into account. POWER BLOCK SIZE
The size of the power blocks – which 
may of course differ according to 
technology – is another consideration for 
auctions. As the size of the power block 
increases, competition may decrease. If 
a large power block is auctioned with 
little competition, there is a high risk that 
demand may not get supplied. 
Dissatisfaction with the fragmentation 
observed in Peru when an auction process 
is conducted over several rounds cannot 
be solely related to block definition. There 
is an art to holding an auction. The most 
important parameters for proper auction 
design are the reduction of barriers to 
entry for new players and a correct definition of the price cap.
Block size needs to be defined in a very 
careful way and consider not only Peru’s 
renewable policy goals, but also the degree 
of competition that can be achieved for 
each block defined. No standard roundsize has been found to attract international 
bidders. However, rounds should be large 
enough to draw the interest of bidders, and 
power blocks sized to foster competition. It 
is also important to evaluate carefully the 
trade-off between one large auction round 
or different auctions carried out in different years. The latter signals to the market 
a continuous programme to integrate 
renewables. 
MINEM is to analyse to what extent the 
disclosure of the auctioned volume is 
necessary. Disclosure is current practice. While revealing auctioned demand 
communicates the size of the auction to 
investors, it removes auctioneer flexibility.
It might also create perverse incentives for 
competitive behaviour (empiric auction 
theory shows that bidding under demand 
uncertainty leads to cheaper outcomes). If 
there is no requirement to publish demand, 
the auctioneer has more flexibility to define 
it once candidate supply is already known 
and registered in the auction.
The Brazilian experience is interesting in this 
respect. Brazil conducts two main types of 
energy auctions. Firstly, regular new energy 
auctions contract an amount declared by 
distribution companies to meet demand 
growth in the regulated market. Secondly, 
reserve energy auctions are used to 
contract supplementary energy to increase 
the system’s reserve margin. Demand for 
reserve energy is entirely determined by 
the government following its own security 
of supply and energy policy criteria. The 
costs of these contracts are split among all 
consumers by means of a system charge. 
In either auction, the government has the 
right to intervene with policy decisions 
(some auctions have had candidate supply 
restricted to renewables). The demand to 
be auctioned is not disclosed before the 
auction. This gives a great deal of flexibility for the government to adjust, through 
the reserve energy auctions, the level of 
demand to ensure competition.
HYBRID GENERATION AUCTIONS
Hybridisation in Peru is defined as a renewable generator that combines different 
types of renewable resources (i.e. wind and 
hydro, wind and solar). It aims to manage 
production variability more effectively. This 
is achieved through a portfolio of non-dispatchable resources with complementary 
production patterns or through a portfolio of dispatchable and non-dispatchable 
resources. 
In addition, renewable energy hybridisation 
may potentially raise the baseload power 
generation offered by renewable energy 
systems. This has a subsequent positive 
impact on grid management, while at the Hydropower plant
Photo Courtesy: Shutterstocksame time increasing the service reliability and overall energy security. COES has 
stated that hybridisation is welcome to the 
extent that it can help increase the plant 
load factor. OSINERGMIN has at present 
a hybridisation procedure on electricity generation facilities using renewable 
energy sources. 
There are concrete opportunities in Peru 
for hybridisation systems, according to 
resource assessments. The first is on the 
North coast and consists of wind-hydro 
systems that could complement each 
other effectively. This is because there is 
good wind potential during the dry season 
and vice versa. The possibilities of wind 
generation are limited during the months 
with high precipitation. The second potential area for hybrid systems is on southern 
coast. This offers the opportunity for solarhydro systems.
Due to the variability of renewable energy 
production, hybrid systems could be appropriate for reducing the commercial impact 
of production variability. Electricity market 
players worldwide have created such 
systems, whenever there is a spot price risk 
due to imbalances in energy production.
Since wind power has developed quickly, 
the most relevant hybridisation experience 
comes from wind farms and pumped-storage hydro plants. Portfolios of wind and 
solar and even solar and gas have recently 
been analysed in Europe and the US. 
In Latin America, Brazil provides the most 
relevant experience with a portfolio of 
renewables. There, energy trading companies form portfolios of small hydro, wind 
and (sugarcane-based) biomass production to devise commercial strategies for 
supplying a stable energy load and mitigating production risk. The natural synergy 
between these two production sources 
makes it possible to develop a portfolio 
that can mitigate hydrological and fuel 
shortage risks. It thus enables competitive, 
stable energy delivery. Portfolios of wind 
and small or large hydro, and even wind and 
thermal generation, have recently emerged 
in Brazil to enable less risky transactions in 
the free market.
Peru has significant resources that would 
enable efficient hybrid systems in general. 
This includes fossil fuels and mid-large 
hydro, which have not yet been considered 
by the norm for system hybridisation using 
renewable energy resources.25 Two hybrid 
system portfolios are possible in Peru. 
Firstly, a portfolio of non-dispatchable 
resources with complementary production 
patterns such as wind and small hydro, or 
wind and solar. Secondly, a portfolio of nondispatchable and dispatchable resources 
such as wind and hydro, solar and gas, etc.
One option is to allow fossil fuel generation – mainly natural gas – and other hydro 
plants into the hybridisation process. For 
example solar/wind/hydro and gas systems 
could form a portfolio of non-dispatchable 
and dispatchable resources that could 
ease the penetration of renewables. The 
southern coast of Peru offers one of the 
continent’s premier areas for solar generation. This offers clear opportunities for 
gas — solar (both PV and Concentrated 
Solar Power) development, and for hybrid 
solar — natural gas electricity generation. For example, the Southern Gas pipeline project in the South of the country to 
Arequipa, Moquegua and Tacna is being 
developed in the medium-term. The subsequent construction of a petrochemical 
and thermocouple pole in this region will 
result in a substantial increase in natural 
gas demand. Demand for energy generation due to an expanding mining sector 
(Quellaveco, expansion of Cerro Verde and 
expansion of Southern Copper Corporation, 
25 Norm N. 200-2009-OS/CDamong others) will increase. These two 
factors could prompt the need to investigate other sources of energy, especially 
renewables. 
The hybridisation focus in Peru in an 
auction-based setting for long-term 
contracts is not typical. Most hybrid 
systems across the world have not been 
developed in the context of renewable 
energy auctions, but free market transactions and spot market bidding to mitigate 
spot price risk. Only Colombia has made 
similar proposals. This involves the investigation of a hybrid system formed by 
wind and hydropower in the Colombian 
Firm Energy Market, which is based on 
auctions using long-term reliability options. 
The proposals arising from this study, 
however, have still not been implemented 
(Cramton, et al., 2010). 
MINEM will need to further study and overcome challenges arising from the inclusion of hybrid systems in auctions. These 
consist of defining a proper product and 
the price cap of a given product for each 
hybrid system. Other challenges include 
penalty definition, guarantee and incentives schemes for hybrid systems (not for 
separate technologies). Finally MINEM will 
need to ensure that the lenders would be 
interested in such a financial portfolio and 
that the hybrid systems would not discourage finance.
LOCAL CONTENT REQUIREMENTS
Peru has a metalworking industry with 
the capacity and experience for the local 
manufacture of equipment components 
for renewable energy generation. The 
auction bidder could acquire a competitive 
advantage over competitors by using local 
manufacturers. The opportunities are clear. 
Strategic alliances could be made between 
renewable energy companies and local 
electrical and metalworking companies. 
To improve the auctions, it would be worth 
considering for a period of time, a separate scoring criteria by incorporating Local 
Content Requirements (LCR). These would 
be ranked according to the manufacturing 
capacity and a national economic added 
value score up to a certain maximum 
limit. Alternatively, the state could offer 
to purchase the energy in the auction in 
20-year PPA contracts. It would, contract 
a maximum tariff per technology under 
the condition that a certain percentage of 
manufacturing takes place locally, allowing 
reinvestment and job creation. This may 
include the local supply of wind turbinetowers, kits and batteries for PV panels. 
Other examples include electrical wires, 
medium voltage substations, boards with 
command and monitoring elements, insulators, instrumentation, capacitors and metal 
structures. The definition of the percentage 
number is important, since it can be done 
on a component-by-component basis or 
according to the total development cost of 
the plant.
Globally, LCR for renewable technologies 
has been used in different forms mainly 
in developing countries. China required 
LCR from renewable energy systems 
developers until 2010, but discontinued 
the requirement after negotiations with 
the US. Through the Brazilian National 
Development Bank (BNDES), Brazil offers 
subsidised loans to renewable developers 
only if they source 60% of their equipment 
and work locally. In the Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD), the Canadian provinces of Quebec 
and Ontario stand out for their application of 
LCR. The World Trade Organisation (WTO) 
challenged the LCR in Canada because it 
discriminates against foreign suppliers. 
Additionally, LCR is not permitted under 
EU competition rules. South Africa was 
successful in attracting foreign companies 
to its renewable energy auctions because 
of the absence of LCR (IRENA, 2013a).In the case of Peru, the government has 
the opportunity to carefully assess the 
objectives of developing a manufacturing industry for renewables. This needs to 
consider two main aspects: 
i) the size of the potential market for 
renewable generation over a long time 
horizon. 
ii) the existence of manufacturers in other 
countries.
It is important to provide signals on 
market potential and economies of scale 
in Peru. This communicates whether there 
is enough local demand to absorb equipment production or export potential. The 
National Renewable Energy Plan is one way 
to transmit these signals. The size of the 
potential market could point to the need 
to rely on exports to ensure a market for 
local manufacturers. If so, it is important to 
assess which manufacturers are already in 
the region. 
It is also important to analyse whether 
Peru’s current infrastructure (supply chainlogistics, transportation, ports, etc.) and 
human resources (HR) could absorb a growing renewables manufacturing industry.
LCR might also lead to the opposite effect 
to that intended. Restricted competition 
might allow local producers to extract 
monopoly rents. It might reduce both 
competitive pressures and the number 
of players in the sector. This can increase 
investment costs and often compromises 
the quality of equipment used in renewable generation plants. As a result of raised 
costs, fewer renewable projects may be 
developed, while compromised quality leads to fewer operating hours and 
lower generation efficiency. This effect is 
particularly strong in countries that introduce LCR without having already established a local manufacturing and service 
industry, or that lack a comparative advantage in manufacturing renewable technologies. In these countries, investors struggle 
to find local suppliers and are forced to 
delay project development. 
Finally, it is worth mentioning that the 
world’s biggest exporters of renewable 
technologies were first movers. They 
applied predictable support policies for 
renewable energy generation and strong 
research and development (R&D) support. 
They enjoyed long-lasting growth in 
domestic demand for green power and a 
stable investment environment. 
Direct R&D programmes or support for 
dedicated innovative industrial clusters 
proved more powerful and more sustainable for facilitating knowledge and technology transfer to the domestic manufacturing sector. Most late entrants to this 
market could catch up with the competition, 
not by protecting non-competitive local 
producers of standard technologies, but 
by creating a stable and growing domestic 
market for renewable energy generation. 
They could then support R&D in innovative 
renewable technologies. This can create a 
new wave of front-runners, who become 
the global industry leaders. Strong domestic demand and targeted R&D support will 
automatically encourage local manufacturers, whether they are owned by foreign or 
domestic companies. 
INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE OF 
TECHNOLOGY-NEUTRAL AUCTIONS
During Peru’s two auctions, limits per 
renewable technology have been specified 
and contracts signed in each technology 
depending on tariffs offered. Following 
international experience, the next call could 
consider a technology-neutral approach. 
This would remove limits for each technology. The auction would be designed so 
that the competition is between bidders of all renewable technologies. Contracts 
are awarded starting with the power block 
with lowest tariff and moving to the next 
tariff level.
Renewable auctions can be bundled and 
structured in different ways, depending 
on the level of competition and specificity desired. Auctions can be designed 
to allow IPPs using different renewable energy technologies to participate 
together. Alternatively, participation may 
be restricted to IPPs providing energy 
from particular types of technologies or 
at particular sites (as is the case in Peru at 
present). The decision to go with technology-neutral, technology-specific or technology and site-specific auctions involves 
a trade-off between competition stimulation and policy objectives. These include, 
for instance, energy diversification, the 
promotion of selected technologies and 
the achievement of emission reduction 
targets. 
All technologies could in principle be 
allowed to compete on a level playing field 
to intensify competition. That would imply 
that the auctions are not technology-specific. The underlying assumption behind 
this type of auction is that the market can 
price energy correctly in time and space. 
However, certain energy policy objectives 
and other practical considerations need 
to be made by policy makers who decide 
to guide the energy mix in a certain direction. This they do by selecting the type and 
relative participation of different technologies in the generation portfolio allowed to 
participate in energy auctions. It is sometimes difficult to open an energy auction 
up to all conventional sources. 
This is the case, for example, for very large 
hydro generation plants prioritised by 
governments due to their strategic role in 
a specific country. The capital expenditure 
of these projects is significant, and requires 
very special arrangements for financing and guarantees. It also demands the 
formation of specific consortia to develop 
projects. Environmental and construction 
risks may be high, requiring careful and 
expensive due diligence in comparison 
to smaller plants. This has prompted the 
development of project-specific auctions. 
The objective in this case is to create the 
conditions to maximise competition among 
a set of bidders for a given project. 
Energy policy decisions are multi-faceted 
and take into account cost, diversification, environmental objectives and energy 
security concerns. Promoting renewable 
technologies that are not yet economical 
(or not viewed as such) to compete with 
traditional energy sources requires specific 
government energy policy interventions.
Strictly speaking, an auction is a selection process and its award is based solely 
on a financial bid. If non-price objectives 
are legitimate and need to be considered, 
the most effective practice is to carry out 
auctions with restrictions on participation. This means pre-selecting a range of 
possible technologies that meet the nonprice objectives, and restricting participation in the auction to those technologies. 
Auctions can still be an efficient allocation 
mechanism, even when applied to a more 
limited technology portfolio.
One of the advantages of auctions differentiated by technology is that, given the 
similar features of a given technology, bids 
can be compared on an equal basis. The 
disadvantage is the fragmentation of the 
procurement process, which could lead to 
reduced competition and increased costs 
for end-users. Technology-neutral auctions 
always aim to bring about the purchase 
of the cheapest technology. Their main
disadvantage is that using purely pricebased criteria do not adequately value 
externalities.Energy policy should drive auction design, 
not vice versa. Auctions will not have the 
most efficient outcomes when underlying 
policies driving their design and implementation are absent and constrain the 
effectiveness of energy procurement at 
least cost. 
This explains the importance of a National 
Renewable Energy Plan for Peru. If governments have a preference for particular technologies due to energy policy concerns, 
this should be made explicit and transparently reflected in the auction design. Policy 
objectives, such as increasing renewable 
energy to diversify the energy matrix, 
meeting peak and base-load requirements 
cost-effectively and developing a nascent 
local manufacturing industry, all can affect 
auction design.
South American experience of technologyneutral and technology-specific auctions is 
interesting. Given that long-term electricity 
auctions are nowadays the main driver for 
capacity expansion. Initially, the auctioning schemes represented a new capacity 
mechanism fostering investment in new 
generation plants by competitively assigning long-term contracts. 
These settle part of the generators’ remuneration, thus hedging their risks. Following 
this regulatory trend, these mechanisms 
have recently started to be used for the 
promotion of renewable energy technologies too. To start with, these two contexts 
were considered separate. Conventional 
technologies (large hydro, fossil fuel thermal plants) competed in system-adequacy 
auctions. Renewable energy technologies 
competed in technology-specific auctions. 
The former were meant to involve large 
quantities of energy (or stable energy) at 
the market price, while the latter were to 
cover lower quantities at relatively high 
prices. However, the most recent renewables auctions in Brazil and Peru contracted 
renewable energy supply at very competitive prices, unimaginable only a few years 
ago. These schemes, separate until now, 
seem to be close to convergence. This is 
reinforced by the participation of wind 
energy projects in recent conventional 
Brazilian auctions (competing against gas, 
coal, small hydro and biomass).
In countries and regulations where these 
mechanisms seem to be merging, it is 
possible to observe how conventional and 
renewable technologies are still far from 
competing under equal conditions. The 
main differential lies in the way these technologies are assessed for their contribution to security of supply and how this is 
settled. For instance, this can work using 
a firm energy/capacity calculation methodology and non-compliance penalties for 
the provision of energy. This has an implication on the design of products for each 
technology. Experience shows that these 
problems get in the way of a level playing 
field and prevent full competition between 
technologies.
INTEGRATION OF RENEWABLE 
ENERGY INTO THE GRID
Electricity demand is not evenly distributed 
throughout Peru. COES has forecast that 
in 2016 greatest demand will come from 
the South, accounting for 57.6% of electricity and representing 8 015 GWh. The 
central region will come next with 31.9% 
(4 439 GWh) and northern Peru comes last 
with 10.5% (1 461 GWh) (COES, 2012a).
By 2016, Peru will have to supply almost 
60 000 GWh/year. New power generation 
plants need to be commissioned to meet 
this demand, including those using renewable energy resources. Hydropower is the 
dominant technology, supplying 52.3% of 
the electricity mix. Other renewables will 
contribute 1 285 GWh. Wind will account 
for 1.7%, solar 0.4% and biomass 0.1%. The present transmission system structure 
has been optimised for the conventional 
generation plants. The SEIN northern 
zone does not suffer from congestion. Its 
average flux to the centre is less than 500 
MW. For the next few years the development of new projects will not compromise this part of the grid. Although most 
conventional projects are located in the 
centre of SEIN, the lines operate undercapacity. However, fast growing demand in 
the southern region will probably cause a 
bottleneck.
The centre has surplus production capacity of low cost energy, while the northern and southern areas have deficit 
balances between local generation and 
demand. As a result of this situation, the 
central region supplies electricity to the 
southern and northern areas. There is at 
present a 500 kV single circuit line from 
the centre to the North of the country. 
A 500 kV double circuit line to the South of 
the country is under construction. The first 
and second inner circuit lines are expected 
to be completed in 2016.
New generation from renewable energy 
is an option for the North and South of 
Peru. However, technical challenges for 
integrating variable renewable power 
into the grid would need to be addressed 
for this to become a reality. Wind is the 
second largest renewable energy resource 
in the generation mix and more capacity is expected to come onstream in the 
next few months. It is therefore necessary to establish maximum wind power 
values and other non-dispatchable renewables that can be fed into the grid without 
compromising its stability.
By 2016 wind power is expected to contribute 232 MW of new capacity and will 
account for 1.7% of electricity generation in 
Peru. Most wind projects are planned to be 
commissioned in the North and South. It is 
therefore crucial to understand the impact 
of injecting wind power from non-synchronous generators into the SEIN. 
In 2011, a study entitled ‘Wind Power 
Generation in SEIN - Analysis of the 
Maximum Capacity to be Injected’ was 
completed. It analysed the maximum 
wind power that can be injected at different grid connection points for 2013-2014. 
The conclusion was that a maximum of 
497 MW can be connected in the selected 
nodes, given the present status of the grid 
and upgrade projects in progress. Annex 9 
presents the main results of the study by 
bus (Ramirez, 2011). 
Additional studies will help understand 
the performance of SEIN when including renewables. For example, MINEM is 
carrying out a study of the maximum 
on-grid renewable energy generation 
that can be connected to SEIN between
May 2013-May 2017.
CHALLENGES
Transmission expansion has historically 
focused on the development of a highcapacity network allowing for the reliable 
supply of generation and load patterns at 
a minimum cost. At the same time, it needs 
to comply with technical criteria such as 
equipment overloads, admissible voltage 
magnitudes, stability and power quality. 
These practicalities refer to a transmission 
planning paradigm in which system expansion was characterised by comparatively 
low uncertainty as generation was developed mainly through large units. In the 
case of large hydro and thermal plants, the 
significance of connection costs usually 
faded when compared to total project 
investments. In the case of large hydroelectric plants, the time needed for erecting 
a transmission system was usually much shorter than the power plant construction 
time.
Renewable energy projects throw up a 
number of considerations not efficiently 
resolved through traditional transmission 
planning and cost allocation practices. 
Projects are remote, and this demands 
considerably costly transmission solutions. 
These costs may be significant in comparison with total project investment and can 
even be prohibitive to some investors. 
PROACTIVE VERSUS REACTIVE PLANNING
This leads to a chicken-and-egg dilemma 
in the decision to build a project. Investors 
can only assess project feasibility once 
they know connection costs, but transmission is usually planned only after financial 
(or physical) commitment of the units. 
The significance of total connection costs 
in comparison to total expenditure may 
also mean higher cost of capital. This is 
because lenders may have the perception 
that the recovery of capital is uncertain. 
Furthermore, the comparatively greater 
numbers of smaller projects seeking 
connection can mean longer lead times 
for processing requests. This is because it 
stretches the capacity of the transmission 
planning workforce.
The existing market, commercial and regulatory frameworks have become a barrier 
to timely and cost-effective renewable 
generation connection. This is because 
they may not be flexible and rapid enough 
to allow for the connection of smaller, 
dispersed generators with short construction times. The problem of connecting 
renewable generating units to the bulk 
transmission system has often been 
approached by sequentially analysing and 
processing individual connection requests 
from physically and/or financially committed 
generators. This is known as the reactive 
planning approach. 
However, the integration of renewable 
energy to the grid has been seen as an 
important driver for new approaches. Many 
countries have been moving towards using a 
more proactive planning to network design 
practices. This is where transmission planning anticipates and facilitates renewables 
connection. A proactive approach to transmission planning for renewables connection might start by identifying proactive 
planning criteria under which potential 
investments will be evaluated. Traditional 
minimum cost and reliability criteria may 
not result in generation and transmission expansion through the integration of 
renewable generators. It may therefore be 
necessary to also explicitly consider criteria 
that specifically aim to support the integration of relatively small-scale, remote and 
variable renewable generators.
TRANSMISSION PLANNING 
In Peru, the system operator, COES, plans 
the transmission capacity expansion every 
two years. This is done in accordance 
with system performance requirements. 
The resulting transmission plan must be 
approved by the Ministry of Energy. The 
plan has a ten-year horizon. Planning 
criteria are based on indicators (congestion 
hours and cost, supply cost, investment 
costs, cost of unsupplied energy) for possible generation, demand, and transmission 
expansion scenarios. The selected plan 
optimises transmission system operation 
by considering variations in the parameters 
using a risk-return approach. The costs of 
the resulting transmission plan upgrade 
are recovered as a tariff.
In long-term studies, COES considers the 
typical annual production pattern for 
renewable generation. In short and medium-term studies, COES also considers the 
limited reactive contributions characteristic of renewable generation. Using technical and economic studies, COES also determines the maximum wind generation 
capacity that may enter the system without adversely affecting its operation.
ZONING FOR BETTER PLANNING 
Certain mechanisms help drive proactive 
transmission planning for renewables integration. The planning process can be triggered by introducing a cluster of potential 
projects. These could be based on location, 
development phase, estimated date for 
commissioning and/or other attributes. It 
is possible to conduct studies to plan and 
facilitate economies of scale by considering sharing transmission facilities. This will 
make transmission planning less reactive 
and more proactive to integrating renewables. It can lead to the identification of 
areas with a high renewables potential. It 
can also help estimate the possible impact 
of different levels of renewable generation 
from various sources on the transmission 
system.
Brazil has used renewable generation to 
drive new planning and cost allocation 
techniques. Transmission connection was 
made on a first-come first-served and 
case-by-case basis according to available 
grid capacity determined by the system 
planning company. 
Now there is a higher share of renewables in 
the grid, transmission planning has, however, 
become more proactive. In 2008-2012, solutions were designed based on cooperative 
planning of integration networks to connect 
renewables. These networks became 
known as Shared Facilities for Generators 
(SFGs). These facilities are used exclusively 
by generators, but shared by different projects. Their aim was to anticipate renewable 
penetration, and they were based in areas 
with a large number of renewable projects 
under development. As illustrated in figure 
13, this avoided the need for individual 
exclusive high voltage (HV) grid connections for each generator.
Figure 13 
Shared connections to the high voltage grid
Source: www.PSRInc.comThis approach worked well in the first few 
years but suffered from implementation 
problems. These were related to lack of 
certainty on renewable project development. This was especially true when the 
grid was extended for expected rather 
than actual projects awarded through the 
renewable energy auctions. Its application 
was therefore suspended in 2012 to allow 
for a review of its improvement. 
The second approach, initiated by the 
Ministry of Energy in 2013, used studies of 
existing and planned transmission capacity. These were the source of a public list of 
the available capacity of several transmission zones before the renewable auction. 
Renewable generators have to compete in 
two auctions. The first is for transmission 
connection (lowest energy offers have grid 
connection priority). Then, the winning 
projects have to compete for the PPA.
In 2014, a final approach will use transmission planning techniques in Brazil to identify 
areas with high renewables potential. It will 
suggest the construction of transmission 
highways (or a bulk transmission system) 
to anticipate the development of renewable projects. Planning practices in Peru 
are considered adequate. Transmission 
plans take account of uncertainty about 
how demand and generation capacity will 
evolve. 
However, further improvements based on 
the concept of proactive transmission planning for renewables integration described 
above could be investigated. Of particular interest is the proactive identification 
of possible areas with a high renewables 
potential. This would yield proposals for 
some ex-ante (binding) transmission reinforcement planning.26 The main trade-off in 
any proactive scheme is, of course, related 
to economic risk allocation. The more 
proactive the transmission planning for grid 
connection (anticipating connection based 
on renewable potential), the lower the 
likely cost to generators and the higher to 
consumers, and vice versa. This should 
be carefully analysed. Moreover, proactive 
transmission planning will also influence 
auction design. It may become more sitespecific than it is at the moment.
REGIONAL GOVERNMENTS 
At the moment, the role of regional 
governments in energy policy is to formulate policies. They also implement and 
monitor energy plans in their region in 
accordance with national policies and
sector plans. Additional mandates 
include investment promotion in their jurisdiction and 
monitoring and implementing rural electrification programmes within the National 
Rural Electrification Plan framework. 
Regional governments grant authorisations and final concessions for renewable electricity projects in their region 
whose installed capacity is greater than 
500 kW27 and less than 10 MW.28 They are 
also responsible for granting land concessions29 and operation permits to bidders 
awarded renewable energy projects in 
their regions, under the national auctioning 
process. Regional governments are also in 
charge of land planning in their regions. They 
identify ecological and economic areas, 
and establish and classify extractive areas 
for power generation activities. Obtaining 
land titles is one of the challenges associated with implementing projects success26 This means establishing obligatory mandates in the construction of future transmission facilities.
27 Concessions are not required for systems under 500 kW (article 2 and 3 of Law Decree No 258)
28 Supreme Executive Order 056-2009-EM
29 The Special Programme for Land Titling (“PETT”) was transferred from to regional governments 
 by the Organismo de Formalización de la Propiedad Informal (Commission for the Formalization of 
 Informal Properties) (COFOPRI). ful through the auction process. Unlike the 
mining cadastre, land was not geographically referenced with a Unique Cadastre 
Code,30 which aggravates the problem. 
It sometimes leads to land disputes and 
social conflict due to the lack of clarity 
in property rights for land to be used by 
successful bidders. It leads to subsequent 
delays in project start-up. 
The governors of Arequipa and Puno, who 
participated in the RRA discussions, demonstrated their commitment to renewables 
deployment. This example, along with the 
regional government mandate, prompted 
a strong recommendation that regional 
governments and MINEM coordinate the 
planning process more closely for future 
renewable energy auctions. There seems 
to be a definite need to encourage regional 
authorities to prioritise land registration 
in areas with renewable energy potential to facilitate future auctions. Working 
together, MINEM and regional governments 
could define appropriate locations for the 
installation of solar and wind projects. They 
could eventually plan and promote regional 
industrial parks acting as load centres for 
renewable energy clusters. Coordination 
between these two entities would also 
lead to better definition of power blocks in 
renewable energy auctions. 
While MINEM is responsible for the energy 
sector, the regional governments have 
a much broader development agenda. 
Regional industry and investment promotion is a critical element of that agenda, 
as well as providing energy access. Closer 
coordination and role clarity in facilitating 
renewable energy procurement can ease 
renewables business transactions in Peru.
30 Law for the establishment of the National Integrated Cadastre System (2008); Law No. 28294V. Rural electrification
Peru has made remarkable efforts to improve its national electrification rate. This has 
increased from 55% in 1993 to 87.2% in 2012. Its rural electrification rate grew by over 
50% from almost 30% in 2007 to 63% at the end of 2012. This provided electricity to 
3.9 million people (MINEM, 2012a).
The 2013-2022 National Rural Electrification Plan includes a goal to provide electricity access to 6.2 million people in the next decade. This plan provides strategic 
direction and sets medium- and long-term goals for rural electrification. One of its 
objectives is the promotion of renewable energy for productive uses. Another is to 
coordinate different private and public stakeholders to create favourable financing 
conditions for rural renewable energy projects.
In accordance with the provisions of the Rural Electrification Law and the 2013-2022 
National Rural Electrification Plan, rural electrification activities will in the short term 
include renewable energy systems installation. They will also include grid expansion. 
Projects led by the national government (MINEM-DGER), regional governments and 
distribution concessionaires are part of the implementation plan.
NATIONAL RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PLAN 
The Rural Electrification (Law No. 28749), states that DGER has the authority to draw 
up the National Rural Electrification Plan. Peru aims to achieve universal access to 
electricity by 2021.
Electricity access in rural Peru is challenging because of the mountainous terrain 
and scattered settlements. Low energy consumption and limited purchasing power 
per household add to the challenge. Investors are therefore not attracted to these 
projects unless the state provides the right financial incentives and other necessary 
requirements.
MINEM has placed an emphasis on grid extension, mini-grids with hydro, solar and 
wind, in that order of priority, to achieve universal access. The rural electrification 
strategy states that wherever grid extension is possible it should be chosen over offgrid solutions. However, many settlements are located in areas where grid extension 
is not feasible. Small and mini-hydro are preferred where communities have perennial 
sources.
MINEM-DGER has 437 rural electrification projects clustered into 35 groups. The total 
investment is estimated at USD 417.8 million31 and will benefit 1.2 million people. 
Additionally, DGER is implementing 16 other special projects which will benefit 
150 000 people, with approximately USD 140 million will be invested.
31 PEN 1 162 million. Exchange rate Pen/USD =2.78Off grid rural renewable energy system, solar PV and wind
Photo Courtesy: MINEM PeruCompetitive funds for rural electrification projects are on offer. The project for 
increased rural electrification (FONER), 
finances rural electrification projects. 
FONER subsidises the investment cost of 
rural electrification projects to distribution 
companies qualified to provide electricity to rural communities (Andina, 2012). 
The first phase was known as FONER I 
(2006-2013) and had a total budget of 
USD 129.55 million. This initiative provided 
110 000 new electricity connections 
(7 000 using renewable energy). Following its success, the second phase 
(FONER II) has been awarded a total budget 
of USD 82.7 million. There are 19 grid 
extension and 29 solar PV projects in the 
pipeline.
Two more programmes: Programa Nacional 
de Electrificación Fotovoltaica Domiciliaria 
(National Photovoltaic Household 
Electrification Programme) and Luz en 
Casa (Light at Home) are also in progress.
The National Photovoltaic Household 
Electrification Programme was launched 
by MINEM in 2013. Its aim was to install 
500 000 stand-alone solar PV systems 
and to increase the national electrification rate to 95% by 2016. The first phase 
started in July 2013 with 1 601 solar PV 
systems distributed among 126 communities (MINEM, 2013). In September 2013, 
OSINERGMIN invited companies to participate in the tender for 500 000 solar PV 
systems (Pekic, 2013).
Companies are expected to make a bid 
for the design, installation, operation and 
maintenance of three different sized solar 
PV systems to households and public facilities, like schools and health centres. They 
range from 85 Wp to 1 kWp. The electricity provided by the systems should 
be enough to satisfy the needs of the 
end-user and depending on the design also 
offer a commercial service. Depending 
on the bids, a monthly fee will be set by 
OSINERGMIN based on the size of the 
system, investment required and commercial service provided, among other things. 
OSINERGMIN will form a trust fund in order 
to pay these companies. The capital will 
come from the monthly payment from rural 
off-grid users and a social compensation 
fund32 (FOSE). It will also be based on the 
compensation mechanism outlined in the 
Law for Energy Security and Development 
of the Southern Petrochemical Pole 
of Peru (Law 29970). 
The Acciona Microenergy Foundation 
has created a sustainable energy service 
company to lead its Light at Home 
programme. This provides underprivileged 
families with solar home systems and 
three compact fluorescent lamps (CFL). 
The management model is fee-for-service and so far it has installed more than 
1 300 solar home systems. 
By the end of 2013 an additional 1 700 solar 
home systems had been installed, reaching a milestone of 3 000 families (REVE - 
Revista Eólica y del Vehículo Eléctrico, 2013). 
The IDB provided a loan of USD 900 000 
and a donation of USD 330 000 via the 
Multilateral Investment Fund for technical 
cooperation and capacity building activities. 
Acciona Microenergy Foundation provides 
USD 500 000 (Acciona, 2013).
The innovative financing and business 
model, as well as good project management, has resulted in project success. 
A large number of successful microfinance institutions are operating in Peru, 
although they have not yet made a foray 
into rural renewable electrification projects 
32 Fondo Social de Compensación Eléctrica(El Comercio, 2013b). This is partly because 
of their lack of knowledge of the technology, performance parameters and risks. 
Capacity of these entities needs to be built 
to understand the technology, value chain 
management, equipment standards and 
criticality of establishing a good after-sales 
service. This needs to be done in collaboration with local universities and technical 
institutions.
Finally, improved coordination with relevant stakeholders — regional governments, 
private sector and technical institutions — 
is needed. This accelerates the deployment 
of renewable energy technologies in rural 
areas. Programmes for promoting rural 
livelihoods and poverty alleviation provide 
natural leverage points for off-grid solutions. Identifying a successful livelihood 
programme in rural areas as a partner 
immediately provides the scale required, 
as off-grid programmes take time to build 
up.
RENEWABLES FOR DEVELOPMENT
Access to modern energy services can 
transform the quality of life. Renewable 
energy, combined with other factors such 
as human capacity, knowledge and markets, 
can foster productive uses of energy. This 
hopefully contributes to income generation and local value chain development and 
thereby to economic growth and poverty 
alleviation in rural areas (IRENA, 2012).
In 2011, Peru completed a very successful pilot project in Cusco, Junin and 
Lima. It supported almost 5 000 microenterprise engaged in income-generating 
activities, such as cereal milling, agroprocessing and irrigation business by 
providing grid connections. 
The total investment in the three communities was over USD 700 000. This 
contributed an additional demand of 
1 863 MWh per year and improved the 
financial feasibility and sustainability of 
electricity infrastructure in rural areas 
(Finucane, Bogach and Garcia, 2011).
This pilot showed the importance of linking 
community ownership of a rural electrification programme to investment in employment promotion to enhance its economic 
feasibility. But lessons from the successful 
pilot are still to be embedded in the regulatory design and guidelines for implementing rural electrification programmes and 
operating electricity distribution companies (Finucane, Bogach and Garcia, 2011).
Off-grid solutions based on renewables such as solar and small hydro can 
provide the energy for development in 
remote areas. Successful and innovative 
programmes from Tanzania and Indonesia 
providing energy for productive uses with 
solar, small-hydro and hybrid systems can 
be studied and replicated.
Solar-powered systems are ideal for low 
power Productive Use of Energy (PUE) such 
as cellphone charging. In Tanzania local 
entrepreneurs may start a cellphone charging business by using a 12 Volt rechargeable battery. It charges from a solar panel, 
a dynamo connected to a bicycle or gridbased electricity. One important feature of 
the system is the battery charge controller, 
which provided a battery lifetime of two or 
three years (GSMA, 2011).
This type of system provides enough 
energy to charge up to ten cellphones per 
day. It also supplies LED lighting, allowing 
shopkeepers to work longer hours. The cost 
of the system is around USD 200, with estimated revenue of USD 40-50 per month 
(Gifford, 2013). Crowd funding produced 
the necessary funding for the second stage 
of the solar systems (Kickstarter, 2013).For more power-intensive productive 
use, small hydro is a suitable option. For 
example, Energising Development (EnDev) 
in Indonesia implemented a pilot project 
in nine villages in Sumatra and Sulawesi. 
It assessed PUE in existing communityoperated micro-hydropower (MHP) plants. 
A total budget of USD 12 776 was distributed among 53 businesses with the 
objective of studying the impacts of PUE 
on potential revenue expansion. It also 
assessed whether single specialised large 
appliances are more cost-effective and 
less technically vulnerable than numerous 
small-scale appliances.
Following several months of evaluation, it 
was concluded that medium-cost appliances for productive use have a higher 
chance of success. The rice huller was the 
most expensive appliance in the whole 
pilot project and it failed to satisfy expectations. Profitability of the businesses was 
the highest with group-owned as opposed 
to individual or community-owned businesses. PUE is very compatible with minihydro plants, and in most cases the operating times could accommodate productive 
activities without modifying operating 
hours. For the MHP operator, an additional 
PUE tariff generally does not require additional effort and helps increase its income 
(Shultz and Suryani, 2013).
Pilot projects like these will raise awareness in the community and among relevant 
stakeholders of the benefits of including productive uses in electrification 
programmes. Hopefully, it will accelerate 
the rural electrification rate. 
TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND 
QUALITY ASSURANCE
To ensure renewable energy systems last 
long enough and perform appropriately, 
components and installations have to 
comply with national technical regulations. 
Peru is already using national technical 
standards to ensure component and equipment quality, both imported and local. The 
following specific national standards are 
relevant:
• PV systems up to 500 Wp: technical specifications and energy rating 
method of a PV system.33
• Lead-acid electric batteries: requirements and test methods.
• Biofuels: physical-chemical characteristics and test methods for biodiesel 
321.125:2008 321.126:2011 NTP specifications for ethanol blends with petrol 
engine use.
The National Institute for the Defence of 
Competition and Protection of Intellectual 
Property (INDECOPI),34 Peru’s national 
standardisation body, has developed solar 
PV systems standards. However, there are 
still opportunities to further develop similar standards for other renewable energy 
technologies, like wind, biomass and 
geothermal. It is recommended that in the 
near future INDECOPI maps the existing 
gaps in technical standards for all renewable energy technologies and should also 
adopt the required national standards that 
are based as far as possible on international standards.
33 NTP 399.403.2006
34 Instituto Nacional de Defensa de la Competencia y de la Protección de la Propiedad IntelectuaThe IRENA recent report ’International 
Standardisation in the Field of Renewable 
Energy’ may provide valuable information 
on existing international standards as well 
as how to adopt them at national level 
(IRENA, 2013b).
The first step is to identify a list of equipment and services, which need standardisation. A second step determines the national 
technical standards already in existence. 
The third step is to define the chronological prioritisation of existing national technical standards to be revised and updated 
and new national technical standards to 
be adopted. As a fourth step, international 
reference standards should be identified as 
a basis for developing national standards. 
Technical committees responsible for 
developing national standards for renewable energy should include representatives 
from various stakeholders in the renewable energy market. These include industry 
associations, equipment suppliers, manufacturers, users, project developers, power 
generation companies and relevant state 
agencies.Box 5
Financing renewable energy projects in Peru
In recent years investors have shown an interest in renewable energy projects in Peru. 
Nevertheless, there are opportunities to further support an increased financial institutional participation in the sector. 
Some project developers have in recent times experienced delays on renewable 
energy project financial closure. During the RRA discussions it was clear that bank 
project appraisal units had a limited understanding of technology performance and 
risks. This led to a reluctance in project financing. It has also meant renewable energy 
projects are subject to increased collaterals and higher costs of finance and coverage 
ratios.
Commercial banks have successfully participated in funding projects in Peru’s two 
renewable energy auctions. The Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria (BBVA) has national 
experience of funding renewable energy projects. It is financially supported by IFC 
through a green credit line that was used for two small 5.9 MW and 9.6 MW hydropower plants (IFC, 2011). 
COFIDE has access to a credit line of USD 100 million from JICA designated to 
finance energy renovation infrastructure (Peru 21, 2012). It also has a credit line of 
EUR 50 million with KfW for renewable energy and energy efficiency (COFIDE, 
2012). The European Commission financed over USD 8 million under the Euro Solar 
programme. In addition, the Peruvian government provided additional funds of 
almost USD 2 million under this project. Euro Solar aims to provide 130 rural communities in Peru with access to electricity and the internet. Likewise, IDB implemented a 
USD 230 million programme to help Peru develop a sustainable energy programme to 
increase renewable energy and energy efficiency uptake (IDB, 2012). IFC has proven 
experience of funding renewable energy activities in Peru, for example, funding a 
market evaluation of Peruvian renewable energy finance, the 168 MW hydropower 
plant Cheves and a bioethanol project developed by Maple (IFC, 2011).
Recent renewables auctions allowed local financial institutions to engage with renewable energy projects and improve their appraisal of renewable energy projects with 
variable power. It is expected that domestic banks will be actively engaged in future 
auctions, based on their increased understanding of how these new technologies are 
performing. Specialised training for local banks in cooperation with technical institutions could be arranged. This would provide them with a better understanding of the 
technology, using case studies of actual projects on the ground. 
An understanding of technology, revenue streams, regulatory framework, electricity markets and auction processes would reduce bank perception of the renewables 
risk. It would increase lending to renewables projects. Feedback from banks could 
contribute to design PPAs for renewable energy projects, ensuring its bankability.Jatropha for biodiesel production
Photo Courtesy: ShutterstockVI. Bioenergy 
MOTIVATIONS FOR BIOFUELS DEVELOPMENT 
Domestic demand for liquid fuels has been growing over time, particularly as a result 
of increased demand from public transport. Figure 14 shows the national consumption of liquid fuels derived from oil, expressed in thousands of barrels of oil equivalent 
(KBOE) per day. Diesel shows the greatest consumption in 2006-2010. Since 2011, the 
Regulation for Biofuel Commercialisation has set a mandatory blend of 7.8% ethanol 
in gasoline and 2% to 5% biodiesel B100 in diesel.
Biofuels could be a renewable energy alternative to fossil fuels in the transport sector. 
In Peru, biofuels could have subsequent positive impacts by diversifying the energy 
matrix, developing rural and marginal areas, and creating value chains and jobs in 
agriculture, industry and research. 
Peru has crops with potential for producing first and second generation biofuels. 
Sugarcane and sorghum are the crops with greatest potential for ethanol production. For biodiesel production the crops are palmoil, jatropha, castor oil and canola 
(SNV-IIAP, 2007).
BIOFUELS REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 
In 2002, the National Environmental Council35 (CONAM) approved the creation of 
a technical committee for the biofuels promotion in Peru.36 This group proposed 
the Law for the Promotion of the Biofuels Market,37 which was approved in 2003 
by the permanent commission of Congress. This law defines a regulatory framework 
for the promotion of biofuels in a free market while encouraging the development 
of the agricultural sector and the reduction of environmental pollution. It also establishes the basis for the creating the Programme for the Promotion of the Use of 
Biofuels (PROBIOCOM) under the jurisdiction of the Agency for Promotion of Private 
Investment (Proinversión). 
35 Consejo Nacional del Ambiente
36 Via decree 024-01-CD/CONAM
37 Law Nº 28054 followed by D.S. Nº 013-2005-EM in 2005, and the RE-0014-2007-EF in 2007A subsequent standard, the Regulation for 
Biofuels Commercialisation,38 set out the 
requirements for marketing and distributing biofuels. It also set out requirements 
for technical and quality standards, the 
scope of application and the roles of the 
entities involved in the process. This standard also set mandatory requirements for 
ethanol blend percentages in petroleum 
and biodiesel in B100 diesel. From 2011 
onwards, this blending mandate has been 
established at 7.8% ethanol in petroleum 
and 5% biodiesel in diesel (diesel B5).39
Table 4 provides detailed information on 
the blending requirements for biodiesel. 
BIOFUELS STAKEHOLDERS
The biofuels market comprises different 
stakeholders that can be divided in two 
groups. Firstly there are those in charge of 
the regulatory framework and its application. The others are responsible for biofuels 
production and commercialisation. The role 
of the main players in the Peru regulatory 
framework is established in the Regulation 
for Biofuel Commercialisation40 as follows:
• Ministry of Agriculture41 identifies and 
promotes the development of areas 
available and suitable for agriculture 
and biofuel production.
• Ministry of Production42 grants permits 
for installing and running biofuel 
plants.
• Ministry of Energy and Mines—
Dirección General de Hidrocarburos 
(DGH) provides records and authorisations for marketing biofuels. 
• OSINERGMIN is responsible for supervising and monitoring compliance with 
the regulation on biofuels marketing, 
transportation and quality. 
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
150
120
90
60
30
0
1.83
1.24
0.99
15.2
23.6
78.3
0.77 0.32
10.6
30.4
87.4
13.3
27.7
82.0
13.1
22.8
69.5
14.4
21.4
63.5
Diesel Petroleum Industrial Oil Kerosene
Thousand Barrels per Calendar Day
Figure 14 
Trends in annual domestic demand for liquid fuels in 2010
Source: OSINERGMIN, 2011
38 Through the D.S. Nº021-2007-EM amended by the D.S. Nº 0064-2008-EM, D.S. Nº 0091-2009-EM, 
 D.S. Nº 0061-2010-EM, and D.S. Nº 0024-2011-EM.
39 From 2009 to the end of 2010 the mandatory blend for biodiesel was 2% for diesel B2.
40 Nº021-2007-EM
41 Ministerio de Agricultura
42 Ministerio de la ProducciónThe second group of stakeholders 
is involved in biofuels production and 
commercialisation in Peru. Key stakeholders 
within this group are domestic producers of 
ethanol (Caña Brava43 and Maple Energy44), 
biodiesel B100 producers (Grupo Palmas,45
Pure Biofuels and Bio Agro Heaven), several 
fuel trading companies46 and two oil 
refinery companies (Petroperú and Repsol’s 
Refineria de la Pampilla). The latter two 
are both involved in the blending process.
It is expected that second generation 
biofuels production projects will come 
forward in the next few years, producing 
ethanol and biodiesel B100 from agroindustrial products.
43 Caña Brava started operations in 2009 with three subsidiaries: 1) Agrícola del Chira, responsible for 
 planting and harvesting sugar cane; 2) Sucroalcolera del Chira, responsible for ethanol milling and 
 industrial production; and 3) Bioenergia del Chira, responsible for electricity generation through bagasse. 
44 Maple Energy started operations in 2012 and currently has two subsidiaries; Maple Etanol S.R.L and Maple 
 Biocombustibles S.R.L.; Maple Energy harvests and processes sugar cane to produce ethanol. Production 
 is marketed locally and also exported.
45 Grupo Palmas is located in the San Martin region. It converts palm oil into biodiesel in a plant with 
 production capacity of 50 000 million tonnes of biodiesel B100 per year. In 2012, its production was 
 15 137 million tonnes per year.
46 In the Lima region, Pure Biofuels and Bio Agro Heaven import crude oil and refi ne it to produce mostly 
 biodiesel B5 and occasionally biodiesel B100, which is then off ered on the market.
Table 4 
Diesel blending under the Regulation for Biofuel Commercialisation
Volume biodiesel* % Volume diesel Denomination Applicability
 2 98 Diesel B2 1 Jan 2009 - 31 Dec 2010
 5 95 Diesel B5 from 1 Jan 2011
*(B100)
Source: OSINERGMIN, 2010
Figure 15 
Ethanol production chain in PeruBIOFUELS BUSINESS MODELS
Peru has been promoting a biofuel market 
based on a model of free competition and 
free access to economic activity. This is in 
accordance with a legal framework established by the Law for the Promotion of the 
Biofuels Market and the Regulation for 
Biofuel Commercialisation. 
To satisfy current blending mandates for 
ethanol (7.8%) and biodiesel (5%), refining companies procured these inputs from 
national and international markets. Price 
and availability of the products are important parameters while procuring biofuels.
Repsol Refinery purchases some of its 
ethanol inputs domestically and imports 
the remaining balance, while Petroperu 
imports 100% of its ethanol inputs. Cana 
Brava, for its part, sells some its production to Repsol Refinery and exports the 
rest. Maple Energy sells 100% of its ethanol production to markets abroad.47 Figure 
15 displays the present ethanol business 
model in Peru.
In the case of biodiesel, two different products are on the market, B100 (100% biodiesel) and B5 (5% biodiesel B100 and 95% 
diesel). As in the case of ethanol production, most raw materials used in the biodiesel blending are imported. Repsol Refinery 
buys 100% of the B100 biodiesel used in 
its process while Petroperu only replaces 
imports of biodiesel B100 in situations 
where the imported biodiesel purchases 
are delayed. Petroperu claims that the 
quality of the biodiesel produced domestically does not meet the required standards, 
thus giving a preference to imports. Grupo 
Palmas produces B5, which is then sold 
to the trading company Primax. Bio Agro 
Heaven and Pure Biofuels, two companies 
based in Lima, import crude oil and produce 
B5. It is then sold to fuel trading companies 
as well as to private companies. 
Petroperu and Repsol Refinery run international tenders for biodiesel purchase. Grupo 
Palmas transports at a high cost, its biodiesel from the Amazon jungle to the Lima 
region because of the inadequate existing 
infrastructure. Figure 16 displays the present biodiesel business model in Peru.
CHALLENGES TO 
BIOFUELS DEVELOPMENT 
Peru has made major efforts to set up standards and regulations promoting biofuel. 
Nevertheless, there are still challenges 
to overcome, especially in relation to the 
development of the local biofuel markets 
and the promotion of local production.
One of the main challenges is the need 
to increase local biofuels production. The 
objective of the Regulation for Biofuel 
Commercialisation is to promote biofuel 
under market conditions. This leads to price 
competition between biofuels produced 
in Peru and potential imports. Biofuels 
produced domestically are generally priced 
higher. 
To substitute biofuel imports, an increase in 
local biofuel production will be required.48 
Table 5 shows the average prices of biofuel 
in the national and international markets. 
Table 6 shows biofuel production volumes 
and import, and export volumes for 2012. 
It can be determined from this information 
that domestic biodiesel production in 2012 
47 Several ethanol certifi cations are recognised in Peru, so that some companies prefer to sell their 
 production abroad, where they may gain an additional premium from these certifi cations.
48 Some countries, like Colombia, have promulgated norms that promote the production of biofuels. 
 Diario Ofi cial Colombia, ‘Ley 939 del 2004’, 
 www.secretariasenado.gov.co/senado/based oc/ley/2004/ley_0939_2004.html, 31 December 2007Figure 16 
Biodiesel production chain in Peru
Table 5 
Average biofuel prices, 2012
Ethanol 800 650-800 1 010 725
Biodiesel (B100) 1 500 1 280 ------- 1 500(iii)
Source: (i) Biofuels Committee-SNI, Sucroalcolera del Chira and Grupo Palmas; (ii) Lima Chamber of 
Commerce, SUNAT biofuels customs information for import and export 2012; (iii) UFOP biodiesel report 
2011/2012
Biofuel National 
market(i)
USD/mt
Import 
price(ii)
USD/mt
International 
market
USD/mt
Export 
price(ii)
USD/mtwas substantially lower than that required 
to sustain market demand.
To increase biofuels production, it may be 
necessary to do other things such as registering land tenure or forming producer 
associations, which could integrate biofuels 
into productive chains. Regional governments could engage in these activities, 
particularly land registration. This could 
be an opportunity to move forward with a 
cadastre.
More effective coordination between 
different stakeholders may also be important. There might be an opportunity to 
create an autonomous entity at ministerial level to coordinate and provide regulatory supervision of the activities of the 
different stakeholders in the biofuels value 
chain. This entity could facilitate greater 
coordination between MINEM, the Ministry 
of Agriculture (MINAG), OSINERGMIN and 
biofuels producers.
Annex 10 shows the typical water consumption of main crop types used to produce 
biofuels. Crops used for biodiesel production such as soybean or jatropha are 
the most water-intensive crops, consuming 400-600 m3 of water per gigajoule 
(GJ). By contrast, crops for ethanol 
production such as sugar beet, sugar 
cane and sorghum require on average 
100-400 m3/GJ (Gerbens-Leenesa, 
Hoekstraa and van der Meerb, 2009). 
Securing a complete and enforceable 
regulatory framework for the rational use 
of water may result in an efficient allocation of resources, given the cost of working 
in the Peruvian jungle. It could also result 
in the sustainable development of biofuels 
projects.49 In addition, it would be helpful to assess water resource availability 
before approving a project and concession 
land for biofuel crops. Finally, water usage 
could be improved by implementing irrigation systems, reservoirs, water damming 
and channelling. 
Biofuels producers would also benefit 
from improved infrastructure such as 
roads, bridges and ports, particularly in the 
Amazon. This would facilitate their access 
to markets, cutting costs and transport 
time. This could be particularly important for bioethanol producers in the North 
of Peru and in the Amazonian region. 
Transportation from those areas to the 
consumption centres is a challenge.
Peru has favourable regulatory conditions for biofuels development. However, 
as highlighted earlier, research and trainTable 6 
Biofuels production, import and export volumes- 2012
Ethanol 78 607(i) 67 149(i) 126 438(iv)
Biodiesel (B100) 18 136(iii) 223 613(ii)
Source: (i) National Industry Society, Biofuels Committee; (ii) Lima Chamber of Commerce, SUNAT biofuels 
customs information for import and export 2012; (iii) MINEM, Grupo Palmas; (iv) Lima Chamber of Commerce
Biofuel Market for national 
production
mt/p.a
Exports
mt/p.a
Imports
mt/p.a
49 The Law on Water Resources (No. 29338) regulates the use and responsible management of surface 
 water and groundwater. It states that the use of water resources is conditioned to availability, and 
 recognises three classes of water use: primary use, population use and productive use. Meeting the 
 primary needs of the individual takes priority over any other use. The last priority is for productive use, 
 which includes agricultural, energy and industrial use, among others. ing, among other factors, may be required 
to take advantage of these conditions. 
MINEM, (MINAG, regional governments, 
the Council for Science Technology and 
Innovation50 (CONCYTEC) and universities 
all need to collaborate in setting up training, 
university curricula and research institutes. 
This will help develop a biofuels market. A 
capacity-building initiative, concentrated in 
regions with high biomass potential, could 
focus on agricultural production topics 
related to native crops and on the biodiesel 
refining process. It could also focus on the 
technical and financial assessment of biofuels projects.
The Brazilian experience is made up of an 
interesting mix. This consists of an early 
1970s public policy on technology development aimed at reducing international 
oil price vulnerability combined with a 
late 1980s opportunity to foster a multimarket ethanol industry. This has had a 
positive result for the whole country. Box 5 
summarises the key aspects of Brazil biofuels programmes.
50 Consejo Nacional de Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación Tecnológica
Box 6
Key aspects of Brazil’s biofuels programmes
The Brazilian experience of biofuels is an interesting mix of public policy and market 
opportunities and has had a positive result for the whole country. Ethanol development has 
taken Brazil decades of subsidies and policy intervention. These went through several changes 
and reviews. In the end, they led to an increase in ethanol production and a transformation of 
the sugar cane industry. Originally a family business, it became one of the strongest Brazilian 
agribusiness sectors.
Brazil has signifi cant resource availability of both feedstocks (sugar cane and soy beans) and 
has taken advantage of economies of scale to increase their productivity. Brazil’s push towards 
biofuels had a signifi cant public policy component, which incentivised fi nancing, created tax 
breaks and established mandatory blends to defi ne a captive market. This has created the 
conditions for these industries to develop, including production and transportation networks. 
With respect to the design of specifi c policies, there are two important aspects that should 
be taken into account:
• It is important not to only consider resource availability, good agricultural practices and 
mechanisation, but also the logistics and transportation network. For example, as biodiesel 
production is geographically decentralised, its distribution may become a burden for the 
transportation network, due to the low density of its feedstock. As mentioned above, 
the National Petroleum Agency (ANP) auctions in Brazil consider a logistics factor 
(FAL – Factor de Ajuste Logístico) to place a value on the best locations.
• Fuel technical specifi cation and blending practices: In the early days of Brazilian ethanol 
usage the percentage of ethanol in the ethanol-petroleum mixture varied widely and had 
no policy control. This lack of standardisation had a negative impact on engine effi ciency 
and as a result consumers and the automotive industry became increasingly dissatisfi ed. 
Additionally, there were many complaints about engine problems due to biodiesel 
blending. These factors may have discredited the biofuels programme. Nowadays ANP 
has rigid control over ethanol specifi cation/blending, and biodiesel specifi cation is wellestablished in ANP biodiesel auctions. Thus the observation by Petroperu claiming the 
quality of biodiesel produced domestically does not meet the required standards, gives 
cause for concern and Petroperu have mitigated this by giving preference to imports.Harnessing the plentiful supply of wind along Peru’s 
coastline to power local communities and businesses
Courtesy of Ashden AwardsVII. Recommendations
Actions 1-3: Renewable energy auctions
Peru has taken signifi cant steps to develop successful renewable energy auctions and it 
is one of the leading countries in the world with regard to this activity. However, there are 
opportunities to further improve planning and preparatory activities. Auction process design 
needs to be improved to resolve some outstanding problems.
Action 1: Undertake more eff ective long-term 
 renewable energy auction planning 
Resource- service pair(s) On-grid/off-grid/solar/wind/biomass/hydro
Description Define clear long-term policy goals for renewable energy 
auctions to articulate an enduring vision. This provides a strong 
signal of intent, attracts serious global IPPs and encourages 
equipment manufacturers to develop the local industrial base 
in Peru.
 Announce renewable energy auctions, at least one year in 
advance, so as to provide bidders sufficient time to perform 
resource assessments and undertake required due diligence, preparing the ground to secure finance and obtain, 
in–principle, clearance on potential project sites from regional 
governments.
 Encourage regional authorities to prioritise the identification 
and provision of land with clear land titles/lease options in 
areas with renewable energy potential. This would reduce 
project delays once a project has been awarded. 
 Communicate best practice on how to better assess technology performance and risks associated with it. This includes 
PPA clauses to guide and facilitate renewable energy project 
appraisal with local banks and financial institutions.
 Regular consultations with financial institutions to improve 
renewable energy projects through PPA bankability.
 Consider the requirement, at least in-principle, of environmental clearance for each potential generation project in the 
auction, as part of the qualification process.Relevant organisations MINEM, OSINERGMIN, regional governments, financial institutions, universities.
Timing End 2015
Key outcomes Attracts more investment to the renewable energy sector.
 Promotes local content within the framework of overall 
economic efficiency.
 Mitigates the risk of failure in project implementation.
 Strengthened financial institution appraisal capabilities for 
renewable energy projects.
Action 2: Fine-tune renewable energy auction design 
 and procedures to close gaps
Resource- service pair(s) On-grid/off-grid/solar/wind/biomass/hydro
Description Improve process design to secure participation of experienced 
developers and also mitigate risk of aggressive bidding.
 Develop a mechanism to closely monitor project implementation and also allow for contract termination at an early stage 
if ground-level implementation continuously lags behind and 
does not meet required milestones.
 Introduce PPA clauses to allow contracted power quota calculation to three years instead of the current practice of only one 
year. This would introduce more flexibility in the system and 
also reduce the inherent risk from a variable resource.
Relevant organisations MINEM, OSINERGMIN, regional governments
Timing End 2015
Key outcomes Bidders awarded contracts have flexibility in power supply 
standards, in keeping with the nature of the resource, while 
meeting grid specifications.
 Companies are able to secure better financing conditions 
resulting from a more bankable PPA.
 Risks of projects not being commissioned due to delays are 
reduced in a timely manner.Action 3: Reduce administrative costs of auctions 
 and maximise their benefi t
Resource- service pair(s) On-grid/off-grid/solar/wind/biomass/hydro
Description Size of rounds: large power auction rounds for renewable 
energy could lead to tariff reductions and promote local 
manufacturing. There is as yet no standard round size. Rounds 
should be large enough to draw the interest of bidders and 
small enough to foster competition. Large rounds will require 
a mechanism to reduce the potential adverse impact on 
domestic companies.
 Local Content Requirements (LCR) could lead to green jobs, 
but conditions should be set only after assessing existing 
manufacturing capabilities and the overall economic efficiency 
of the renewable energy auction process. A clear roadmap for 
gradually introducing local content into future auctions over 
a period of time, should be prepared so that manufacturing 
investments match policy aspirations.
 Hybrid systems: Peru’s significant resources could make efficient hybrid systems possible. Auctions could be designed 
to allow investors to bid for a portfolio of non-dispatchable 
and dispatchable resources that could ease renewables 
penetration.
 Technology-neutral auctions: launch an in-depth examination 
of the possibility of further lowering tariffs by introducing 
technology-neutral auctions.
Relevant organisations MINEM, OSINERGMIN, regional governments
Timing End 2014
Key outcomes Rounds are large enough to get the interest of bidders at the 
global level and small enough to foster competition, while 
securing local participation.
 Green jobs are promoted , as well as securing overall economic 
efficiency.
 Peru exploits a combination of its own energy resources.Action 4: Increase intake of renewables into the grid
Resource-service pair(s) On-grid/solar/wind/biomass/hydro
Description Segment-specific upgrade of grid infrastructure to allow 
increased renewable energy uptake.
 Address renewable energy integration by proactively identifying areas with high renewables potential and by conducting studies to estimate possible impacts of different levels of 
renewable generation from various sources on the transmission system.
Relevant organisations COES, MINEM, regional governments, Peruvian Renewable 
Energy Association (APER)
Timing End 2015
Key outcomes Increased capability of the grid to integrate renewable power 
from variable sources.
Action 5: Boost rural renewable energy
Resource- service pair(s) Off-grid/solar/small hydro
Description Achieve greater coordination between national and regional 
governments, private sector, as well as the alignment of 
the new energy infrastructure with social and economic 
objectives. 
 Support and promote the productive use of energy so as to 
make system operations sustainable and further promote rural 
development. 
 Complement existing renewable energy standards (i.e., 
solar PV) with those that could be developed for other 
technologies. 
 Capacity-building activities for installation, operation and 
maintenance of rural renewable energy systems for productive energy use.
Relevant organisations MINEM-DGER, regional governments, private sector, 
Asociación Peruana de Energías Renovables (APER) (Peruvian 
Renewable Energy Association), universities and technical 
centres, and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) Timing End 2015
Key outcomes Increases electricity access in Peru using technically and financially sustainable renewable energy systems.
 Includes productive use of renewable energy as a specific 
objective in rural electrification programmes in order to foster 
rural development.
Action 6: Continue developing biofuel
Resource-service pair(s) Transport biofuels
Description Provide enabling policy framework that facilitates business 
models for biodiesel and ethanol and promotes biofuel market 
development.
 Introduce university courses and provide research institutes 
with R&D funds, to provide the sector with trained personnel 
and entrepreneurs.
 A capacity-building initiative could be launched with academic 
institutions in regions of high biomass potential, focusing on 
agricultural production topics related to native crops, and the 
ethanol and biodiesel refining process. This could also include 
building capacity for the technical and financial assessment of 
biofuels projects.
 Develop quality standard for biofuels in Peru (applicable to 
both locally-produced and imported biofuels).
Relevant organisations MINEM–DGH, MINAG, Ministry of Transport, National Society of 
Industries(SNI), Biofuels Committee, universities, CONCYTEC
Timing December 2015
Key outcomes Sustainable business biodiesel and bioethanol models developed in Peru.Action 7: Periodically update solar and 
 wind resource assessments
Resource- service pair(s) On-grid/off-grid 
Description Update solar, renewable energy resource maps.
 Publicly announce methodology to be used for the assessments; undertake periodic updates of renewable energy 
maps.
Relevant organisations MINEM
 IRENA could assist in providing expert advice on methodological issues, if required.
Timing Ongoing
Key outcomes Facilitates decision-making process and leads to accelerated 
renewable energy deployment in Peru.
 Continuous resource atlas updates and regular consultations 
with potential investors and users will improve data quality 
and availability, facilitating policy and investment decisions.VIII. References
Acciona Micro-energía Perú (2013), “Proyecto LUZ EN CASA-1.700”, https://sites.google.com/a/accioname.org/
acciona-microenergia-peru/programa-luz-en-casa-sfd/proyecto-lc1700, accessed November 2013.
Andina (2012), “Proyecto Foner permitió acceso a electricidad a más de 365 mil peruanos en zonas rurales”, 
www.andina.com.pe/Espanol/noticia-proyecto-foner-permitio-acceso-a-electricidad-a-mas-365-mil-peruanoszonas-rurales-394334.aspx#.Uotb0sRT7n5, accessed November 2013.
BCRP (Banco Central de Reserva del Perú) (The Central Reserve Bank of Peru) (2013),” Reporte de Inflación” 
(Inflation Report), www.bcrp.gob.pe/docs/Publicaciones/Reporte-Inflacion/2013/marzo/reporte-de-inflacionmarzo-2013-sintesis.pdf, accessed November 2013.
Bessombes, C. (2013), “OSINERGMIN confirma que tarifas eléctricas subirán 3%” (Osinergmin confirms that 
electricity rates will rise 3%), La Republica, Peru, 31 May 2013, www.larepublica.pe/31-05-2013/OSINERGMINconfirma-que-tarifas-electricas-subiran-3.
Cámara del Pacifico (Pacific Chamber) (2012), “Agricultura”, www.camaradelpacifico.org/index.php/sectoragroindustrial.html, accessed October 2013.
CLIMATESCOPE (2013), www5.iadb.org/mif/climatescope/2013/tool.html, accessed November 2013
CNN (2012), “World’s top economies in 2050 will be…”, January 12, 2012, http://business.blogs.cnn.
com/2012/01/12/worlds-top-economies-in-2050-will-be/, accessed November 2013.
COES (2012a), “Informe de Diagnóstico de las Condiciones Operativas del SEIN 2015 -2024” (Diagnostic Report 
of the Operational Policies, SEIN 2015 -2024), 27 February 2013, http://contenido.coes.org.pe/alfrescostruts/
download.do?nodeId=47e6f25b-dc6f-424a-98b9-b04082c71807
COES (Comité de Operación Económica del Sistema) (Committee on Economic Operation System) (2012b), 
“Propuesta Definitiva de Actualización del Plan de Transmisión 2013-2022, ”(Final Proposal to Update the 
Transmission Plan 2013 - 2022), report COES/DP-01-2012, http://contenido.coes.org.pe/alfrescostruts/download.do?nodeId=85b37cac-cb11-4a28-af3e-035c00bc6df6
COFIDE (Corporación Financiera de Desarrollo) (Development Finance Corporation) (2012), “Annual Report 
2012”, www.cofide.com.pe/textos/Memoria_2012_VF_ING-.pdf
Cramton, P., et al. (2010), Wind Energy in Colombia: A Framework for Market Entry,
The World Bank, Washington, DC.
El Comercio (2013a), “Fitch Ratings eleva calificación crediticia del Perú a 'BBB+” (Fitch Ratings raised credit 
qualification of Peru to BBB+), 23 October 2013, http://elcomercio.pe/economia/1648804/noticia-fitch-ratingseleva-calificacion-crediticia-perubbb, accessed December 2013.
El Comercio (2013b), “Eligen a Perú como el mejor entorno para micro finanzas por sexto año” (Elected to Peru 
as the best environment for microfinance sixth year), 2 October 2013, http://elcomercio.pe/economia/1639138/
noticia-peru-logra-sexto-ano-consecutivo-mejor-entorno-microfinanzas, accessed December 2013.ESMAP (Energy Sector Management Assistance Program) (2011), “Peru, Opportunities and Challenges of 
Small Hydropower Development”, www.esmap.org/sites/esmap.org/files/7747-ESMAP%20Peru%20English%20
Web_4-11-11_0.pdf
ESMAP and GIZ (German Society for International Cooperation) (2013), “Productive Use of Energy (PRODUSE): 
Measuring Impacts of Electrification on Small and Micro-Enterprises in Sub-Saharan Africa”, GIZ, Eschborn, 
www.esmap.org/sites/esmap.org/files/ESMAP_GIZ_BMZ_AEI_PRODUSE_Study_FullText_Optimized_0.pdf
Finucane, J., S. Bogach and L. Garcia (2011), Promoción de los Usos Productivos de la Electricidad en Áreas 
Rurales de Perú: Experiencia y Lecciones Aprendidas (Promoting productive uses of electricity in rural areas of 
Peru: experience and lessons learned), ESMAP, Washington, DC.
Gerbens-Leenesa, W., A.Y. Hoekstraa and T.H. van der Meerb (2009), “The water footprint of bioenergy”, N.Y., 
www.pnas.org/content/106/25/10219.full.
Gifford, J. (2013), “Solar phone charging launched in Tanzania”, PV-Magazine, 19 February, www.pv-magazine.
com/news/details/beitrag/solar--phone-charging-launched-in-tanzania_100010263/#ixzz2iTiKC4g5. accessed 
November 2013.
GSMA (2011), “Chapter 3: Off-Grid Charging Solutions”, In: Green Power for Mobile Charging Choices, 
www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/offgridchargingsolutions.pdf, 
Accessed October 2013.
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank) (2012), “BID aprueba US$30 millones para matriz energética sostenible 
en el Perú” (IDB approves $30 million for sustainable energy matrix in Peru), 26 November, www.iadb.org/es/
noticias/comunicados-de-prensa/2012-11-26/matriz-energetica-sostenible-de-peru,10230.html#.UluSIGZfrIU. 
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2013), Country Data, IEA, Paris. 
IFC (International Finance Corporation) (2011), Assessment of Peruvian Market for Financing Sustainable 
Energies, IFC, Washington, DC 
IFC (2013), Doing Business, IFC, Washington, DC. 
INEI (Instituto Nacional de Estadística Informática) (The National Institute of Statistics and Informatics) (2013), 
Indicadores Temáticos (Thematic indicators), INEI, Lima.
IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2012), “International Off-grid Renewable Energy Conference 
(IOREC) 2012”, www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IOREC_Key%20Findings%20and%20
Recommendations.pdf
IRENA (2013a), Renewable Energy Auctions in Developing Countries, IRENA, Abu Dhabi. 
IRENA (2013b), International Standardisation in the Field of Renewable Energy, IRENA, Abu Dhabi.KICKSTARTER (2013), “Readyset Solar Kit for ipad, iphone, Android and more”, www.kickstarter.com/projects/
mikelin/readyset-solar-kit-for-ipad-iphone-android-and-mor?ref=live
KPMG (2011), “KPMG report on Tax and Incentives for Renewable Energy”, June, www.kpmg.com/Global/en/
IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/taxes-and-incentives-for-renewable-energy/Documents/taxes-and-incentives-for-renewable-energy-2013.pdf
Mendoza,J. (2011), Subastas de Energía: Experiencias de Perú (Energy auctions: Peru Experiences), 31 October 
2011, OSINERGMIN (Organismo Supervisor de la Inversión en Energía y Minería), Lima.
Mendoza, J. (2012), Marco Legal de las Energias Renovables en el Peru (Legal Framework for Renewable Energies 
in Peru), Seminario de “Energías Renovables en el Perú y Tecnología Made in Germany” (Seminar Renewable 
Energy in Peru and Technology Made in Germany), 13 November, OSINERGMIN, Lima.
MINEM (Ministry of Energy and Mines) (2010), Balance Nacional de Energía 2010 (National Energy Balance 
2010), MINEM, Lima.
MINEM (2012a), Perú Electricity Subsector – Promotion Document, MINEM, Lima.
MINEM (2012b), “Con Inversiones por 5 Mil Millones de Dólares Oferta de Energía es Suficiente Hasta el 2016” 
(With Investment of 5 billion the energy supply is enough until 2016), 10 March 2012, www.minem.gob.pe/
descripcion.php?idSector=6idTitular=3164&idTitular=4622
MINEM (2013), Más de dos millones de peruanos tendrán energía eléctrica a través de paneles solares, (More 
than Two Million of Peruvian Electric Power will be Via Solar Panels), 08 July 2013, San Borja, www.minem.gob.
pe/descripcion.php?idSector=12&idTitular=5533
Molinelli, F. (2011), Renewable Energy in Peru, Presentation August 2011, OSINERGMIN, Lima.
Nicho Diaz, L. (2013), Rol de las Energías Renovables en Perú (Role of Renewable Energy in Peru), 12 December 
2013, Rome, Italy, MINEM, Lima.
OSINERGMIN (Organismo Supervisor de la Inversión en Energía y Minería) (2006), “Ley para asegurar el desarrollo eficiente de la generación eléctrica” (Act to ensure the development of efficient electric generation), 
www2.osinerg.gob.pe/MarcoLegal/pdf/LEY%2028832.pdf
OSINERGMIN (2009), Electric Concessions Law No. 25844, http://intranet2.minem.gob.pe/web/archivos/dge/
publicaciones/compendio/dl25844.pdf
OSINERGMIN (2010), “First Auction, Second Call up of Renewable Energies for Electricity Generation”,
www2.osinerg.gob.pe/EnergiasRenovables/contenido/SubastasAnteriores.Subasta1.2daConvocatoria.html
OSINERGMIN (2011), “Análisis situacional de la comercialización de combustibles líquidos en el Perú (Situation 
Analysis of the marketing of liquid fuels in Peru), División de planeamiento y desarrollo gerencia de fiscalización 
de hidrocarburos líquidos (Division of planning and development management control of liquid hydrocarbons)OSINERGMIN (2012), “Second Auction Call of Renewable Energies for Electricity Generation” 
www2.osinerg.gob.pe/EnergiasRenovables/contenido/SubastasAnteriores.Subasta1.2daConvocatoria.html
OSINERGMIN (2013a), “Results Renewable Energy First Auction”, www2.osinerg.gob.pe/EnergiasRenovables/
contenido/Resultado1raSubasta.html
OSINERGMIN (2013b), “Third Auction Call of Renewable Energies for Electricity Generation”, www2.osinerg.
gob.pe/EnergiasRenovables/EnergiasRenovables.html. 
PERU 21 (2012), “Japón presta a Perú US$156 millones para energía y gestión de residuos” (Japan Lends Peru 
U.S. $156 million for energy and waste management), 12 October, http://peru21.pe/economia/japon-presta-peru-us-156-millones-energia-y-gestion-residuos-2046305, accessed November 2013.
Pekic, V. (2013), “Peru to launch off-grid request for tender”, PV Magazine, 17 September, www.pv-magazine.
com/news/details/beitrag/peru-to-launch-off-grid-request-for-tender_100012756/#axzz2h1xXpdAP
ProInversion (2013), “Why Invest in Peru?”, www.proinversion.gob.pe/E407EC87-36BE-48FC-8851-
A7F7CFD662A0/FinalDownload/DownloadId-59C0FDD625525683339D701EAEBB52C7/E407EC87-36BE48FC-8851-A7F7CFD662A0/RepositorioAPS/1/0/JER/PRESENTACION_PAIS_PDF/PPT_Por%20que%20
invertir%20en%20Peru%20en%20ingles%20agosto_pptx.pdf
Ramirez, R. (2011), “Implicaciones de Integrar Generación con Recursos Energéticos Renovables en 
el SEIN” (Implications of Integrating Renewable Energy Resources with Generation in SEIN), COES, 
http://contenido.coes.org.pe/alfrescostruts/download.do?nodeId=d7194db3-4802-4550-871a-1c559c78d23c
REN21 (Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century) (2012), Global Status Report 2012, REN21, 
Paris.
REVE (Revista Eólica y del Vehículo Eléctrico) (Wind Energy and Electric Vehicle Review) (2013), “1 700 nuevas 
familias en la Región de Cajamarca accederán a energía solar fotovoltaica en 2013”, (1 700 new families in the 
region of Cajamarca gain access to solar PV in 2013), 8 March 2013. www.evwind.com/2013/03/08/1700-nuevasfamilias-en-la-region-de-cajamarca-accederan-a-energia-solar-fotovoltaica-en-2013, accessed December 2013.
SAB (Sociedad Agente de Bolsa) (Stock Exchange Real Society) (SAB) (2013), ”Perú continuara liderando el 
crecimiento económico de la región” (Peru will continue to lead economic growth in the región), 22 June 2013, 
www.larepublica.pe/22-06-2013/peru-continuara-liderando-el-crecimiento-economico-en-la-region
Schultz, R. and A. Suryani (2013), Productive Use of Energy (PUE): Finding of the EnDev Indonesia Pilot Project, 
GIZ, Bonn.Sector Electricidad (Electricity Sector) (2012), “Perú: Inauguran Línea 500kV Zapallal-Trujillo y subestaciones” (Peru: Inauguration of500kVLineandSubstationZapallal-Trujillo), 22 November, www.sectorelectricidad.
com/3170/inauguran-linea-500kv-zapallal-trujillo-y-subestaciones/
SNV-IIAP (Servicio Holandes de Coperacion al Desarrollo) (Dutch Service for Development cooperation or partnership) (2007), Linea de Base Biocombustibles en la Amazonia Peruana (Baseline biofuels in the Peruvian 
Amazon), December 2007. 
Vargas, V. and V. Cruz (2010), Geothermal map of Peru, Proceedings World Geothermal Congress.
Vergara, W., et al. (2010), Wind Energy in Colombia: A Framework for Market Entry, World Bank, 
Washington, DC, pp. 120. 
World Bank (2012), “Country Data”, http://data.worldbank.org/country, accessed November 2013.Annex 1: Renewable energy resource maps
Geothermal atlas of Peru
Source: MINEM 
PERU
Ministry of Energy and Mines
Available Geothermal Potential
Source: CENERGIA
GEOTHERMAL REGIONS
I CAJAMARCA
II HUARAZ
III CHURIN
IV CENTRAL
V CADENA DE CONOS VOLCANICOS
VI PUNO-CUZCOs
 Hydropower atlas of Peru
Source: MINEM Annex 2: Major renewable energy stakeholders in Peru 
ON-GRID MARKET
Name of organisation 
MINEM-DGE
OSINERGMIN-GART
Peruvian Renewable 
Energy Association 
National Mining, Petroleum 
and Energy Society – SNMPE
PD: Tacna Solar S.A.C
PD: GCZ Ingenieros S.A.C
PD: HMV Ingenieros del Perú 
S.R.L
COES
National Assembly of 
Regional Governments
Regional Government 
of Arequipa
OFF-GRID MARKET – 
ELECTRIC AND HEATING/
COOLING APPLICATIONS
MINEM-DGER
Regional Government of Puno
Practical Solutions (ITDG)
ADINELSA
Renewable Energy Centre 
(CER) National Engineering 
University (UNI)
Rural Sector Support Group
Pontifi cal Catholic University of 
Peru ( PUCP)
JICA
Website
www.minem.gob.pe
www.osinergmin.gob.pe
N/A
www.snmpe.org.pe
www.solarpack.es
www.gczingenieros.com
www.h-mv.com
www.coes.org.pe
www.angr.org.pe
www.regionarequipa.gob.pe
www.minem.gob.pe
dger.minem.gob.pe/
www.regionpuno.gob.pe
www.adinelsa.com.pe
www.cer.uni.edu.pe
gruporural.pucp.edu.pe
www.jica.go.jp/peru/espanol
Address and telephone
Av, Las Artes Sur 260 - 
San Borja-Lima 41. 
Av. Canadá 1460 San Borja - Lima 41. 
Av. Del Pinar 152-Piso 3-Ofi cina 302. 
Francisco Graña 671 Magdalena del Mar. 
Av. V. A. Belaúnde 147- Torre Real 3- Piso 
12- San Isidro- Lima 27. 
Av. Del Pinar 152-Ofi c. 508- ChacarillaSurco- Lima 33- Perú
Av. Del Pinar 152-Ofi c. 705- ChacarillaSurco- Lima 33- Perú. 
Calle Manuel Roaud y Paz Soldan 364. 
San Isidro, Lima – PERÚ. 
Calle Coronel Inclán 750 Ofi c. 602- 
Mirafl ores – Lima 18 – Perú. 
Av. Unión 200-Urb. César VallejoPaucarpata-Arequipa; 
Av, Las Artes Sur 260-San Borja-Lima 41. 
Jr. Deustua 356 - Puno 
Av. Jorge Chávez 275-Mirafl ores 
Av. Prolongación Pedro Miotta Nº 421 San 
Juan de Mirafl ores – Lima
Av. Tupac Amaru 210-Rímac 
(Pab Central 2do piso B1-260)
Av. Universitaria 1801-San Miguel. 
Av. Canaval y Moreyra 380 piso 21 Edif. 
Siglo XXI TRANSPORT 
BIOFUELS MARKET 
Name of organisation
MINAM (Climate Change 
Directorate) 
MINEM- DGH
MINAG
National Agrarian University 
(UNALM)
National Society of Industries - 
(SNI) Biofuels Committee 
Grupo Palmas
Caña Brava
DONOR AGENCIES/
RENEWABLE ENERGY 
FUNDING PARTNERS
Scotiabank
COFIDE
Andean Development 
Corporation (CAF)
Peruvian Renewable Energy 
Association
IFC - World Bank Group
Interbank 
Inter-American Development 
Bank (IDB)
Banco de Crédito (BCP)
Peruvian Banking Association 
(ASBANC)
Website
www.minam.gob.pe
www.minem.gob.pe
www.minag.gob.pe
www.lamolina.edu.pe
www.sni.org.pe
www.palmas.com.pe
www.cañabrava.com.pe
www.scotiabank.com.pe
www.cofi de.com.pe
www.caf.com
N/A
www.ifc.org/lac
www.intebank.com.pe
www.bif.com.pe
www.viabcp.com
www.asbanc.com.pe
Address and telephone
Av. Javier Prado Oeste 1440 San IsidroLima 27- Perú. 
Av, Las Artes Sur 260-San Borja-Lima 41. 
Jr. Yauyos 258- 3er Piso- Lima 1. 
Av. La Molina S/N La Molina. 
Los Laureles 365 San Isidro- Lima 27. 
Av. Nicolás Arriola 740 - Urb. Santa 
Catalina-Lima 13- Perú. 
Calle Francisco Graña 120 - Santa CatalinaLima 13- Perú. 
Av Dionisio Derteano 102-San Isidro.
Augusto Tamayo 160 S.I.
Av. Canaval y Moreyra 380 - Piso 13. 
Av. Camino Real 725 Dpto.
5A-San Isidro. 
Av. Miguel Dasso 104-5to PisoSan Isidro-Lima 
Av. Carlos Villarán 140 - Lima 13-Perú.
Av. Rivera Navarrete 600 – Lima 27-Perú.
Calle Centenario 156-La Molina- Lima 
12-Perú
Calle 41 Nº 975 - Urb. Córpac, Lima 27, 
Perú.Annex 3: Challenges and barriers identifi ed in the RRA workshopBarriers and challenges to on-grid renewable energyBarriers and challengesInvestment costsOperation & maintenance costsTransport and construction infrastructureEnvironmentalFinancial
Small hydroHighly variable investment costs depending on technology and type of power station Low Rigorous environmental evaluation to reduce damage and avoid aff ecting other sectors like agriculture 
WindInvestment costs depend on resource ModerateHR trainingLogistics deployment should be overcome (roads, ports and cranes) Some people consider its operation as visual pollution; probable damage to birds in surrounding areas
BiomassInvestment costs depend on resource abundanceModerateHR trainingPotential greenhouse gas emissions
BiogasInvestment costs depend on resource abundanceModerateHR trainingPotential greenhouse gas emissions
HR training and local exp
Bankers’ lack of knowledge of renewable energy market and profi tability; Cre
project evaluation and regulations; banking may have external technical sup
technical assistance component tBarriers and challengesSocial Operational Project maturityAdministrative 
Small hydro Wind
Potential visual and noise pollution in surrounding areasLack of use of double fed induction generator (DFIG), static frequency converter(SFC), squirrel cage induction generator (SCIG) technologies to avoid instability in grid frequency due to generation fl uctuation caused by wind variability Measures of at least one year are required
Biomass Biogas 
Delays caused by central and regional governments durinAnnex 4: Challenges and barriers identifi ed in the RRA workshopBarriers and challenges to on-grid renewable energyBarriers and challengesExisting electrical infrastructure - SEIN Subsidised natural gas to electricity generatorsOwnership titles by regional governments (PETT) NormativeLack of smart grid and Automatic Generation Control
Small hydroDiffi cult grid access; transmission losses and high length radial network distribution; limited transmissionlines
WindPossible dispatch restrictions due to limited transmission lines and weak radial power systemReduces generation competitiveness Lack of register and ownership titles for land acquisitionLimitations of maximum power connectivity nodesReduces network connectivity opportunities 
BiomassLack of register and ownership titles for land acquisition; delaysLack of biofuels incentives; failure to comply with toxicity index 
BiogasLack of registeand ownership titles for land acquisition; delaysBiofuelsRENEWABLE ENERGY APPLICATION BIOFUELS (SUMMARY OF DISCUSSION TABLRRA elementCurrent situation(includes good practice areas) Challenges/problems to be solvedCapacity-building needsConcrete actions
Business modelRequires a deliberate state policy to promote biofuelsCreate conditions that favour biofuels businessNo technical or university courses for biofuelsPromote a workshop with interested parties to discuss and issue a document to relevant authorities
Policies and strategiesRequires - connection between entities involved in biofuels No consistent policies, only guidelinesEducational policies leading to capacity building for biofuels----- 
Institutions, reguand market strucRequires an autogoverning body coordinating variaspects of regulabiofuels marketRegulators (OSININDECOPI) do nocomply with theiadequatelyCreation of autonational biofuels with capacity and -----BARRIERS AND CHALLENGES TO OFF
Barriers and challengesTechnologyInvestment costsOperation and maintenance costsTransport - construction infrastructureEnvironmental
SPP (small hydro)Main technical diffi culties due to 
inadequate resource estimationModerate investment costsSkilled operating and maintenance personnel are required
WindRequires wind speed; conditions lacking in many places
BiomassVery little local experience using kind of technologreducing options rural areasDue to the diffi curequired, results 
Rigorous environmental evaluation required in order to reduce damage and avoid aff ecting other sectors, such as agriculture
Training required in biomass waste management for use 
Off -grid renewable energy
High costs of transport due to project location in remote areasSocial 
Project maturity AdministrativeExisting electrical infrastructure –isolated systemNormative 
Limited amount of transmission and distribution networks in isolated areasThese types of project require local management capacity due to unique grouConfl icts can arise around water useExhaustive evaluation of hydro resource required as part of development process
Reduced promotrural isolated sys
Complex project 
Moderate opposition to its useExhaustive evaluation of wind resource required as part of development processRENEWABLE ENERGY APPLICATION WIND POWE
Current situation(includes good practice areas)Challenges/problems to be solvedCapacity-building needsAction to be taken
Business modelDemand that motivates business has not been identifi edOnly two wind turbine manufacturing companiesUncertainty re: exact wind power potentialLittle knowledge of this type of energyGeneration of information to assist in business areaConduct additional wind speed studies Include wind power in education programmes at all levelsTraining programmes at regional government decision-making levels
Policies and strategiesNo evidence of policy or strategyPeople may be in favour of this type of energyRecommend DGER generates new policies and strategies
Institutions, regulations and market structureSome institutions conducting individual researchIn general, government entities know very little about wind technologies
Annex 5: Key results from the RRA studyRENEWABLE ENERGY APPLICATION OFF-GRID SOLARRA elementCurrent situation(includes good practice areas) Challenges/problems to be solvedCapacity-building needsAction to be taken
Business modelPresent business model is designed to meet national renewable energy requirementsThere is experience of private company controlTechnical and adminsitratvie capcities in state agencies involved in Renewable Energy may need to be upgradedEnergy use for production purposesSpeed up current renewable energy projectsMonitor present business model for future improvement
Policies and strategiesOriented to renewable energyPolicies that generate integrated cross-sector actionPolicies and strategies to promote small interconnected PV systemsCreate executive interagency for off -grid renewables Expand scope of PV tariff schedule at both ends of power range
Institutions, regulaand market structuAdequate regulatioformal frameworkLack of communicaand partnership amgovernments and nuniversitiesRegulatory framewfor small interconneinstallations neededIn technical specifi ccertifi cationFull implementation existing regulationSpecify environmenimpact scenario of installationsRENEWABLE ENERGY APPLICATION SOLAR THERRRA elementCurrent situation(includes good practice areas) Challenges/problems to be solvedCapacity-building needsAction to be taken
Business modelBusiness model is private sector driven; state not participatingSlow technology penetration in large domestic sectorEntrepreneurship with AC SolarPromotion of profi table solar water heating use in medical and industrial sectors; higher education institutions to communicate knowledge
Policies and strategiesEnergy policy document to contains solar thermal system goals Identify potential uses of solar water heatingDesign and project managementSpecifi es goals written in the policy document
Institutions, reguand market strucThere are fi ve NTapplicable to solaheating systems:- solar water heasystem collector 
- performance - effi cient design- effi cient installa- limits and label-certifi cation labs Lack of knowledgtechnology choicscopeEstablish appropmechanisms so texisting NTPs becompulsoryRENEWABLE ENERGY APPLICATION BIOMASSRRA elementCurrent situation(includes good practice areas) Challenges/problems to be solvedCapacity-building needsAction to be taken
Business modelProgramme to promote cooking stove upgrade; this is not a business plan at present.Limited scope of programmes undertakenTraining and organisation at a municipal level
Policies and strategiesCentralised government strategy (NINA Project), private initiatives and cooperation agenciesLack of commitment of local and municipal governments
Institutions, reguand market strucSENCICO certifi eimproved cookinRENEWABLE ENERGY APPLICATION TRANSPORT BIORRA elementCurrent situation(includes good practice areas) Challenges/problems to be solvedCapacity-building needsAction to be taken
Business modelLack of an explicit state policy to promote biofuelsCreate conditions that make biofuels business profi table and sustainableNo specialised technical or university courses on biofuelsPromote a workshop with interested parties to discuss and create a roadmap for relevant authorities
Policies and strategiesLack of coordination of entities involved in biofuelsNo consistent policies, only guidelines issuedStart educational courses leading to capacity building for biofuels industry
Institutions, reguand market strucLack of an autonogoverning body tcoordinates varioaspects of regulabiofuels marketRegulators (OSININDECOPI) do nowith their regulatadequatelyPromote creation autonomous orgato deal with biofuRENEWABLE ENERGY APPLICATION FINANCERRA elementCurrent situation(includes good practice areas) Challenges/problems to be solvedCapacity-building needsAction to be taken
Business modelLack of ability to evaluate projects for the fi nancial system; very few bankable projects submitted to dateDevelop user guide that provides investing promoters with necessary requirements for making loan applications
Policies and strategiesLack of capacity of relevant institutions to assess renewable energy projects; funding for new opportunities lost Build capacities to utilise renewable energy business model or chain e.g., technology transfer through universities and R&D think tanks 
Institutions, reguand market strucLack of clarity in project managemfor compliance wrenewable energy project requiremee.g., environmentevaluations, environmental Imassessments, leadto fi nancial proporejections Build capacities tenforce complianrenewable energy Annex 6: Renewable energy auction process 
Item Activity Deadline
1 Call for auction day 1
2 Registration of participants day 2 to day 41
3 Sale of auction documents day 2 to day 41
4 Suggestions and queries to the terms day 6 to day 23
5 Analysis of suggestions and queries day 26 to day 30
6 Publication of suggestions and answers to queries. day 30
7 Publication of consolidated terms on the website day 37 
8 Publication of schedule for bid submissions day 72
9 Submission of bids day 79
10 Evaluation of bids day 82 to day 86
11 Notice of bidder qualifi cation and comments to participants day 90
12 Submission of rectifi cations day 100
13 Publication of Bidder Certifi cate day 104 
14 Challenge to rejection of bids day 106
15 Resolution including challenges and publication 
 of fi nal act of bidders, if necessary day 113
16 Public Act for opening off ers and award to bidder day 118 
17 Publication of auction results on OSINERGMIN website day 119
18 Closing date day 126Annex 7: Renewable energy auction process 
Price 
ceiling 
(cts
USD/kwh)
Power 
to be 
installed
(MW)
Plant 
factor 
(%)
Energy 
awarded
(GWh/year)
Estimated 
investment 
(USDm)
Date for 
commercial 
start-up
Projects awarded for biomass, wind and solar (fi rst auction)
Technology Project
Price 
off ered 
(cts USD/
kwh)
Biomass Paramonga1* 5.20 12.00 23.0 57.0 115.0 31.0 31/03/2010 
Biomass Huaycoloro 11.00 12.00 4.4 73.0 28.0 10.5 01/07/2011
Wind Marcona 6.56 11.00 32.0 53.0 148.0 43.6 01/12/2012
Wind Talara** 8.70 11.00 30.0 46.0 120.0 71.1 29/06/2012
Wind Cupisnique*** 8.50 11.00 80.0 43.0 302.0 198.9 29/06/2012
Solar Panamericana^ 21.50 26.9 20.0 28.9 51.0 87.7 30/06/2012
Solar Majes Solar^^ 22.25 26.9 20.0 21.5 38.0 73.6 30/06/2012
Solar 20T Solar^^^ 22.30 26.9 20.0 21.4 37.0 73.6 30/06/2012
Solar Tacna Solar 20T 22.50 26.9 20.0 26,9 47.0 85.1 30/06/2012
*Paramonga 1 Cogeneration Power Plant | **Talara Power Station | ***Cupisnique Wind Power Station
^Panamericana Solar | ^^Majes Solar 20 T | ^^^20T Solar Distribution 
Source: OSINERGMIN, 2010
Price 
ceiling 
(cts
USD/kwh)
Power 
to be 
installed
(MW)
Plant 
factor 
(%)
Energy 
awarded
(GWh/year)
Estimated 
investment 
(USDm)
Date for 
commercial 
start-up
Projects awarded for small hydropower (fi rst auction)
Project
Price 
off ered 
(cts USD/
kwh)
Santa Cruz II 5.5 7.4 6.50 66 33.0 13.2 01/07/2010
Santa Cruz I 5.5 7.4 6.00 65 29.5 12.2 29/05/2009
Nuevo Imperial 5.6 7.4 3.97 81.4 25.0 7.5 01/05/2010
Yanapampa 5.6 7.4 4.13 77.4 28.0 9.0 01/12/2012
Huasauasi II 5.7 7.4 8.00 70.5 42.5 14.5 01/04/2012
Huasauasi I 5.8 7.4 7.86 70 42.5 17.4 01/10/2012
Chancay 5.9 7.4 19.20 85 143.0 36.9 31/12/2012
Poechos 2 5.9 7.4 10.00 75 50.0 20.3 27/05/2009
Concador 5.9 7.4 3.80 88.9 28.1 8.2 01/12/2010
La joya 6.0 7.4 9.60 65 54.7 19.4 01/10/2009
Angel I 6.0 7.4 19.95 75 131.0 23.1 31/12/2012
Angel II 6.0 7.4 19.95 75 131.0 21.5 31/12/2012
Angel III 6.0 7.4 19.95 75 131.0 25.1 31/12/2012
Pumacana 6.0 7.4 1.80 71.3 9.0 2.8 01/07/2011
Shima 6.4 7.4 5.00 75 32.9 N/A 30/09/2012
Carhuaquero IV 7.0 7.4 10.00 76 66.5 20.3 22/05/2008
Caña Brava 7.0 7.4 6.00 41 21.5 12.2 19/02/2009
Empresa (**) 6.4 7.4 18.00 67 85.0 39.6 31/12/2012
**Empresa Electrica Rio Doble Hydropower plant assigned after second call
Source: OSINERGMIN, 2010Power 
to be 
installed
(MW)
Plant 
factor 
(%)
Energy 
awarded
(GWh/year)
Estimated 
investment 
(USDm)
Date for 
commercial 
start-up
Projects awarded for biomass, wind and solar (second auction)
Technology Project
Price 
off ered 
(cts USD/
kwh)
Biomass La Gringa V 9.9 2.0 8.0 14.0 5.6 31/07/2014
Wind Tres Hermanas* 6.9 90.0 52.0 415.0 180.0 13/12/2014
Solar Moquegua FV 11.99 16.0 30.5 43.0 43.0 31/12/2014
*Tres Hermanas Wind Farm 
Source: OSINERGMIN,2010
Power 
ouput
(MW)
Plant 
factor 
(%)
Annual 
Energy
(GWh/year)
Date for 
commercial 
start-up
Projects awarded for small hydropower (second auction)
Bidder Project
Price 
off ered 
(cts USD/
kwh)
Aldana Contratistas* Canchayllo 4.74 3.73 77 25.16 31/12/2014
Arsac Contratistas** Huatziroki I 4.76 11.08 75 72.27 31/12/2014
Peruanas Renovables^ Manta 5.29 19.78 74 127.50 31/05/2013
Renovables de los Andes RenovAndes H1 5.39 19.99 90 150.00 31/12/2014
Andes Corporating Gerenation 8 de Agosto 5.39 19.00 90 140.00 30/12/2014
Andes Corporating Gerenation El Carmen 5.59 8.40 76 45.00 30/12/2014
Empresa de Generacíon Junín^^ Runatullu III 5.65 20.00 80 120.00 15/12/2014
Aldana Contratistas Generales | ** Arsac Contratistas Generales | ^ Peruanas Renovables en Energías Renovables
^^Empresa de Generacíon Electrica Junín
Source: OSINERGMIN,2010
Annex 7: Renewable energy auction process Annex 8: Power plants on stream 2013-2016
EC Type Project Capacity MW
Jan-2013 Hydro Yanapampa - ELÉCTRICA YANAPAMPA. 4.1
Mar-2013 Hydro Huanza - EMPRESA DE GENERACION HUANZA 90.6
Apr-2013 Hydro Las Pizarras - EMPRESA ELÉCTRICA RIO DOBLE 18.0
Apr-2013 Cold Reserve Talara- Dual Plant with Gas Natural - EEPSA 183.0
Jun-2013 Combined Cycle Fenix - TG1+ TG2 + TV– FENIX 534.0
Oct-2013 Cold Reserve TURBO GAS DUAL Natural Gas - SUR (Ilo) - ENERSUR 460.0
Oct-2013 Thermal Santo Domingo de los Olleros - TG1- TERMOCHILCA 197.6
Nov-2013 Wind Wind Park Cupisnique 80.0
Nov-2013 Wind Wind Park Talara 30.0
Dec-2013 Hydro Manta - PERUANA DE INVERSIONES EN ENERGÍAS RENOVABLES 19.8
Jan-2014 Wind Wind Park Marcona 32.0
Jan-2014 Hydro Tingo - COMPAÑÍA 8.8
Jun-2014 Cold Reserve TURBO GAS DUAL D2/ Natural Gas - NORTE (Planta de Eten) 219.0
Jul-2014 Hydro San Marcos - HIDRANDINA 11.9
Jul-2014 Hydro Pelagatos - HIDROELECTRICA PELAGATOS S.AC. 20.0
Jul-2014 Hydro Santa Teresa - LUZ DEL SUR 98.1
Aug-2014 Biomass La Gringa V - CONSORCIO ENERGÍA LIMPIA 2.0
Oct-2014 Hydro Langui II - CENTRAL HIDROELÉCTRICA DE LANGUI S.A. 2.9
Nov-2014 Hydro Quitaracsa - ENERSUR 112.0
Dec-2014 Hydro Muchcapata - ANDES GENERATING CORPORATION S.A.C. 8.1
Dec-2014 Hydro Machupicchu II-Etapa – EGEMSA 99.9
Jan-2015 Hydro Carpapata III - Cemento Andino 12.8
Jan-2015 Hydro Cheves - SN POWER 168.0
Jan-2015 Hydro Runatullo III - EMPRESA DE GENERACIÓN ELÉCTRICA JUNIN 20.0
Jan-2015 Hydro Runatullo II - EMPRESA DE GENERACIÓN ELÉCTRICA JUNIN 17.6
Jan-2015 Hydro 8 de Agosto - ANDES GENERATING CORPORATION 19.0
Jan-2015 Hydro El Carmen - ANDES GENERATING CORPORATION 8.4
Jan-2015 Wind Tres Hermanas - CONSORCIO TRES HERMANAS 90.0
Jan-2015 Solar Moquegua PV - SOLARPARCK CORPORATION TECNOLÓGICA 16.0
Jan-2015 Hydro Canchayllo - ALDANA CONTRATISTAS GENERALES 3.7
Jan-2015 Hydro Huatziroki I - ARSAC CONTRATISTAS GENERALES 11.1
Jan-2015 Hydro RenovAndes H1 - RENOVABLES DE LOS ANDES 20.0
Jan-2015 Hydro Rucuy - EMPRESA DE GENERACIÓN ELÉCTRICA RIO BAÑOS S.A.C. 20.0
Jan-2015 Hydro Vilcanota 2 - RENEWABLE ENERGY PERÚ S.A.C. 19.0
Mar-2015 Cold Reserve PlantPuerto Maldonado 18.0
Mar-2015 Cold Reserve Plant Pucallpa 40.0
Jul-2015 Hydro Angel III - GENERADORA DE ENERGÍA DEL PERÚ 20.0
Jul-2015 Hydro Chaglla - EMPRESA DE GENERACION DE HUALLAGA 456.0
Jul-2015 Hydro Cola 1 - HIDROELECTRICA COLA 10.4
Jul-2015 Hydro Tulumayo IV - EGEJUNIN TULUMAYO IV 40.0
Jul-2015 Hydro Tulumayo V - EGEJUNIN TULUMAYO V 65.0
Jul-2015 Hydro Macon - EGEJUNIN MACON 10.0EC Type Project Capacity MW
Jul-2015 Hydro Chancay - SINERSA 19.2
Oct-2015 Hydro Zaña - ELECTRO ZAÑA 13.2
Jan-2016 Hydro Cerro del Águila - CERRO DEL AGUILA 525.0
Jan-2016 Hydro Nueva Esperanza - ANDES GENERATING CORPORATION 8.0
Feb-2016 La Virgen - PERUANA DE ENERGÍA 64.0
Mar-2016 Hydro Chancay 2 - EMPRESA DE GENERACIÓN ELÉCTRICA RIO BAÑOS S.A.C. 40.0
Oct-2016 Hydro Potrero - EMPRESA ELÉCTRICA AGUA AZUL 19.9
Oct-2016 Pucará - EMPRESA DE GENERACIÓN MACUSANI 149.8
Oct-2016 Thermal Quillabamba - (4 TGs - 50 MW) - Natural Gas - ELECTROPERÚ 200.0Annex 9: Maximum power injected into SEIN 2013-2014
Region Candidate business Power [MW]
 Name Units [KV] P admitted Region total
North of SE Trujillo LA NIÑA 220 41 67
 CHICLAYO 220 67 
 GUADALUPE 220 73 
 TRUJILLO 220 114 
 TUMBES 220 6 
 PIRUA 220 45 
 TALARA 220 32 
Between SSE Huacho and Chimbote PARAMONGA 220 119 57
 HUIACHO 220 84 
 CHIMBOTE 220 135 
South REPARTICION 138 45 204
 MOLLENDO 66 18 
 TACNA 220 15 
 MOQUEGUA 220 127 
South Middle MARICONA 220 88 168
 ICA 220 81 
Total additional wind power [MW] 497
Annex 10: Major crop water consumption
Crop Water/energy (m3/GJ) End-use
Sugar beet, sugar cane, maize 50 Biofuel
Canola (rape seed), jatropha 400 Biofuel
Sugar beet, potato 60-100 Ethanol
Sugar cane 110 Ethanol
Sorghum 400 Ethanol
Soybean, canola (rape seed) 400 Biodiesel
Jatropha 600 Biodiesel
Source: Gerbens-Leenesa, Hoekstraa and van der Meerb (2009)Fiscal and 
labour 
requirements
Fiscal clearance 
certifi cate
Social security 
clearance 
certifi cate
Clearance 
certifi cate for 
federal taxes
Clearance 
certifi cate for 
state taxes
Financial and 
economical 
requirements 
of bidder
Clearance 
certifi cate of 
bankruptcy
Liquidity (ratio 
between asset 
and liabilities) 
greater than 0.1
Equity greater 
than 10% of 
the overall 
investment 
Technical 
requirements 
(all sources)
Power grid 
access 
document
Environmental 
License – Prior 
License
Environmental 
impact studies 
and reports
Technical 
requirements 
(thermal and 
wind)
Proof of right 
to use the 
location where 
the project is 
to be installed 
Technical 
requirements 
(hydro)
Basic project 
Hydrological 
availability 
reserve
Construction 
performance 
guarantees and 
penalties
Bid bond 
equivalent to 1% 
of the project’s 
estimated 
investment
Performance bond 
equivalent to 5% 
of the project’s 
estimated 
investment 
There are several 
specifi c penalties 
for delays
Contract 
termination and 
performance 
bond execution 
in the case of 
delay greater 
than 365 and 540 
days for projects 
contracted in 
auctions for 
delivery 3 and 5 
years ahead.
Annex 11: Qualifi cations for auctioned generation in Brazil IRENA Secretariat
CI Tower, Khalidiya
P.O. Box 236, Abu Dhabi
United Arab Emirates
www.irena.org
Copyright © IRENA, 2014