File Name: PHL-CPD-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Philippines
Country Code: PHL
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 4 - 7 September 2018
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2023
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
5 July 2018
Original: English
1811101X (E) 100718
Second regular session 2018
4 - 7 September 2018, New York
Item 4 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Philippines
(2019-2023)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
 Annex
Results and resources framework for the Philippines (2019-2023) 10I. Programme rationale 
1. Ambisyon Natin 2040, the Philippine long-term vision charts a bold trajectory. It sees the 
Philippines as a middle-class society where no one is poor, and people enjoy healthy and long 
lives. Development is driven by innovation and a globally competitive populace. Families 
thrive in a culturally diverse society that is resilient to human-made and natural shocks. 
2. The prospects for realizing this vision have substantially improved. The Philippines is one 
of the most dynamic economies in the region, having achieved an average annual growth rate 
of 6.6 per cent over the last five years.1In 2016, employment reached a decade high of 95.3 
per cent.2 Poverty incidence, using the national poverty threshold, substantially declined from 
25.2 per cent in 2012 to 21.6 per cent in 2015.3Improvements in universal primary education
and health coverage, gender equality, child mortality and access to water and sanitation 
underline good performance against many of the Millennium Development Goals and provide
a solid foundation to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (the Goals). Growth in tax 
receipts has led to a strong fiscal position, with significantly increased budget allocations for 
infrastructure and the social sectors.4 Private financial flows in remittances (more than 10 per
cent of gross domestic product), together with high levels of domestic credit, provide ample 
resources to finance development ambitions.
3. Impressive economic performance, however, has not extended equally throughout the 
population and across the country.
5 The Gini coefficient has remained stubbornly high and
above the world average in the past 30 years.
6 Around two thirds of the poor are located in 
Visayas and Mindanao. All regions have per capita gross regional domestic product less than 
half that of the National Capital Region.7 This highlights the country’s substantial spatial 
inequality. Progress against some Millennium Development Goals has lagged substantially, 
particularly improving maternal and child health and eradicating hunger. 
4. The paradox of high growth and high inequality emphasizes the need to tackle several
critical challenges. The drivers of inequality are many, but from the perspective of the UNDP 
comparative advantage in providing support, three challenges stand out: weak institutions that 
lead to poor service delivery; high levels of exposure to the impacts of climate change that 
push people back into poverty; and persistent conflict that hinders development in parts of the 
country. 
5. Structural bottlenecks constrain institutional capacity to exploit greater fiscal space.
Government agencies with low disbursement rates suffer from weak planning, procurement 
and contract management.8 Overlapping, inconsistent institutional structures and programmes 
further undermine performance. Programming and delivery of public services are not 
compatible with ecosystem-based governance, required by the integrated nature of the Goals. 
Lack of widespread adoption of e-governance limits transparency, efficiency and access.
Deficits in citizens’ ability to check power and ensure accountability further erode public 
institutions’ responsiveness.
6. Frequent disasters impose a huge cost.
9 An average of 22 typhoons hit the Philippines
annually, causing millions of dollars in damage and loss of life. The hottest temperatures were 
recorded in 2016, with widespread drought. Rapid loss of forest cover, degradation of 
biodiversity and coastal and marine pollution have reduced the natural resilience of 
 
1 National Economic Development Authority, 2016, Statement on the 2016 Q3 performance of the Philippine economy.
2 Philippines Statistics Authority, 2016, Labour Force Survey.
3 PSA, 2015, Poverty incidence among Filipinos registered at 21.6 per cent in 2015.
4 Department of Budget Management, Technical notes on the 2017 proposed national budget.
5 Philippine Development Plan, 2017-2022.
6 Asian Development Bank and UNDP, Eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing Asia-Pacific, 2017. 
7 PSA, 2017, Regional Accounts
8 DBM, A story of budget and management reforms 2010-2016, June 2016.
9 W
ld Rik Rt2011 t2017DP/DCP/PHL/3
ecosystems, magnifying the impact of disasters. The average annualized long-term loss from 
multi-hazards is equivalent to 69 per cent of social expenditures and 14 per cent of capital 
investments.
10 The country needs to improve its adaptive capacities and resilience. Risk and 
evidence-based planning can be strengthened. Effective structures and frameworks for 
managing disasters and recovery need to be institutionalized and backed with proactive 
investment in adaptation and mitigation. Climate change and disaster risk reduction 
considerations can also be better integrated into environmental management.
7. Intergenerational cycles of armed violence affecting parts of the country consign 
populations to enduring poverty. The Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, locus of 
much of the country's conflict, is the poorest, with a human development index 60 percentage 
points lower than the national capital region in 2015.
11 Life expectancy lags by 19 per cent, 
mean years of schooling is 27 per cent less, and per capita purchasing power is 40 per cent 
lower in 2012.
12 These desperately poor conditions cannot be reversed by ambitious plans and 
increases in budget allocations alone. Deep social and economic marginalization and decades 
of poor local governance must be comprehensively tackled to achieve lasting peace and 
stability.
13
The UNDP country programme, 2014-2018, aligned strongly to the Government’s 
priorities and helped to tackle a number of binding development constraints. 
8. UNDP support strengthened democratic institutions and improved governance 
effectiveness.14 To enhance transparency and accountability, UNDP supported the formulation
of a national anti-corruption framework. It worked closely with government and civil society 
to pass critical legislation to enhance human rights.
15 It helped increase access to quality basic 
services nationwide by strengthening planning and procurement. UNDP work with citizen 
monitors helped make information on revenues, budgets, procurement and audits more 
accessible to the public. While UNDP played an important role in strengthening access to 
justice and human rights and in deepening democracy, limited and inconsistent funding 
prevented a systematic approach to its support.
16 To increase the future impact of UNDP 
governance initiatives, these will need to be consistently incorporated as crosscutting 
interventions in its thematic areas of engagement.
9. Climate change adaptation and mitigation have been a cornerstone of the country 
programme. UNDP provided technical assistance and guidance to help formulate the intended 
nationally determined contributions to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC).
17 It piloted an innovative weather index-based climate insurance that 
provides rapid compensation to poor farmers. UNDP support for the production of climateadjusted multi-hazard maps and an open source climate-exposure database provides the basis 
for risk-informed development planning, investments, construction standards, preparedness, 
and contingency arrangements across the country. For municipalities ravaged by super 
typhoon Haiyan, the evacuation centres UNDP built, the disaster risk reduction and 
management training it provided and its support for sustainable livelihoods helped thousands 
of families on the road to recovery. UNDP can do more by helping to integrate its post-disaster 
recovery interventions into longer-term support to build the institutions and systems for 
 
10 United Nations, Global assessment report on disaster risk reduction 2015: Making development sustainable. The future of 
disaster risk management, 2015.
11 Philippine Human Development Report, 2017, draft
12 Common country assessment: Philippines, 2017.
13 Studies carried out by the Mindanao Trust Fund-Joint Needs Assessment, the National Unification Commission and the 
Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP) have all arrived at this conclusion. 
14 Independent Country Programme Evaluation] Philippines, draft: January 2018.
15 Anti-torture law, international humanitarian law with enforced disappearances, Migrant Law and the Human Rights Victims 
Reparation and Recognition Act.
16 ICPE Philippines, 2018.
17 UNFCCC
itdd tilldtid tibti2015disaster risk reduction and management.18 To strengthen national mitigation and adaptive 
measures, UNDP can help improve understanding of the longer-term consequences of climate 
change.
10. UNDP worked closely with the Government and armed groups to find lasting solutions to 
long-standing conflict. UNDP supported the drafting of a new version of the Bangsamoro 
Basic Law, established a high-level group comprised of eminent Filipinos to advocate for the 
passage of the law, and supported influential intermediaries to facilitate convergence of Moro 
perspectives.
19 UNDP worked with academic institutions and the Government on conflict 
analysis and research on violent extremism, and facilitated knowledge-sharing within the 
Southeast Asian region. Following the armed conflict in Marawi City, UNDP was the first to 
help local governments build their capacity for conflict-sensitive recovery planning. While 
national and local efforts to sustain peace and prevent violent extremism have had some initial 
success, more investment is needed to tackle the underlying causes of repeated cycles of 
violence. 
11. To increase impact, UNDP needs to enhance its crosscutting strategies and partnerships.
UNDP has developed interventions targeting disadvantaged groups,
20 fishermen and farmers, 
poor women, people with disabilities, indigenous groups, former combatants and the 
displaced. To scale up and deepen the impact of its support, UNDP needs to adopt a
crosscutting strategy focused on leaving-no-one-behind.21 UNDP needs to better analyse and 
contribute to removing structural gender inequality and discriminatory practices.
22 It can 
further deepen its partnerships with the private sector to draw on capacities for complementary 
financing, innovation and the potential to reach people at the bottom of the economic pyramid.
UNDP needs to facilitate knowledge-exchange, noting that the country has much experience 
to share with its neighbours.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
12. UNDP will draw on its signature solutions and deep appreciation of the national context
to help the Philippines translate economic growth and fiscal space into inclusive national 
development. UNDP will build on its existing programme to help deliver on the national 
development plan that is aligned to the Goals. It will strengthen institutional capacity to deliver 
targeted programmes that ensure no one is left behind; assist the country’s structural 
transformation to low-carbon and climate-resilient development; and address the key drivers 
of conflict and instability. Strengthening governance and concentrating UNDP engagement on 
targeted geographically isolated and disadvantaged areas will provide the integrating focus of 
its work. UNDP will seek to create multiplier effects across the Goals from each of its thematic 
areas of engagement.
To improve access to quality social services for the poor, marginalized and at-risk, UNDP 
will further develop the capacity of targeted local governments, strengthen governance 
in key national agencies, and expand citizen engagement in government policy and 
programmes.
13. UNDP efforts will focus on 100 local governments with geographically isolated and 
disadvantaged areas.
23 These local governments units (LGUs) need to simultaneously tackle
the inter-related issues of high incidence of multidimensional poverty and vulnerability to 
 
18 ICPE Philippines, 2018.
19 The law is now under deliberation in Congress.
20 PSA, 2015 poverty statistics for the basic sectors, 30 June 2017.
21 ICPE Philippines, 2018.
22 Despite being the best performer in gender outcomes in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, it’s ranking in the 
global gender gap index (World Economic Forum) declined from seven (2016) to 10 (2017). While scoring high in political 
empowerment and educational attainment, rankings on health and survival and economic participation and opportunity 
ddDP/DCP/PHL/3
natural disasters and conflict, and they must adopt localized integrated planning and 
programming consistent with an ecosystem-based approach necessary to achieve the Goals. 
UNDP will build an innovative monitoring system that integrates household sampling, 
administrative and big data analytics to provide local governments with disaggregated data to
help formulate local development plans and target programmes to the most vulnerable and 
disadvantaged. This will enable effective use of public resources, tracking of progress towards 
achievement of the Goals, and development of business cases to attract private investment. 
UNDP will strengthen capacity for administrative reforms to accelerate and improve the 
quality of service delivery. It will support the transition from a paper-based system to a secure,
efficient and transparent e-governance system drawing on global good practice. To provide 
analytical and technical support to communities, local institutions and local governments, 
UNDP will expand its support for governance hubs, comprising tertiary institutions, private 
sector and civil society organizations. UNDP will also develop a system to promote and 
recognize the efforts of local governments in achieving the Goals. These approaches will 
provide a template for national replication.
14. UNDP will assist key national government agencies to better execute budgets allocated 
for the delivery of basic services. UNDP will undertake baseline assessments to identify gaps 
and opportunities to strengthen public financial management. The assessments will be used to 
develop systemic, agency-specific capacity development plans to strengthen capabilities and 
promote integrity, accountability and transparency. UNDP will continue to support the current 
budgeting framework to better integrate the Goals and enable expenditure tagging to inform 
prioritization for the most disadvantaged. It will help provide a stronger evidence base for 
budget allocations by strengthening capacity for performance-based, value-for-money audits 
and evaluation. UNDP will enhance procurement capacity through internationally accredited 
training and on-the-job learning. 
15. UNDP will strengthen existing platforms for citizen engagement with national and local 
government, and build strong constituencies for democracy and governance reforms. UNDP 
will equip the 3,000 citizen monitors, most of whom are women, with innovative monitoring 
tools. Smartphone applications will provide real-time feedback through observation, photos, 
and geo-tagging of service delivery and infrastructure construction. UNDP will develop a set 
of indices to measure the state of local governance, including democracy, justice, integrity and 
service delivery. It will mobilize and equip consortia of citizens, faith-based groups, civil 
society organizations, academia and the private sector to generate and analyse data and conduct 
regular local governance reviews. Pioneering UNDP work on participatory public finance 
through the establishment of a network of people’s public finance institutes will be expanded 
to provide accessible, continuing education, mentoring and advice for local leaders and citizens
to monitor the effectiveness of national and local programmes. 
UNDP will support the transition to low-carbon, climate-resilient development by 
enhancing risk-informed policies and programmes, supporting the implementation of the 
Paris Climate Agreement, and improving natural resource management. 
16. UNDP will support the application of climate-sensitivity models and hazard maps so 
national and local governments better understand and plan for the extent, scope and 
distribution of medium and long-term risks. Of its target 100 local governments, UNDP will 
focus on those most at-risk from disasters and help formulate ecosystem-based climate and 
disaster-resilient land use and socioeconomic development plans and investment programmes. 
To respond to increased threats to water security, under the framework of the water supply and 
sanitation master plan, UNDP will support the formulation of a national adaptation programme
for the water sector, using climate modelling data. To give poor rice farmers access to speedy 
payments following droughts and floods, UNDP will expand its weather index-based insurance 
system country-wide. It will enhance national institutional mechanisms to better integrate 
preparedness, response and recovery by strengthening legislations, the risk exposure database, 
the centralization of risk data, and budgeting, allocation and expenditure monitoring.17. To help the Philippines meet its commitments to the Paris Climate Agreement, UNDP will 
support enabling policies, greater private sector engagement, and effective reporting. UNDP 
will focus its support on the energy and transport sectors to expand the use of renewable energy 
and hybrid vehicles. This will not only support the country’s path to low-carbon development 
but also give citizens access to cheaper, more resilient, environment-friendly alternatives. 
UNDP will work closely with key cities to demonstrate more integrated approaches to 
improving city planning, energy efficient infrastructure and adoption of viable options for lowcarbon urban development. UNDP will also assist in establishing monitoring and verification 
systems for reporting on the nationally determined contributions, and strengthening policies 
and programmes related to mitigation and adaptation.
18. With biodiversity threatened by degradation from unsustainable practices and climate 
impact, UNDP will partner with communities and local governments to promote conservation 
areas as economic assets. To enhance the quality of ecosystems and enable them to provide a 
sustainable source of ecological goods that improve community resilience, UNDP will further 
strengthen its partnerships for biodiversity conservation with local governments, indigenous 
peoples, community groups and the private sector. It will introduce models that foster equitable 
access to natural wealth and its benefits, and develop incentives for the private sector to provide 
job opportunities and adopt profit models that preserve the health of marine and coastal 
ecosystems. UNDP will also help to establish a unified database system with standardized 
metrics and methodology for collecting and consolidating environment-related data to inform 
planning and policy formulation and to better focus private investment.
To respond to the drivers of conflict and risks to stability, UNDP will assist the transition 
of armed groups from combatants to civilians, establish transitional justice mechanisms 
and community security platforms, and provide socioeconomic opportunities for 
communities in conflict-affected areas.
19. To help secure peace following the finalization of formal peace processes, UNDP will 
support the participation of former combatants in local governance, public administration, 
and political processes. The Academy for Peace and Development will be established with 
key Moro stakeholders to deepen understanding of Islamic principles of good governance and 
provide online and on-the-job training to combatants who may assume key administrative, 
political and civic roles. This will enable transitioning combatants to carry out their 
responsibilities with integrity and efficiency and deliver well-targeted socioeconomic 
programmes. UNDP will also support armed groups in forming political parties to provide 
platforms for peaceful and lawful participation in national and local political processes. UNDP 
will draw on the experience of similar transitions in the region, including in Indonesia and 
Nepal.
20. To respond to the deep sense of marginalization, UNDP will support the 
operationalization of transitional justice and community security platforms. To pursue social 
cohesion and prevent further alienation within and among communities, UNDP will support 
the establishment of mechanisms for truth-telling, redress of historical grievances and human 
rights violations. UNDP will emphasize participatory decision-making for the ownership and 
use of land and natural resources. It will broaden the constituency for peace by expanding its 
work with influential intermediaries to engage with women, youth, minority groups and people 
living with disabilities. To respond to existing and new threats to stability, UNDP will 
strengthen national capacity for reconciliation and mediation, the peaceful management of 
conflict, and the prevention of violent extremism. UNDP will help establish an early warning 
system centred on community leaders and local government officials as a preventive response 
to clan conflict and radicalization.
21. UNDP will help provide incentives for combatants and communities to move away from 
the roles and positions that define them in times of conflict, towards identifying themselves as 
citizens and productive members of society in times of peace. UNDP will support the DP/DCP/PHL/3
development and implementation24 of a comprehensive socioeconomic programme in Moro 
Islamic Liberation Front camps and in communities most prone to radicalization or subject to 
the influence of the New People’s Army (many are within the jurisdiction of the 100 targeted 
LGUs). Interventions will be framed in the context of the Goals and informed by a detailed 
profile of the communities, covering age, gender, civil status, dependents, education, health, 
needs and expectations. It will include an assessment of the economic and social potential of 
the areas of settlement, and information on natural resources, infrastructure, security and social 
capital.
Signalling a distinct break from previous programmes, UNDP will work to maximize 
impact through the following approaches.
22. A focus on financing (and not funding) to deliver results. UNDP will steer high levels of 
public and private domestic resources towards programme outcomes. It will improve the 
quality and quantity of budget execution through government financing of its own systems and 
processes to accelerate delivery of critical national programmes, while working to reform 
business processes and build administrative capacity. UNDP will help LGUs to access 
underutilized national funds. It will engage the private sector by identifying the economic 
potential inherent in the Goals and provide technical support and knowledge-sharing to 
strengthen inclusive business approaches to reach the bottom of the economic pyramid. UNDP 
will explore mechanisms to reduce risk for private investment in the Goals.
23. Innovations to provide new solutions to old development problems. Information and 
communications technology offer considerable promise to improve efficiency, transparency, 
responsiveness and accountability in the delivery of government programmes. A digital 
payment platform will help to improve financial inclusion and facilitate rapid and transparent 
fund transfer from government to beneficiaries. Blockchain and crowdfunding applications 
will support private contributions (including remittances) for recovery and development 
programmes. Analysis of big data will provide alternative and real-time information to 
improve effectiveness and targeting. Mobile-phone-based applications will support citizen 
monitoring. To facilitate innovative solutions for some of the country’s critical development 
challenges, an acceleration mechanism will support innovative start-ups with potential for high 
social impact to become financially viable, so they can ‘do well by doing good’. Public-sector 
innovation labs will help prototype government-of-the-future planning and programming and 
facilitate stronger user-centred interventions.
24. Deeper partnerships to ensure no one is left behind. To strengthen the evidence base of
the specific location, characteristics, economic and social circumstances of the identified 
marginalized, vulnerable and at-risk groups and help refine target policies, programmes and 
projects, UNDP will expand partnerships with leading think tanks, centres of excellence, 
policy research centres and academic institutions. It will use the analysis to develop strategies 
that empower disadvantaged sectors to engage in democratic processes, organize themselves 
to advocate for policy reforms and improve access to information, justice and quality public 
services. 
25. Re-conceptualizing duty bearers and claim holders. UNDP will strengthen its longstanding efforts to empower women, men and children as rights holders to actively participate 
in development processes and make government more accountable and responsive by 
crowding in media, civil society organizations and academia as key stakeholders to the UNDP 
human rights-based approach. Media will provide channels for citizens’ voices; civil society 
organizations will drive value-based development and partner with UNDP on policy advocacy;
and academia will provide the empirical basis for policies and programmes for human centred
development. UNDP will expand its partnership with the private sector in technology 
development, innovation and sustainable investment to include United Nations guiding 
 
24 F
ll ilttiill ifilitif thprinciples on business and human rights to shape business models that positively impact 
people’s lives and prevent risks of potential adverse impacts.
25
26. UNDP as integrator. To deliver impact at scale and to utilize limited resources efficiently,
UNDP will provide platforms to draw in the capacities of United Nations organizations, 
development banks, the private sector, academia and civil society. UNDP data management
support for local governments to localize the Goals will provide the basis for collaborative 
design and delivery of solutions to complex and systemic challenges. UNDP will integrate its 
interventions on public financial management and citizen’s oversight in the design and 
delivery of United Nations organizations’ and development banks’ support for national 
sectoral programmes. It will provide leadership for multi-stakeholder engagement on climate 
action (as co-conveners with government on the working group), and UNDP work on riskinformed planning will provide the evidence base for government, non-government and 
international organizations to target their disaster preparedness and sectoral adaptation 
programmes. UNDP will lead stakeholders in co-designing and delivering the comprehensive 
socioeconomic programme for conflict-affected communities. The aim is to promote ‘wholeof-government’ and ‘whole-of-society’ responses vital for achieving the Goals.
III. Programme and risk management
27. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels, with respect to the country programme, are 
prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and the 
internal control framework. The programme will be nationally executed, which may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure, in consultation with the Government.
28. The country programme was prepared in consultation with government and national and 
international development partners. UNDP will utilize national and direct implementation and 
partnerships with civil society organizations, academia and the private sector. Implementation 
modalities will be determined based on capacity assessments to maximize the relevance, 
efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability of the interventions. In all cases, it will involve 
strong national ownership. Direct implementation will mostly take place in cases where the 
Government requests access to UNDP systems, processes and technical expertise, and/or will 
finance the intervention. In such cases, UNDP will build in an institutional capacity 
development component and identify a clear exit strategy. The country programme and major 
interventions will be governed by boards co-chaired with government and will involve nongovernment stakeholders. 
29. UNDP will anticipate and manage risks through analysis of trends and nimble 
programming. A few currently stand out. The Philippines may move to a federal system within 
the programme period. If and when the parameters for federation are set, UNDP will realign
and adjust partnerships and interventions. A significant aspect of UNDP work in peace 
building is premised on the passage of legislation creating an autonomous Bangsamoro Region 
delivering on the aspirations of its people. If this does not occur, interventions focused on 
assisting the transition of combatants to civilian roles may need to be refocused on building 
the capacities for peace and preventing radicalization. The momentum in supporting
democratic processes will be maintained through strong partnerships with the constitutional 
bodies and civil society. Responses to disasters and conflict will draw on surge capacity 
enabling continued delivery of the programme in times of localized crisis. To offset reliance 
 
25 UNDP will work with the private sector to increase women’s labour force participation (52.6 per cent; males 80.9 per cent) 
and the quality of work. Women earn 68 per cent of what men earn and are more present in jobs lacking decent work 
dii(ld ihlbl d)DP/DCP/PHL/3
on any source of funding, the programme will draw on a combination of third party, 
government financing and vertical funds. UNDP will manage fiduciary risks through assurance 
mechanisms, including spot checks, programme monitoring and audits. Where nationally 
implemented, the harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used to manage financial risks. 
In accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/32, all direct costs associated with project 
implementation will be charged to the concerned projects.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
30. Project results and resources frameworks will have clear linkages to programme outcomes 
and outputs. Capacities and systems will be in place to ensure data generation, collection, 
analysis and reporting for quality planning, monitoring and reporting. Outcome evaluations 
will be conducted, measuring the consolidated contributions of individual projects to 
programme and United Nations Development Assistance Framework results.
26 UNDP will 
ensure consistent use of the UNDP gender marker to monitor expenditure and improve genderbased planning and decision-making. It will pursue partnerships with academic and research 
institutions to implement its evaluation plan and to generate regular independent assessments 
of achievements. UNDP with strengthen the capacities of implementing partners in 
disaggregated and innovative data collection and usage to support impact monitoring. It will 
aim to allocate at least 3 per cent of the programme budget, proportionately charged to projects, 
for monitoring, evaluation and communications. 
31.UNDP will assist the Philippine Statistical Authority to draw on non-conventional data 
sources, including big data and private sector contributions to report on the Goals. It will 
support the National Economic and Development Authority in formulating and implementing 
the national evaluation agenda, 2018-2022, to evaluate the Philippine development plan, the 
public investment programme, and progress against the Goals, and to inform the continuous 
improvement of United Nations-led interventions. 
32. To facilitate evidence-based programme design and support the United Nations systemwide engagement to broaden the debate on the national development agenda and the Goals, a 
multi-year research agenda will produce policy briefs, discussion papers and periodic reports, 
including the national human development reports on themes related to inequality.Annex. Results and resources framework for the Philippines (2019-2023)
PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, 2017-2022, GOAL: People-centred, clean and efficient governance.
United Nations-Philippines Partnership Framework for Sustainable Development (PFSD, formerly UNDAF) OUTCOME 1: The most marginalized, vulnerable, and at-risk people and 
groups benefit from inclusive and quality services and live in a supportive environment wherein their nutrition, food security, and health are ensured/protected.
STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME 1: Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions.
PFSD outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs
Major partners / 
partnerships
frameworks
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome (United 
States dollars)
1.1. Primary government 
expenditure to gross domestic 
product ratio (%)
Baseline (2016): 15.5
Target: 18.8
1.2. Percentage of government 
shared services fully integrated 
to the national government 
portal increased 
Baseline (2016): 10%
Target: 100%
DBM, annual
Department of 
Information and 
Communications 
Technology, annual
1.1. Government capacities enhanced to utilize resources and track 
progress against the Sustainable Development Goals.
1.1.1. Number of UNDP-assisted LGUs with geographically isolated and 
disadvantaged (GID) communities having development plans and budgets 
integrating the Goals [Integrated results and resources framework. (IRRF)
1.1.1.1]
Baseline (2017): 0 
Target: 100
Source: Project reports
1.1.2. Number of UNDP-assisted municipalities with GID communities 
having innovative monitoring platforms providing disaggregated data.
[IRRF 1.1.1.3]
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 100
Source: Independent evaluation and project reports
1.1.3. Number of people accessing essential public services with UNDP 
assistance. [IRRF 1.1.2.1]
Baseline (2017): women (87,966); youth (172,181); internally displaced 
(57,222); people with disabilities (3,272)
Target: 92,364; 180,790; 60,083; 3,436
Source: Independent evaluation and project reports
1.2. Public financial management strengthened for efficient and effective 
execution of budgets allocated for the delivery of basic services.
1.2.1. Number of UNDP-assisted national government agencies and LGUs
implementing reforms and innovations for:
Government
National Economic and 
Development Authority 
(NEDA) • DBM • 
Department of the 
Interior and Local 
Government (DILG)• 
Department of Social 
Welfare and 
Development (DSWD) 
• other frontline national 
government agencies • 
Philippine National 
AIDS Council • 
Commission on Human 
Rights (CHR) • Civil 
Service Commission • 
Office of the 
Ombudsman • Supreme 
Court • Leagues of 
Cities, Municipalities 
and Provinces • 
Selected LGUs
Donors 
Government of 
Australia • Canadian 
International 
Development Agency • 
European Commission • 
Regular
687,000
Other
40,553,000DP/DCP/PHL/3
a) Delivery and monitoring of services;
b) Public finance management;
c) Public procurement;
Baseline (2017): NGA (2); LGU (0)
Target: 8; 100
Source: Project reports
1.2.2. Number of NGAs and LGUs using the UNDP-assisted electronicgovernance system. [IRRF 2.2.1.1]
Baseline (2017): NGA (0); LGU (0)
Target: 4; 50
Source: DILG and project reports
1.3. Existing platforms for citizen engagement strengthened to build strong 
local constituencies for democracy and governance reforms.
1.3.1. Number of individuals and institutions engaged in NGAs and LGUs 
through UNDP-supported civic engagement mechanisms.
Baseline (2017): male (1,219); female (1,642); youth (1,874); civil society 
organizations (CSOs) (88)
Target: 1,460; 1,970; 2,250; 100
Source: Project reports
1.3.2. Number of LGUs using the UNDP-developed governance index 
measuring the state of local governance.
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 45
Source: DILG and project reports
Government of New 
Zealand • Government 
of Spain • Korea 
International 
Cooperation Agency 
(KOICA)
Other partners 
• Philippine Institute for 
Development Studies 
(PIDS) • Philippine 
Business for Social 
Progress • Social Watch 
Philippines • United 
Nations Civil Society 
Advisory Council • 
Ateneo School of 
Government • Human 
Development Network • 
youth groups • private 
sector associations • 
United Nations
organizations
PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, 2017-2022, GOAL: Ensuring ecological integrity, clean and healthy environment.
PFSD OUTCOME 2: Urbanization, economic growth, and climate change actions are converging for a resilient, equitable, and sustainable development path for communities.
STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME 2: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
2.1. Greenhouse gas emissions 
per sector reduced (mMT CO2e)
Baseline (2010): energy (55.7); 
transport (25.3)
Target: 38.4; 21.3
2.2. Area of important sites for 
biodiversity covered by 
Climate Change 
Commission (CCC),
annual
2.1. Climate-sensitivity models and hazard maps developed and applied to 
help NGAs and LGUs better understand and plan for the extent, 
scope, and distribution of medium and long-term risks.
2.1.1. Number of UNDP-assisted LGUs with risk-informed development 
and investment plans, integrating solutions for disaster risk reduction 
(DRR) and climate change adaptation and mitigation. [IRRF 2.3.1.1]
Baseline (2017): provinces (74); municipalities (11)
Government
NEDA • Department of 
Environment Natural 
Resources • CCC • 
Department of Energy • 
DILG • Office of Civil 
Defence (OCD) –
National Disaster Risk 
Regular 
687,000
Other 
124,254,000protected areas, by ecosystem 
type
Baseline (2016): marine (112,822);
terrestrial (42,135)
Target: 2.57 M/ 1.86 M
Department of 
Environment and 
Natural Resources 
Biodiversity 
Management Bureau
(DENR BMB), annual
Target: 80; 37
Source: NDRRMC and project reports
2.1.2. Number of farmers implementing climate change adaptation and 
mitigation strategies in UNDP-assisted communities.
Baseline (2017): 2,413
Target: 5,000
Source: Project monitoring and evaluation data
2.2. Enabling policies, private sector engagement, monitoring, reporting 
and verification systems strengthened to help the country meet its 
commitments to the Paris Climate Agreement.
2.2.1. Extent to which low emission and climate-resilient development 
targets are reflected in: 
a) National plans, strategies and budgets;
b) Local development plans, strategies and budgets;
c) Private sector business plans and strategies.
[IRRF 2.1.1.1]
Baseline (2017): 1 (inadequate)
Target: 4 (largely) 
Source: Project reports
2.2.2. Number of public and private entities making investments in low 
emission solutions and schemes through UNDP support. [IRRF 2.5.1.1]
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 5
Source: Independent evaluation and project reports
2.3. Partnerships strengthened and economic models introduced to reduce 
biodiversity degradation from unsustainable practices and climate 
impact.
2.3.1. Area of UNDP-assisted protected areas with high biodiversity 
effectively managed. [IRRF 1.4.1.2]
Baseline (2017): marine (800,000); terrestrial (96,825.56)
Target: 1,800,000; 496,000
Source: Project monitoring and evaluation data
2.3.2. Number of models developed, piloted and evaluated for equitable 
access and benefit sharing from sustainable use of genetic resources. [IRRF 
2.4.1.1]
Reduction and 
Management Council • 
Department of 
Transportation; 
Philippine Atmospheric, 
Geophysical and
Astronomical Services 
Administration • 
Philippine Institute of 
Volcanology and 
Seismology • leagues of 
cities, municipalities 
and provinces • selected 
LGUs
Donors 
Government of 
Australia • European 
Commission • Global 
Environment Facility • 
Green Climate Fund 
Government of New 
Zealand • Government 
of Spain • Government
of Japan 
Other partners 
• Philippine Business 
for Environment • 
Philippine Disaster 
Resilience Foundation 
(PDRF) • other civil 
society organizations • 
youth groups • private 
sector associations • 
United Nations
organizationsDP/DCP/PHL/3
Baseline (2017): 0 
Target: 2
Source: Project reports
2.3.4. Value of financing generated for conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity and ecosystems.
Baseline (2017): $96 million 
Target: $196 million
Source: DENR and project reports
PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, 2017-2022, GOAL: Reduce vulnerability of individuals and families; attain just and lasting peace
PFSD OUTCOME 3: National and local governments and key stakeholders recognize and share a common understanding of the diverse cultural history, identity and inequalities of areas 
affected by conflict, enabling the establishment of inclusive and responsive governance systems and accelerating sustainable and equitable development for just and lasting peace in conflict 
affected areas in Mindanao.
STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME 3: Strengthen resilience to shocks and crisis.
3.1. Number of non-state armed 
groups transformed into 
legitimate 
socioeconomic/political 
organizations
Baseline (2016): 1
Target: 5
3.2. Number of barangays 
affected by internal armed 
conflict
Baseline (2017): 716
Target: 0
Office of the 
Presidential Adviser on 
the Peace Process 
(OPAPP), annual
Department of National 
Defence (DND), annual
3.1. Effective participation of former combatants in local governance, 
public administration, and political processes supported to secure 
lasting peace.
3.1.1. Number of former combatants who have completed integration, 
healing, and reconciliation programmes through UNDP support.
Baseline (2016): 148
Target: 1,000
Source: Project monitoring and evaluation data
3.2. Platforms for transitional justice and community security established 
and operationalized to respond to the deep sense of marginalization.
3.2.1. Extent to which transitional justice mechanisms are operational
[IRRF 3.2.2.1]
Baseline (2017): 1 (Partially)
Target: 4 (Largely)
Source: Independent evaluation and project reports
3.2.2. Number of local security plans and mechanisms that integrate the 
UNDP-developed early warning system for threats of conflict. [IRRF 
3.3.1.1]
Baseline (2017): 0 LGUs
Target: 10
Source: Independent evaluation 
Government
OPAPP• Mindanao 
Development Authority 
• NEDA • OCDNDRRMC • 
Autonomous Region of 
Muslim Mindanao • 
Task Force Bangon 
Marawi • Housing and 
Urban Development 
Coordinating Council • 
Selected LGUs 
Donors [preliminary]
Government of 
Australia • European 
Commission • 
Government of Spain • 
Government of Japan
Other partners 
Philippine Disaster 
Resilience Foundation • 
Bangsamoro Transition 
Commission • Moro 
Regular 
687,000
Other
36,113,0003.3. UNDP-assisted combatants and conflict-affected communities 
provided with incentives and capabilities to become productive 
members of society in times of peace.
3.3.1. Proportion of households in conflict-affected areas accessing 
financial or non-financial assets. [IRRF 1.1.2.2]
Baseline (2017): 0%
Target: 20%
Source: Independent evaluation and project reports
3.3.2. Number of people benefitting from jobs and livelihoods in crisis or 
post-crisis settings. [IRRF 3.1.1.3]
Baseline (2017): women (0); men (148)
Target: 6,000; 4,000
Source: Project monitoring and evaluation data
Islamic Liberation Front 
• Moro National 
Liberation Front • 
Oxfam • youth groups • 
private sector 
associations • United 
Nations organizations