File Name: PHL-NEEP-2016-FR
Year: 2016
Country Name: Philippines
Country Code: PHL
Category: NEEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2016
Start Year: 2016
End Year: 2020
Language: FR
------------------------------------------------

 
 
Rdtitth
Philippines Energy Efficiency 
and Conservation Action Plan 
2016-2020 Switch Asia Policy Support Component in the 
Philippines
Philippines Energy Efficiency and Conservation 
Action Plan 2016-2020 
Recommendations to the 
Philippine Department of Energy 
Final Report 
Submitted by:
Mr Mark Lister 
September 2015 
Funded by:
The European Commission; The Switch-Asia Programme 
www.switch-asia.eu
Operated by:
Delegation of the European Union to the Philippines 
http://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/philippines/index_en.htm 
Technical assistance provided by:TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................... 1
1 INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 2
1.1 Foundations for Development of this Action Plan ................................................. 2
1.2 From Plans to Reality: Priorities for Short Term Action and Resource 
Allocation ................................................................................................... 6
2 INDUSTRIAL SECTOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN ................................ 9
2.1 Why this sector is important to energy use in the Philippines ............................... 9
2.2 Pathway to 2030 Energy Efficiency Roadmap targets .......................................... 9
2.3 Programs and Actions to Progress .................................................................... 10
2.3.1 IND-A: Industry Energy Management and Opportunity Identification 
Program .................................................................................................. 10
2.3.2 IND-B: Energy Efficiency Intermediary and ESCO Development 
Program .................................................................................................. 13
2.3.3 IND-C: Demand Response and Demand Side Management Program .... 15
2.4 Summary of Industrial Energy Efficiency initiatives ............................................ 17
3 TRANSPORT SECTOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN .............................. 18
3.1 Why the transport sector is important to energy use in the Philippines .............. 18
3.2 Pathway to 2030 Energy Efficiency Roadmap targets ........................................ 19
3.3 Programs and Actions to Progress .................................................................... 20
3.3.1 TRA-A: Vehicle Efficiency Improvement Program ................................... 20
3.3.2 TRA-B: Driver Awareness Program ........................................................ 22
3.3.3 TRA-C: Freight Transport Energy Efficiency Partnership Program .......... 24
3.4 Summary of Transport Energy Efficiency Initiatives ........................................... 25
4 COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS SECTOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN ....... 26
4.1 Why this sector is important to energy use in the Philippines ............................. 26
4.2 Pathway to 2030 Energy Efficiency Roadmap targets ........................................ 27
4.3 Programs and Actions to Progress .................................................................... 27
4.3.1 COM-A: Government Buildings Efficiency Program ................................ 27
4.3.2 COM-B: Building Codes Program ........................................................... 30
4.3.3 COM-C: Building Information and Ratings Program ................................ 31
4.4 Summary of Commercial Buildings Energy Efficiency Initiatives ........................ 34
5 RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS SECTOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN ........ 35
5.1 Why this sector is important to energy use in the Philippines ............................. 35
5.2 Pathway to 2030 Energy Efficiency Roadmap targets ........................................ 35
5.3 Programs and Actions to Progress .................................................................... 35
5.3.1 RES-A: Appliance Standards and Labeling Program .............................. 35
5.3.2 RES-B: Bulk Purchase and Large Employers’ Staff Energy Efficiency 
Loans Program ....................................................................................... 37
5.3.3 RES-C: Behavioral Information Program ................................................. 395.4 Summary of Residential Sector Energy Efficiency Initiatives.............................. 41
6 CROSS SECTORAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTIONS ........................................... 42
6.1 Defining the need for cross-sectoral energy efficiency actions ........................... 42
6.2 Programs and Actions to Progress .................................................................... 43
6.2.1 CS-A: A new vehicle for public-private collaboration on energy 
efficiency ................................................................................................. 43
6.2.2 CS-B: Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund and Finance Sector Capacity 
Building ................................................................................................... 46
6.2.3 CS-C: Energy Efficiency Data Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Program .................................................................................................. 48
6.3 Summary of Cross-Sectoral Energy Efficiency Initiatives ................................... 52
7 REFERENCES .......................................................................................................... 53
ANNEXES 
ANNEX 1 - SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED ACTION PLAN PROGRAMS AND 
INITIATIVES .................................................................................................. 54 
ANNEX 2 - PEOPLE AND ORGANIZATIONS CONSULTED ......................................... 60 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1 An Energy Efficiency Roadmap for the Philippines, 2014-2030 ....................... 3
Figure 2 Aspects of a Strong Energy Efficiency ‘Ecosystem’ ......................................... 4 
Figure 3 Foundational energy efficiency policies considered to be effective .................. 5 
Figure 4 Breakdown of 2009 Final Energy Consumption by Industrial Subsector .......... 9 
Figure 5 Percentage share of vehicle types in the Philippines Vehicle Fleet, 2012 ...... 18 
Figure 6 The Building Life Cycle and Selected Energy Efficiency Opportunities .......... 26 
Figure 7 Appliance Bulk Purchase Incentive Program through corporate payroll ......... 38 
Figure 8 Cross-cutting dimensions of the energy efficiency ‘ecosystem’ or enabling 
environment ................................................................................................... 42 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Industrial Sector Energy Efficiency Targets to 2020 and 2030 ......................... 9 
Table 2 Industrial Sector Energy Efficiency Initiatives 2016-2020 ............................... 17 
Table 3 Transport Sector Energy Efficiency Targets to 2020 and 2030 ...................... 19 
Table 4 Transport Sector Energy Efficiency Initiatives 2016-2020 .............................. 25 
Table 5 Commercial Buildings Sector Energy Efficiency Targets to 2020 and 2030 ... 27 
Table 6 Commercial Buildings Sector Energy Efficiency Initiatives 2016-2020 ........... 34 
Table 7 Residential Buildings Sector Energy Efficiency Targets to 2020 and 2030 ..... 35 
Table 8 Residential Buildings Sector Energy Efficiency Initiatives 2016-2020 ............ 41 
Table 9 Proposed Proxy Indicators for Energy Efficiency Monitoring and Evaluation .. 49 
Table 10 Cross-Sectoral Energy Efficiency Initiatives 2016-2020 ................................. 52 ABBREVIATIONS 
ADB Asian Development Bank 
APEC Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
APERC Asia-Pacific Energy Research Center 
ASEAN Association of South East Asian Nations 
BERDE Building for Ecologically Responsive Design Excellence 
BOI Board of Investments 
BPO Business Process Outsourcing 
CNG Compressed Natural Gas 
CO2 Carbon Dioxide 
DBP Development Bank of the Philippines 
DENR Department of Environment and Natural Resources 
DOE Department of Energy 
DOST Department of Science and Technology 
DPWH Department of Public Works and Highways 
DSM Demand-side Management 
DTI Department of Trade and Industry 
EE Energy efficiency 
EEC, EE&C Energy efficiency and conservation 
EECD Energy Efficiency and Conservation Division 
Enercon Bill draft Energy Efficiency and Conservation Act 
ENMAP Energy Managers Association of the Philippines 
EPPB Energy Policy and Planning Bureau 
ESCO Energy Service Company 
EUMB Energy Utilization Management Bureau 
GEF Global Environment Facility 
GEMP Government Energy Management Program 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GIZ Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
GWh Gigawatt-hour 
HEMS High Efficiency Motors 
IEA International Energy Agency 
IEC Information, Education and Communication 
IFC International Finance Corporation 
ILP Interruptible Load Program 
IPMVP International Performance Measurement and Verification Protocol 
ISO International Standards Organization 
IT Information technology 
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 
KTOE kiloton of oil equivalent 
LED light-emitting diode 
LGU local government unit 
LOE liters of oil equivalent 
LPG liquid petroleum gas 
LTO Land Transportation Office 
MEPS Minimum Energy Performance Standards 
MMDA Metropolitan Manila Development Authority 
MWe Megawatts equivalent 
NAMA Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action 
PEEAB Philippines Energy Efficiency Advisory Board (proposed) 
PEZA Philippine Economic Zone Authority PIEEP Philippine Industrial Energy Efficiency Project 
PUV Public utility vehicle 
TESDA Technical Education and Skills Development Authority 
TVET Technical and Vocational Training and Education 
UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
KTOE kilotons of oil equivalent 
MWh megawatt-hours 
PHP Philippine pesos EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The Philippines has a long history of action on energy efficiency, in recognition of the 
potential that it provides to meet energy demand and in response to strong sustained 
economic growth in recent years. In 2014 the Philippines Government approved a 
stronger set of ambitions for energy efficiency action that sought to coordinate and 
focus existing effort and to ensure that energy efficiency plays its part in addressing 
looming energy supply constraints in a cost-effective and timely manner. With 
support from the EU-SWITCH Policy Support program, the Energy Efficiency and 
Conservation Roadmap 2014-2030 set out high level directions across the key 
energy using sectors of industry, transport, commercial buildings and residential 
consumers, along with a more ambitious target to achieve a 40% reduction in energy 
intensity by 2030, equating to a saving against the business-as-usual baseline of 
10,665 KTOE. This target is realistic and achievable according to both the current 
trajectory of Philippines energy use and the known economy-wide potential for 
energy efficiency. 
There are many potential actions that the Department of Energy and Government 
more broadly can take to catalyze energy efficiency action. Responsibility for policy 
that guides the key energy using sectors resides with a range of different Government Departments, including notably the Department of Trade and Industry, 
Department of Transport and Communications, and Department of Public Works and 
Highways. Beyond better coordination within Government, and most importantly, 
activity and investment by the private sector must be harnessed if targets are to be 
realized. 
In recognition of the need to stimulate activity across different aspects of the enabling 
environment, or energy efficiency ‘ecosystem’, the Action Plan casts the Department 
of Energy as a coordinator, facilitator and technical advisor on energy efficiency, 
rather than as lead implementer. In some cases this requires a sharpening and refocusing of current policy activities, and in others, new approaches will be required. 
This Action Plan gives more detail to the Roadmap by articulating actions to 2020 
that will set the Philippines in the path to greater energy efficiency. It contains a total 
of 39 initiatives across all energy using sectors, as well as key initiatives to establish 
a stronger institutional framework, build energy efficiency understanding and capacity 
in the finance sector, and establish performance monitoring frameworks. Taken 
together, they represent an ambitious leadership platform for a marked upswing in 
energy efficiency for the Philippines. 
Determining the resources that need to be allocated to the priority actions that should 
be taken is made difficult by both the breadth and size of the task, and by the 
expectation of a change in Government administration following general elections to 
be held in the first half of 2016. A preliminary assessment of priority actions and 
likely resource requirements is provided, to assist the Department of Energy with its 
resource allocation tasks. It is hoped that this Action Plan, and the programmatic 
guidance it sets out, will form a cornerstone of Department of Energy planning and 
budgeting for energy efficiency initiatives to be pursued over the next five years. 1 INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Foundations for Development of this 
Action Plan 
The EU-SWITCH Policy Support Component for the Philippines is a project funded 
by the European Union under its SWITCH-Asia Programme, which aims to provide 
policy support to the Philippine Government in implementing Sustainable Consumption and Production-related policy instruments. One of the key result areas is to 
facilitate the development and implementation of policies and regulations related to 
energy efficiency by raising the quality of public-private partnerships, and enhancing 
the capacity of the Department of Energy (DOE) and other stakeholders to analyze 
policy impacts and formulate appropriate policy instruments. Under this key result 
area, the project is tasked to undertake activities that will support DOE and other 
relevant entities’ efforts in the promotion of energy efficiency standards and explore 
opportunities to promote energy efficient products. 
In late 2013 the Philippines Department of Energy, with assistance from EU-SWITCH 
Policy Support, embarked on an initiative to create a more robust and comprehensive policy framework to address energy efficiency in the country. This effort was 
premised on the fact that, while energy efficiency has long been a stated priority for 
the Government, existing efforts have been fragmented and could benefit from a 
strengthened overarching framework and long term targets under a more coordinated approach. It also recognized growing concern over forecast energy supply 
shortages in the country due to a sustained period of rapid economic growth in 
recent years, and an acknowledgement of the value of energy efficiency in creating 
additional energy system capacity to meet this expanding energy demand. 
The DOE formally adopted its more ambitious Energy Efficiency and Conservation 
Roadmap for 2014-2030 in July 2014, which set out high level targets and milestones 
for the short, medium and long term. The Roadmap set out some suggested areas 
for future effort across key energy using sectors of industry, commercial buildings, 
residential buildings, and transport, as well as proposing some cross-cutting 
measures which support the growth of energy efficiency implementation in all 
sectors. The work drew on both a review of the existing status of energy efficiency 
policy and implementation in the Philippines, as well as broadly referencing 
international experience of good practice and energy efficiency potential in setting 
more ambitious long term targets than those currently in place. A summary of the 
recommendations of the National Energy Efficiency Roadmap 2014-2030 is 
presented in Figure 1 overleaf. 
The Roadmap, however, does not provide the necessary level of detail to drive 
programmatic action within Government, and the allocation of specific resources and 
responsibilities to ensure programs are developed and implemented in each of these 
key sectors. In recognition of this, in early 2015 the Department of Energy requested 
further EU-SWITCH support to create a series of sectoral initiatives for the period 
2016-2020, that would elaborate further detail on the Roadmap and together form the 
National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Action Plan for 2016-2020. It is 
intended that the Action Plan will define specific activities and establish implementation parameters for each sector listed in the Action Plan, including resources, 
institutional arrangements, stakeholder engagement, and timeframes for completion. The five sections of this document that follow outline the sectoral recommendations that, 
taken together, form the National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Action Plan 2016-
2020. Building on the broad foundations of the Roadmap, it forms a concrete set of 
recommendations to Government on which future energy efficiency programs can be built by 
the incoming administration following Presidential elections to be held in May 2016. 
In considering the best way to catalyze and expand energy efficiency actions, the Action Plan 
takes the perspective of aiming to grow the energy efficiency ‘ecosystem’ – that is, taking a 
systems approach to the range of actors, policy instruments and market conditions that are 
needed for successful energy efficiency implementation. Often energy efficiency initiatives 
are targeted at one or other of the actors involved in energy efficiency rather than 
considering this broader view, however it is the interaction and connectivity of the different 
actors in this system and its overall strength that leads to energy efficiency take-up. 
Government, and specifically the Department of Energy, is only one part of this ecosystem, 
with the Department positioned to play an important role as coordinator, catalyst and 
technical advisor to others, rather than as the sole lead energy efficiency agency. DOE has 
a range of tools, whether part of its mandated role or more informally, that it can deploy to 
influence, strengthen and guide behavior and public and private sector decision-making. 
Many of the initiatives outlined in this Action Plan are actions of Government, but they are 
suggested with a view to encouraging implementation partners to play their own roles, and to 
develop their own actions in response to market needs. Overall, the Roadmap and Action 
Plan should be widely communicated so that the objectives of Government are well known, 
and so that other partners can conceive of their activities within a coordinated framework 
towards energy efficiency action. 
Some characteristics of a successful energy efficiency ecosystem are outlined in Figure 2. 
Figure 2 Aspects of a Strong Energy Efficiency ‘Ecosystem’In terms of the actions DOE can take within this ecosystem, the barriers to further energy 
efficiency uptake are well studied, and the policy responses that have proven effective are 
also well documented. 
A recent report by the UN Economic Commission for Europe (2015) has attempted to 
summarize the policy options available to Government, by undertaking detailed analysis of 
what energy efficiency policies have worked elsewhere as effective catalysts. While this 
work mostly draws on the experience of European and West Asian countries, rather than that 
of the Philippines and its ASEAN counterparts, it remains a useful framework to inform the 
potential initiatives available to DOE in pursuing greater energy efficiency implementation. 
Figure 3 provides a summary of the sector-specific and cross-sectoral policies considered to 
be most effective in this work. 
Figure 3 Foundational energy efficiency policies considered to be effective 
Source: UNECE, 2015 
Cross-sectoral: Governance 
Enabling frameworks 
National strategies, plans and targets 
Institutional arrangements: 
Energy efficiency operational agencies 
Coordination mechanisms 
Cities and Regions 
Data, statistics and evaluation
Cross-sectoral: Finance 
Government and leveraged loans finance 
Public-private finance from ESCOs 
Funds Guarantees, risk sharing 
Fiscal Policies: tax incentives rebates etc. 
Government grants 
International climate finance 
Policies for Utilities to enable all sectors 
Utility cost-reflective pricing 
Energy efficiency regulatory mandates 
Utility Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) 
Utility white certificates 
International Financial Institutions (IFI) finance for utility 
energy efficiency 
Voluntary energy efficiency programs
Policies for
Households 
Insulation, retrofits 
for existing homes 
Minimum energy 
performance 
standards (MEPS) 
and building codes 
Energy efficiency 
certification 
Appliance MEPS and 
labeling 
High efficiency 
appliance 
endorsement 
Efficient lighting
Transport 
Policies 
Fiscal policies for 
transport 
Passenger Light 
Duty Vehicle Fuel 
Economy Standards 
and Labeling 
Heavy Duty Vehicle 
Fuel Economy 
Standards 
Eco driving 
Public Transport 
and low energy 
modes 
Business 
Sector Policies 
Energy 
management, 
ISO 50001 
Commercial 
Buildings 
Capacity building 
Small and 
Medium 
Enterprises 
(SMEs) 
MEPS for 
industrial 
equipment 
Voluntary 
agreements 
Industry 
innovation While this provides a ‘menu’ of effective energy efficiency actions and is a relatively 
exhaustive list, the Philippines remains at an early stage of its journey towards a stronger 
energy efficiency ecosystem. Recommended 2016-2020 initiatives that follow for transport, 
residential buildings and appliances, commercial buildings and industry, as well as 
suggested cross-sectoral measures, reference both the agreed Roadmap to 2030 and the 
above suite of possibilities, but can only go so far given the existing state of energy efficiency 
implementation, institutional capacities, and the peculiarities of the Philippine energy sector. 
Therefore, the recommended initiatives in this Action Plan have an emphasis on pragmatic, 
realistic and achievable actions in the short term, and in the context of the overall journey of 
the Philippines towards better energy efficiency. In many cases, they are continuations of 
existing programs for which resources and working arrangements are already established, as 
it is more realistic to take this approach than to require the setting up of new roles and 
responsibilities. In others, new approaches where required have been recommended. 
The reader should note that, while some initiatives have been presented as relating mostly to 
a single energy-using sector, it is clear that such actions will strengthen the energy efficiency 
ecosystem for other sectors as well. For example, development of the energy services 
(ESCO) industry as a support to the industrial sector will also provide impetus to commercial 
building energy efficiency projects, while appliance standards proposed for the residential 
sector will have impact on other sectors using similar equipment, and the standards 
development program can equally be extended to industrial appliances such as electric 
motors. The initiatives must therefore be viewed as a whole, rather than sector-by-sector, to 
understand the intended interactions between different energy efficiency actors. 
1.2 From Plans to Reality: Priorities for Short 
Term Action and Resource Allocation 
In making recommendations to the Philippines government on appropriate energy efficiency 
actions, it would also be helpful to provide some guidance on the required resourcing levels 
to implement each program, to assist with budget planning. As part and parcel of this 
assessment, it is helpful to provide guidance on which if the proposed initiatives are most 
readily implementable, and would have the greatest impact. However, these two issues –
allocation of budget and resources to programmatic initiatives, and the expected impact of 
such initiatives, are largely a function of each other. Well-resourced and planned initiatives 
will obviously have greater impact than those without such support. 
It is clear, with the backdrop of targets and objectives approved in 2014 as part of the Energy 
Efficiency and Conservation Roadmap 2014-2030, that the increase in energy efficiency 
focus of the Philippines Government and subsequent required resource allocation will need 
to be at a significant scale: 
x The Roadmap and the actions of this Action Plan set out the first steps of the journey 
towards an ambitious target to achieve accumulated energy savings of 10,665 KTOE 
by 2030. This means finding new savings each year of approximately 600 KTOE, 
and retaining the savings of previous years, to reach the target. Against the expected 
business-as-usual energy demand, this represents a 20.2% saving by the end of the 
period to 2030. 
x If measured purely in terms of electricity generation, achievement of the Roadmap 
targets would mean that annual energy demand would be reduced in 2030 by the 
amount generated by 15,000MW of electricity generation capacity, alleviating the 
need for a great deal of new generation infrastructure in the next 15 years. In the forecast to save as much as 6,000MW of generation capacity from being required, 
through savings of approx. 4,155 KTOE. 
x In the context of rising economic growth, targets for reduction in overall energy 
intensity are even greater representing a decrease in energy intensity between 2005 
and 2030 of over 40%. This compares favorably with international and regional 
ASEAN benchmarks and targets for energy intensity reduction. 
x A saving of this magnitude would lead to a reduction of approximately 21 million tons 
of CO2 by 2030, which is more than 15% of current national emissions. 
x If we assume a levelized cost of achieving energy savings at about US$25/MWh 
(taking the midpoint of the $0-50/MWh range for energy efficiency measures as quoted by recent estimates1), this suggests that a savings of 10,665 KTOE p.a. (approx. 
124 million MWh) would require an overall investment in the region of US$3.1 billion 
(PHP 140 billion) over the period, or in the region of USD $200 million per year. This 
suggests an investment cost for the five years of the 2016-2020 Action Plan of the 
order of $1 billion (PHP 45 billion).2 Government investment will be a fraction of this 
amount and must be principally deployed to leverage and incentivize private sector 
debt and equity investors, rather than to implement energy efficiency projects per se. 
The foregoing figures are conservative, demonstrate the scale of realistic and achievable 
cost-effective energy efficiency potential, and are in line with energy efficiency’s studied 
potential in other countries. 
This Action Plan puts forward a wide range of initiatives in the hope of creating a comprehensive platform for future energy efficiency action across all sectors. Initiatives are 
summarized at the end of each section, with some indication of timeframe in which they 
might be progressed based on existing constraints, and key agencies that will need to take 
carriage of their implementation. Annex 1 also provides a further preliminary assessment of 
which initiatives may be prioritized based on a few key parameters, including potential 
contribution to meeting overall targets, speed of deployment, government’s readiness and 
capacity to implement, and need for additional resources to support their adoption. 
Highlighted initiatives in the Annex form a basis for early discussion about initial program 
resource allocation. 
Budgetary determinations are a matter for Departmental and Congressional consideration 
and are made in the context of Presidential elections that will be held in the Philippines in 
May 2016. With an expected change of administration in the near future, recommendations 
made in this Action Plan are made without the benefit of knowledge about the policy priorities 
of the future government, nor of the relative weight that may be applied to activity in each 
sector. It is therefore premature to pre-empt these deliberations of Government in this 
document. 
Having said this, many of the initiatives outlined in the Action Plan are not resource intensive 
and, in line with Part 1.1, cast DOE as a facilitator and catalyst of private sector investment, 
rather than as a direct investor itself. Some of the presented initiatives can be pursued in the 
short term through realignment and focus of existing activity, rather than through new budget 
allocations. Once there is greater clarity on the implementation priorities to be taken forward 
from this Action Plan, there must be further work undertaken on the required resource 
 
1 See for example http://www.lazard.com/media/1777/levelized_cost_of_energy_-_version_80.pdf 
2 Alongside this high-level calculation of investment need, it is noted that recent detailed modeling by private 
sector companies, using different assumptions about the range and cost-effectiveness of required energy allocation and its integration into national budget formulation and financial planning 
processes. Indeed, as it developed the Philippines Government will need to form a view in 
higher resolution as to what proportion of the required investment in energy efficiency will be 
financed by end-users through available disposable income or working capital, by public 
spending, by debt through developmental and commercial lenders, and by equity capital 
flowing through ESCOs and project developers. To that end, this Action Plan is also 
intended as a framing document for potential funders of future energy efficiency policy 
development activities, such as private sector investors, development finance institutions and 
bilateral donors, to better determine where their investments, programmatic support activities 
and funding might be most usefully allocated. 
Follow-up Action Plans will also be required for later periods, likely to be the two five-year 
periods 2021-2025 and 2026-2030, that can take more ambitious steps beyond 2020, and 
draw upon a review of the outcomes and experiences gained in the first five-year period of 
this Plan. 2 INDUSTRIAL SECTOR ENERGY 
EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN 
2.1 Why this sector is important to energy use in 
the Philippines 
Industrial growth in the Philippines has been strong in recent years, underpinned by ongoing 
growth in certain key sectors, which sees industry consume a rapidly growing share of 
energy over the period to 2030. Key industries are as depicted in Figure 4. 
Figure 4 Breakdown of 2009 Final Energy Consumption by Industrial Subsector 
Source: Adapted from JICA, 2011 
This indicates the primacy of a few individual sectors of key importance to industrial energy 
use – namely cement, food processing (including a large sugar industry), and mining/minerals processing – that ought to be the focus of future industrial energy efficiency 
efforts. 
2.2 Pathway to 2030 Energy Efficiency Roadmap 
targets 
Table 1 Industrial Sector Energy Efficiency Targets to 2020 and 2030 
2013 
actual 
2020 2030 
Baseline industrial energy consumption (KTOE) 8,893 12,871 20,587 
Targeted industrial energy consumption (KTOE) 11,751 17,499 
Targeted savings (KTOE) 1,120 3,088 
% saving over business as usual 8.7% 15.0% 
Source: DoE EPPB data 
Cement and 
Construction, 
27.4% 
Mining, 
Minerals and 
Metals 
processing, 
All Other 
Manufacturing, 
10.4% 
Machinery and 
Equipment, 
8.6% 
Chemicals, 5.2% 
Sugar, 15.5% 
Other food 
processing and 
manufacturing, 
20.7% 
Food processing 
and 
Manufacturing, 
36.2% The 2030 energy savings target for industrial energy use has been set at 15% lower 
consumption than 2030 baseline, which sees a targeted interim reduction in industrial energy 
use of 1,120 KTOE, or 5,106 GWh, by 2020. This is the equivalent of taking a 300MW 
power plant off line by the end of the five-year Action Plan period. There is a range of levers 
available to DOE in extending and deepening its implementation of energy efficiency with the 
industrial sector. 
Consultation with government agencies and representatives of different industries has 
revealed the following specific sectors that warrant specific focus: 
x Cement 
x Steel 
x Semi-Conductor Manufacturing – especially with existing Government interests in 
moving beyond assembly activities towards silicon wafer manufacture. 
x Sugar 
Further, the DTI Board of Investments (BOI) has set up 32 industry development roadmaps 
with a focus on manufacturing in areas of comparative advantage for the Philippines. 
Supported by GIZ, ‘greening’ of these manufacturing industry roadmaps has been identified 
as a priority, and is underway with a targeted completion date of end 2015. Some industries 
in the manufacturing sector have self-selected ‘power and electricity’ as a key development 
area, and these industries should also be a focus of future efforts for energy efficiency. 
Moreover, energy efficiency is an important activity to underpin both economic productivity 
and reduced environmental impact of industry envisaged under the process of greening the 
industry roadmaps. 
Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) is a large and rapidly growing services sector of the 
Philippines economy. However, in terms of energy needs, this sector sits more closely with 
the energy efficiency opportunities available in commercial and office buildings. This industry 
is better addressed in coverage of the commercial buildings sector. 
2.3 Programs and Actions to Progress 
2.3.1 IND-A: Industry Energy Management and Opportunity Identification Program 
There is a great deal of evidence that points to the value of reporting and monitoring of 
energy use and energy efficiency opportunities at industrial sites. While this approach often 
meets some resistance from companies because it tends to impose compliance costs, this is 
more than outweighed by the savings brought about through a sharpened management 
focus on energy efficiency opportunities. Importantly, this sharpened focus must be 
reinforced with pathways to project implementation to ensure that industrial managers not 
only see the opportunities but also know how to proceed to realize the benefits. 
The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Bill (Enercon Bill) pending with Congress imposes 
legislative reporting requirements on energy users above a certain threshold (i.e. those who 
use in excess of 1 million or 2 million liters of oil equivalent per annum). However, in the 
absence of this Bill passing into law, DOE can still encourage reporting and follow up of 
opportunities, both in its own right and as a necessary preparation of large industrial users 
for the passage of the Enercon Bill. Measures include the release of reporting templates and 
procedures that would be required by the Enercon Bill and allocation of responsibilities to 
officers internally for energy conservation reporting; awareness raising on DOE’s own audit 
program that is available to industrial users and potential new requirements for large users to 
ndertake adits and report on opportnitiesand importantlstrengthening of spport to the ESCO industry to allow confidence in their services to be built among industrial energy users. 
Another area for longer-term consideration may be for DOE to start to study the energy 
saving impacts of district energy production (e.g. district cooling systems for commercial/business districts or industrial park eco-zones; district steam generation for co-located 
industrial buyers of metered steam) and support the identification of project investment 
opportunities. With the exception of this final point, each of these items is covered 
throughout this Action Plan and those covering other sectors. 
Other key efforts to capitalize on EE opportunities in industry revolve around the Philippine 
Industrial Energy Efficiency Project (PIEEP), which is a joint project of the Global Environment Facility, the United Nations for Industrial Development Organization, DOE, DTI and 
DOST. The key thrust of the PIEEP has been in capacity building for energy efficiency 
through introduction of energy management standards (ISO50001), systems optimization, 
and expansion of financing opportunities for industrial energy efficiency investments. Key 
activities include: 
x The training of 40 energy management experts and the delivery of awareness training 
to 300 factories, with the aim of operational improvements and ISO50001 certification; 
x Training of experts, equipment vendors and factory personnel in systems optimization 
for pumps, compressed air, fans, motors, steam boilers, as well as training on the use 
of UNIDO tools; 
x Training materials and tools for finance managers to develop bankable projects and 
energy efficiency project evaluation criteria. 
The lessons of the PIEEP are highly valuable and can assist in further rollout of industry 
skills in identifying and structuring projects. The next phase of the PIEEP is moving from 
ISO50001 training and energy management systems towards a focus on the SME sector, 
financing and ESCO development. 
Another key initiative is the High-Efficiency Motors (HEMS) initiative supported by EUSWITCH. The program aims to tackle the inefficient use of motors in industry, and estimates 
that motors account for as much as 65-70% of industrial electricity consumption. Initially 
targeting the sugar milling industry, the project supports the decision making process 
towards more efficient motors through demonstration and pilots, financing and service 
provider capacity building, information dissemination and business matching. Lessons from 
this initiative are directly relevant to other electric motor-intensive industries. 
Despite these existing initiatives, even where opportunities are identified and implementation 
pathways established, DOE still has no direct mandate to provide fiscal incentives to industry 
for EE (or any other purpose). However DTI’s Board of Investments, through the Investment 
Priority Plan 2014-16, already allows for financial incentives for EE upgrades in the form of 
e.g. duty free importation of equipment, and tax holidays on revenues derived from projects. 
It appears that these incentives are not being widely taken up, and the means by which the 
scheme is administered needs further clarification. Moreover the level of take-up under 
existing efforts remains low, pointing to the need for further awareness rising of energy 
efficiency programs and opportunities among industrial energy users, and coordination with 
finance and service provider activity to ensure that implementation pathways are better 
established. 
The Philippine Economic Zone Authority (PEZA) is also very active in giving EE incentives 
for inbound investment, as well as requiring compliance measures by industrial companies 
wishing to establish a presence in the Philippines. More technical guidance is required to 
support this effort as well as extend reach of incentives to existing companies. Lastly, DOE can further support the effort to identify EE opportunities and incentivize their 
realization through work to refresh existing very old materials on energy conservation in 
industry as a standing resource. These materials were last updated in the 1980s and can 
serve as an additional resource to support decision-making by industrial energy users on 
energy efficiency projects. 
2.3.1.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Create a mechanism for DOE to have direct EE input into the Investment Priority Plan 
development process for 2017-19, with a view to clarifying incentives and expectations for 
large energy using sectors. Linked to this, DOE is already working with DTI – Board of 
Investments on its process to ‘green’ its Manufacturing Industry Roadmaps, as a basis for 
cooperation. 
Scale up and broaden the sectors targeted by the PIEEP and HEMS projects to priority 
sectors of Cement, Steel, Semi-Conductor Manufacturing and Sugar, subject to funding 
availability, and support stronger direct links to project financing initiatives. Coordination 
between the capacity building activities of these funded programs and overall DOE capacity 
building is critical, as both programs are busy with capacity building for end users, financiers 
and ESCOs as also contemplated in sections of this Action Plan.
DOE to provide support PEZA and DTI with technical advice specifying what inbound 
equipment should be eligible for EE incentives, accredited ESCO providers, and disseminating energy efficiency information to locators. As part of this technical work, DOE can 
establish indicative benchmarks for identified key energy using sectors, providing information 
about expected levels of energy use per unit of output for key inward investment sectors. 
Link EE incentive provision by DTI to the establishment of a compliant data collection 
regime, performance against benchmarks, and initiation of other EE management practices, 
in preparation for the Enercon Bill and as a precursor to obtaining any available incentives or 
benefits. This will assist in administration of overall data collection and monitoring regimes. 
Further awareness raising about the existence of these incentives by DTI is also required.
Update Published DOE Guides to Industrial Energy Efficiency Projects across 
technologies, project types, project management issues, and financing options for wider 
distribution via PEZA and other DTI channels. 
2.3.1.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x Investment Priority Plan 2017-19 to clarify available DTI energy efficiency incentives 
x Measurable increase in industry-specific energy efficiency objectives contained within 
manufacturing sector roadmaps being developed by DTI 
x PIEEP and HEMS continued and expanded to 2020, with stronger coordination on 
capacity building activities across industrial energy efficiency implementation partners 
x PEZA to issue clear guidelines on eligibility of locators to receive energy efficiency 
incentives, and accredited providers, by 2017 
x Establishment of a data collection regime and initiation of other EE management 
practices in industry by 2018 
x Update DOE Guides to Industrial Energy Efficiency Projects by 2017 2.3.2 IND-B: Energy Efficiency Intermediary and ESCO 
Development Program 
Where industrial EE opportunities are identified and have management support, there needs 
to be a robust model for implementation. This requires both information and understanding 
on the part of the energy users and their onsite energy managers (as addressed above), as 
well as the existence of a functioning and effective energy efficiency service companies 
(ESCOs) that can physically deliver upgrades, provide confidence to energy users about the 
success of their energy efficiency projects, and ensure that savings are sustained to 
underpin financing agreements under any performance contracting period. 
Many countries have long experience with the ESCO sector and reasons for its growth are 
relatively well understood. A number of actions can be undertaken to ensure that confidence 
in ESCOs can be built such that more energy efficiency projects are completed. The industry 
development activities that follow have been effective in growing the ESCO market in other 
countries. It is also noted that ESCO industry development activities are private sector in 
nature and may be best handled by a dedicated industry representative body that can 
administer such issues, building on existing work of the Energy Efficiency Practitioners’
Association of the Philippines (ENPAP) and other recent private sector efforts to support the 
ESCO industry. 
As well as the proposed structural measures, there is an ongoing need for awareness raising 
and capacity building among both ESCOs and their customers on the different contracting 
and financing models, and the nature of the opportunities to work with ESCOs. Some of this 
work is already underway through initiatives such as the HEMS and UNIDO projects, and 
should be continued and strengthened as part of coordinated overall efforts to improve the 
uptake of energy efficiency services. 
2.3.2.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Coordinate ESCO sector capacity building activities – there are a number of efforts 
underway that recognize the importance of the ESCO sector to energy efficiency implementation and aim to strengthen the sector. These include programs planned by UNIDO, HEMS 
and emerging efforts to support a reformation of an ESCO industry body (ESCOPHIL) 
targeting for example, the finance sector and the small to medium enterprise sector. 
Coordination is necessary for this activity to ensure that duplication is avoided, and DOE is 
well placed to administer such coordination. Specific consideration should also be given to 
engagement of DOE on the issue of guarantee cover for ESCO projects, both for credit risk 
and project performance risk; the lack of such cover and resultant lack of confidence in 
ESCO services and creditworthiness is hampering implementation efforts at present. DOE 
aggregation of projects and creation of mechanisms for risk cover could facilitate such cover 
being better provided by the finance and insurance sectors. 
Create standard ESCO contracts for bidding procedures – following on from the 
proposed DOE Guides to Industrial Energy Efficiency Projects as outlined above is the need 
for DOE to create a standard contractual basis for the conduct of tender processes for 
energy performance contracting. The performance contract between an ESCO and its 
customer guarantees that the ESCO will deliver an agreed level of savings, or compensate 
the customer for any shortfall. In essence, it is an instrument by which risk is shared 
between the ESCO and its customer. However, if the basis of this risk sharing agreement 
differs between competing bids, it is extremely difficult for energy users to compare bids 
against one another in a competitive bidding process. The creation of a standard legal document on which bids can be based is an important first step to improving the ability of 
energy users to procure ESCOs.3 
Create Standard Monitoring and Verification (M&V) Guidelines for Energy Efficiency 
Projects – similarly to the need for standard legal contracts to allow customers to compare 
different ESCO offerings during competitive tending, there also needs to be an understood 
method of recourse in the case of dispute over achieved energy savings from projects to 
assist in reducing the perception of high performance risk of ESCO projects. This gives rise 
to the need for a clear and consistent regime of monitoring and verification to be articulated 
at the outset of any EE project. DOE can provide clear best practice guidelines on this issue, 
with direct reference to the International Performance Measurement and Verification Protocol 
(IPMVP) promulgated by the Efficiency Valuation Organization (EVO). 
Strengthen ESCO Accreditation – it is very important for energy efficiency project 
proponents to have confidence in the ESCO counterparties with which it may engage, as it 
will need to enter into multi-year contracts with these counterparties for ‘pay through savings’ 
type projects. DOE has a role to play in providing such confidence through the accreditation 
of ESCOs both as technically and financially sound. ESCO accreditation by DOE is already 
in place, however the rigor of the process by which ESCOs become accredited needs to be 
revisited. In many countries such accreditation processes are ultimately owned by industry 
representative bodies rather than by government. 
Create an ESCO pilot site for industry – largely for promotional and explanatory purposes, 
it would be useful for DOE to work with private sector energy efficiency providers on a 
flagship industrial site and act as a direct facilitator of a large ESCO project, in order to 
communicate the value of such projects and the potential of energy efficiency to a wider 
audience. This initiative would also serve a practical purpose of providing a direct link to 
operational issues to inform policy making, and to allow for adjustments and refinements to 
ongoing ESCO sector support initiatives. Suggested flagship sites might include airports, 
food and beverage manufacturing facilities, or a large cement plant.
2.3.2.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x Coordination strengthened between DOE and implementation partners on ESCO 
sector capacity building and training activities by 2016, including proposed remedies 
for guarantee cover for ESCO projects 
x Publication of standard performance contract documents for use in energy efficiency 
project bidding processes by 2016 
x Training performed and guidelines published for project monitoring and verification 
procedures by 2017 
x Overhaul of the ESCO accreditation scheme completed by 2017 
x Completion of a DOE-brokered energy performance contract for a major industrial 
site by 2018 
 
3 Once an ESCO provider is chosen by a customer, both parties are free to negotiate contractual changes, 2.3.3 IND-C: Demand Response and Demand Side 
Management Program 
At times of high electricity demand, utilities have traditionally leveraged peaking power plants 
to increase power generation to meet requirements. Demand response works from the other 
side of the equation – instead of adding more generation to the system, it pays energy users 
to reduce consumption. Utilities pay for demand response capacity because it is typically 
cheaper and easier to procure than traditional generation. Demand response provides 
system and local reliability benefits, in that they enable utilities to avoid the use of rolling 
brownouts when there is not enough generation to satisfy demand. 
Demand response allows energy users of all kinds to act as “virtual power plants,” adding 
stability to the grid by voluntarily lowering their demand for electricity. Participants in demand 
response programs get paid for providing demand response capacity, which avoids the need 
for utilities to find additional generation capacity at a higher cost. While any consumer can 
typically play a role in demand response activity, mechanisms typically target heavy industrial 
users as they offer the largest and most easily manageable opportunities to impact overall 
energy demand. 
In 2014 the Philippines Government instituted the Interruptible Load Program (ILP), which 
recognized the important role that demand response can play in times of constrained supply, 
as expected to persist in Luzon between 2015-2018. This program has called for the 
voluntary enlistment of large corporations and government owned enterprises that have 
backup generation capacity, with the aim of providing a means for covering an expected 
700MW shortfall in generation capacity during the period. The ILP encourages heavy 
electricity consumers with loads of at least 1MW to run their own generator sets to ease 
demand from the grid and, in exchange, they are compensated for using their own power. 
Beyond recognition of the wider social value of ‘switching off’ from the grid and using 
alternative generation for payment through the ILP, dedicated demand response providers 
can identify ways for facilities to participate in demand response programs without using 
additional generation, and without significantly affecting business operations, comfort, or 
product quality. Demand response energy reduction measures are customized for each 
facility and can include turning off lighting, air conditioning, pumps, and other non-essential 
equipment. Financial support for such activity is justified, similarly to using backup 
generation, by the reduction in costs it imposes on utilities to either find new sources of 
supply or to pay higher wholesale power prices at times of peak demand, with the added 
benefit of reducing greenhouse gases and overall energy costs. 
2.3.3.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
While the ILP has provided a good start towards recognition of the value of demand 
response, a more comprehensive program needs to consider incentive payments by utilities 
to those users who find semi-permanent or permanent means of reducing peak power 
consumption. Many of the finer details of such a comprehensive regulatory framework, that 
would empower utilities to pursue this work and to administer stronger demand response 
programs, still need to be worked out including responsibilities, funding/financial model, and 
requirements for regulatory change. Importantly, constraints placed by the requirement that 
any company undertaking electric utility activities have at least 60% Filipino ownership 
appear to be hindering utility energy efficiency deployment. This Action Plan proposes that 
DOE prepare an analytical paper setting out the framework and regulatory steps that 
would need to be taken to implement a comprehensive and best-practice Demand 
Response Strategybuilding on and extending existing work on the ILPand considering the In the medium term, there is need for a comprehensive energy efficiency strategy for the 
power sector, which incorporates both the demand response activities and regulatory 
authority of distribution utilities, as well as building a culture of energy efficiency throughout 
the electricity generation, transmission and distribution system, and establishing rules and 
regulatory arrangements that are supporting of energy efficiency activity by utility companies. 
2.3.3.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x Framework for Demand Response completed, incorporating the ILP and other 
regulatory requirements and enablers for utilities to participate in demand response 
and demand-side management activities, by 2017 with a view to developing a Power 
Sector Energy Efficiency Strategy by 2020 2.4 Summary of Industrial Energy Efficiency 
initiatives 
Table 2 Industrial Sector Energy Efficiency Initiatives 2016-2020 
Program Proposed Action By When Responsibilities
IND-A: Industry Energy 
Management and 
Opportunity 
Identification
Create a mechanism for DOE to have 
direct EE input into the Investment Priority 
Plan development process for 2017-19 and 
to assist DTI to ‘green’ industry roadmaps 
with energy efficiency measures 
2016 DOE, DTI-BOI 
Scale up and broaden the sectors targeted 
by the PIEEP and HEMS projects to priority 
sectors of Cement, Steel, Semi-Conductor 
Manufacturing and Sugar 
2017 UNIDO, EU, DOE 
Provide technical assistance to PEZA on 
qualifying EE service providers and 
technologies 
2017 DOE, PEZA 
Link EE incentive provision by DTI to the 
establishment of a compliant data 
collection regime 
2018 DOE, DTI 
Update and refresh existing DOE reference 
material on industrial energy efficiency 
opportunities 
2017 DOE, EU-SWITCH 
IND-B: ESCO 
Development Program
Create coordinated platform for ESCO 
sector training capacity building activities, 
and consideration of guarantee support 
2016 DOE, ESCOPHIL, 
UNIDO, HEMS, other 
capacity providers 
Develop standard ESCO contracts for 
bidding 
2017 DOE, industry partners 
Develop Project M&V Guidelines in line 
with IPMVP
2017 DOE, Efficiency 
Valuation Organization 
(EVO) 
Overhaul ESCO Accreditation process 2017 DOE, industry partners 
Create an ESCO pilot site for industry 2018 DOE, ESCO and site 
counterparties 
IND-C: Demand 
Response and Demand 
Side Management 
Program
Prepare an analytical paper setting out the 
framework and regulatory steps that would 
need to be taken to implement a 
comprehensive Demand Response 
Strategy 
2017 DOE, utility 
representatives, 
regulators, market 
operators
Establish a Power Sector Energy Efficiency 
Strategy
2020 DOE, utility 
representatives, 
regulators, market 
operators 3 TRANSPORT SECTOR ENERGY 
EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN 
3.1 Why the transport sector is important to 
energy use in the Philippines 
Transport is the largest energy-using sector in the Philippines, accounting for consumption of 
11,195 KTOE in 2010. This represents 34% of total national energy use. DoE expects 
strong growth in transport energy use based on continued population and economic growth 
by 2030 to 19,444 KTOE. 
Within the transport sector, oil-based fuels dominate with diesel fuel accounting for around 
50% of energy consumption (JICA, 2011). Road-based transport is by far the largest energy 
user, accounting for 88% of transport energy use; sea transport accounts for 7% and 
domestic air transport 4%, while rail transport energy use is minimal (DoE EPPB, 2012). 
Accordingly, this Action Plan focuses on road transport initiatives in the period to 2020, with 
other measures for non-road transport being a consideration for the longer term only. 
On 2012 data from the Land Transportation Office (LTO), the breakup of road transport 
vehicles in use was as follows in Figure 5. 
Figure 5 Percentage share of vehicle types in the Philippines Vehicle Fleet, 2012 
 Source: LTO (2012) 
While two-wheelers dominate the overall fleet, their fuel use per unit remains significantly 
lower than for cars and light duty vehicles, which presents a higher opportunity for fuel 
savings. Motorcycles and tricycles contribute just 8% of transport greenhouse gas 
emissions, while trucks and PUVs contribute as much as 73% (TTPI, 2010). LTO data also 
shows that approximately 18% of the country’s vehicle fleet (890,000 units) is used for public 
transportwhile 806% is registered as private vehicles3.2 Pathway to 2030 Energy Efficiency Roadmap 
targets 
Table 3 Transport Sector Energy Efficiency Targets to 2020 and 2030 
2013 
actual 
2020 2030 
Baseline transport energy consumption (KTOE) 11,195 14,734 19,444 
Targeted transport energy consumption (KTOE) 12,483 14,583 
Targeted savings (KTOE) 2,252 4,861 
% saving over business as usual 14.3% 25.0% 
Source: DoE EPPB data 
The 2030 energy savings target for energy use in transport has been set at 25% lower 
consumption than the business-as-usual baseline, which sees a targeted interim reduction in 
transport energy use of 2,252 KTOE by 2020. This more aggressive target is justified based 
on a sharply increasing baseline and the known opportunities in vehicle improvements that 
could be implemented within the period to 2030. Meeting the 2020 interim target would be 
the equivalent of permanently removing approximately 250,000 standard cars from the road, 
which would constitute about 5% of the Philippines overall vehicle fleet. 
It is important to note that DOE does not hold many policy levers related to energy use in the 
transport sector. In pinpointing useful initiatives to be taken forward in the short to medium 
term, it is worth examining the determinants of energy use in transport in detail. According to 
the US Center for Climate and Energy Solutions, there are four main determinants of energy 
used (and subsequent greenhouse gas emissions) in transport: 
1. Fuel types and energy sources 
2. Vehicle Efficiency 
3. Vehicle Use and Distance Travelled 
4. System Efficiency 
DOE has some involvement on the first two of these areas; however genuine influence on 
the second two areas are the responsibility of the Department of Transport and Communications (DOTC) and other urban development agencies such as MMDA. Roles and 
responsibilities on all aspects of transport are currently overlapping; for example, while DOE 
can play some role in relation to vehicle efficiency standards, key instruments of enforcement 
related to vehicle taxes and licensing rest with the Land Transportation Office (LTO) and the 
Land Transport Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB). DOE can only therefore seek to 
coordinate energy discussions and try to focus these agencies more squarely on energy 
efficiency goals, rather than directly take responsibility for implementation. 
Within the ‘avoid/shift/improve’ rubric for sustainable transport policy, DOE can focus on
improvement of the efficiency of the vehicle stock and to some extent on driver training, 
rather than changing the country’s transport task, creating modal shift (which must be 
underpinned by substantial infrastructure investment), improving city traffic conditions or 
creating new transport options. This Action Plan notes, however, the existence of many 
Government programs that are focused on avoiding the need for vehicular transport and 
improving system efficiency, such as DOTC’s efforts to develop a ‘Road Based Public 
Transport Reform’ initiative for modernizing the PUV fleet and undertaking institutional 
reforms (to be submitted as a Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA)), and its study 
into the movement of people and goods in Metro Manila as part of understanding the current 
transport task and future needs. This Action Plan is therefore targeted at what vehicles get driven and how they are driven, 
rather than broader issues of infrastructure investments for greater system efficiency, though 
DOE encourages such programs to reinforce and strengthen its own efforts towards creating 
a more enabling environment for efficient energy use in the transport sector. 
The Action Plan notes that there are important co-benefits of energy savings in the transport 
sector. While the focus is on reduced energy use, reduced air pollution, resultant health 
impacts, and economic productivity are acknowledged as key drivers of plans for energy 
efficiency in the transport sector. 
3.3 Programs and Actions to Progress 
3.3.1 TRA-A: Vehicle Efficiency Improvement Program 
Leaving issues of transport infrastructure and system efficiency aside, as above, ensuring 
the fuel efficiency of the existing passenger vehicle fleet is a priority. Fuel efficiency is 
dependent on many parameters of a vehicle, including its engine parameters, aerodynamic 
drag, weight, and rolling resistance. There have been advances in all areas of vehicle 
design in recent decades including through better design and also the shift towards 
alternative fuel vehicles such as hybrid drives and electric vehicles. 
There is much that needs to be done to improve vehicle fuel efficiency in the Philippines. 
However, introduction of mandatory policies to remove inefficient existing vehicles from the 
road are difficult to introduce, both practically and politically, and policy levers available to 
DOE are relatively limited. DOE can, however, provide important informational inputs on the 
existing levels of fuel efficiency of the vehicle fleet, appropriate levels of efficiency to be 
targeted, technologies for alternative fuel vehicles, and advice to other agencies of 
Government who may be in a position to introduce incentives or disincentives for more fuel 
efficient vehicle manufacture and sale. 
3.3.1.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Baseline Assessment for new light duty vehicles - the first stage in establishing clearer 
requirements for passenger vehicle efficiency and in understanding the potential impact of 
new measures is to improve information about the level of efficiency of the current vehicle 
fleet. Clean Air Asia is currently performing a baseline assessment for new light duty vehicle 
performance in the country, which will be used as the foundation for establishing this 
information.
New vehicle labeling - vehicle labeling follows on naturally from a better understanding of 
the fuel efficiency of the vehicle fleet. It is also something on which DOE (rather than DOTC 
and its agencies) could take the lead, based on actions to develop a better understanding of 
the fuel efficiency of the vehicle fleet that are already underway. The vehicle manufacturing 
industry is aware of the role vehicle labeling can play through discussions with DENR that 
commenced before 2012, and is broadly supportive of this direction.
Vehicle labeling typically refers to requirements for new light duty vehicles being sold to carry 
stickers with information on vehicle fuel efficiency, or for information to be displayed about 
the vehicle in the showroom, online or through other media. Schemes can be designed with 
reference to similar schemes in successful operation in other countries, such as the United 
States which through its Environment Protection Agency has a strong model of vehicle 
labeling requirementsMore consultation with industry will be required as any labeling Clean Air Asia is cooperating with DOE with regards to developing an action plan for 
establishing a vehicle fuel efficiency labeling scheme. Enforcement of the scheme is a key 
issue – roles and responsibilities need to be formalized, potentially through an Executive or 
Administrative Order. 
Investigate the integration of vehicle labeling into vehicle inspection and registration 
regimes – the current regime of vehicle inspection and registration is the responsibility of 
agencies of DOTC such as LTO and LTFRB. Once better information and labeling is 
established, it is possible to consider the inclusion and streamlining of fuel efficiency with the 
existing LTO and LTFRB inspection and vehicle tax regime. Currently emissions testing of 
vehicles is already a requirement of vehicle registration; this can be extended to require a 
Certificate of Compliance with emerging fuel efficiency standards. Extra charges can be 
levied for inefficient vehicles as a means of disincentive for keeping older, polluting vehicles 
on the road. 
Importantly, such a measure would require fuel economy standards to be put in place and 
therefore goes beyond vehicle labeling as a market information strategy. This is a bigger 
issue that needs a revision of the process of applying for new motor vehicle types (as the 
Clean Air Act provisions are limited to Certificates of Compliance being based against the 
emission standards). Differentiated tax rates that can incentivize fuel efficient vehicle subsegments maybe looked into and the information through the labeling scheme can be utilized 
in the formulation of “fuel-economy” based fiscal policies.
Further work is required to examine the most appropriate approach to deployment of such a 
fiscal scheme, including the overall economic impacts on different groups, the appropriate 
means of financially administering the scheme, and the intended impact on fuel efficiency. In 
regard to this, New Zealand’s approach has been mentioned as a possible scheme to be 
replicated in the Philippines, as it uses existing vehicle testing regimes for vehicle supplier 
countries rather than needing the establishment of extensive testing facilities in-country, and 
is therefore less resource-intensive. There are other initiatives such as the ‘gas guzzler’ tax 
levied in the United States on vehicle manufacturers, that can provide incentives towards 
production and sale of more efficient private vehicles. 
Continue and strengthen management of Vehicle Conversion Programs – DOE has a 
number of existing activities that consider the conversion of existing vehicles to cleaner 
burning fuels and/or replacement with electric vehicles. DOE has advised that its capacity is 
fully extended in delivery of these existing programs, and no further rollout of programs to 
2020 is proposed. In summary, DOE is suggested to: 
x Consider further rollout of E-trikes in the mid-term review of that initiative. 
x Continue its Auto LPG program by upholding the current incentives for license 
extension4
x In conjunction with TESDA, support TVET training for vehicle conversion, to overcome issues with substandard conversions experienced in early stages of 
Formulate a transport and urban energy efficiency Inter-Agency Committee – while 
noting that DOE does not have a lead role in determining transport system efficiency or 
influencing user behavior, given the current limited stage of development of work to develop 
linkages between consideration of energy and transport, it may be necessary to formalize 
new arrangements to tackle key overlapping. An Executive Order that establishes a 
 
4 It is noted that LPG costs substantially less than gasoline in the Philippines and offers a comparable driving range to 
conventional fuel. This offsets its lower calorific value, which generally results in lower vehicle fuel economy. This initiative Committee for Energy Use in Transport could be required to take this work forward. Key 
activities for such a Committee in the first instance would be to
a) perform a study into the model that could be deployed by DOTC for recognition of 
vehicle efficiency through vehicle taxes levied by LTO and LTFRB, as suggested 
above, as a precursor to introduction of such measures. 
b) Perform a study recommending actions to reintegrate consideration of energy use 
existing into holistic urban planning activities, itself currently relatively uncoordinated 
between DOTC, DPWH, MMDA and local governments. 
c) Form guidelines on energy-efficient transport infrastructure investments to be made 
by LGUs, in particular targeting efficient street lighting where international standards 
exist but are not prescribed during LGU procurement processes. Such guidelines 
could be trialed through a pilot efficient transport infrastructure investment initiative, in 
conjunction with the APEC Low Carbon Model Towns initiative (refer also Part 4.3.2.1 
of this document). 
3.3.1.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x Baseline Assessment of new light duty vehicles completed by 2016 
x New inter-agency committee on Energy Use in Transport established by 2017 
x New light duty vehicle labeling requirements in place by 2017 
x Study on recognition of vehicle efficiency in vehicle inspection regimes and vehicle 
taxes completed by 2018 
3.3.2 TRA-B: Driver Awareness Program 
Driver training and information to improve awareness on fuel efficiency has been provided for 
many years in the Philippines. The now largely defunct Fuel Economy Run Program tested 
new passenger vehicles to establish their fuel efficiency and mileage, and this has been 
selectively continued by private sector partners in recent years, including through: 
x Volkswagen – in conjunction with Shell, has staged a series of ‘Eco Fun Runs’ aimed 
at highlighting and publicizing the efficiency of its product offering in the Philippines, 
which gained wide mainstream media coverage. 
x Honda – similarly to Volkswagen has staged a number of events aimed at publicity of 
the fuel efficiency of its vehicle fleet. 
x Petron – staged a “SafeRun” event in 2012 whereby motorcycle manufacturers and 
enthusiasts could test the fuel efficiency of their motorcycles. 
x In February 2015, the Car Awards Group Inc. (CAGI) devised and released a local 
benchmark for vehicle fuel efficiency under Philippine driving conditions. 
DOE has indicated a desire to continue such work in 2015, either through its own programs 
or in partnership with vehicle suppliers. 
Additionally, the Fuel Conservation and Efficiency in Road Transport (FCERT) program has 
encompassed a variety of publicity campaigns promoting conservation of transport fuel 
across different media, seminars and workshops, and promotional material including 
publications and other collateral. Under the FCERT program workshops for jeepney drivers 
have also been held commencing December 2012 in partnership with University of the 
Philippines National Engineering Center; these workshops have since been extended with 
private sector partners. It would be desirable for training and workshops to also cover the 
benefits of emerging technologies and fuels that have the promise of lower fuel consumption, 
both as environmental and economic measures that may benefit transport company It is difficult for DOE to lead activities involving mandatory requirements of private or PUV 
drivers, as such regulation and control is led by DOTC, and its agencies such as LTO and 
LTFRB. While it may be desirable to mandate driver education requirements as a precondition of licensing, any additional action would require more coordination with DOTC as 
lead, and is likely to remain on a voluntary basis only. 
3.3.2.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
DOE to co-ordinate and re-launch a Fuel Economy Run competition – given a wealth of 
private sector interest and promotional opportunity in the efficiency of private vehicles, DOE 
is well placed to coordinate a large scale activity to publicize and promote vehicle fuel 
efficiency. This should extend beyond previous activities to consider different elements of 
efficiency according to a range of possible categories: 
x Comparing groups of new cars across different manufacturers according to classification by similar engine capacities 
x Comparing groups of five year old cars across different manufacturers according to 
classification by similar engine capacities 
x Comparing groups of ten year old cars across different manufacturers according to 
classification by similar engine capacities 
x Comparing fuel types (and costs) from different fuel suppliers in the same vehicle 
x Comparing different technologies (e.g. catalytic converters, turbos, clean burning fuel 
technologies in the same vehicle 
Measurements can be taken according to locally developed benchmarks as well as 
international benchmarks. 
A wealth of information on the performance of different vehicles and the efficacy of fuels 
available on the market could be generated from such a program. Importantly, the expanded 
program should consider existing vehicles as well as simply new vehicles, and may even be 
extended to include PUVs such as buses and jeepneys. It is very likely that financial support 
would be forthcoming from private sector participants given the promotional opportunities 
that would arise from a comprehensive and well-run program. The activity could be refined 
and repeated in future years, based on the success of the initial staging of this expanded 
Fuel Economy Run Initiative. 
Extend driver awareness training through Development Academy of the Philippines 
and UP National Engineering Center and include technology awareness as well as 
driving techniques. This existing activity should continue to be supported and consideration of its expansion should be investigated. 
3.3.2.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x Successful staging and publication of Fuel Economy Run by 2016
x Number of drivers trained increased by 2017 over 2014 levels 3.3.3 TRA-C: Freight Transport Energy Efficiency 
Partnership Program 
Freight transport accounts for a growing percentage of transport energy use and is an area in 
need of further attention, as trucks and heavy vehicles account for as much as 33% of overall 
greenhouse gas emissions from transport in the Philippines despite making up only 5% of 
the vehicle fleet. There is currently very little in the way of government policy targeting this 
area. An initiative is currently underway coordinated by the Export Development Council to 
create a “Philippine Multimodal Transportation and Logistics Industry Road Map”; however 
this needs a layer of Government coordination and support if it is to gain traction. The 
existing effort proposes capacity extension and efficiency enhancement involving the 
material implementation of policies and the adaptation of efficiency measures in its second 
Phase, envisaged for 2017-22. 
In the longer term, large-scale infrastructure decisions must be made about the best way in 
which to move goods in the Philippines. This may consider broader issues of balance, 
reliability, efficiency, and sustainability in the overall freight system and a shift from a 
predominantly road-based infrastructure to a multimodal infrastructure, including rail. 
3.3.3.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Investigate the formation of a Partnership to develop a National Efficient Freight and 
Logistics Master Plan. Such a plan would aim to initiate measures for the more efficient 
movement of freight in the country with the joint aims of improved productivity and reduced 
energy use. Such a Master Plan would ultimately need to be owned by DOTC, however 
DOE could provide important context and technical advice relating to the energy efficiency of 
different vehicles and transport modes, and the potential alternative logistics models that 
may be effectively deployed. 
3.3.3.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x DOE involvement in development of a National Efficient Freight and Logistics Master 
Plan, in coordination with the Export Development Council and other agencies, by 
2020 3.4 Summary of Transport Energy Efficiency 
Initiatives 
Table 4 Transport Sector Energy Efficiency Initiatives 2016-2020 
Program Proposed Action By When Responsibilities
TRA-A: Vehicle 
Efficiency 
Improvement 
Program
Complete baseline assessment for efficiency of 
new light duty vehicles
2016 DOE, Clean Air Asia 
Roll out new vehicle labeling for energy use 2017 DOE, CAMPI 
Vehicle inspection regimes 
x Include fuel efficiency rating with emissions 
compliance testing 
x Investigate differentiated vehicle taxes for 
efficient vehicles 
2018
2018
LTO, LTFRB
LTO, LTFRB
Vehicle conversion programs 
x extend Auto-LPG program for taxi fleet 
x support TVET training for LPG vehicle 
conversion 
x E-Trikes – focus on current delivery; 
consider further rollout in mid term review
2016
2016
2018
DOE
DOE, TESDA
DOE, ADB 
Formulate a transport and urban energy 
efficiency Inter-Agency Committee 
2017 DOE, DOTC, MMDA, 
DPWH, LGUs 
TRA-B: Vehicle 
Efficiency and Driver 
Awareness Program
Re-launch Fuel Economy Run initiative 2016 DOE, CAMPI, vehicle 
manufacturers, fuel 
suppliers
Driver training program rollout Ongoing Development 
Academy of the 
Philippines, UP 
National Engineering 
Center, DOE
TRA-C: Freight 
Transport Energy 
Efficiency 
Partnership
Form partnership to develop a National Efficient 
Freight and Logistics Master Plan
National Efficient Freight and Logistics Master 
Plan developed 
2017 
2020
EDC, DOE, DPWH, 
DTI
EDC, DOE, DPWH, 
DTI4 COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS SECTOR 
ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN 
4.1 Why this sector is important to energy use in 
the Philippines 
Commercial buildings account for approximately 10% of energy use in the Philippines. 
Strong ongoing growth in building and construction of commercial buildings is expected, 
associated with ongoing economic growth and encouragement of inward investment, as well 
as a sharp expansion in the hotels and hospitality sector. This growth is concentrated in key 
business and tourism districts of the country. An increasing trend towards business process 
outsourcing has also changed the commercial building usage mix towards longer hours of 
operation and emphasis on different energy uses (towards IT and data center management). 
Efficient buildings are the product of concerted efforts to target energy savings through 
different activities across the ‘building life-cycle’. Not all of these are the responsibility of 
DOE, which necessitates partnership and collaboration. A representative of the kinds of 
initiatives that can be run as part of a comprehensive commercial building energy efficiency 
action plan is as follows in Figure 6, with typical actions to support energy efficiency 
highlighted in red. 
Figure 6 The Building Life Cycle and Selected Energy Efficiency Opportunities 
Source: adapted from WRI Ross Center for Sustainable Cities, 2015 
While DOE cannot tackle all of these areas in the short to medium term, this building life 
cycle is an important framework within which to consider current and future programs. 
Many building efficiency programs target new buildings, however the cost-effectiveness of 
undertaking existing building refurbishments when key plant and equipment is reaching the 
end of its useful life is well studied. Ageing building stock in major building districts such as 
Makati and Ortigas in metropolitan Manila presents good opportunities for retrofitting and 
building management programs. Many planks of rapid energy efficiency deployment, across 
tidlid fiiild btthd i
Building 
Codes 
Building 
Ratings and 
Information 
Financing, 
Support for 
ESCOs 
Awareness 
raising, facility 
management 
programs 
Incentives the relatively short term for increased uptake. However, measures proposed for commercial 
buildings take account of the capacity in DOE to implement complicated policy schemes for 
the sector, and also point to the important role of the private sector and other agencies of 
Government in delivery of programs for this sector. 
It should also be noted that some initiatives proposed for other sectors will have a clear 
bearing on commercial building energy efficiency, particularly through standards for 
appliances and measures to improve finance availability and the strength of the ESCO 
sector. These measures are largely proposed in other parts of this document under Action 
Plans for other sectors. 
4.2 Pathway to 2030 Energy Efficiency Roadmap 
targets 
Table 5 Commercial Building Sector Energy Efficiency Targets to 2020 and 2030 
2013 
actual 
2020 2030 
Baseline commercial buildings energy consumption (KTOE) 2,481 3,221 4,821 
Targeted commercial buildings energy consumption (KTOE) 2,897 3,615 
Targeted savings (KTOE) 324 1,206 
% saving over business as usual 10.0% 25.0% 
Source: DoE EPPB data 
DOE’s 2030 target for energy efficiency from commercial buildings is 25% savings against 
the baseline; its interim target is to save 324 KTOE or 10% of commercial building energy 
consumption by 2020. This is the equivalent of taking a 90 MW power plant off line for the 
entire five-year Action Plan period. This is considered achievable through a range of 
measures that can be deployed in commercial buildings that are individually cost-effective, 
meaning that they can generate positive income streams that allow for finance to be repaid 
by energy savings in relatively short timeframes. This cost-effectiveness presents an 
opportunity for intermediaries like ESCOs to create new financing pathways for execution of 
existing building upgrades. Further, the substantial role of government as a property owner 
and manager can be better utilized to provide market examples and models for commercial 
building refurbishment. 
4.3 Programs and Actions to Progress 
4.3.1 COM-A: Government Buildings Efficiency Program 
Government buildings have been a key success story for Philippines energy efficiency, with 
substantial consolidated savings achieved from over 590 government agency reports. 
Building on circulars and administrative orders that require government agencies to reduce 
fuel and electricity consumption by at least 10% and adopt other efficiency measures, DoE’s 
Government Energy Management Program (GEMP) is a continuing program that requires 
establishment of energy conservation programs and dedicated staff for each agency, 
including government departments, bureaus, government owned and controlled corporations, 
academic institutions and others. DoE conducts awareness raising for government agencies, 
conducts spot checks on agencies for compliance with the requirements, and recognizes 
good performersAdditionallythe ADB-supported Philippine Energy Efficiency Project included a component of retrofitting of lighting in government buildings and public facilities, 
including office buildings, street lighting, traffic lights and other public lighting. 
A key feature of the GEMP program has been its ability to generate credible monitoring 
reports about energy use and savings generated, something that has been lacking in other 
sectors. Consolidated reporting indicates that as much as PHP 2 billion was saved on energy 
costs between 2005 and 2013. 
While DOE has already been active in supporting the upgrade and refurbishment of 
government buildings, much more can be done to go deeper than the required 10% savings. 
Government plays an important role in commercial building energy efficiency, as a 
substantial owner and manager of non-residential properties and facilities, which provides a 
clear opportunity to act as a market leader. This covers both Government’s own municipal 
offices and also significant energy using sites that have not yet been targeted, such as 
educational, health care, military and other municipal facilities. Harnessing the power of 
private sector service delivery models can also catalyze deeper energy efficiency uptake in 
non-residential buildings and provide models for others to adopt. 
There is a plethora of legislative instruments that relate to energy use in Government 
buildings that have been passed in recent years that demonstrate recognition of the 
opportunity to improve energy efficiency in Government operations. It is noted that, in 
December 2014, Joint House Resolution 21 was passed by the House of Representatives 
which was targeted at addressing shortfalls in power supply that were projected to begin in 
2015. This Resolution was mostly targeted at the powers granted to the President to 
undertake emergency procurement of additional generation capacity. However, it also 
contained an assertion that “all government offices and institutions are authorized to retrofit 
their offices and buildings with, among others, energy efficient LED bulbs, air conditioning 
units with inverters, and solar energy systems, subject to emergency procurement 
procedures.” While the provisions of this Resolution were not fully agreed by the Senate and 
ultimately not passed, and took effect only until 31 July 2015 in any case, the intent indicates 
both an understanding of the contribution that government buildings can make to overall 
energy demand and a willingness of Government to examine current procurement practices 
for energy efficiency. 
4.3.1.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Strengthen the GEMP with higher targets and retro-commissioning resources - 
Administrative Order No. 110-A, which institutionalizes the GEMP, is now almost ten years 
old. This program has been very successful in both building capacity within government 
agencies to understand energy efficiency opportunities, seeing them implemented and in 
creating a regime for energy reporting.
It is proposed that DOE expand the GEMP through a new Administrative Order to reflect an 
updated understanding of the depth of opportunity to upgrade facilities in Government 
Buildings, with extension to all government owned buildings and facilities. This should reflect 
its expanded ambition for the buildings sector as articulated in the Energy Efficiency 
Roadmap; namely, that all Government buildings should achieve savings of 25% by 2030 
against baseline energy use. 
Some support for this new target can be offered in the form of retro-commissioning advice 
provided to government building managers. According to the American Council on an 
Energy-Efficient Economy, retro-commissioning or “existing building commissioning” is a 
systematic process for identifying and implementing operational and maintenance the process is to optimize the performance of building subsystems as well as how they 
function together. Retro-commissioning is important because deferred maintenance takes a 
toll on commercial buildings in the form of wasted energy and finances. Retro-commissioning 
focuses on operations and maintenance improvements and diagnostic testing (although 
needed capital improvements may also be identified and recommended through the 
process). 
DOE has an existing audit program, whereby facility managers can avail of resources to 
assess energy efficiency opportunities by way of audit. However, the need for capital to 
implement audit recommendations can lead to low levels of take-up. Retro-commissioning 
may be an attractive option under these circumstances and can also lead to permanent 
energy savings with little or no capital outlay. It is proposed that the existing audit program 
be supplemented with a retro-commissioning advisory resource. 
There also needs to be stronger links with private sector finance initiatives being developed 
under these Action Plans so that identified opportunities have access to other sources of 
finance than Government’s own funds. There is a clear overlap with ESCO sector 
development activities; ESCO services could be better utilized by Government Departments 
given reforms to Government procurement practice (see below). 
Procurement assistance program - It is apparent that existing purchasing and procurement 
rules impede the ability of government to implement energy efficiency projects. Typically, 
government procurement is on the basis of tender for prescribed assets, which can be 
assessed according to fixed criteria such as rated outputs, price, product specifications, etc. 
This approach is confirmed by the Procurement Service website which specifies simply that 
the Service ‘buys electrical supplies’ in the form of lamps, batteries and ballasts. 
The implementing rules and regulations of Republic Act 9184 set out the requirements for 
Government procurement processes. Procurement of energy efficiency services can be 
challenging, as it effectively involves procurement of an intangible stream of reduced 
expenses that may be difficult to situate in terms of the required purchasing processes. 
There are a couple of key issues to be overcome: 
x Direct budget ‘disincentives’ – government departments and agencies typically 
receive an allocation for electricity and other energy costs as part of annual budget 
disbursement. Energy efficiency activities can reduce this required amount for a department or agency, and be can be financed through energy savings over a ‘payback 
period’, usually several years. However, it is very common for budget allocations for 
energy use to be reduced after energy efficiency projects, based on the reduced outgoings. This leaves no capital to pay for the upgrade through the achieved savings. 
Managers are therefore reluctant to undertake projects that will lead to future cuts in 
budget allocation. Better understanding of this dynamic is required when making 
budget allocations. 
x The requirement for multi-year contracts – as noted, utilization of ESCO services and 
payment through savings under performance contracts typically requires an agreement between the department or agency and the energy efficiency service provider, 
which may span a number of years. This does not sit well with procurement processes and systems that consider discrete purchase of goods or services, and can create 
additional barriers to uptake of energy efficiency projects in government buildings. 
Based on consultations, there is willingness for Government’s Procurement Services to work 
on potential changes to procurement rules and/or exemptions for energy efficiency 
procurement. This is an important initiative to run alongside other efforts to catalyze the 
take-up of energy efficiency projects in the Government sector.Pilot ESCO deployment program on selected Government sites - While ESCO Sector 
development activities are listed under the Industrial Sector part of this Action Plan, one 
method for practically supporting the growth of the ESCO sector is for Government to call for 
bids on the upgrade of one or more of its significant energy-using sites. Government is in the 
position to specify its requirements for this tender which reinforce its other efforts to build 
good practice for the ESCO sector, with emphasis on the use of accredited ESCOs and bestpractice contracting and monitoring and verification protocols. This model tendering process 
will help to establish momentum for the ESCO sector. This could build on work towards 
procurement reform that would enable easier Government procurement for energy efficiency 
services, and pave the way for further and deeper implementation of energy efficiency in 
Government buildings.
Sites have not been chosen, but it would be advantageous to consider those sites which may 
have common features with other similar buildings that would make the model ESCO 
deployment process relatively replicable. Sites such as hospitals, publicly owned 
educational campuses such as the University of the Philippines (UP), or flagship Government 
buildings in Quezon City or Malacañang would make good candidates. 
4.3.1.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x New procurement rules and guidance established by 2018 
x Large-scale ESCO retrofit project at a government site completed by 2018 
x Reported achievements of the GEMP program increased by 2020 
4.3.2 COM-B: Building Codes Program 
DOE has developed guidelines on the Energy Conserving Designs of Buildings, which were 
completed in 2008 as an activity of the former Philippine Efficient Lighting Market Transformation Project (PELMATP), supported by UNDP and GEF. The Guidelines were developed 
through a consensus development process facilitated by the Institute of Integrated Electrical 
Engineers of the Philippines, Inc., the Philippine Lighting Industry Association, and the 
Energy Efficiency Practitioners Association of the Philippines together with various 
Government agencies and other stakeholders. The Guidelines are detailed and aim to 
prescribe minimum requirements for energy conserving design of new buildings, and provide 
methods for determining compliance. 
More recently, work has been rapidly progressed on a Green Building Code that is being 
trialed in Mandaluyong City. Supported by the IFC, the Mandaluyong experience with Green 
Building Code implementation has been used to re-formulate this document into a draft 
referral code of the National Building Code, tabled before Congress in June 2015, so that its 
measures can take effect at the city level across the whole country.
In the first instance, and for the sake of administrative simplicity, the draft referral code 
applies to larger buildings only (i.e. it applies only to buildings of more than 10,000m2
 for 
hotels and offices, and more than 15,000m2
 for malls). This will limit the energy savings 
impact, as in many cases (especially outside of Metro Manila and Metro Cebu) proposed 
construction sites will be smaller than this threshold. An extensive training program for city 
officials and the enforcement effort will also be required. 4.3.2.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Permanent coordination mechanism established for DOE/DPWH collaboration on 
codes - the implementation of the green building code as a referral code to the National 
Building Code will be reviewed three years after first approval. DOE is already part of the 
working group to consider the integration of energy efficient and other environmental 
measures into building codes and must assist with the review process by recommending 
appropriateness and stringency of measures, as well as new mechanisms for the application 
of the green building code to permits for existing building refurbishment, and for expanding to 
smaller buildings. This assistance should reference the existing work completed on the 
guidelines on Energy Conserving Designs of Buildings. Formalization and articulation of this 
role is important to ensure that the appropriate input to the process is made when required.
DOE can also help with calculation and assessment of embodied energy in construction 
process, and in increasing motivation and recognition through existing awards programs 
such as the annual Don Emilio Abello Awards. 
Support for LGU training on building codes rollout - It is recognized that further rollout of 
green building codes will be resource intensive, with the need for LGU training and 
establishment of procedural requirements at the LGU level. DOE can support efforts by IFC 
and others by developing materials and tools and participating in training for LGU adoption of 
green building codes. Participating LGUs will have the ability to set their own thresholds for 
energy use and size of buildings to which codes will be applied through the use of town 
ordinances. 
A next step should also be to target rollout of green building codes to LGUs and municipalities already earmarked for participation in the Low Carbon Model Town (LCMT) initiative, 
which is among the regional initiatives APEC is undertaking along with an Energy Smart 
Communities Initiative. APEC Energy Ministers will consider expansion of the LMCT 
initiative at upcoming meetings, and this is a good opportunity to create linkage with the 
rollout of green building codes. 
4.3.2.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x DOE participation in training for LGUs on implementing energy efficiency requirements in building codes by 2017 
x DOE input to Green Building Code mid term review process in 2019 
4.3.3 COM-C: Building Information and Ratings 
Program 
There are a number of building information and ratings initiatives well underway in the 
Philippines. The Philippine Energy Efficiency Project – Efficient Building Initiative aimed to 
reduce energy consumption and greenhouse gases in the Philippines through introduction of 
a unified Green Building Certification System, that streamlined existing initiatives into a single 
nascent system. A 2011 tender process saw the appointment of the Philippine Green 
Building Council to develop and implement this rating system, leading to the design and June 
2013 launch of the Building for Ecologically Responsive Design Excellence (BERDE) suite of 
nine rating tools, which are growing their penetration of the market. 
IFC has also been actively developing another tool known as ‘EDGE’ (Excellence in Design many countries. The EDGE tool is a voluntary initiative that targets incremental improvements in energy, water and materials use in all buildings across five broad categories, 
including households and different types of commercial buildings. While some other ratings 
tools tend to target high levels of performance, the EDGE tool is geared towards a simple, 
quick, affordable and accessible rating system. It only applies to new buildings and does not 
consider the actual operational performance of buildings. 
In relation to better information on actual performance of commercial buildings, there is a lot 
of interest in creating a single, reliable measure for benchmarking office building energy 
efficiency. This is also in line with APEC Peer Review Recommendations for the sector, 
which suggested development of a comprehensive and mandatory building energy 
consumption survey in order to better understand the types of buildings and their energy 
consumption. There is also a range of international building energy benchmarking 
experience that can be drawn upon. 
The Philippines has particular issues for creating a comparable measure based on the 
prevalence of BPO activities in office space that have different requirements to international 
standards, typically running 24/7 and having a higher density of staff members per square 
meter. As such there may also be a need to differentiate between different types of office 
building. It has been noted that there is no single ideal benchmark, based on different end 
uses for any given building. However measures could be adjusted or presented on the basis 
of energy consumption per unit of area (i.e. per m2
), density (per person-hour) and unit of 
economic output (per business revenue in pesos). Further work could support a benchmark 
being developed using the Government building stock as a starting point, and studies must 
be undertaken to determine the appropriate level of energy use benchmark with reference to 
overall energy efficiency objectives. Progression of this work is currently under discussion 
with the EU-SWITCH Policy Support team. 
DOE can further build on efforts to improve building information by encouraging expansion of 
the breadth of coverage of ratings tools to include operational reporting and existing 
buildings, and also by linking their use to the rollout of incentives and access to finance for 
energy efficiency retrofits. 
4.3.3.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Develop an energy performance benchmark for government buildings, with a view to 
creating the market standard for all commercial buildings - similar to industrial energy 
efficiency, better information on the current performance of the commercial building stock is 
necessary in order to track progress and penetration of efficiency programs. Creation of an 
energy benchmark for government buildings is proposed, by which underperformance can be 
identified and measures to address them designed through retrofitting and linkage to other 
initiatives under this Action Plan. Government buildings are proposed as a first stage since 
good information about current building performance is available through the GEMP 
program. This benchmark setting exercise can lead to establishment of performance ratings 
or energy use benchmarks for different categories across the entire public and private 
building stock according to their use (e.g. buildings with mostly BPO facilities will have 
different energy requirements to other traditional office space). 
Create linkage between building performance benchmarks and availability of funding 
and incentives – as above, it is important that building benchmarks and ratings are used as 
a basis for further policy, if they are to gain currency and relevance, and thereby influence 
levels of energy efficiency activity by catalyzing new projects. To that end, further work is 
required to formally link achievement of benchmarks and ratings levels to eligibility for funding qualification or implementation support. This work must be developed in tandem 
with other initiatives to create energy efficiency incentives and services (see Part 6 of this 
document). 
Establish a mandatory performance disclosure requirement for commercial buildings 
on sale or lease – some countries have successfully implemented a mandatory requirement 
for commercial building vendors to disclose the energy performance of a building before it 
can be sold. Mandatory performance disclosure can send a powerful market signal for 
energy efficiency. Disclosing energy performance according to agreed benchmarks provides 
access to consistent and meaningful information about building performance, making it 
easier for companies to buy or rent more energy efficient office space. An informed market 
rewards better performing buildings and creates a strong market-based incentive for owners 
to improve their properties with cost-effective energy efficient upgrades that are attractive to 
buyers and tenants and increase return on investment, by allowing ratings to feed into and 
influence property price determinations. 
In order to successfully implement such a scheme in the Philippines, more work needs to be 
done on the parameters for implementation, including the legislative basis for making 
building energy performance disclosure mandatory, under what circumstances energy 
performance needs to be disclosed, using what format or tool, and for which properties. 
4.3.3.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x Benchmarks established for operating energy use in Government buildings by 2017 
x Mandatory disclosure of building performance on sale or lease introduced by 2020 4.4 Summary of Commercial Buildings Energy 
Efficiency Initiatives 
Table 6 Commercial Building Sector Energy Efficiency Initiatives 2016-2020 
Program Proposed Action By When Responsibility 
COM-A: Government 
Buildings Efficiency 
Program
Strengthen and extend the GEMP 
program 
2017 DOE 
New Guidelines released for 
government procurement of energy 
efficiency services
2017 DOE, Procurement 
Services
Complete a model ESCO 
procurement and implementation 
project at a high-profile Government 
building site
2018 DOE 
COM-B: Building 
Codes Program
Permanent co-ordination body 
established for EE input to Green 
Building Code development
2017 DPWH, DOE, IFC, 
LGUs
Establish Building Code training 
program for selected LGUs 2017
DPWH, DOE, IFC, 
LGUs
Inclusion of energy efficiency in threeyear review process of Green Building 
Codes 2019 DPWH, DOE
COM-C: Building 
Information and 
Ratings Program
Develop annual performance 
information tool - benchmark for 
government building energy efficiency 
2017 DOE, private sector 
partners, EUSWITCH
Incentive mechanism to link 
certification to eligibility for energy 
efficiency incentives
2018 DOE
Mandatory Disclosure of performance 
ratings on sale or lease of buildings 
2020 DOE, DPWH, 
property agencies, 
LGUs 5 RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS SECTOR 
ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN 
5.1 Why this sector is important to energy use in 
the Philippines 
Residential energy consumption in the Philippines is dominated by three sectors: space 
cooling and refrigeration (56% of consumption), appliances (18%) and lighting (11%). Any 
efforts at reducing energy consumption in residential buildings should therefore be targeted 
at these three sectors. 
Despite a growing population, energy demand in the residential sector is forecast to remain 
flat over the period to 2030. This forecast is the result of energy efficiency measures in place 
and planned over the period that are expected to cancel out endogenous demand growth. 
Alongside ongoing expected strong demand growth for transport and industrial sectors, this 
sees the forecast proportion of energy consumed in residential buildings decrease markedly, 
from 26% to 14% of overall energy consumption. 
5.2 Pathway to 2030 Energy Efficiency Roadmap 
targets 
Table 7 Residential Building Sector Energy Efficiency Targets to 2020 and 2030 
2013 
actual 
2020 2030 
Baseline residential buildings energy consumption (KTOE) 6,622 6,678 7,160 
Targeted residential buildings energy consumption (KTOE) 6,238 5,728 
Targeted savings (KTOE) 439 1,432 
% saving over business as usual 6.6% 20.0% 
Source: DoE EPPB data 
The 2030 energy savings target for the residential sector has been set at 20% lower 
consumption than the business-as-usual baseline, which sees a targeted interim reduction in 
residential energy use of 439 KTOE, or 5,106 GWh, by 2020. This is the equivalent of taking 
a 120MW power plant off line in the five-year Action Plan period. There are a number of 
measures that could potentially assist to meet this very achievable target and increase 
residential energy savings substantially, especially through support for greater deployment of 
lighting, cooling and building envelope improvements in the Philippine housing market. 
5.3 Programs and Actions to Progress 
5.3.1 RES-A: Appliance Standards and Labeling 
Program 
Implementing minimum energy performance standards that are enforceable is a key future 
activity related to residential energy use. Appliance standards have proven a very successful 
mechanism in a number of countries, with successful and well-documented programs like 
EnergySTAR in the United States, and Top Runner in Japan, leading to sustained and 
substantial energy demand reductions. Testing and labeling of household appliances has been the cornerstone of energy efficiency 
policy for the residential sector given its coverage of the principal consumption appliances 
used. DOE has had support from the ADB-funded Philippine Energy Efficiency Project on 
this program and implemented it in partnership with the DTI’s Bureau of Philippine Standards 
and the Philippines Appliances Industry Association. The testing program is mature and 
requires appliances and lighting products to meet prescribed minimum energy efficiency 
levels and to carry an energy label at the point of sale. Covered products include window airconditioners, household refrigerators and freezers, and lighting. Coverage is in the process 
of being expanded to televisions, clothes washers and fans which will provide coverage for 
the majority of energy consumption of appliances used in the Philippines. However, the 
conversion of this labeling information into enforceable standards for the sale of all 
appliances in the country is still some way off – enforcement mechanisms and channels for 
rollout remain under development. 
MEPS have proven effective in many countries as a mechanism for improving the energy 
efficiency of appliances used in the market. The main issue with this is in allocating roles 
and responsibilities; BPS has a focus on product safety rather than increasing stringency of 
MEPS. The Enercon Bill needs to sort out these responsibilities and allocate a specific role 
for energy efficiency product standards, however in the absence of this there needs to be 
improved coordination between DTI and DOE to ensure that energy efficiency is better 
captured. 
On the issue of standards, while it relates more to commercial and industrial energy use 
settings, standards for electric motors will support efforts to both improve efficiency of 
appliances using motors and motors used in building plant and industrial processes. 
International standards for efficiency of motors are well developed and the Philippines can 
first adopt these standards, before considering the implementation of enforceable minimum 
energy performance standards for motors in future. There is currently good local representation in existing international efforts to develop and introduce these standards through the EU 
funded High-Efficiency Motors (HEMS) initiative. 
5.3.1.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
x A DOE/DTI Coordination mechanism is proposed to overcome the lack of communication and occasionally conflicting objectives between DOE and DTI on product 
standards for energy efficiency. Gradually, this must be streamlined into a single 
program for joint responsibility on energy efficiency standard setting and application 
to different appliance groups.
x A strengthened post-market surveillance program has been proposed by DTI as 
a means of improving enforcement of current standards relating to efficient product 
sale. Such a surveillance program may be best administered by a combination of 
government coordination and industry-led enforcement through bodies such as the 
Philippine Appliance Industry Association (PAIA) or other public-private sector collaborations (see Part 6 of this document). 
5.3.1.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x Reformulated mechanism for EE input and cooperation on standards development by 
2017 
x Measurable increase in post-market surveillance programs by 2017 5.3.2 RES-B: Bulk Purchase and Large Employers ’
Staff Energy Efficiency Loans Program 
Given the cost-effectiveness of switching out many inefficient appliances (such as lowefficiency lighting, window-style air-conditioners and cooking equipment), there remains an 
opportunity for greater market penetration of particular appliances. Persistent high electricity 
prices in the Philippines reinforce the cost-effectiveness of many measures. However, the 
average Filipino electricity consumer has limited disposable income with which to fund a 
purchase of efficient appliances, and a limited appetite for external finance that may be 
perceived as expensive. 
Based on this, there is an emerging opportunity to match corporate social responsibility with 
energy efficiency goals for increased uptake of energy efficient appliances. This proposed 
program targets staff of large (e.g. more than 500) employers, by offering them employee 
micro-loans for the purchase of specified energy efficiency equipment. The loans could be 
repaid through salary deductions administered through the payroll department of the 
employer, thereby internalizing credit risk. The employee can justify and afford these 
repayments in part through the reduction in energy bills that they will experience, and can 
also avail of concessional interest rates (effectively set by their employer’s cost of finance). 
There is a need for further development of parameters around the project, such as: what the 
qualifying products are; how the employee eligibility criteria should be set; what the loan 
terms and recourse mechanisms would be; and what documentation would be required. 
Qualifying products might include: 
x Insulation and weatherproofing equipment 
x Air-conditioning units 
x LED lighting 
x Efficient electric fans 
x Efficient televisions 
DOE would be involved in determining what products qualify as efficient products under the 
scheme, which could commence with a limited number of product offers for simplicity of 
administration. Once the volume of demand is determined for an organization, the possibility 
of bulk purchase discounts can also be explored. 
Such a program, catalyzed by DOE, can lead to increased take-up of energy efficient 
appliances. It overcomes existing barriers related to purchase reluctance based on upfront 
costs, finance, transaction costs and product information. Once formulated, the program is 
highly replicable. In relation to replicability, the Philippines is a world leader in business 
process outsourcing (BPO) with many large firms basing global operations in the country to 
perform a range of functions including payroll management. If leading BPO firms can 
develop capacity and capability to assist organizations to administer such an energy 
efficiency loan processing initiative via corporate payroll departments, it can become part of 
the product offering not just to Filipino companies, but also to provide for leadership 
worldwide to other companies that outsource payroll services to the Philippines. 
It is noted that there is also the possibility for credit card providers to be interested in similar 
micro-credit schemes for energy efficiency appliance purchases that improve their corporate 
social responsibility standing, whereby they could increase their market penetration by However, this approach lacks the engagement of large employers and the BPO sector, which 
are key co-benefits of the proposed scheme. 
Figure 7 provides a summary of the benefits of the proposed program for different 
stakeholders. 
Figure 7 Appliance Bulk Purchase Incentive Program through corporate payroll 
5.3.2.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Establish scheme parameters (partners, products, conditions) – it is proposed that DOE 
approach a limited number of large Philippine companies to pilot this scheme with their 
employees. At the same time, DOE can establish product partners and a clear sense of the 
level of efficiency required from qualifying products, which will help in benchmarking the 
energy saved under this scheme. It is not envisaged that a separate finance requirement will 
need to be coordinated, as finance will be made available through microloans within the 
payroll department of each company. Only if the program reaches a significant scale will the 
finance sector need to be engaged. 
Establish DOE support service – once the parameters of the program are established 
through this initial pilot, and a number of employee loans have been processed, DOE can 
begin to offer a staff benefits support service and advice on how to set up the program for 
any company above a certain size threshold (e.g. 500 employees). 
DOE: EE 
Appliances 
bulk 
purchase 
incentive 
program 
Employers: 
Demonstrated 
corporate social 
responsibility 
Staff retention 
Employees: 
Access to finance 
Lower energy bills 
Updated and 
discounted 
appliances 
Market 
Transformation: 
Increased 
penetration of EE 
Industry 
Development: 
leadership and 
replicability through 
BPO sector 
Suppliers: 
Increased sales 
 Support for sale of 
more efficient 
products 5.3.2.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x Scheme operational by 2017 
x In terms of actual results, it is relatively simple to gather information about rates of 
take-up for companies that register as participants under this scheme. Assuming a 
standard level of efficiency for appliances being replaced, it should be relatively 
straightforward to calculate the amount of energy savings per appliance and the 
number of appliances supported by the scheme. It will be important to reference recommended actions back to the level of ambition required in the 2030 EE Roadmap, 
and to set up monitoring actions. 
5.3.3 RES-C: Behavioral Information Program 
There is room for further work to be done on influencing residential electricity usage behavior 
through the provision of on-bill information and further awareness raising campaigns. Such 
programs have proven effective in creating sustained and cost-effective energy use 
reductions as they work through consumer sentiment and behavior change rather than 
requiring direct investment in hardware. 
Housing design and benefits of insulation is one area that warrants further attention for 
information programs targeted at households. Many houses in the Philippines remain poorly 
insulated and cooling accounts for the majority of household energy use. Reductions in airconditioning use through building envelope measures and cool roofs to reduce heat gain 
could be a clear priority of such measures, though it is noted that air-conditioning penetration 
remains relatively low. 
5.3.3.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Support further work on residential energy behavior change using Billing Information 
Analysis, including for low-income groups – there is a growing body of work that points to 
the influential nature of information provided in electricity bills through its role in changing 
consumer behavior. This can especially be targeted at low-income households to include 
both energy efficiency information as well as information about consumption levels relative to 
their community cohort. 
Utilities such as MERALCO have well developed efforts to consider information included on 
residential energy bills in the Metro Manila area. Billing information in the Philippines is 
among some of the most disaggregated and detailed in the world, in the interests of price 
transparency; however this information does not currently explicitly target energy efficiency 
behavior. 
Information companies such as US-based Opower provide billing information services that 
engage customers with targeted information and systematic approaches to consumer 
engagement aimed at achieving energy efficiency. Such approaches can also be tailored to 
low-income customer groups. Across a wide range of programs, this has led to the 
sustained reduction of between 1-3.5% of residential energy use, which on its own could 
account for as much as half of the 2020 Action Plan target for the residential sector. 
Programs such as this could be further explored by Philippines utilities. DOE can support 
MERALCO and other utilities to work more closely on billing information analysis. Behavioral 
impact of the installation and use of home energy monitoring systems can also be explored, 
as another means of improving residential energy information at the time of use. Support extension of the use of pre-paid electricity pilot models. MERALCO is currently 
heavily engaged in the development of the 'Kuryente Load' program, which has been piloted 
in Rizal and Manila, and has been approved by authorities to be expanded to parts of 
Quezon City, Caloocan, Pasig, Makati, and Mandaluyong. MERALCO expects to increase 
its current 5,000 prepaid customers to 40,000 by December 2015, with a further 100,000 
customers expected by end 2016. 
Early measurement of pilot programs indicates that better and more timely information 
regarding energy use has created energy savings of as much as 20%. This is a significant 
finding that shows the potential of prepaid electricity models to appeal to the mindset of 
relatively low-income electricity consumers in the Philippines and to actively engage them in 
energy efficiency activities, mirroring the cultural acceptance of cellphone crediting 
mechanisms. Daily communications about electricity load levels provides an important 
interface point between utilities and customers on their electricity usage and can be used as 
a trigger for significant awareness raising and promotional opportunities, such as incentives 
for energy efficiency opportunities, monthly challenges, product promotions and community 
energy savings competitions. 
DOE can support further analytical work in understanding the nature of electricity purchase 
decisions in the context of these schemes. In particular, DOE can reinforce studies of the 
relative effectiveness of different consumer information regimes under prepaid electricity 
models, to understand the most effective nature and timing of information provided to 
consumers, and to consider alternative further uses of communications with prepaid 
customers to incentivize energy efficiency activity. DOE also has a role to play in 
disseminating prepaid electricity pilots to other distribution utilities around the country. 
Harness the private sector and new media in creating information and awareness 
campaigns. DOE intends to continue its efforts to raise awareness of the energy situation in 
the country, through awareness campaigns on energy efficiency and energy savings 
measures. Previous ‘tri-media’ campaigns have been difficult to monitor in terms of their 
impact, despite their wide dissemination. These approaches must now be supplemented 
with refreshed campaigns that target residential energy awareness and harness social media 
for new and innovative approaches, partnering with the private sector where possible. 
Examples of such new campaigns include the Philips #MayMagagawaKa campaign and the 
MERALCO ‘Bright Ideas’ program, both of which provide new insights and ways to engage 
with customers. 
5.3.3.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x Prepaid customer trial extended to 200,000 customers by 2017 
x Awareness campaigns reaching a measurably increased number of customers during 
the Action Plan period 5.4 Summary of Residential Sector Energy Efficiency Initiatives 
Table 8 Residential Sector Energy Efficiency Initiatives 2016-2020 
Program Proposed Action By When Responsibilities 
RES-A: Appliance 
Standards and 
Labeling program
Reformulate mechanism for EE input 
and cooperation on standards 
development 
2017 DOE, DTI-BPS 
Increase post-market surveillance 
programs 
2017 DOE, DTI-BPS 
RES-B: Large 
Employers Bulk 
Purchase and Staff 
Incentive Program
Undertake design of scheme 
x Eligible organizations 
x Eligible products 
x Scheme mechanics 
2016 DOE, corporate 
sector, BPO 
sector
Roll out scheme and establish DOE 
support activities 
2017 DOE 
RES-C: Behavioral 
information program 
for low-income 
groups
Investigate greater utilization of billing 
information programs and pre-paid 
billing models 
2017 DOE, utilities, 
private sector 
providers 
Continue awareness raising 
campaigns on EE including for 
housing design (e.g. insulation and 
cool roofs) 
ongoing DOE, media 
partners6 CROSS SECTORAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
ACTIONS 
6.1 Defining the need for cross-sectoral energy 
efficiency actions 
In keeping with the energy efficiency ‘ecosystem’ approach as outlined in Part 1, the range of 
enabling conditions and circumstances for stronger energy efficiency action can be described 
in terms of more than just energy efficiency actors or organizations. The strength of the 
ecosystem can also be conceived of thematically, taking account of for example the level of 
technological sophistication present, the prevailing energy culture, and the degree of 
entrepreneurship and innovation capacity. Consideration of some of these more dynamic 
characteristics, and their role in overall success and level of energy efficiency implementation, is important to round out the necessary actions to catalyze energy efficiency. 
This Action Plan document sets out many initiatives that are specific to individual energy-use 
sectors. However, taking a more thematic approach, it is clear that there are also areas of 
energy efficiency activity which cut across all sectors – importantly, in the areas of 
intermediary organizations, structures and delivery vehicles for policy, finance, institutional 
development, and energy efficiency markets. These crosscutting areas are contemplated in 
this section, and to the extent possible, sharpened into some key practical initiatives that 
might be progressed. 
The journey that the Philippines takes towards more integrated consideration of energy 
efficiency as a priority issue on these key cross cutting issues can be represented in Figure 8 
below. 
Figure 8 Crosscutting dimensions of the energy efficiency ‘ecosystem’ or enabling 
environment 
In summarizing the current status of development of this ecosystem in the Philippines 
according to such a thematic breakdown, the following observations can be made: Policy and Regulation: engagement and awareness is growing at the political level in the 
Philippines, due to a growing understanding of the benefits of energy efficiency in the light of 
energy supply constraints. Further development in policy and regulation is the direct subject 
of this Roadmap and also of overarching legislative initiatives, such as the Enercon Bill. 
There is a growing interest for DOE to use and potentially test its legislative mandate to 
promote further energy efficiency on specific policy initiatives, such as the strengthening of 
minimum energy performance standards. 
Financing: there are some notable EE finance initiatives in the country, however financing 
for energy efficiency projects is generally at an early stage of development, with most project 
proponents financing their activities from their own cash flow. To achieve a higher rate of 
implementation access to finance must be improved, and capacity building for finance sector 
development remains necessary. There remains a lack of sophisticated energy efficiency 
finance knowledge and a general lack of investor confidence in energy efficiency projects, 
despite the promise of attractive returns. 
Institutional Development: while DOE has a lead role on energy efficiency, the topic cuts
across many organizational responsibilities that belong to other agencies, such as transport, 
industrial policy, product standards and building codes. In almost all cases, coordination 
mechanisms for delivery of energy efficiency need strengthening and program responsibilities require clarification. Moreover, given the broad sweep of issues across industry, 
transport and buildings sectors, DOE does not have the resources to delivery all of the 
energy efficiency initiatives that may be required to reach current targets. A new vehicle to 
attract external finance, engage partners and work with collaborators may therefore be 
required. 
Markets and Pricing: the emergence of active intermediary markets for EE delivery is yet to 
happen in earnest, and recognition of this in energy pricing, market-based incentives and 
regulatory structures is yet to occur. Additionally, the nascent ESCO market needs to be 
strengthened to ensure strong implementation capability. 
To address these current shortfalls directly, and lay the foundations for a stronger energy 
efficiency ecosystem in the Philippines, this action plan recommends a number of key 
actions and initiatives as outlined below. 
6.2 Programs and Actions to Progress 
6.2.1 CS-A: A new vehicle for public-private collaboration on energy efficiency 
In developing this series of Action Plans it has become patently clear that DOE is not in a 
position to implement energy efficiency without the direct involvement of other implementation partners both within and outside Government. Specifically, within Government DOE has 
jurisdiction over energy, however most energy efficiency activities require engaging with 
organizations in the key energy use sectors for whom other Departments play a leading role: 
notably, DTI with industry and energy using appliances, DOTC with transport, and DPWH 
with buildings. A new institutional arrangement is therefore required to both enfranchise and 
formalize energy efficiency responsibilities of these agencies, and bring together the many 
different organizations with key implementation roles in energy efficiency, including those 
from the private sector. Such an institution would have an express mandate to focus on enduse energy efficiency and to deliver on core aspects of this Action Plan. It is a clear gap in 
the current energy efficiency ecosystem of the Philippinesto the detriment of current efforts Addressing this gap may be best achieved through the formation of a public-private body, 
tentatively called the Philippines Energy Efficiency Advisory Board (“PEEAB”). This Board 
would play a number of roles in creating collaboration and partnerships, leading policy 
advocacy, fostering industry development and coordinating awareness-raising campaigns. 
On this last point, if Government wishes to take a stronger role in awareness raising and 
promotion of energy efficiency, a single clear authority for energy efficiency composed of 
different Government agencies would be in a position to send a strong community 
awareness message. 
The Government is already experienced in administering similar collaborative agencies for 
other issues, including: 
National Competitiveness Council: the Public-Private Sector Task Force on Philippine 
Competitiveness (later renamed to the National Competitiveness Council or NCC) was 
established in 2006, with a focus on promoting a more competitive Philippines and 
instilling a culture of excellence, through public-private sector collaboration as means 
to reduce poverty through inclusive growth. It supports this agenda through private 
sector initiatives that support public policies, with clear deliverables and metrics. The 
NCC focuses on 13 areas expected to improve the country’s competitiveness, with 
each area handled by Working Groups comprised of public and private sector members, including government agencies and offices already involved in the priority projects as well as foreign and local chambers of commerce and various industry associations. The Department of Trade and Industry (Competitiveness Bureau) serves as the 
NCC Secretariat. 
Climate Change Commission: The Climate Change Commission is the lead-policy making 
body of the government tasked to coordinate, monitor and evaluate government programs and ensure mainstreaming of climate change in national, local, and sectoral 
development plans towards a climate-resilient and climate-smart Philippines. It is an 
independent and autonomous body that has the same status as that of a national 
government agency, and falls under the Office of the President, who serves as Chair. 
National Renewable Energy Board: The Board was established in 2010 to act as a policy and 
monitoring body for the effective implementation of the Renewable Energy Act of 2008. 
It is comprised of an Executive and working committees to delve into specific responsibilities such as finance and planning, market transformation, and technical issues. 
It is proposed that a PEEAB would be constituted with features drawn from all three of these 
similar cross-sectoral organizations. For determining the structure of the organization, many 
other international reference points exist also, such as agencies set up for similar purposes 
in countries such as Viet Nam (Energy Conservation Office), South Africa (National Energy 
Efficiency Agency), Ukraine (State Agency on Energy Efficiency and Energy Saving of 
Ukraine), New Zealand (Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority), the United Kingdom 
(Energy Savings Trust) or the United States both at the Federal and State levels. Key 
characteristics include the involvement of both public and private sector; being granted 
responsibility for key aspects of program delivery; and high-level connection with executive 
decision making of Government. It is important to learn from the experiences of constituting 
each of these bodies, such that pitfalls can be avoided and that the new vehicle can 
discharge the envisioned organizational responsibilities. Further, in the context of limited 
energy efficiency implementation capacity in the Philippines, it is important that the 
organization can harness leadership and drive wherever it exists, so that it empowers energy 
efficiency implementation to be led by the stakeholder group in the best position to do so, 
whether public or private. Such efforts have been mooted before; it is noted that, through House Bill No. 1908 tabled in 
2013, Congress has already been asked to consider formation of “an inter-agency energy 
conservation committee to deploy cost-effective energy conservation measures and 
technologies and for other purposes.” This recognizes the multi-disciplinary nature of energy 
efficiency and the need for direct engagement of other Departments, however this committee 
was a limited version of the need expressed here focused on efficiency in Government 
Buildings, rather than including the private sector, and was ultimately not passed. 
Suggested activities for the PEEAB are for further development, but would likely include: 
Energy Efficiency Advocacy and Policy Development 
x Policy advisory and input 
x Assistance with legislative program 
x Specific oversight responsibilities for elements of the Energy Efficiency Action Plan, 
and in relation to the Enercon Bill 
x Research and knowledge dissemination, with an emphasis on data monitoring and 
program evaluation 
Industry Development and Accreditation 
x ESCO industry support and accreditation 
x Product and technology accreditation 
x Market surveillance for non-compliant appliances being sold 
Awareness Raising 
x CEO-level engagement programs 
x Awareness raising 
x LGU training 
x Links with education and broader efforts to institutionalize energy efficiency awareness 
If the PEEAB was specifically charged with responsibilities to deliver on specific initiatives 
under the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, this could be an important vehicle for 
private sector engagement through working committees, and could attract external finance to 
deliver on priority implementation activities. Another aspect of success in attracting external 
funding would be for the PEEAB to build specific capacity in monitoring and evaluation of 
energy efficiency programs according to prescribed indicators. 
There is the possibility of such an organization also playing a global knowledge development 
role by better linking to similar organizations in other countries to include the Philippines in 
regional and global energy efficiency discussions. Such organizations include other country 
governments and international networks of NGOs, such as the Global Alliance for Energy 
Productivity, network of Councils for an Energy Efficient Economy, or other international 
energy efficiency networks. This will be especially important in its role as a Philippines 
knowledge hub and disseminator of best practice energy efficiency information, in order to 
build momentum of local energy efficiency policy and programs, and in the longer term to 
form the basis for the national Energy Efficiency and Conservation Center to be mandated, 
as foreshadowed in the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Roadmap 2014-2030. 
6.2.1.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Decide on organization inception matters – such matters would need to be resolved in 
discussion between Government Departments expected to play a key role. Decisions must be made on the organization’s constitution, Board composition, status in Government, 
funding structure, mission and vision, early partners and supporters. 
Scope Initial Activities – A strategic planning exercise must be conducted to determine the 
early activities of the organization, linking to both the activity envisaged under the Action 
Plans as outlined in this document, and also the available resources. 
Approve the creation of a Philippines Energy Efficiency Advisory Board through retabling of legislative instruments with Congress. 
6.2.1.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
x Organization established and operational by December 2016 
x Identifiable contribution to energy efficiency policy implementation by end 2017 
6.2.2 CS-B: Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund and 
Finance Sector Capacity Building 
A pervasive cross-sectoral barrier relates to the disconnect between energy efficiency project 
proponents and traditional financiers over their perception of energy efficiency project risk. 
Project developers and ESCOs generally see energy efficiency projects as unique low-risk 
financing opportunities with attractive returns; however, traditional financiers usually see the 
same projects as expensive transactions that are relatively small, with a lack of adequate 
collateral, difficulties in establishing baselines, a dearth of standard lending documentation, 
and a general lack of precedence and experience. This summary mirrors the experience of 
the IFC Sustainable Energy Finance program in the Philippines; which despite funding a 
number of successful projects and a resultant portfolio of approx. US$300m, has not created 
a step change in energy efficiency uptake. Average deal size remains in the $2-3m range. 
Given this general view of EE project risk, many banks have a poorly developed capacity to 
assess EE risk, and a poor appetite for what are seen as difficult projects. There are, 
however, further measures that can be taken to make it easier for private sector financiers to 
undertake energy efficiency project lending and quickly build the capacity of the banking 
sector to undertake such projects. 
One such measure is to create an energy efficiency revolving fund, which is a technique 
successfully deployed in other countries (notably Thailand in the ASEAN region). A revolving 
fund is a dedicated fund that is available for qualifying energy efficiency projects, which is to 
be repaid through energy savings. A revolving fund is simply a construct to demonstrate a 
clear signal that EE funding is available on understood terms. 
DOE can act as the arranger of such a fund and can solicit commercial funders to be the 
funding participants. The fund can thereby act as a focal point for any EE project proponents 
to gain project finance and will build capacity of the local finance sector in energy efficiency 
lending at the same time as improving the availability of finance to project proponents. 
Another aspect of improving the availability of energy efficiency finance is, as noted above, 
the capacity of commercial banks to understand and accept energy efficiency risk. This 
program for support of commercial banks could be run through the Development Bank of the 
Philippines (DBP) as a key agency for capacity building in the finance sector. The Action Plan also notes that not all energy efficiency finance will be sourced through 
traditional banks; there will be a growing role for both non-bank debt finance and private 
equity investment. The availability of both debt and equity finance is only one side of building 
energy efficiency finance capacity; energy users and project developers themselves must 
also improve their ability to understand the needs of financiers and present investable 
projects by understanding and addressing risk perceptions that may be held by potential 
funders. Alongside development of the revolving fund, the Action Plan proposes a conduct a 
capacity building and training program for users of energy efficiency finance to explain 
available sources of finance, and the needs and requirements of different financiers, in the 
interests of bringing more investable projects forward for implementation. 
A final plank of strengthening the energy efficiency finance ‘ecosystem’ is in improving the 
risk perception of lending against performance contracts and ESCO performance. This is 
addressed in part through measures for ESCO industry strengthening as outlined in the 
Industry Sector Energy Efficiency Action Plan, outlined in Part 2 above. 
6.2.2.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Establish an Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund, building on and broadening the work 
of IFC’s Sustainable Energy Finance Program. Such a fund should be sized to send a 
strong signal of the investment potential and the intended level of energy efficiency 
implementation, and in this regard, a figure of approximately USD 100m or PHP 5 billion is 
proposed. The Fund would be made available to large-scale industrial and commercial 
building energy efficiency projects that could demonstrate their eligibility in terms of meeting 
certain project parameters, including 
x Loan size and term 
x Amount of energy savings 
x Performance against established energy use benchmarks for the sector 
x Compliance with data and performance monitoring requirements 
x Potential for replicability 
Importantly, the Fund could be kick-started by the involvement of concessional sources of 
finance to ensure that low interest rate loans could be offered. A number of preparatory 
actions would need to be made by DOE, including the recruitment and contracting of funding 
partners, establishment of lending parameters including project eligibility, credit requirements, roles and responsibilities, and Fund administration. 
Care must be taken to ensure that a Revolving Fund creates permanent increases in banking 
sector energy efficiency lending capacity; experience in Thailand shows that, once the Fund 
was withdrawn, the lending activities of partner financial institutions was not sustained at the 
level envisaged. It has bee suggested that, coupled with introduction of such a fund, DOE 
could work with Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) to explore a regulatory intervention 
requiring banks to hold a minimum exposure threshold for green/sustainability/climate 
projects, which of course would include energy efficiency projects. 
Create an Energy Efficiency Finance Program for the commercial bank sector – this 
training program could potentially be led by DBP as a key capacity building partner of the 
finance sector. The program would aim to build on successful bank training programs run in 
other countries, such as those supported by ADB in Indonesia and Sri Lanka, which aim to 
equip commercial banks with the administrative skills required to accept energy efficiency 
risk. Coordinate an Energy Efficiency Finance Training Program for large energy users on 
investable projects. DOE could provide stronger coordination for capacity building activities 
for project proponents, aimed at creating an investible EE project and expanding the pipeline 
of EE projects in order to attract finance, including equity capital and non-bank finance. 
Efforts at this are currently underway through a number of providers. DOE is well placed to 
better coordinate this training activity. 
6.2.2.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
Measurement of the impact of efforts to improve engagement with the energy efficiency 
finance sector will be done through 
x Drawdowns on the Revolving Fund; 
x Identifiable and measurable sizes of energy efficiency lending portfolios of major 
financial institutions; 
x Monitoring of non-bank investments in energy efficiency in the Philippines as tracked 
by private market providers 
6.2.3 CS-C: Energy Efficiency Data Management, 
Monitoring and Evaluation Program 
The establishment of a robust and viable platform for the collection of energy efficiency data 
and information, and its use as feedback for the effectiveness and refinement of programs, is 
a longstanding requirement for energy efficiency project development. Without such 
information, decision makers are unable to have confidence about the success of programs 
and accountability for funding decisions is made more difficult. 
Energy efficiency monitoring and evaluation activities are notoriously complex at the macro 
or economy-wide level. They involve the setting of a hypothetical business-as-usual future 
energy consumption baseline, having sufficient surety through measurement and data 
collection about the impact of all energy efficiency interventions, and having accurate data 
about actual final energy consumption achieved, which is used to assess overall savings 
against the hypothetical level of consumption. 
The calculation of each of these three components is further confounded by a number of 
intractable issues. For example: 
x Knowledge of future energy usage levels must account for a range of unknown or 
unpredictable factors such as future population distribution, overall rates and composition of economic growth, and future climatic patterns; 
x The impact, measured as financial and environmental impact, of energy efficiency 
interventions varies according to endogenous changes in energy sector parameters, 
including changing energy prices, energy supply constraints, carbon intensity of electricity supply, and underlying rates of technology change and innovation. Further, 
changes in energy behavior and energy culture as a direct impact of energy efficiency 
programs are difficult to separate and count as additional to overall energy consumption patterns. 
x There are multiple data quality and availability issues with collation of actual energy 
consumption. DOE produces energy accounts which detail sectoral consumption 
levels, however the veracity of data used is unclear. At the resolution of sectoral or 
locationally specific data on energy consumption, DOE requires participation of many 
data contributors, including large industrial sites, commercial building owners and 
precincts, utilities and fuel distributors. At present, DOE lacks the resources and capacity to both collect and effectively collate the 
information at each of these levels. It is unrealistic to suggest that, in the next five years, 
each of these issues and complicating factors can be adequately addressed. However, as a 
starting point, a priority for data management should be that quantitative indicators are 
established to begin tracking key program parameters and the success of specific 
interventions under this action plan. This will serve as a precursor to more sophisticated 
understandings and modeling of energy consumption patterns and energy efficiency program 
impacts. 
Each sectoral Action Plan presented here has a series of initiatives that can be monitored 
through the use of proxy indicators as follows: 
Table 9 Proposed Proxy Indicators for Energy Efficiency Monitoring and Evaluation 
Sector Program Suggested Proxy Indicator How measured 
Industrial IND-A: Industry 
Skills, Capacity 
and Opportunity 
Identification
1. Number of ISO50001 accredited 
industrial plants 
2. Number and size of industrial 
energy efficiency upgrade and 
implementation projects completed through UNIDO, HEMS and 
PEZA activities 
Data collated by 
responsible agencies 
and program 
administrators
IND-B: ESCO 
Development 
Program
3. Number of accredited ESCOs 
4. Number and financial size of 
projects executed by accredited 
ESCOs 
Data collated by 
agency responsible 
for ESCO 
accreditation
IND-C: Demand 
Response and 
Demand Side 
Management 
Program
5. Size and duration of Demand 
Response contributions to 
meeting power demand 
6. Number and size of DSM 
activities by utilities 
Electricity distributor 
reports
Transport TRA-A: Vehicle 
Efficiency 
Improvement 
Program
7. Fuel intensity of new vehicles sold 
8. Diesel use per registered vehicle 
Vehicle sales data 
Fuel consumption 
and overall vehicle 
fleet data 
TRA-B: Public 
Vehicle Driver 
Awareness 
Program
9. Increased awareness on efficient 
vehicles 
Website hits on Fuel 
Economy Run data 
TRA-C: Freight 
Transport Energy 
Efficiency 
Partnership
10. Heavy vehicle and non-road 
transport energy use as a 
percentage of total transport 
energy use 
DOE and DOTC 
databasesSector Program Suggested Proxy Indicator How measured 
Commercial COM-A: 
Government 
Buildings 
Efficiency Program 
11. Reported government energy 
consumption 
12.Percentage of Government 
buildings meeting specified 
energy use benchmarks 
GEMP reports 
COM-B: Building 
Codes Program
13. Number of LGUs adopting Green 
Building Codes 
14.Number of referrals 
LGU and Green 
Building Code 
implementer records 
COM-C: Building 
Information and 
Ratings Program 
15. Number of building certifications 
16.Energy use of certified buildings 
Building rating 
organizations
Residential RES-A: Appliance 
Standards and 
Labeling program 
17. Number of products for which 
minimum energy performance 
standards apply 
18.Sales of efficient appliances 
DTI-BPS reports 
Records of appliance 
distributors and 
manufacturers
RES-B: Large 
Employers Bulk 
Purchase and Staff 
Incentive Program 
19. Number of participating employers 
20.Size of loans made under the 
program 
DOE reporting 
Participating 
company reporting 
RES-C: Behavioral 
information 
program for lowincome groups
21. Normalized average bill of prepaid 
electricity customers 
Utility data 
Consumer surveys 
Cross 
Sectoral
CS-A: A new 
vehicle for 
public/private 
collaboration on 
energy efficiency 
n/a 
CS-B: Energy 
Efficiency 
Revolving Fund 
and Finance 
Sector Capacity 
Building Program 
22. Investments made under the 
Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund 
23.Number of financial institutions 
making energy efficiency 
investments 
DOE and financial 
provider records 
This set of 23 suggested indicators must now be developed according to a clear allocation of 
roles and responsibilities, noting that DOE is not the custodian of most of the data. This 
realization makes clear that responsibility for the ongoing work required to improve data and 
present monitoring and evaluation work must reside with the multi-sectoral organization 
contemplated in CS-B above. Targets and objectives set against these indicators should be 
made in reference both to establishment of a 2014 baseline and also the level of ambition 
that is contained in the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Roadmap to 2030. 
Such indicators, while not being able to address the full complexity of the overall impact of 
energy efficiency on the economy and overall energy use, are focused on the first priority of 
understanding the impact of funded programs on an ongoing basis. This will allow for efficiency programs. Activity to strengthen understanding of progress against the nominated 
indicators will likely strengthen the available data to make future, more detailed determinations about actual program impacts on energy use. 
As a separate practical initiative to the establishment of the monitoring and evaluation regime 
for energy efficiency as outlined above, it is noted that the GEMP model has been successful 
in building a database of information about energy consumption in Government Buildings. 
To compliment the requirements of the GEMP, it is proposed to establish a requirement 
through Executive Order that all large energy-using companies must designate a company 
‘energy manager’ or energy conservation officer. This designate would be responsible for 
filing energy use returns to DOE in an agreed common format, including regular reporting on 
energy efficiency measures undertaken as well as reporting on energy use, as a means of 
bolstering and widening the reach of voluntary data collections. 
Participation mandated in this way would be an important precursor to introduction of the 
Enercon Bill and would help with future efforts to better understand both baseline energy 
consumption and the ongoing impact of energy efficiency programs, in addition to further 
work by DOE to collate and improve economy-wide data received from electric distribution 
utilities on overall energy consumption. Once a wider data set is established it is envisaged 
that DOE will be in a position to better forecast energy consumption and economy-wide 
energy efficiency impacts in the Action Plan period of 2021-25.
6.2.3.1 Recommended 2016-2020 Program Actions 
Establish responsibility for the monitoring of the Energy Efficiency Conservation Action Plan 
2016-2020 to reside with the PEEAB, as described in Section CS-B. 
Charge the responsible body with legislative power for establishing sectoral energy efficiency 
monitoring and evaluation frameworks, including: 
x Agreed methodologies and metrics by which to monitor and evaluate progress in each 
sector; 
x Identification of key data sets – both at a macroeconomic level and by target sector; 
x Identification of key potential data contributor organizations – e.g. petroleum industry, 
vehicle wholesalers, import authorities, electric utilities, large energy users; 
x Establishment of 2014 baselines for each indicator and metric to be used; 
x Establishment of data collection protocols and responsibilities; 
x Consistency of data storage, including selection of an appropriate ICT and data 
management platform; 
x Framework setting out rights to access, contribute to and manage data; 
x Format and schedule for reporting. 
6.2.3.2 Monitoring and Milestones towards 2030 targets 
As per suggested actions above, a report into progress against key sector indicators should 
be prepared by 2020 and compared against overall targets for sector efficiency as well as for 
overall energy efficiency targets, as described in the Philippines Energy Efficiency Roadmap 
2014-2030. 6.3 Summary of Cross-Sectoral Energy Efficiency 
Initiatives 
Table 10 Cross-Sectoral Energy Efficiency Initiatives 2016-2020 
Program Proposed Action By When Responsibilities 
CS-A: A new vehicle 
for public/private 
collaboration on 
energy efficiency
Gain agreement to establish new 
entity 
2016 DOE 
Formulate membership, composition, 
activity plans 
2016 DOE 
Establish resources for ongoing 
operation
2017 DOE, private 
sector partners, 
donors 
CS-B: Energy 
Efficiency Revolving 
Fund and Finance 
Sector Capacity 
Building Program
Approach donors for assistance with 
EE capacity building for the finance 
sector 
2016 DOE, donors 
Establish dedicated revolving fund for 
EE projects, subject to funding 
availability, including parameters of 
new fund for EE projects – sectors, 
funders, terms and conditions 
2017 DOE, donors 
Create an Energy Efficiency Finance 
Program for the commercial bank 
sector 
2017 DOE, DBP 
Coordinate an Energy Efficiency 
Finance Training Program for large 
energy users on investable projects 
2017 DOE, private 
sector providers 
CS-C: Energy 
Efficiency Data 
Management, 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation Program
Establish responsibility for energy 
efficiency data collection, and sectoral 
frameworks containing agreed 
monitoring regime and stronger 
energy use data protocols 
2016 DOE, data 
providers
Report on Action Plan implementation 
according to agreed indicators 
2017 DOE 7 REFERENCES 
APEC (2014), Follow-Up Peer Review On Energy Efficiency In The Philippines, APEC 
Energy Working Group, Manila 2014 
Ablaza, A. (2015), Bridging the Gaps of Energy Efficiency Finance in the Philippines, 
BlueSky Energy Efficiency Co. Ltd, presentation 4 August 2015 
Clean Air Asia, Clean Fuels and Vehicles program information accessed at 
http://cleanairasia.org/portal/cleanfuelsandvehicles 
DOE (2014), Energy Efficiency and Conservation Roadmap: Milestones and Challenges, 
presented Bali, Indonesia 30 September 2014 
Department of Trade and Industry, Investment Priority Plan 2014-16
Department of Public Works and Highways, Draft Green Building Code for Mandaluyong 
City, June 2015 
EU-SWITCH (2013), An Energy Efficiency Roadmap for the Philippines 2014-2030
Institute for Building Efficiency (2012), Driving Transformation 
International Energy Agency (2015), Energy Technology Perspectives – Executive Summary, 
Paris 
International Energy Agency (2014), Energy Efficiency Indicators – Essentials for Policymaking, Paris 
International Energy Agency (2013), Southeast Asia Energy Outlook, Paris 
Lazard (2014), Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis, accessed via 
http://www.lazard.com/perspective/levelized-cost-of-energy-v8-abstract/ 
Republic of the Philippines (2002), Republic Act 9184: Government Procurement Reform Act
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (2015), Best Policy Practices for 
Promoting Energy Efficiency, Geneva June 2015 
United States Environment Protection Authority, ‘Vehicle Standards and Regulations’ 
accessed at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/standards.htm
WRI (2015), Improving Quality Of Life In Cities Through Partnerships For Better Buildings, 
Presentation to Asian Development Bank, May 2015 EX 1: Summary of Action Plan Initiatives and Preliminary Prioritizat
etail that follows is consolidated from each section of the Action Plan and augmented with a p
ch initiative, based on a qualitative assessment against the following criteria: 
a) potential for impact: whether the initiative directly targets high energy using sectors and su
savings; b) speed of deployment: whether the initiative can produce results within the timeframe of the c) Government readiness: how well aligned the initiative is with existing government priorities
nter-Departmental coordination that may be required; 
d) Need for additional budget: whether the initiative requires substantial new fiancnial allocati
st-ranked initiatives are denoted in red text, and could form a basis for initial prioritization of e
 together, this gives an indicative overall assessment of which initiatives may be prioirtized to 
 preliminary only in that it is a subjective assessment that does not weight each of these crite
portance of each initiative in playing a role as a reinforcing measure in support of other initiat
m Proposed Action By When Responsibilities
Potential 
for impact 
Industry 
 Management 
portunity 
cation
Create a mechanism for DOE to have direct EE input into the Investment Priority Plan development process for 2017-19 
and to assist DTI to ‘green’ industry 
roadmaps with energy efficiency measures 
2016 DOE, DTI-BOI 
Scale up and broaden the sectors targeted by the PIEEP and HEMS projects to priority sectors of Cement, Steel, Semi-Conductor Manufacturing and Sugar
2017 UNIDO, EU, DOE m Proposed Action By When Responsibilities
Potential 
for impact 
Provide technical assistance to PEZA on qualifying EE service providers and technologies
2017 DOE, PEZA 
Link EE incentive provision by DTI to the establishment of a compliant data collection regime
2018 DOE, DTI 
Update and refresh existing DOE reference material on industrial energy efficiency opportunities 
2017 DOE, EU-SWITCH 
ESCO 
pment 
m
Create coordinated platform for ESCO sector capacity building activities, and consideration of guarantee support
2016 DOE, ESCOPHIL, UNIDO, 
HEMS, other capacity providers
Develop standard ESCO contracts for bidding 
2017 DOE, industry partners 
Develop Project M&V Guidelines in line with IPMVP
2017 DOE, Efficiency Valuation 
Organization (EVO)
Overhaul ESCO Accreditation process
2017 DOE, industry partners 
Create an ESCO pilot site for industry
2018 DOE, ESCO and site 
counterparties
Demand 
nse and 
d Side 
ement 
m
Prepare an analytical paper setting out the framework and regulatory steps that would need to be taken to implement a comprehensive Demand Response Strategy 
2017 DOE, utility representatives, regulators, market 
operatorsm Proposed Action By When Responsibilities
Potential 
for impact 
Establish a Power Sector Energy Efficiency Strategy
2020 DOE, utility representatives, regulators, market 
operators
 Vehicle 
ncy 
ement 
m
Complete baseline assessment for efficiency of new light duty vehicles 
2016 DOE, Clean Air Asia 
Roll out new vehicle labeling for energy use
2017 DOE, CAMPI 
Vehicle inspection regimes 
x Include fuel efficiency rating 
with emissions compliance testing 
x Investigate differentiated 
vehicle taxes for efficient 
vehicles 
2018 2018 
LTO, LTFRBLTO, LTFRB
Vehicle conversion programs 
x extend Auto-LPG program for 
taxi fleet 
x support TVET training for LPG 
vehicle conversion 
x E-Trikes – focus on current 
delivery; consider further rollout in mid term review 
2016 2016 2018 
DOEDOE, TESDADOE, ADB 
Formulate a transport and urban energy efficiency Inter-Agency Committee
2017 DOE, DOTC, MMDA, 
DPWH, LGUs 
 Vehicle 
ncy and 
Awareness 
m
Re-launch Fuel Economy Run initiative
2016 DOE, CAMPI, vehicle 
manufacturers, fuel suppliersm Proposed Action By When Responsibilities
Potential 
for impact 
Driver training program rollout Ongoing Development Academy of the Philippines, UP 
National Engineering Center, DOE
 Freight 
ort Energy 
ncy 
ship
Form partnership to develop a National Efficient Freight and Logistics Master PlanNational Efficient Freight and Logistics Master Plan developed
2017 2020 
EDC, DOE, DPWH, DTI EDC, DOE, DPWH, DTI
: 
ment 
gs Efficiency 
m
Strengthen the GEMP program 2017 DOE Complete a model ESCO procurement and implementation project at a high-profile Government 
building site
2018 DOE 
New Guidelines released for government procurement of energy efficiency services
2017 DOE, Procurement 
Services
: Building 
Program
x Permanent co-ordination body 
established for EE input to Green Building Code development 
x Inclusion of energy efficiency in 
three-year review process of 
Green Building Codes 
2017 2019 
DPWH, DOE, IFC, LGUs DPWH, DOE
Establish Building Code training program for selected LGUs 2017 DPWH, DOE, IFC, LGUs m Proposed Action By When Responsibilities
Potential 
for impact 
: Building 
ation and 
s Program
Develop annual performance information tool - benchmark for government building energy efficiency
2017 DOE, private sector 
partners, EU-SWITCH 
Incentive mechanism to link certification to eligibility for energy efficiency incentives
2018 DOE
Mandatory Disclosure of performance ratings on sale or lease of buildings
2020 DOE, DPWH, property 
agencies, LGUs 
 Appliance 
rds and 
g program
Reformulate mechanism for EE input and cooperation on standards development
2017 DOE, DTI-BPS 
Increase post-market surveillance programs
2017 DOE, DTI-BPS 
 Large 
yers Bulk 
se and Staff 
ve Program
Undertake design of scheme 
x Eligible organizations x Eligible products x Scheme mechanics 
Roll out scheme and establish DOE 
support activities
2016 2017 
DOE, corporate sector, BPO sector DOE
 Behavioral 
ation 
m for low
 groups
Investigate greater utilization of billing information programs and pre-paid billing models 
2017 DOE, utilities, private 
sector providers
Continue awareness raising campaigns on EE including for housing design (e.g. insulation and cool roofs) 
ongoing DOE, media partners m Proposed Action By When Responsibilities
Potential 
for impact 
A new vehicle 
lic/private 
ration on 
efficiency
Gain agreement to establish new entityFormulate membership, composition, activity plansEstablish resources for ongoing operation
2016 2016 2017 
DOE DOEDOE, private sector partners, donors
Energy 
ncy Revolving 
nd Finance 
Capacity 
g Program
Approach donors for assistance with EE capacity building for the finance sectorEstablish dedicated revolving fund for EE projects, subject to funding availability, including parameters of new fund for EE projects – sectors, 
funders, terms and conditions
2016 2017 
DOE, donors DOE, donors
Create an Energy Efficiency Finance Program for the commercial bank sector
2017 DOE, DBP 
Coordinate an Energy Efficiency Finance Training Program for large energy users on investable projects 
2017 DOE, private sector 
providers
Energy 
ncy Data 
ement, 
ring and 
tion Program 
Establish responsibility for energy efficiency data collection, and sectoral frameworks containing agreed monitoring regime and stronger energy use data protocols 
2016 DOE, data providers 
Report on Action Plan implementation according to agreed indicators
2020 DOE ANNEX 2: People and organizations consulted 
AGC Flat Glass Philippines Corporation 
Pascual, Alfred G. - Engineering Manager 
Ayala Property Management Corporation 
de las Alas, Jason - Director CBG (Malls) 
Borja III, Benjamin S. - Associate Director 
Penacerrada, Patrick 
Blue Sky Energy Efficiency Co. Ltd 
Ablaza, Alexander 
CAMPI 
Concepcion, Marissa - Secretary-General 
Buela, Mon - Executive Assistant 
Clean Air Asia 
Mejia, Alvin - Program Manager 
Cofely Philippines 
Marquez, Raymond - Business Development Manager 
Marchan, Allan 
Daikin Airconditioning Philippines Inc 
Quitco, Augusto T. - Division Manager, After-sales Service Division 
Dazzling Lite Enterprises 
Yuson, Jennelyn 
Guinto, Roden 
Delegation of the European Union to the Philippines 
Rolfe, Simone 
Department of Energy 
Monsada, Zenaida Y. – Secretary 
Marcos, Donato D. – Undersecretary 
Aquino, Patrick T. – Director, Energy Utilisation Management Bureau 
Anunciacion, Jesus – Assistant Director, Energy Utilisation Management Bureau 
Habitan, Artemio P. 
Almonares, Genevieve L. 
Agagas, T. 
Arias, Helen B. 
Balmes, Renato 
Carlos, Alexis Matel 
Corpuz, A. 
Cruz, Rommel 
Getalado, V.G. 
Landicho, Jomar 
Leonido, L.P. 
Nabong, Antonio M. 
Orencia, Herbert 
OillAitLdPReyes, V. 
Rivera, Joyce 
Soriano, Isagani 
Sotelo, R. 
Department of Finance 
Rivera, Rene – Senior Tax Specialist 
Department of Public Works and Highways – Bureau of Construction 
Garcit, Edgar
Mangubat, Olinar B. 
Department of Public Works and Highways – Sustainable Building 
Sayson, Joselito P. 
Melchor, Angelina B. 
Department of Trade and Industry – Board of Investments (BOI) 
Pajarillo, Dexter S. - Investment Specialist 
Ms. Viloria
Moreno, Neil Irwin 
Department of Trade and Industry – Competitiveness Bureau 
Alpuerto, Michelle Ann 
Department of Transport and Communication 
Nova, Evangeline L. 
Development Bank of the Philippines 
Salayon, Anita C. – Head, Environment Unit 
Corachea, Marichelle 
Edward Marc Philippines 
Cordova, Michelle 
Cordova, Ricky 
Energy Aviation and Support Corporation 
Legada, Rey 
Almario, Jasmin 
Flores, Archie 
De Guzman, Gerard 
Energy Practitioner Association of the Philippines 
Uy, Richard 
Energy Regulatory Commission 
Reymante, Vanessa 
EU High Efficiency Motors (HEMS) Project 
Marquez, Raymond 
Todoc, Jesse 
Bathan, Marvin 
European Chamber of Commerce in the Philippines (ECCP) 
ConstantinoGerman Diaz, Archie 
Skarkou, Lauren 
Gottein, Florian 
EU-SWITCH Philippines 
Balaminto, Maria Eloida 
Tiampong, Denise 
Abliter, Lionel Angelo 
Geosphere Tech, Inc. 
Dela Cruz, Ledicia 
Institute of Integrated Electrical Engineers of the Philippines, Inc (IIEE) 
Caringal, Rhoniel - Chair 
Chua, Roger - Committee Head 
Macayana, Ivan - Committee Member 
Tan, Gem – Chair, Standards Committee 
International Finance Corporation 
Verdote, Noel – Operations Officer, Sustainable Energy Finance 
Fernando-Pacua, Hanna 
Lacerna, Maria Teresita 
Ocampo, Ferdinand 
ISUZU Philippines 
Manalo, Erickson – Product Planning 
Koyo Electric 
Isidro, Vic 
Mandaluyong City LGU 
Raposon Jr, Abraham - Project Development Officer 
MERALCO 
Delumen, Mark - Regulatory Liaison Officer, Utility Economics 
Mathay, Ramon - Regulatory Liaison Officer 
Iporac Jr, Alfred - Customer Solutions 
Arvillo, Danilo – ES Specialist 
Fernandez, Lawrence S. – Utility Economics Division 
MERALCO Energy Inc. 
Baylosis, Victor H. 
Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA) 
Alzona, MaryHelene V. – Planning Officer II 
Parmiguin, Rommel D. 
Najera, Jovito G. 
Pimentel, Nordy Q. 
National Center for Transportation Studies 
Palmiano, Hilario - Director 
Net Group 
RufinoRamon Fernando DExecutive Vice President PAIA – Philippine Appliance Industry Association 
Balobalo, Marlon - Chairman, Product Standards Committee 
Maludonga, Jessie Robert 
Malit, Fernanditas 
Philcarbon, Inc. 
Yu-Owen, Ruth - President 
Philippine Economic Zone Authority (PEZA) 
Panga, Thereso - Deputy Director General 
Sy, Atty. Ross Vincent 
Daza, Ludwig 
Philippine Green Building Council 
De la Cruz, Chris - Chief Executive Officer 
Suelto, Mario Lawrence - BERDE Program Coordinator 
Zwolfer, Cristina 
Philips Electronic and Lighting, Inc. 
Tetteroo-Bueno, Fabia - General Manager 
Andaya, Chestnut V. - General Manager (incoming) 
Yan, Andrew C. 
Philippine Inegrated Energy Soutions, Inc. 
Garcia, Jerard 
David, Jonathan 
Samsung Electronics Phils. Corp. 
Tougan, Herbert 
Schneider Electric Philippines 
Saldua, Darwin 
Payonga, Lorenz Ray 
Buhali, Mario jr. 
Semiconductor and Electronic Industries of the Philippines, Inc
Soriano, Ramil - TWG Vice Chair 
Lachica, Danilo 
Steel Asia Manufacturing Corporation 
Calisura, Arnold - EM Manager 
Sugar Regulatory Administration 
Corpuz, Fernand 
Agosto, Rosaline R. 
Genzola, Rogelio T. 
Trane Philippines 
Redondo, Romano V. 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) 
Malvar, Oscarlito C. – Manager Philippine Industrial Energy Efficiency Project 
University of the Philippines National Center for Transport Studies 