File Name: PHL-NREP-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Philippines
Country Code: PHL
Category: NREP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2019
Start Year: 2017
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

© IRENA 2017
Unless otherwise stated, material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed 
and/or stored, provided that appropriate acknowledgement is given of IRENA as the source and copyright 
holder. Material in this publication that is attributed to third parties may be subject to separate terms of use and 
restrictions, and appropriate permissions from these third parties may need to be secured before any use of such 
material.
ISBN 978-92-9260-003-7 (print)
ISBN 978-92-9260-004-4 (PDF)
Citation: 
IRENA (2017), Renewables Readiness Assessment: The Philippines, International Renewable Energy Agency, 
Abu Dhabi.
About IRENA 
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that supports 
countries in their transition to a sustainable energy future, and serves as the principal platform for international 
cooperation, a centre of excellence, and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge 
on renewable energy. IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable 
energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable 
development, energy access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity.
Acknowledgement
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and the Department of Energy of the Republic of the 
Philippines would like to express sincere appreciation for the invaluable contributions of numerous energy 
experts and stakeholders in the preparation of this joint publication. This report benefited greatly from their 
review and insightful comments and input. Special thanks to His Excellency Alfonso G. Cusi, the Energy Secretary; 
Richie Avigale Ramos-Pilares, Assistant Secretary for the Renewable Energy Management Bureau, Gaspar G. 
Escobar, Jr., Chief, Technical Services and Management Division of Renewable Energy Management Bureau; Pete 
H. Maniego, Jr., Chairman of the National Renewable Energy Board; Lily L. Gutierrez and Enrique Gallardo, Jr., of 
the United States Agency for International Development; and Maria Eloida Balamiento, Senior Energy Adviser for 
EU-SWITCH, Policy Support Component. 
Contributors: Yong Chen and Gürbüz Gönül (IRENA), Mario C. Marasigan (Department of Energy, Philippines) 
and Renato T. Goco (consultant)
The contribution of Hendrik Meller and Ferdinand Larona of the German International Cooperation Agency 
(Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit), specifically with respect to mapping out the administrative 
procedures for on-grid solar PV project development, is also greatly appreciated. 
Disclaimer
This publication and the material herein are provided “as is”. All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability 
of the material in this publication. However, neither IRENA nor any of its officials, agents, data or other third-party content providers 
provides a warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied, and they accept no responsibility or liability for any consequence of use of 
the publication or material herein. 
The information contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA. The mention of specific companies 
or certain projects or products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by IRENA in preference to others of a similar RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT
THE PHILIPPINESIn recognition of the importance of indigenous energy options to enhance the economic growth 
and improve livelihoods, the Philippine Department of Energy (PDOE) has been exploring a 
variety of options to build an energy independent future supplied by sustainable, stable, secure, 
sufficient, accessible and reasonably-priced energy sources. In pursuit of this ultimate goal, the 
Philippines has stepped up its efforts in promoting the deployment of indigenous renewables 
energy over the past few years. 
Blessed with abundant renewable energy resources, including geothermal, biomass, solar, wind 
and hydrological energy sources, the Philippines has already made significant achievements in 
developing these resources, such as being the second largest geothermal power producer in 
the world. The use of new renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind energy, has also 
dramatically increased thanks to the great interest from the private sector and as a result of the 
favourable policy framework that is in place. 
Nevertheless, the rapid scale-up of renewables reached a milestone where a systematic assessment 
became necessary. In this context, the PDOE through its Renewable Energy Management Bureau 
(REMB) has closely collaborated with International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) to conduct 
a Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA). The process aims to identify the gaps that must be 
filled or narrowed if the national goal of being energy independent is to be achieved. Through the 
process, constructive engagement from the bilateral and multilateral co-operation agencies, financial 
FOREWORD
from the
Secretary of Energyinstitutions and the private sector, was sought. To this end, this study has also defined the priorities 
that the PDOE would like to continue working in close co-operation with relevant stakeholders. This 
would provide directional guidance for them to direct their resources towards a common target. 
The Philippines has already initiated some of the recommended actions in the RRA report; for 
example, a mini-grid study for the Philippines with the continued support from IRENA. In line 
with the recommendations, REMB has been substantially strengthened with additional staff to 
better serve the renewable energy sector. 
Lastly, on behalf of the PDOE, I would like to express our gratitude to IRENA as well as other 
development partners including Asian Development Bank, Germany’s International Cooperation 
Agency (GIZ), the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the European 
Union (EU) for their invaluable support and technical assistance, and we look forward to a long 
and fruitful relationship in the future. 
Alfonso G. Cusi
Secretary of Energy
The PhilippinesLike many countries in South East Asia, the Philippines faces the challenge of a growing population 
and rising demand for energy to power its economic growth. Yet nearly half of its primary energy 
supply is imported, making the country vulnerable to rising costs for fuel imports and global oil 
price volatility. At the same time, the Philippines is frequently exposed to tropical storms and 
natural disasters that adversely impact its energy infrastructure. 
In response to these challenges, the Philippines has resolved to bolster its energy security 
and pursue low-carbon economic development while taking an active part in global efforts to 
address climate change. Renewable energy technologies have become increasingly prominent 
in national planning and policy-making and are gaining importance in the realisation of the 
country’s sustainable development objectives. In 2011, the Philippines set an ambitious renewable 
energy target of 15.3 gigawatts by 2030. With the entry into force of the Paris Agreement, 
renewable energy is poised to play an even bigger role in meeting climate objectives and in the 
decarbonisation of the energy sector.
This Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA), undertaken in co-operation with the government 
of the Philippines, examines the energy sector holistically and identifies barriers, as well as key 
actions to accelerate renewable energy deployment. In this regard, it puts forward options to 
strengthen the Philippines’ renewable energy policy, regulatory and institutional framework. 
It includes an assessment of the country’s grid infrastructure and examines the institutional 
capacity in the Philippine renewable energy sector, along with the potential for electrification 
through renewable-based mini- and micro-grid solutions.
FOREWORD
from the IRENA 
Director-GeneralSome 30 countries, spanning Africa, the Caribbean, Latin America, the Middle East and the AsiaPacific region, have undertaken the RRA process since 2011, exchanging knowledge and supporting 
international co-operation to promote clean, indigenous renewable energy technologies. 
IRENA wishes to thank the Renewable Energy Management Bureau at the Department of Energy 
of the Philippines for providing continuously strong and valuable support. I am encouraged by 
the active participation and contributions of the international community, including the Asian 
Development Bank, Germany’s International Cooperation Agency (GIZ), the United States Agency 
for International Development (USAID) and the European Union (EU). A range of stakeholders 
in the Philippines, meanwhile, provided enthusiastic and serious engagement, without which the 
process could not have succeeded.
I sincerely hope these RRA findings will strengthen the pursuit of renewable energy solutions. 
IRENA stands ready to support the Philippines as the country strives for a sustainable energy 
future.
Adnan Z. Amin
Director-General
International Renewable Energy AgencyCONTENTS
FIGURES VIII
TABLES VIII
BOXES VIII
ABBREVIATIONS IX
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY XI
INTRODUCTION 1
1.1 Country background 1
1.2 Renewables Readiness Assessment 2
ENERGY CONTEXT 5
2.1 Energy supply and demand 5
2.2 Electric power system 7
2.3 Rural electrification 9
2.4 Legal and regulatory frameworks 12
2.5 Key institutions of the energy sector 14
RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT IN THE PHILIPPINES 17
3.1 Renewable energy resource potential and development 17
• Geothermal energy 17
• Hydropower 19
• Solar energy 20
• Wind energy 22
• Biomass and biofuels 23
• Ocean energy 25
3.2 Key supportive initiatives for renewable energy deployment 26
• National Renewable Energy Program 2011-2030 26
• Mapping out administrative procedures for 
on-grid solar PV project development 27
• Financing initiatives supporting renewable energy developers 30
• Renewable Portfolio Standards 31
3.3 Renewable-powered mini/microgrids 31
01
02
03KEY CHALLENGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS 35
 4.1 Political commitment 35
• Challenges 35
• General recommendations 36
• Proposed action: establish a solid foundation for sustaining political 
commitment through a broad public awareness campaign 36
 4.2 Grid stability study 36
• Challenges 36
• General recommendation 36
• Proposed action: grid infrastructure assessment 36
 4.3 Institutional capacity analysis 37
• Challenges 37
• General recommendations 37
• Proposed action: assessment of institutional capacity in the Philippines 
renewable energy sector 37
 4.4 National mini/microgrid study 38
• Challenges 38
• General recommendation 39
• Proposed action: study on potential of renewable 
energy mini/microgrids for electricity access 39
Annex 1: Summary of rural electrification projects in the Philippines 40
Annex 2: Renewable Energy Act of 2008 41
REFERENCES 45
04FIGURES
Figure 1: Annual GDP growth, 2010-2014 1
Figure 2: Philippine exposure to climate change (map) 2
Figure 3: Trends in total primary energy supply, 2004-2015 5
Figure 4: Energy dependence ratio, 2004-2015 6
Figure 5: Total primary energy supply by source, 2015 6
Figure 6: Final energy consumption by sector, 2011 and 2015 7
Figure 7: Installed electricity generating capacity in the Philippines 7
Figure 8: Electricity consumption by sector in the Philippines 8
Figure 9: Solar energy resource in the Philippines 20
Figure 10: Wind energy resource in the Philippines 23
Figure 11: Timeline for NREP implementation 26
TABLES
Table 1: Geothermal projects identified in the Philippine Energy Plan (2012-2030) 19
Table 2: Wind energy resource potential in the Philippines 22
Table 3: Potential electricity generation capacity from biomass-based fuel 24
Table 4: Comparative overview of project development for on-grid solar PV 28
Table 5: Eligible FiT projects, January 2015 44
BOXES
Box 1: Missionary Electrification Development Plan 12
Box 2: Cavite Pig City 25ABBREVIATIONS
AMORE Alliance for Mindanao Off-grid Rural Electrification
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations
CEPALCO Cagayan Electric Power and Light Company
EPIRA Electric Power Industry Reform Act
ERC Energy Regulatory Commission
FiT Feed-in-Tariff
GDP gross domestic product
GIZ German International Cooperation Agency (Deutsche 
 Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit)
GW, GWh gigawatt, gigawatt-hour
IPP independent power producer
kW, kWh kilowatt, kilowatt-hour
m/s metre per second
Meralco Manila Electric Company
MW megawatt
NREB National Renewable Energy Board
NGCP National Grid Corporation of the Philippines
NPC-SPUG National Power Corporation Small Power Utilities Group
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory
NREP National Renewable Energy Program
PHP Philippine Peso
PSA power supply agreement 
QTP qualified third party
RPS renewable portfolio standard
RRA Renewables Readiness Assessment
TPES total primary energy supply
TRANSCO National Transmission Corporation
UCME Universal Charge for Missionary Electrification
USAID United States Agency for International Development 
USD US DollarEXECUTIVE 
SUMMARYThe Philippines is a net fossil energy importer and depends heavily on imports 
of oil for transport, and coal for power generation. On average, nearly half the 
country’s primary energy supply is imported. In addition, due to its geographical 
location, the country’s energy infrastructure is frequently exposed to tropical 
storms. At the same time, strong power grid interconnections with other countries 
in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) as part of the proposed 
ASEAN Power Grid may not be realised in the near future. 
As a result, the country continues to face energy security challenges. Energy 
independence has become a central aim of policy development to ensure 
sustainable, reliable, secure, sufficient and accessible energy.
In 2011, the Philippines set an ambitious renewable energy target to raise installed 
generation capacity by 2030 to almost three times its 2010 level i.e. from 
5,438 megawatts (MW) to 15,304 MW. This was established in the National 
Renewable Energy Program (NREP), which serves as the blueprint for the 
implementation of the Renewable Energy Act of 2008. This has put the country 
on a course to meet half its electricity demand with renewables and thus to 
strengthen energy security. At the same time, this would reduce electricity tariffs 
in remote areas and islands. 
One year after the target was set, Feed-in-Tariffs (FiTs) were issued by the Energy 
Regulatory Commission (ERC). The Philippines has since then made remarkable 
achievements in renewable energy deployment. This has taken place not only in 
the northern region, where the wind resource is great, but also through urban 
rooftop solar PV. This has been due largely to dramatically declining costs 
for renewable energy technologies like solar and onshore wind, as well as to 
attractive FiT schemes. As a result, the industry has also grown rapidly, 
fuelled by increasing domestic and overseas 
investments and thus transforming power 
markets and business models. ASEAN recently 
set a regional renewable energy target of 23% 
by 2025, and this has provided the Philippines 
with an additional important reason for pursuing 
cleaner and sustainable alternative energy. Yet 
emerging concerns need to be resolved in relation 
to future policy making and institutional evolution 
in the renewable energy sector. Only then will the 
country maintain its development momentum and 
achieve the ultimate policy objective of energy 
independence by replacing imported fossil fuels 
with indigenous renewables. 
The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) 
identified and analysed key challenges, 
recommended action to deal with issues it 
revealed and offered guidance on fine tuning the 
Philippine renewable energy policy, regulatory and 
institutional framework. 
Recommended actions 
1. Raise awareness to ensure sustained political 
commitment
 In the Philippines, public awareness plays a 
very important role in influencing the political 
commitments, decisions and the orientation 
of public policies. Raising public awareness on 
the benefits of renewable energy applications 
is hence essential. The Philippines has the 
second highest electricity tariff in the region so 
the economic benefits of adopting renewables 
have major implications for the general public, 
especially in the rural areas and islands, where 
fuel costs are prohibitively high. This is one of 
the important economic factors explaining 
regular interruption of the power supply. 
Renewable energy sources have proved to 
be the most cost-effective options in these 
settings, thanks to their near-zero marginal 
production costs for electricity. Some renewable 
energy technologies, notably solar PV, have 
experienced sharp cost reductions. Affordability 
could thus be significantly improved if capital 
costs were brought down with the support of 
the government. 
 A range of different stakeholders should initiate 
a series of public campaigns with the assistance, 
participation and resources of the development 
partners. Educational programmes could be set 
up to provide the public with real examples and 
can also be used to provide practitioners with 
hands-on experience.
2. Assess the country’s grid infrastructure
 A comprehensive grid evaluation with a focus on 
grid stability is recommended for the islands of 
Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. This includes an 
analysis of the present state of the infrastructure, 
quality of service and power flow, and stability 
assessments responding to solar or wind 
generation inputs at various points and different 
penetration levels. This would better explain how 
the connection of variable renewable sources 
affects the grids to thus minimise potential grid 
operation problems. 
 The results allow the development of proactive 
energy planning relating to generation, transmission and distribution networks, producing 
the standards and guidelines for future gridconnected solar PV and wind systems. 
 The completion of this recommended study should 
be followed by a training programme. This would 
equip the utilities with the knowledge necessary to 
understand the results and also modify the model 
when there are changes to the grid.
3. Examine institutional capacity in the Philippine 
renewable energy sector 
 A thorough institutional capacity assessment 
of the Department of Energy Renewable 
Energy Management Bureau and other relevant 
agencies is recommended accompanied by an 
assessment of stakeholders. Its aim should be to 
analyse their legal mandates and responsibilities 
for implementing the Renewable Energy Act 
and the NREP in comparison to their current 
functions and capacity. It should examine 
the existing co-ordinating mechanisms of 
these agencies alongside new and emerging 
challenges in the Philippine renewable energy 
development, and the new sets of skills and 
personnel required to overcome them.  This will draw out and build on the Renewable 
Energy Management Bureau’s current expertise. 
It will identify the existing skills of current 
personnel, analysing its wide network to intensify 
collaborative action, and will explore the efficient 
use of available resources. The programme will 
identify the skills and resource deficiencies within 
the Renewable Energy Management Bureau and 
key stakeholders in order to address their capacitybuilding needs. The ultimate goal is to equip the 
Renewable Energy Management Bureau with the 
appropriate capacity level while improving the 
ability of other key stakeholders in the sector to 
function and perform in a co-ordinated fashion.
 As a result of the study, recommendations on 
improving these capacities will be presented to 
the Department of Energy and other 
governmental agencies most relevant to 
renewable energy sector institutional 
development in the Philippines. The results can 
also be presented to development partners 
to design more effective capacity-building 
programmes aided by various technical 
assistance programmes.
4. Study potential for renewable electrification 
through mini- and microgrids
 The recommended study should cover a range 
of topics. These include an estimation of physical 
regulatory frameworks, technological options/
guidelines, business models and long-term 
social and economic benefits that such systems 
can generate for society as a whole. It would 
concentrate on islands and remote regions 
without electricity where mini-grids powered by 
renewable energy can be economically viable 
and also used to promote rural development. 
 The recommended study should also consider 
potential sites for mini-grids and explore 
renewable energy technology options and 
available resources that could be tapped 
for power supply. It should identify barriers 
and concerns and come up with alternative 
approaches and recommendations to promoting 
renewable energy in off-grid areas. In particular, 
it should examine the franchise areas of electric 
co-operatives with the highest mini-grid 
potential. Mini-grids offer numerous advantages, 
including easier power service restoration after 
a natural disaster, improved quality of life and 
income-generating opportunities. These should 
be studied in relation to rural electrification in 
the Philippines. 
 Finally, the study should produce recommendations to develop the policies and 
regulatory frameworks necessary to promote 
investment in mini-grids and facilitate private 
Wind turbines in Pililla, Rizal
Photo: Alternergy Wind One CorporationINTRODUCTION1.1 Country background
The Republic of the Philippines (“the Philippines”) is a country in Southeast Asia 
composed of an archipelago of 7,107 islands in three main groups: Luzon, Visayas 
and Mindanao. The population exceeds 100 million, approximately 55% of which 
still lives in rural areas. The country is divided into 18 regions and administered 
under 81 provincial governments (Worldometers, 2015; World Bank, 2014).
From 2010 to 2014, the Philippine economy grew at an average annual rate of 6.3% 
(World Bank, 2015) despite the devastation caused by a series of natural disasters 
throughout 2013, including super typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan).1
 This has made the 
country among the strongest economies in ASEAN, as illustrated in Figure 1. The 
2016 growth rate was estimated by the Asian Development Bank and the World 
Bank at 6.3% and 6.5% respectively. This would rank the Philippines as the country 
with the third fastest economic growth after China and Vietnam, according to the 
Economic Planning Secretary and National Economic and Development Authority. 
01
Figure 1. Annual GDP growth, 2010-2014 
Source: World Bank, 2015
12
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
10
8
6
4
2
0
-4
-2
East Asia & Pacific
(developing only)
Indonesia
Cambodia
Malaysia
Thailand
Brunei Darussalam
PhilippinesDue largely to its geographical location and densely 
inhabited coastal regions, the Philippines is highly 
exposed to severe tropical weather and extremely 
vulnerable to climate change, as shown in Figure 2. 
The people affected by these natural disasters often 
bear significant economic loss and as a result can fall 
back into poverty. For instance, in several provinces 
in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, 
poverty incidence exceeds 55%. In the Eastern 
Visayas, which was struck by typhoon Yolanda, it 
is 37%. The National Capital Region has the lowest 
incidence of poverty, which is at 2.6% according to 
the National Statistical Coordination Board (NSCB, 
2015). Among the three, the Autonomous Region 
The Philippines has set an ambitious renewable 
energy target to raise installed generation capacity 
by 2030 to almost three times its 2010 level. The 
ASEAN region recently set a renewable energy 
target of 23% by 2025, providing the Philippines with 
an additional important reason to pursue cleaner 
and sustainable alternative energy. There are a range 
of social benefits, too. Scaling up renewable energy 
system deployment will not only improve energy 
supply security given its indigenous renewable 
energy resources but also create a variety of job 
opportunities for local people, for which there is high 
demand. 
In this context, the RRA was conducted at the 
of Muslim Mindanao has the highest proportion of 
areas in the country lacking electricity (apart from 
areas affected by Yolanda) (National Electrification 
Administration, 2015).
With 274 disasters over the past two decades, the 
Philippines has been ranked as the country with 
the fourth highest number of natural disasters in 
the world after the United States of America, China 
and India. During that period, 130 million people in 
the Philippines were affected by these disasters – 
the fourth highest number in the world after China, 
India and Bangladesh (United Nations International 
Strategy for Disaster Reduction, 2015). 
Figure 2. Philippine exposure to climate change
Source: Philippine Department of Environment and Natural Resources, 2013
Cluster II – extreme heating events, 
extreme rainfall events, disturbed water 
budget, sea level rise
Cluster III – extreme heating events, 
disturbed water budget, sea level rise
Cluster IV – extreme heating events, sea 
level rise
Cluster XI – sea level rise
Cluster V – extreme rainfall events, sea 
level rise
Cluster I – extreme heating events, sea 
level rise
Cluster X – extreme heating events, 
increasing ocean temperature, extreme 
rainfall events, disturbed water budget, 
sea level rise
Cluster IX – extreme heating events, 
extreme rainfall events, disturbed water 
budget, sea level rise
Cluster VIII – extreme heating events, 
increasing ocean temperature, extreme 
rainfall events, sea level rise
Cluster VII – extreme heating events, 
increasing ocean temperature, sea level 
rise
Cluster VI – sea level rise
Bureau. The aim was to assess the country’s position 
on renewable energy development and deployment, 
and to identify the issues to resolve to unlock the 
remaining potential renewable energy sources in the 
Philippines.
1.2 Renewables Readiness Assessment
IRENA developed the RRA as a tool for carrying 
out a comprehensive evaluation of the conditions 
for renewable energy deployment in a particular 
country. The RRA is a country-led and consultative 
process. It provides a venue for multi-stakeholder 
dialogue to identify challenges to renewable 2
 It is also known as the Republic Act No. 9513: An Act Promoting the Development, Utilization and Commercialization of Renewable Energy 
 Resources and for Other Purposes. The full text of the act is available at www.doe.gov.ph/laws-and-issuances/republic-act-no-9513.
recommendations are presented to governments to 
guide the development of new policies or reform 
of existing policies to open up a more enabling 
environment for renewable energy. The RRA also 
consolidates existing efforts and mobilises available 
resources for priority action.
IRENA and the Department of Energy worked 
alongside a local expert to conduct research, set 
the process in motion and co-ordinate with relevant 
stakeholders. The first step in the RRA process was 
to prepare a background paper which presented 
an overview of the geographical, economic and 
social environment of the Philippines. It describes 
the present status of the energy sector, available 
renewable energy resources, and the energy 
policies, programmes and strategies adopted thus 
far to advance renewables use. 
To prepare the background paper, a review of recent 
studies and reports by the country’s development 
partners such as the Asian Development Bank, the 
United States Agency for International Development 
(USAID) and the World Bank was carried out to 
assess what has already been done. These studies 
identified challenges and deficiencies affecting the 
renewable energy sector and outlined interventions 
to resolve concerns relating to renewable energy 
development and deployment.
The local team interviewed key stakeholders (project 
developers, financial institutions, government 
agencies and academia) to validate these issues 
and to gather first-hand information on what is 
already happening on the ground. 
Four focus groups examined the critical issues raised 
during the interviews and literature review to identify 
root causes and conceive possible interventions. In 
particular, they discussed the following renewable 
energy sector concerns: (a) lengthy and costly 
permitting process (b) lack of appropriate (technical) 
human resources in the sector and (c) ineffective 
design and lack of implementation of the National 
Renewable Energy Program (NREP) to accelerate 
renewable energy deployment.
An issues paper was then prepared to consolidate the 
outputs of these activities including the salient findings 
and recommendations of past studies on renewable 
energy development. It features an issues map that 
presents in graphic form how challenges interrelate 
and draws attention to the greatest bottlenecks. 
The paper reinforces the findings of past studies and 
reveals persisting challenges to renewable energy 
development. It also generates recommendations 
to resolve them. 
In co-ordination with the German International 
Cooperation Agency (Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit – GIZ), IRENA and the Department 
of Energy jointly organised and conducted a round 
table and action planning workshop. This brought 
together stakeholders from across the whole 
country to discuss appropriate action to overcome 
barriers to renewable energy deployment. 
Three bottlenecks were prioritised for discussion. 
They are related to a) institutional capacity 
development b) proactive power system planning 
and c) permits. The two-day workshop culminated 
in a session to prioritise possible interventions and 
converted them into actions incorporated in the 
recommendations section of this report. The RRA 
recommendations will be presented to the National 
Renewable Energy Board (NREB), a multi-sector 
body that oversees the direction of the renewable 
energy sector and guides the development of the 
National Renewable Energy Program (NREP). The 
NREP serves an implementation roadmap for the 
Renewable Energy Act of 2008.2
The Philippines RRA assesses the current state of the 
renewable energy sector and its challenges. It makes 
recommendations to bridge the implementation 
gaps in the sector and accelerate the use of the 
country’s abundant renewable energy resources.ENERGY
CONTEXT 02
As a net fossil energy importer, and a country whose energy infrastructure is inevitably 
exposed to tropical storms, the Philippines has constantly battled with energy supply 
security. The threat of power shortages in 2015 was successfully reduced. However, 
this experience sent a warning signal to decision makers and has provoked public 
debate on the appropriate type of power grid for the Philippines in future. This is 
a particular concern because the Philippines may not be able to establish strong 
interconnections with the ASEAN Power Grid due to its geographical location.3 
Energy independence is therefore the core of energy policy development in the 
Philippines to ensure sustainable, reliable, secure, sufficient and accessible energy.
2.1 Energy supply and demand
Between 2004 and 2015, global oil prices surged from around 20 US dollars (USD) per 
barrel in 2004 to peak at USD 147/barrel in 2007. Since 2014, Philippine total primary 
energy supply (TPES) has returned to its 2005 level following the dip observed in 
2007-2009. This is because one-third of national energy demand correlates largely 
with the changes of oil prices over that period, as shown in Figure 3. 
Figure 3. Trends in total primary energy supply, 2004-2015 
Source: Based on data from the Philippine Department of Energy, 2015
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
MTOE*
*million tonnes of oil equivalent Year
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Figure 4. Energy dependence ratio, 2004-2015
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
38%
39%
40%
41%
42%
43%
44%
45%
46%
47%
48%
49%
Source: IRENA
The Philippines has over that decade been heavily 
dependent on imported energy – mostly oil and 
coal for transport and power generation. Over 
the period, on average nearly half the TPES was 
imported, as shown in Figure 4. According to the 
Philippine Department of Energy, the importation 
of coal reached a record high of 15.2 million tonnes 
of coal equivalent in 2014 – mostly from Indonesia. 
Figure 5 indicates that coal accounted for 22% of 
Since the Philippines is both in the tropical region and 
the Pacific “Ring of Fire”, biomass and geothermal 
energy contributed about 12% and 20% respectively 
to TPES in 2015. The Philippines produces the 
greatest amount of geothermal electricity in the 
world while the majority of biomass is consumed 
in traditional ways. The other renewables represent 
about 8% of TPES, including hydropower, solar and 
wind.4
Between 2011 and 2015, the residential sector 
experienced a fairly major increase in share of total 
final energy consumption, rising from 26% to nearly 
31%, as shown in Figure 6. In addition to electricity, 
fuelwood, charcoal, liquefied petroleum gas and 
kerosene remain the major sources of household 
energy in the Philippines.
TPES in 2015. The share of oil in TPES has stagnated 
at about 30%, and natural gas at 7%-8%. With a 
significant number of coal power projects in the 
pipeline, amounting to nearly six gigawatts (GW), 
the energy dependency ratio measured in million 
tonnes of oil equivalent could rise even higher. 
This would therefore have a negative impact on 
energy and electricity security despite lower energy 
commodity prices globally. 
4
 The share of solar PV and wind energy accounts for a tiny 
 proportion of TPES. Nevertheless, with solar and wind 
 technology costs experiencing sharp reductions and significantly 
 improved system performance, renewable energy could provide 
Figure 5. Total primary energy supply
by source, 2015
4% 22%
32%
4% 20%
12% 6%
Coal
Oil
Natural Gas
Traditional biomass
Hydropower
Geothermal
Solar, wind and biofuelsFigure 6 indicates that industry and transport 
experienced a fall of around 2% in share of final 
energy consumption in the period 2011-2015. Over 
the same timeframe, the commercial sector share 
2.2 Electric power system
The Philippines has three main power grid systems 
as well as off-grid systems serving the three major 
island groups Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. 
Total installed generating capacity has reached 
17,943 MW,5 out of which only 15,933 MW is dependable6
capacity that can be made available to generate 
electricity whenever needed. This accounts for nearly 
90% of the total. Dependable grid-connected capacity 
is currently 12,970 MW.7 Of this, Luzon accounts for 
5
Bhd f 2014
barely changed. The final energy consumption 
share of agriculture, forestry and other sectors 
doubled but was still insignificant given its very 
small percentage of the total.
Figure 6. Final energy consumption by sector, 2011 and 2015
Industrial Commercial Residential Transport Agriculture, forestry & others
2011 2015
23.1%
11.1%
2.6%
32.1%
30.1%
25.9%
11.9%
1.3%
34.7%
26.1%
Source: Philippine Department of Energy, 2016
9,706 MW, Visayas accounts for 1,801 MW and Mindanao 
accounts for 1,463 MW to meet peak demand of 
8,617 MW, 1,612 MW and 1,428 MW respectively. This 
suggests that reserve capacity ranges from 2% in 
Mindanao to 11% in Luzon, which is fairly modest. 
Generation capacity based on fossil fuel accounts for 
72% of the total, and geothermal and hydropower 
account for most of the remainder, as illustrated in 
Figure 7. This shows the insignificance of variable 
renewable energy sources such as wind and solar 
power in the power system at the moment.
Figure 7. Installed electricity generating capacity in the Philippines
Luzon Visayas Mindanao
Installed power generation capacity (MW)Coal Oil-based Natural Gas Geothermal Hydropower Wind Biomass
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
Source: Philippine Department of Energy, 20158At present, the Luzon and Visayas grids are 
interconnected, and there is a plan to interconnect 
the Mindanao grid with the Visayas grid by 2018. 
Half the generating capacity in the Mindanao grid is 
from hydropower. However, for an isolated grid, the 
security of power supply can be a concern; it is more 
vulnerable to disruption due to seasonal variations 
in the hydrological resource and the physical power 
infrastructure. This is especially the case when a 
large portion of the generator fleet is utility-scale 
centralised power, and reserve capacity is very 
low. The bombing incidents of late 2015 put 16 
transmission line towers out of service and caused 
significant stress to power supply in Mindanao. 
All three power grids are owned by the Government 
of the Philippines through the National Transmission 
Corporation, known as TRANSCO. They are operated 
and managed9
 by the National Grid Corporation of 
the Philippines (NGCP) while generation assets10 are 
being privatised in accordance with the Electric Power 
Industry Reform Act of 2001 (EPIRA).11 The three grids 
cover the service areas of 15 out of a total of 18 regions, 
leaving the rest served by electric co-operatives12 and 
private utilities on a franchise area coverage basis.
Unlike TPES, electricity consumption had seen the 
steady growth charted in Figure 8. This indicates that 
electricity is an essential product for the Filipinos, 
especially during the summer when the weather 
is hot and humid. During that season, the use of 
air conditioning units and other cooling devices is 
necessary for residential and commercial sectors in 
particular. Reliability and adequacy of power supply 
capacity were put to serious test in 2015 as a result of a 
hot summer combined with low precipitation caused 
by the powerful El Niño effect. Power shortages 
loomed, and panic broke out across the country. 
The potential crisis was avoided mainly owing to 
the Department of Energy’s Interruptible Load 
Program, which delivered effective demand-side 
management. This has encouraged businesses with 
a load exceeding or equal to 1 MW to participate in 
the Interruptible Load Program by running their own 
generator sets (gen-sets) instead of drawing power 
from the grid. Distribution utilities have requested 
participating customers to switch from the grid to 
their own generation systems when there is a power 
supply deficit. In return, they will be compensated by 
the distribution utility for their actual fuel costs plus 
a certain margin to be agreed by the customer and 
distribution utility. The grid peak load was therefore 
significantly reduced (ERC, 2014). 
9
 This lasts 25 years under the Franchise Law enshrined in RA 
 9511 and can then be renewed for another 25 years. www.ngcp. 
 ph/corporate.asp. 
10 Except for rural electrification through National Power 
 Corporation Small Power Utilities Group (NPC-SPUG). 
11 It is also known as the Republic Act No. 9136: An Act Ordaining 
 Reforms in the Electric Power Industry, Amending for the Purpose 
 of Certain Laws and for Other Purposes. The full text of this Act 
 is available at: www.neda.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/ 
 R.A.-9136.pdf.
12 Electric co-operatives are non-profit, member-owned entities 
 that operate a distribution system to provide retail electricity 
 services within an exclusive franchise area. The National 
 Electrification Administration supports electric co-operatives 
 by providing loans and capacity-building, for example. It 
 regulates their key activities such as election of officers.
13 www.transco.ph/downloads.
Figure 8. Electricity consumption by sector in the Philippines 
Residential Commercial Industrial Others Own-use System losses
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
80,000
90,000
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Electricity Consumption (GWh)
Year
* Gigawatt-hours
Source: Philippine Department of Energy, 201513Demand for electricity will continue to rise along 
with the continued GDP growth.14 However, an 
Economist Intelligence Unit analysis has shown that 
the Philippine electricity consumption growth rate 
(5.7%) will in any case outstrip the growth rate of 
energy generation (5.3%) in 2015-2020.15
Hence the question is not whether additional 
electricity generating capacities in all three 
grids are needed but what power generation 
portfolio the country should develop from a longterm perspective, taking energy security into 
consideration.
2.3 Rural electrification 
The Philippine rural electrification programme 
started in the early 1960s, when the Philippine 
government declared its commitment to universal 
electrification. It established the Electrification 
Administration, which quickly began financing over 
200 small-scale generation-distribution systems. In 
1972, 36 rural electric co-operatives were launched 
and started operating with the financial support of 
USAID and the Philippine government while more 
formed on their own. The rural electric co-operative 
model has to a large extent been considered a 
good practice. However, some of the newly formed 
electric co-operatives failed to follow strict costrecovery criteria. They thus suffered significant 
financial deficits mostly due to the high cost of 
power purchase from main grid, which in turn limits 
low-income consumer access to electricity.
Since 2001, as part of the power sector reform 
engaged under the EPIRA, the government 
has mandated the National Electrification 
Administration and the National Power Corporation 
Small Power Utilities Group (NPC-SPUG) to lead 
rural electrification activities to achieve the 90% 
electrification goal. Of these two, the National 
Electrification Administration carries out the 
Barangay Line Enhancement Program and Sitio 
Electrification Program, both of which extend 
distribution lines to unelectrified barangays, 
sitios16 and households. The National Electrification 
Administration implements these programmes 
through the electric co-operatives by providing 
them with the funds to extend their distribution 
networks. 
NPC-SPUG provides power and/or distribution 
services to small, isolated and island grids. It 
provides power to 78 small islands and eight 
isolated grid areas nationwide by operating 92 
land-based diesel power plants, 11 power barges, 17 
mini-grids, 154 microgrids, a hybrid grid-connected 
wind plant and a mini-hydropower plant. 
In most off-grid areas, especially isolated islands, 
electricity is generated by diesel gen-sets, resulting 
in high electricity costs. The average energy price 
set by the Manila Electric Company (Meralco) retail 
tariffs was 8.82 Philippines Pesos (PHP) in 2013,17 
and the NPC-SPUG notified rate for its operations 
in Mindoro area was PHP 6.19 per kilowatt-hour 
(kWh) as of October 2015. This was higher than 
the highest main grid rate i.e. for Luzon at PHP 
5.71/kWh. It was more than double the rate applied 
to grid-connected consumers in Mindanao i.e. PHP 
2.95/kWh. The biggest component of this tariff 
is the generation component (65% of the overall 
retail tariff) (NPC-SPUG, 2015; Somani et al., 2013). 
To sustain operations in off-grid areas, revenue 
is collected under the EPIRA from sales in the 
missionary areas18 and from the Universal Charge for 
Missionary Electrification fund (UCME – a common 
tariff charged to all electricity end-users). It is used 
to cover the cost difference that the Power Sector 
Assets and Liabilities Management Corporation 
(often known as PSALM) would not able to recoup 
from end-users. 
In past years, governmental programmes have taken 
place to achieve its target to reach 90% household 
electrification by 2017.
14 The International Monetary Fund has estimated an average 4.6% GDP growth rate for the Philippines in 2011-2035. Sources: International 
 Monetary Fund (2013); Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2013).
15 http://country.eiu.com/ArticleIndustry.aspx?articleid=1173164301&Country=Philippines&topic=Industry&subtopic=Energy#. 
16 A barangay is the smallest government unit in the Philippines, composed of a group of households. A sitio is a smaller cluster of households 
 within a barangay.
17 USD 1 = PHP 43.135 (June 2013).
18 As explained in Box 1.The Renewable Energy Management Bureau in 2008 
initiated a complementary programme entitled 
the Household (Sitio) Electrification Program. This 
supplies household lighting to off-grid areas using 
mature renewable energy technologies such as PV 
solar home systems, PV streetlights and microhydropower. The Household (Sitio) Electrification 
Program is a continuation of the Department of 
Energy’s Barangay Electrification Program, which 
started in 1998 and played a role in completing 
barangay electrification by 2010. The Household 
(Sitio) Electrification Program aims to contribute 
to the national government’s goal to attain 90% 
household electrification level by 2017. 
Generally, solar PV systems are the most common 
renewable energy technology for household 
lighting purposes. However, micro-hydropower 
systems are a better strategy when hydropower 
resource is available within a reasonable distance of 
clustered household beneficiaries. 
Between its inception and June 2016, the Household 
(Sitio) Electrification Program was able to complete 
the energisation of 33,304 households. It installed 
1,610 communal PV lighting systems (solar home 
systems and streetlights) in various off-grid areas 
nationwide with an aggregate capacity of 930 kW.
The overall electrification rate is now at around 
87.5% while only 73%19 of rural households have 
access to electricity (World Bank, 2015). A table 
of rural electrification programmes is presented in 
Annex 1. 
The Missionary Electrification Development 
Plan, explained in Box 1, is one such government 
initiative supported by development partners – the 
World Bank and the United Nations Development 
Programme. The World Bank also supported the 
implementation of the Rural Power Project with 
USD 40 million funding to the Development Bank 
of the Philippines under the Global Environment 
Facility. The Rural Power Project aimed to reduce 
poverty and improve the quality of life of 10,000 
rural households in the hard-to-reach, isolated and 
poorest areas of the country, particularly Mindanao. 
The Global Environment Facility’s financial support 
takes the form of a long-term partial credit 
efficiency of selected electric co-operatives. This 
loan guarantee fund also shares the risks faced by 
primary lenders such as microfinance institutions 
(Rural Power Project, 2014). When it closed in 
2012, the Rural Power Project had achieved some 
of its development objectives to electrify rural 
households with solar home systems via a publicprivate partnership with the Department of Energy. 
The Development of Bank of the Philippines 
managed the microfinance credit. 
The approach taken for its Sustainable Solar Market 
Packages is known to be the successful feature of 
the Rural Power Project. It made barangay clusters 
commercially viable despite the usual requirement 
for large-scale solar business operations to overcome 
transaction costs (Rural Power Project, 2014). 
Over 21,000 rural solar home systems have been 
connected, exceeding the target 20,000 (World 
Bank, 2012). Most Rural Power Project strategies are 
stand-alone solar systems but in the next phase they 
may include small wind home systems and picohydropower (Rural Power Project, 2014).
In addition, many rural electrification initiatives have 
taken place with the support of the Department 
of Energy and development partners, and active 
engagement at the regional levels. The Alliance for 
Mindanao Off-grid Rural Electrification (AMORE) 
programme was co-ordinated from 2002 to 2009 
for three purposes: lighting up households, energy 
access for education in school and safe water supply 
for income generation.
By September 2009, the end of the programme’s 
phase II, AMORE had provided electricity to 44,000 
pupils in over 200 rural schools and more than 
13,000 households in over 400 remote rural villages 
(barangays) in 12 provinces in Muslim Mindanao. 
It used stand-alone solar and micro-hydropower 
systems and was supported by the Department of 
Energy, USAID, NGOs and Winrock International, a 
US-based foundation. AMORE improved the living 
standards of rural households dependent on fishing 
and farming by providing safe water using solar 
battery chargers and solar-powered drinking water 
systems.developed rural electrification using a resident 
autonomy commercial approach. This encouraged 
rural households not only to be energy and service 
providers but also financing institutions. Community 
members were organised into Barangay Renewable 
Energy and Community Development Associations. 
These were trained to operate and maintain the 
renewable energy systems and raise their own 
funds. One of the successful features of the AMORE 
rural programme is a building operations and 
maintenance fund mechanism in each community 
for the efficient ongoing collection of community 
funds to cover expenses (AMORE 2014).
These rural electrification programmes were 
instigated by the public sector. However, the private 
sector can also participate in rural electrification 
through two schemes: (1) the New Power Producers 
scheme and (2) the Qualified Third Party (QTP) 
Programme. The New Power Producers scheme 
involves the full or partial takeover of an NPC-SPUG 
area. The QTP scheme on the other hand allows the 
delivery of electricity services to “unviable”20 areas 
that the electric co-operative has waived from 
its franchise coverage. The New Power Producer 
scheme covers all the NPC-SPUG areas in which 
power supply is predominantly fuelled by diesel. 
A New Power Producer for a particular NPC-SPUG 
area is chosen through a competitive selection 
process and is entitled to receive subsidies from the 
UCME. The scheme permits the assets of NPC-SPUG 
to be used or new power plants and distribution 
network to be constructed. 
Through a public notice in 2005, the Department 
of Energy designated 428 barangays as remote 
and unviable areas open for QTP participation. 
These areas are exempt from the electric cooperative/distribution utility franchise coverage 
and are thus made available to QTPs. However, only 
three accredited QTPs exist to date: PowerSource 
Philippines, DMCI Power Corporation and Sabang 
Renewable Energy Corporation. The PowerSource 
Philippines is the first ever QTP in the country and 
provides power to barangay Rio Tuba, Bataraza and 
Palawan. DMCI Power, on the other hand, provides 
generation and distribution services to Semirara 
Island in Antique (GIZ, 2013). Sabang Renewable 
Energy Corporation is the third QTP which was 
awarded the service contract in September 2015 
and is operating in Sabang, Puerto Princesa. 
Unlike the New Power Producer scheme for NPCSPUG areas, QTPs do not go through a competitive 
selection process although they are entitled to the 
UCME. Instead, QTPs are subject to the Department 
of Energy accreditation process. After this, they file 
for approval of the retail rate and final authorisation 
from the ERC. There are still numerous unviable 
areas eligible for the QTP scheme. At the moment, 
no takers are to be found for these remaining areas, 
largely due to the regulatory challenge at the national 
level. They will thus in the meantime be included in 
the government’s electrification programmes.
19 Equivalent to around 2.4 million households (National 
 Electrification Administration, 2015).
20 Unviable areas are generally remote, isolated locations in which 
 the electric co-operative could not provide electricity services.
NorthWind Poer Deelopment Corportion’33 MW The Missionary Electrification Development Plan 2012-2016 is an outline of the Philippine 
government’s plan to increase the electrification rate in missionary areas that the main grid 
cannot reach. 
The Universal Charge for Missionary Electrification (UCME) is a subsidy designed to be funded 
by the customers of the general on-grid distribution areas (GIZ, 2013). It is intended to act as a 
financial incentive to the private sector to provide electricity to missionary areas using off-grid 
systems powered by renewables and/or hybrid fuels. The UCME incentive rate is determined, 
fixed and approved by the ERC based on the Missionary Electrification Development Plan. 
The NPC-SPUG is the NPC functional unit for pursuing the Missionary Electrification 
Development Plan. New Power Producers are able to serve or take over existing NPC-SPUG 
areas, technically and financially, during the course of the competitive bidding process. As all 
the existing NPC-SPUG areas are open to private sector, any NPC-SPUG area should privatise 
its power generation facilities and associated power delivery systems by leasing or selling its 
assets when it ceases to serve in one area. While the NPC-SPUG acts as the NPC functional 
unit for pursuing the Missionary Electrification Development Plan, New Power Producers can 
work in missionary areas though a competitive bidding process.
The Philippine Rural Electrification Service Project has provided electricity through solar home 
systems to 108 villages and through small diesel-fuelled mini-grid systems to another 102 
villages. As one of the QTP rural electrification projects, PowerSource Philippines provides 
generation and distribution to Rio Tuba. For the other remote areas, it deploys the Community 
Energizer Platform (CEP™), a combined microgrid infrastructure.
Box 1: 
Missionary Electrification 
Development Plan 
Wind turbines in the Philippines
Photo: Shutterstock
Source: Department of Energy, 2014
2.4 Legal and regulatory frameworks 
The legal and regulatory framework for the energy 
sector was set up in 1936 through the Public Service 
Act (Commonwealth Act No. 146), which established 
the Public Service Commission with the mandate to 
issue the certificates authorising the operation of 
public services. This was followed by a number of 
key decrees and acts outlined below.
• Presidential Decree No. 910 signed on 22 March 
1972 to create the Energy Development Board, 
composed of the heads of the key government 
ministries such as the Ministry of Finance, 
Ministry of Economic Planning, as well as the 
head of the Philippine National Oil Company 
and the Chairman of the Energy Development 
Board. The board has an overarching role to coordinate the formulation and implementation of 
energy policies, regulations and programmes, • The Department of Energy Act (Republic Act 
No. 7638)21 approved by the President on 
9 December 1992. This act creates the 
Department of Energy of the Philippines and sets 
forth its powers and functions, and composition. 
The Department of Energy is made up of four 
bureaus and one administrative support service 
unit. It acts under the leadership of the Secretary, 
three Undersecretaries and three Assistant 
Secretaries. It performs a wide range of duties 
from energy policy formulation to facilitating 
the engagement of private enterprises in variety 
of energy projects. 
• The Electric Power Industry Reform Act 
(EPIRA; Republic Act No. 9136)22 approved by 
the President on 8 June 2001. Its main aim is 
to improve the reliability of power supply and 
reduce tariffs. This is achieved by opening up the 
power market to competition by restructuring 
the power industry from a vertical to horizontal 
model and privatising the NPC. 
• The Renewable Energy Act (Republic Act 
No. 9513)23 approved by the President on 16 
December 2008. This act aims to accelerate the 
exploration, development and utilisation of all 
forms of renewable energy resources including 
hybridisation with other energy sources. It 
provided for the creation of the NREB. Among 
other functions, this was mandated to set the 
sector Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) on 
a per grid basis and minimum renewable power 
generation capacities in off-grid areas. 
The EPIRA and the Renewable Energy Act have provided 
the most important framework to achieve energy 
security and clean energy generation in the country. 
Electric Power Industry Reform Act (EPIRA)
The EPIRA provided a structure for reforming the 
electric power industry to allow more private sector 
participation and attain power security. The EPIRA’s 
primary objectives are to ensure and accelerate 
total electrification; to ensure the quality, reliability, 
security and affordability of the supply of electric 
power; to ensure transparent and reasonable prices 
in a regime of free and fair competition; and to 
encourage private sector capital and participation 
into the sector. To achieve this, the EPIRA restructures 
the power industry by unbundling it into four sectors: 
(1) generation (2) transmission (3) distribution and 
(4) supply. Before the EPIRA, the government 
operated the electricity sector as a vertically 
integrated industry. This led to the reorganisation of 
certain government agencies and the creation of new 
entities: the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market, the 
Power Sector Assets and Liabilities and Management 
Corporation, and TRANSCO. The functions of these 
entities will be described in the next section. 
The EPIRA emphasises the importance of private 
sector support and renewable energy deployment 
to provide electricity to remote areas. The Rules 
and Regulations to Implement Republic Act No. 
913624 lay down the requirements described below.
• Section 6 (Provision of Service in Unviable 
Areas) in Rule 7 on Distribution Section 
provides that, in remote and unviable areas 
where the distribution utility is unable to 
serve for any reason as authorised by the ERC 
in accordance with the Act, the areas shall be 
opened to other qualified third parties that 
may provide the service pursuant to Rule 14 
on Provision of Electricity by Qualified Third 
Parties (QTP). 
• Section 3 (Obligations of SPUG) in Rule 13 
on Missionary Electrification prescribes that, 
whenever feasible, SPUG shall utilise Renewable 
Energy Resources. 
Private sector participation is possible under two 
general schemes, the QTP for the unviable areas 
and the New Power Producer for SPUG generation.
21 Republic Act No. 7638: An Act Creating the Department of Energy Rationalizing the Organization and Functions of Government Agencies 22 Related to Energy and for Other Purposes. The full text of this act is available at www.doe.gov.ph/republic-act-no-7638-0. Republic Act No. 
 9136: An Act Ordaining Reforms in the Electric Power Industry, Amending for the Purpose of Certain Laws and for Other Purposes. The full 
f hiiilbldh//ld/2013/12/RA9136dfRenewable Energy Act 
The Philippines Renewable Energy Act was 
considered the first in Southeast Asia to act as 
comprehensive legislation on renewable energy. 
The primary goal of the act is to achieve energy 
self-reliance through the accelerated exploration 
and development of renewable energy resources. 
To attain this objective, the Renewable Energy 
Act offers various fiscal and non-fiscal incentives 
to private sector investors, renewable energy 
equipment manufacturers and suppliers, and 
renewable energy project developers. 
The non-fiscal incentives in the Renewable Energy 
Act include the RPS and FiT. The RPS mandates a 
minimum percentage of renewable energy generation 
for on-grid systems while the FiT guarantees a fixed 
price for at least 12 years for systems within the RPS. 
However, the RPS has not yet been set and is still 
under public consultation and design.
To make use of the incentives, project developers 
must first secure a renewable energy service contract 
from the Department of Energy Renewable Energy 
Management Bureau. In addition, renewable energy 
equipment manufacturers, fabricators and suppliers 
must be accredited to avail of the incentives. 
The NREB was created through this act. It is 
composed of representatives from various 
government agencies and from relevant 
stakeholders. It is supported by a technical 
secretariat from the Department of Energy 
Renewable Energy Management Bureau sourced 
from the Technical Services Management Division.
More details can be found in Annex 2. 
2.5 Key institutions of the energy sector
Under the two above-mentioned acts, the role 
of the Department of Energy was expanded, and 
several key institutions were established. These now 
play important roles in governing the energy sector 
in the Philippines. 
Philippine Department of Energy 
This key department of the government was 
created in 1992 pursuant to RA No. 7638, also 
known as Department of Energy Act of 1992. 
It is responsible for preparing, integrating, coordinating, supervising and controlling all plans, 
programmes, projects and activities of the 
Government of the Philippines relative to energy 
exploration, development, utilisation, distribution 
and conservation (Department of Energy, n.d.).25 
To this end, the Philippine Department of Energy 
takes a long-term and sustainable perspective 
when it designs energy policies and regulations. 
This is to ensure the provision of reliable, accessible 
and sufficient energy sources in a sustainable 
and secure fashion to all. To deal with the excess 
dependence on energy, the Department of Energy 
has over the past decade stepped up its efforts to
strengthen the security of energy supply by 
harnessing more indigenous energy resources 
coupled with measures to improve energy efficiency 
and conservation. 
As it evolves, the Department of Energy has 
assumed additional responsibilities and functions 
including that mandated by the EPIRA and 
Renewable Energy Act of 2008.
Renewable Energy Management Bureau 
The Renewable Energy Management Bureau is an 
integral part of the Department of Energy with 
the mandate to formulate and implement policies, 
plans and programmes related to the accelerated 
development, transformation, utilisation and 
commercialisation of renewable energy resources 
including emerging energy technologies. It has five 
divisions: biomass; hydropower and ocean energy; 
geothermal; solar and wind power. In addition, a 
special division provides technical services to the 
NREB. 
As a result of the recent rapid deployment of 
renewable energy projects in the Philippines, 
particularly in response to FiTs issued in 2012, the 
human resources capacity at the Renewable Energy 
Management Bureau was overstretched. In 2015, 
the Philippine Department of Energy management 
decided to reinforce the Renewable Energy 
Management Bureau staffing in recognition of this 
emerging challenge. Energy Regulatory Commission. The EPIRA 
converted the Energy Regulatory Board into the 
ERC, strengthening its role over the industry. It is 
the only regulatory body created by the EPIRA 
that exerts control over the four components of the 
industry, i.e. generation, transmission, distribution 
and supply. The ERC role is to promote competition, 
encourage market development, ensure customer 
choice and penalise abuse of market power in the 
restructured electricity industry.
National Transmission Corporation. TRANSCO is 
the system operator of the nationwide electrical 
transmission and sub-transmission system. It 
assumes the authority and responsibility of 
the NPC for the planning, construction and 
centralised operation and maintenance of its 
high voltage transmission facilities, including grid 
interconnections. 
Wholesale Electricity Spot Market. The role 
of this market is to provide the mechanism for 
identifying and setting the price of actual variations 
from the quantities transacted under contracts 
between sellers and purchasers of electricity. It was 
envisioned to create a more competitive electricity 
market and offer a reasonable and more affordable 
rate to end-users. The Philippine Electricity Market 
Corporation was incorporated on the initiative of 
the Department of Energy as the governance arm 
of the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market. 
Power Sector Assets and Liabilities Management 
Corporation. Often known as PSALM, this 
corporation is owned and controlled by the 
government. It takes ownership of NPC generation 
assets, liabilities, independent power producer 
(IPP) contracts, real estate and other disposable 
assets. The principal purpose of the Power Sector 
Assets and Liabilities Management Corporation is to 
manage the orderly privatisation of NPC assets and 
IPP contracts in order to liquidate all NPC financial 
obligations in an optimal manner. The sale of NPC 
assets increases private sector participation in the 
industry.
National Renewable Energy Board. This was 
created pursuant to the Renewable Energy Act and is 
composed of representatives of various government 
agencies and from relevant stakeholders. The NREB 
is supported by a Renewable Energy Management 
Bureau technical secretariat, specifically from the 
Technical Services Management Division. The tasks 
of the NREB are described below. 
• To evaluate and recommend to the Department 
of Energy the mandated RPS and minimum 
renewable energy generation capacities in offgrid areas as it deems appropriate.
• To recommend specific action to facilitate the 
implementation of the NREP.
• To monitor and review the implementation of 
the NREP, including compliance with the RPS 
and minimum renewable energy generation 
capacities in off-grid areas.
• To oversee and monitor the utilisation of the 
Renewable Energy Trust Fund. This fund’s 
implementing guidelines have not yet been 
finalised. 
• To cause or initiate the establishment of a 
one-stop facilitation scheme to accelerate 
implementation of renewable energy projects. 
The 20 MW MibrrRENEWABLE 
ENERGY 
DEVELOPMENT
IN THE PHILIPPINES
NorthWind Poer Deelopment Corportion’33MW 03
The Philippines has been increasing its efforts to develop renewable energy since 
passing the Renewable Energy Act. In 2011, the NREP was launched and has set 
a roadmap for the Philippines towards a reliable, affordable and resilient energy 
future powered by independent indigenous renewable energy sources. The NREP 
target to triple installed generation capacity by 2030 has put the country on a 
course to meet half its electricity demand with renewables and thus to strengthen 
energy security while reducing electricity tariffs in remote areas and islands.
Since the FiTs were put in place in 2012, and also thanks to the sharp decline 
in costs of technologies like solar and onshore wind, the Philippines has made 
remarkable achievements in renewable energy deployment. These have taken 
place not only in the northern region, which has a strong wind resource, but 
also in cities through the use of rooftop solar PVs. As a result, the industry has 
also grown rapidly, fuelled by growing domestic and overseas investments, thus 
transforming the power markets and business models. 
Nevertheless, emerging challenges need to be overcome through future policy 
making and institutional evolution in the renewable energy sector if the country is 
to maintain its development momentum. This will be discussed in the next chapter. 
3.1 Renewable energy resource potential and development
The country’s location offers great potential for geothermal, hydropower and 
ocean energy, and fairly good resources of solar and wind energy. 
Geothermal energy
After the 1970s global oil crisis, the country established the Philippine National its geological advantage given its position on the 
Pacific “Ring of Fire”. The first geothermal power 
plant was built in 1977 on the island of Leyte. 
Over two waves of rapid development from 1976 
to 2001,26 total installed geothermal electricity 
generation capacity in the Philippines ramped up to 
about 1,900 MW. At that time, this represented about 
22% of the national power generation capacity mix, 
and 23% of the world’s total geothermal electricity 
generation capacity. In terms of net capacity 
addition, growth slowed down after this period 
given decommissioned capacities such as the 
110 MW facility in Tiwi. From 2010 to 2015, the 
country experienced a net decrease of 34 MW, 
contributing to the loss of 2% in total electricity 
generated from geothermal energy (Bertani, 2015). 
In 2015, with the total installed geothermal electricity 
generation capacity reaching about 1,900 MW, the 
Philippines is second largest in the world after the US, 
according to the International Geothermal Association. 
It generates not only 14% of total national electricity 
output but also a significant amount of budgetary 
saving from avoided fuel imports. 
The Philippine Department of Energy estimates 
significant remaining potential – as much as 
2,600 MW. Bertani (2015) has forecast that by 
2020 geothermal power will increase in the 
Philippines by more than 600 MW. In the most 
recent Philippine Energy Plan (2012-2030), 
the Department of Energy identified 26 sites 
to increase existing installed capacity by 62% 
throughout the 18-year planning period, as shown 
in Table 1. The total estimated potential capacity 
of these sites will reach 1,165 MW. The majority of 
the listed areas have either been awarded or have 
submitted an application for a Renewable Energy 
Service Contract (Bertani, 2015).
The 20 MW Maibarara geothermal power plant 
was the most recent award. It started up on a 
commercial basis in February 2014. The plant 
is linked by a transmission line to the Luzon grid 
five kilometres (km) in length. This goes through 
Meralco’s distribution system. More are in the 
pipeline. For instance, the Philippine Department of 
Energy approved the Declaration of Commerciality 
of the 31 MW Bacman geothermal project, which is 
an expansion project within the Bacman geothermal 
production field with total project cost amounting 
to approximately USD 129 billion. The plant was 
expected to come online by the first quarter of 2019. 
26 First wave (1976-1984): 330 MW MakBan, 330 MW Tiwi, 112.5 
 MW Tangonan I and 112.5MW Palinpinon I. Second wave (1990- 
 2001): 95.73 MW Makban, 610.18 MW Unified Leyte, 151.5 MW 
 Bacman, 108.48 MW Mindanao, and 80 MW Palinpinon II.Table 1. Geothermal projects identified in the Philippine Energy Plan (2012-2030)
Region Site Location Generation capacity 
(MW)
Cordillera 
Administrative 
Region
Kalinga Kalinga 120
Daklan Benguet 60
Buguis-Tinoc Ifugao 60
Acupan-Itogon Benguet 20
Mainit-Sadanga Mt. Province 80
II Cagua-Baua Cagayan 45
III Natib Bataan 40
IV-A
Mabini Batangas 20
San Juan Batangas 20
IV-B Montelago Oriental Mindoro 40
V
Del Gallego (Mt. Labo) Camarines Sur 65
Camarines Sur 
Geothermal Project Camarines Sur 70
Southern Bicol Sorsogon 40
VI Mandalagan Negros Occidental 20
VII Lagunao Negros Oriental 60
VIII
Biliran Biliran 50
Bato-Lunas Leyte 65
IX Lakewood Zamboanga del Sur 40
X
Ampiro Misamis Occidental 30
Balingasag Misamis Oriental 20
Sapad-Salvador Lanao del Norte 30
XI
Amacan Compostela Valley 40
Mt. Zion North Cotabato 20
Mt. Matutum General Santos 20
Mt. Parker South Cotabato 60
XIII Mainit Surigao del Norte 30
TOTAL 1,165
Source: Philippine Energy Plan (2012-2030)
Hydropower
The country is rich in hydropower resources. The 
first mini-hydropower plant, which had an electricity 
generation capacity of 560 kW, was installed as 
early as 1913 in Camp John Hay, Northern Luzon. 
the NPC in 1936. The NPC was given the exclusive 
rights to develop all streams, lakes and rivers for 
power generation.
However, the National Electrification Administration 
received a mandate in 1979 to develop the to develop power projects under a Build-OperateTransfer scheme introduced in 1987. In addition, 
the Mini-Hydroelectric Power Incentives Act of 
1991 (Republic Act No. 7156)27 aims to grant minihydroelectric power developers the necessary 
incentives and privileges to provide an environment 
conducive to the maximum development of the 
Philippine hydroelectric power resources. Prior to 
the Renewable Energy Act of 2008, hydroelectric 
power capacity amounting to 3,291 MW had been 
installed. This had risen to 3,543 MW by 2014. 
The assessment has identified untapped 
hydropower resource amounting to 13,097 MW. Of 
this, 11,223 MW is suitable for large hydropower in 
the 18 potential sites identified across the country, 
accounting for nearly 86% of the total potential. 
The rest consists of mini- and micro-hydropower 
schemes in 888 locations significantly more spread 
out than the large hydropower sites.28
Solar energy
Updated resource potential data produced by 
the Philippine Department of Energy with the US 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) 
show that the Philippine average solar energy 
resource is fairly good. This is based on the NREL’s 
previous assessment conducted in 2000 while 
applying a new methodology, calibrating the 
Climatological Solar Radiation Model results with 
ground measurement validation. NREL assessed 
the annual average solar resource at 5.1 kWh per 
metre squared (m2) per day. The highest solar 
irradiance occurs in April at 6.1 kWh/m2 per day 
throughout the country and is at its most intense in 
the northwestern part of Luzon (Region I) (NREL, 
2015). As illustrated in Figure 9, the solar resource 
data with 3 km resolution presented in IRENA’s 
Global Atlas also show similar results. It also shows 
that the solar resources in the southern areas are 
also fairly good. 
The data show the resource distributed fairly evenly 
across the country, varying by 10%-20% in any given 
month. This qualifies both northern and southern 
parts of the country for solar power generation. 
However, when factoring in seasonal variation 
between the wet months of May to October and dry 
months of November to May, solar irradiance changes 
substantially by 30%-50% due to cloud coverage.
Figure 9. Solar energy resource in the Philippines
VAISALA Global solar
dataset 3km with
units in W/m2/day
77.9574 W / m2
124.892 W / m2
145.328 W / m2
160.063 W / m2
172.654 W / m2
184.423 W / m2
206.783 W / m2
236.519 W / m2
27 Republic Act No. 7156: An Act Granting Incentives to Mini- 
 Hydroelectric Power Developers and for Other Purposes.
28 Contributed by Andresito F. Ulgado, Hydropower Division Chief 
 of the Department of Energy – Renewable Energy Management 
 Bureau.Beyond the country’s physical assets, rising 
electricity demand and job creation potential are 
additional incentives for solar. This is particularly 
true for remote areas, rural electrification and 
efforts to reduce dependency on imported fuels.
The first on-grid solar farm in the country is the 
Cagayan Electric Power and Light Company’s 
(CEPALCO) PV power plant in Cagayan de Oro 
in Northern Mindanao (Region X), which has a 
capacity of one megawatt-peak. CEPALCO is a 
private investor-owned utility serving Cagayan de 
Oro city and three nearby municipalities in Misamis 
Oriental. The 1 MW embedded generation solar 
PV plant operates in conjunction with CEPALCO’s 
7 MW run-of-river small hydropower plant. Electricity 
produced is fed to CEPALCO’s distribution network 
(Global Environment Facility, 2005). During its 
first year of operation, the actual generated power 
reached 1.5 GWh, which is 19% higher than the 
projected 1.2 GWh (Abaya, 2005). 
Notwithstanding this early installation, the real 
evolution of the solar PV market began with the 
implementation of a long overdue FiT for solar 
PV projects granted by the ERC in 2012.29 The 
USD 0.24/kWh FiT attracted considerable attention 
from investors and the development community. 
Its first round ended with a combined generation 
capacity of 108 MW across six projects. These were 
fully financed by equity capital due to the unique 
policy design. They were the first to come online 
and first to get served by FiTs. 
The San Carlos Solar Energy (SaCaSol) project is 
the second stand-alone and first eligible solar farm 
in the Philippines to supply power to the Visayas 
grid. It was developed in two phases: Phase 1 with 
13 MW and Phase 2 with 9 MW and has a total 
gross capacity of 22 MW. It was inaugurated and 
commissioned in May 2014.
Given the dramatic fall in costs, solar PV has been 
increasingly economically attractive to end-users, 
particularly industrial and commercial companies. 
Several commercial and industrial establishments 
have installed solar rooftop systems to reduce 
their electricity consumption from the distribution 
The installation provides 30% of the shopping mall’s 
electricity requirements, giving a monthly saving of 
more than PHP 100,000 (USD 2,000) in power costs 
(Philippine Star, 2014). Solar Philippines, the company 
that designed and installed the Central Mall’s solar 
rooftop system, also developed a similar system for 
SM North EDSA Mall under the FiT schemeand will 
be constructing a solar rooftop for at least two more 
malls. There are over 500 major shopping malls across 
the country appropriate for similar systems.
Smaller capacity rooftop installations can benefit 
from the net-metering scheme enabled by the 
Renewable Energy Act. In 2013, the ERC Resolution 
No. 9, Series of 2013 (Resolution Adopting the Rules 
Enabling the Net-Metering Program) presented the 
rules for enacting the net-metering programme for 
renewable energy technologies. Under this scheme, 
consumers who generate their own electricity may 
sell their excess supply to their distribution utility. The 
net-metering is limited to 100 kW capacities from 
solar, wind, or biomass systems installed within the 
consumer’s premises (ERC, 2013). A net-metering 
agreement is entered into by the consumer and its 
electricity distribution utility. Currently, Meralco, 
Visayan Electric Company (known as VECO) and 
Davao Light are the private distribution utilities with 
systems and procedures in place to operate a “twoway” grid with its consumers subscribed under 
the net-metering programme. The Department 
of Energy and GIZ have prepared a net-metering 
guidebook that outlines the steps required to enter 
the programme. 
The cap set originally at 50 MW was quickly met, and 
the industry filed a request to scale up. On 27 March 
2015, the ERC responded positively with the approval 
for the proposed ceiling expansion to 500 MW with 
the timeframe extended to 15 March 2016. At the same 
time, the FiT was reduced to USD 0.18/kwh. 
By April 2016, the total installed solar power 
generation capacity had reached nearly 800 MW – 
95% of which was installed in Luzon and Visayas. 
The government is considering a switch to auction 
schemes aimed at reducing the overall costs of 
solar PV installations in the country, especially in Table 2. Wind energy resource potential in the Philippines30
Wind resource 
utility-scale
Wind power
W/m2
Wind speed
m/s
Total area
km2
Total capacity 
installed MW
Total power 
GWh/year
Good 300-400 6.4-7.0 5,541 38,400 85,400
Excellent 400-500 7.0-8.0 2,841 19,700 52,200
Excellent 500-700 8.0-8.8 2,258 15,600 47,900
Excellent 700-1,250 8.8-10.1 415 2,900 9,700
TOTAL 11,055 76,600 196,200
Source: NREL, 2014
view of the significantly oversubscribed service 
contracts from the Department of Energy. By the 
end of March 2016, these had amounted to nearly 
4 GW, consisting of 147 service contracts – including 
4.3 MW off-grid. 
Wind energy
Meteorological data from both PAG-ASA, the 
NREL’s computerised geographic information 
system (GIS) and IRENA’s Global Atlas for 
Renewable Energy depicted in Figure 10 show 
fairly good wind energy potential for the 
Philippines. The greatest wind resources are in 
northern and central areas such as Batanes and 
Babuyan and the northern and central Luzon areas. 
As shown in Table 2 below, 11,055 km2 of windy 
territory has been identified as a “good-to-excellent” 
wind resource. The wind speeds in these sites are 
6.4-10.1 metres per second (m/s) and wind power 
density values are 300-1,250 watts/m2 (W/m2) 
(40 m hub height). This makes them theoretically 
suitable for grid-connected electricity generation. 
Using conservative assumptions of about 
7 MW/km2, these areas could support more than 
76,000 MW of potential installed capacity, providing 
more than 195 billion kWh per year. 
Under USAID’s Capacity for Low Emission 
Development Strategies, NREL updated the previous 
wind resource estimates in 2014 after modernising 
its approaches. The output is a geospatial wind 
toolkit that provides wind resource data at specific 
sites across the country. This assessment expands 
the datasets from 40 m (2001 NREL wind atlas) to 
50 m, 80 m, 100 m, 140 m and 200 m. The geospatial 
toolkit visually explores data and combines 
renewable energy information with other base and 
infrastructure data. The toolkit includes data layers 
on transmission lines, infrastructure (airports, wind 
manufacturing facilities, existing wind farms etc.) 
land ownership (restricted areas, indigenous people, 
lands among others), topography etc. The updated 
atlas provides valuable preliminary information 
that will allow investors and project developers to 
identify economically viable wind sites. Another 
output is the wind prospector. This web-based 
application can be downloaded to obtain detailed 
wind and meteorological data. The wind geospatial 
toolkit and prospector may be accessed on the 
NREL’s website. The resource assessment will 
continue in order to further populate the data and 
to estimate the potential power generation from 
wind resources across the country.31
30 The results were computerised by the NREL resource data 
 assessment methodology based on GIS data. It used the 
 following assumptions: turbine size 500 kW; hub height 40 m; 
 rotor diameter 38 m; turbine spacing 10 D by 5 D; capacity/km2 
6.9 MW. 31 Raw data are available at www.nrel.gov/international/ra_ 
 philippines.html. Analysis of raw wind measurement data is yet 
 to be concluded to determine the potential capacities from 
 wind energy resources across the country.Figure 10. Wind energy resource in the Philippines
Global Atlas for Renewable Energy (IRENA); map data: 3TIER 2015; base map: Google 2016
Average WS 1km
at 100m height
DTU 2015
3 m/s
4 m/s
5 m/s
6 m/s
7 m/s
8 m/s
9 m/s
10 m/s
11m/s
12 m/s
Some of the latest developments in Ilocos Norte 
include the EDC Burgos Wind Power Corporation 150 
MW wind farm in Burgos, the 18.9 MW NorthWind 
Power Development Corporation’s Phase 2 in Bangui 
and the North Luzon Renewable Energy Corporation 
81 MW wind farm in Pagudpud. Full integration of 
the total capacities generated by these wind farms 
has already been achieved following the completed 
upgrade of transmission network capacity. They had 
initially stalled due to its technical limitations, as it 
could only export a maximum power of 110 MW to 
the rest of the Luzon grid. So far, total installed wind 
farms capacity is 393.9 MW.
Biomass and biofuels
The Philippines produces a large amount of 
agricultural residues annually from farm land 
amounting to 14 million hectares, accounting for 
nearly half its total area. Rice husk and straw make 
up the lion’s share of the residue, while the rest 
includes coconut shell and sugarcane bagasse, for 
instance. Forest residue, municipal solid wastes and 
animal manure from the husbandry industry are 
also part of the biomass feedstock. 
An investigation on resource potential conducted 
net available capacity for power generation from 
different types of biomass feedstock33 across 
the country (De Guzman, 2014). The indicative 
megawatts were calculated at a 70% capacity, 
reflecting biomass resources that can be reasonably 
collected and used for power generation.
The biomass resources considered in the assessment 
varied per main island group, i.e Luzon, Visayas and 
Mindanao, as shown in Table 3. In Luzon, the biomass 
commodities quantified were rice residues, corn 
residues, coconut husks, coconut shell, coconut coir 
and coconut fronds, pig and poultry manure, and 
solid waste. Luzon leads on biomass resources with 
2,094 MW due to its abundant coconut (husk, shell 
and frond) resources followed by rice and livestock 
manure. Isabela province alone (the second largest in 
the Philippines) has the potential to generate about 
800 MW electricity mainly from the by-products of 
its massive corn production. Known as the “sugar 
bowl of the Philippines”, Visayas’ resource base 
comprises sugarcane residues, rice residues, corn 
residues, coconut, poultry and hog animal wastes. 
The major sugar mills in the region own and operate 
their own power-generating boilers.
32 The results of the study are still preliminary and under evaluation 
bhDf EIn Mindanao, the biomass resources quantified 
include rice residues, corn residues, sugarcane 
residues, coconut residues, plantation crops (cassava 
residues, banana wastes, pineapple wastes, rubber 
wastes, empty palm fruit) and emerging energy 
crops (sweet sorghum, bamboo, napier grass). 
Bukidnon has been identified as offering the most 
abundant residual rice straw, cornstalk and bagasse 
that may be utilised for power production. Coconut 
has the potential to be the major power generator, 
particularly in the province of Davao del Sur, 
which has 200 MW equivalent (MWe), and Davao 
City (130 MWe), offering a combined potential 
330 MWe. Corn presents a significant source of 
power too, especially in Bukidnon, which has a 
90 MWe potential. In addition, Bukidnon produces 
large amounts of sugarcane residues, offering a 
potential 43 MWe. Several energy crop plantations 
exist in Mindanao, including at least 440 hectares 
of Napier grass, 200 hectares of bamboo and sweet 
sorghum. Almost all plantations are owned and 
cultivated by biomass power companies. Some state 
universities, as well as the Department of Agriculture, 
grow sweet sorghum for energy crop research. 
Table 3. Potential electricity generation capacity from biomass-based fuel
Major island group Potential biomass
power generation (MW)
Luzon 2,094
Visayas 1,513
Mindanao 843
TOTAL 4,450 
Source: De Guzman, 2014
However, the biomass energy resources thus far used 
for non-power applications are mainly required for 
household cooking, contributing to about 12% of 
national TPES (based on 2013 data) as shown in Figure 
5. Installed biomass-based power generation capacity 
amounted to 119 MW producing 152 GWh of power in 
2013. This represented around 60% of the potential 
generation capacity estimated from available biomass 
resources (International Energy Agency, 2015). 
The Biofuels Act of 2006 (Republic Act No. 9367),34 
which entered into force in 2007, provides the legal 
mandate for blending bio-liquid fuels, i.e. bioethanol 
and biodiesel, into liquid transport fuels. Blending 
requirements have increased progressively to current 
levels of 10% for bioethanol and 2% for biodiesel, up 
from an initial 5% and 1% respectively. This reflects the 
enlargement of production and feedstock capacity. 
Meanwhile, the promotion of biofuel use in the transport 
sector has driven growth in the domestic sugar industry 
and cultivation of coconut and other oil-rich plants. 
Notwithstanding a range of incentive schemes, 
including a value added tax exemption and financing 
through public institutions, the prices of domestically 
blending requirement. The government may review its 
biofuel programmes in the light of experience to date. 
The largest biomass power plant is the 21 MW First 
Farmers Holding Corporation’s cogeneration plant, 
which primarily uses bagasse from its sugar milling 
operation as feedstock. Electricity produced is utilised 
by the sugar mill and refinery while surplus electricity 
is sold to the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market. Rice 
husks, the by-product of the rice milling process, are 
used by several rice mills to fire rice grain dryers and 
other crops such as corn, coffee, legumes and cassava 
(Ragudo, 2011).
Similarly, commercial livestock farms generate 
significant amount of animal wastes. Biogas recovery 
to fuel gas engines for power generation is a clean 
and cost-effective strategy for managing wastes. The 
power they generate may be used in farm operations 
for lighting or cooling livestock housing, generating 
power cost savings. Cavite Pig City is a large hog farm 
with a population of 100,000 heads, which invested in a 
1.1 MW biogas facility to manage its animal wastes. This 
generates power used in the farm (Box 2).Cavite Pig City is a highly efficient swine farrow-to-finish facility located in Cavite City, south 
of Metro Manila. The facility houses around 100,000 heads at any given time. The original 
waste management system consists of a series of seven lagoons into which swine slurry/waste 
water is collected and resides for 30 days. However, the lagoon system cannot fully process 
the waste water. Cavite Pig City decided to develop a biogas power facility in 2009 to address 
the animal waste problem and to generate power cost savings.
The lagoons were replaced with a two-stage biogas digester that improved the quality of the 
treated wastes. Biogas, a product of the digestion process, is used to fuel a 1.1 MW combined 
heat and power generation set. The electricity produced is used by the facility to operate a cool 
cell ventilation system in the barns and a mill that processes pelletised feeds for the animals. 
The hot water generated by cooling the engine is used to heat the nursery for newborn pigs. 
Heat also goes to the feed mill boiler that produces steam for the pelletising process. The solid 
by-products of the digestion process are sold as organic fertiliser. 
Box 2: 
Cavite Pig City
Wind turbines in the Philippines
Photo: Shutterstock
Source: Dresser, 2010
Ocean energy 
The exploration of ocean energy potential in 
the Philippines began with a study of the ocean 
resource assessment conducted by Mindanao State 
University in the 1980s. The result indicated the 
theoretical potential could be as much as 170 GW of 
electricity generation capacity thanks largely to the 
Philippines’ geographical location. Several private 
and public institutions conducted further studies 
in the 1990s and 2000s on ocean energy potential, 
including wave energy and ocean thermal energy 
conversion. 
On the basis of the prevous relevant studies, 
estimated ocean energy generation capacity of 
70.5 MW was proposed for development in 2013-
2030 in the Philippines Energy Plan 2012-2030 
(Department of Energy, 2012). However, the 
sites identified in the plan require more detailed 
viability. The first of the potential sites is the 
10 MW Cabangan ocean thermal project in Zambales 
Province in Luzon. This is being developed by Bell 
Pirie Power Corporation with a service contract to 
explore, develop, build and operate a power plant 
in 1,300 hectares of sea. This was awarded by the 
Philippine Department of Energy. 
The offshore power facility will be housed on a shipbased platform. It is expected to start commercial 
operation in 2018 and evacuate the electricity to the 
mainland via a undersea power cable. H&WB Asia 
Pacific Corporation (Pte Ltd) is another example of 
a private investor developing ocean energy in the 
Philippines. It was awarded service contracts to develop 
four separate sites with a total capacity of 20 MW. 
The government hopes the facilities will help 
stimulate investor interest in exploring and 
developing the untapped potential of the country’s 3.2 Key supportive initiatives for 
renewable energy deployment
A number of important initiatives have been taken 
to scale up renewable energy systems deployment 
in the Philippines. The NREP has drawn up a longterm roadmap with a target set on the basis of a 
bottom-up approach. International development 
partners have also been increasing their efforts to 
support the country with technical assistance on 
various aspects. All these have made significant 
contributions to the development of renewable 
energy sources in the Philippines. 
National Renewable Energy Program 
2011-2030
The NREP was launched in 2011, three years after the 
enactment of the Renewable Energy Act. It serves 
as the blueprint for implementing the Renewable 
Energy Act. It set an aggressive target to triple the 
2010 renewable energy capacity level (5,438 MW) 
to 15,304 MW by 2030, as illustrated in Figure 11. 
This is 61% of projected power demand by 2030.
Figure 11. Timeline for NREP implementation 
Source: NREP 2011-2030
Consolidated Milestones
Implementation of sectoral sub-programs and the policy and program support component
2011 2015 2020 2025 2030
Targets for renewable-based power generation capacity
2027
Existing RE
capacity, 2010:
5,438 MW
7,594 MW
by 2015
12,751 MW
by 2020
15,219 MW
by 2025
15,304 MW
by 2030
Promulgation of
remaining policy
mechanisms, rules
under the RE Law
completed by end-2011
Target additional
biomass capacity
of 276.7 MW is
reached
Target additional 
wind capacity of 
2,345 MW is
reached by 2022
Target additional 
solar capacity of 
284 MW is
reached by 2030
1
st Ocean
Energy facility
operational by 2018
Target additional hydro capacity of 5,394 
MW is reached by 2025
Target additional geothermal capacity 
of 1,495 MW is reached
Target additional ocean power capacity of 
70.5 MW is reached by 2025
The policy mechanisms and instruments set forth 
in the Renewable Energy Act ought to create an 
enabling environment to attract investors into 
the renewable energy sector. They are in some 
senses the key determining factors for renewable 
energy investments and serve as basis for financial 
projections. However, there have been delays in 
developing and implementing the renewable energy 
policy mechanisms. The Renewable Energy Act was 
passed in 2008, mandating the FiT scheme as policy 
The delayed implementation of policy instruments 
contributed to the time lag in renewable energy 
project development. 
As a result, the fulfilment of the renewable energy 
target set in the NREP has also been delayed 
significantly. However, the Department of Energy is 
optimistic that although it has taken a long time to 
add to installed capacity, more renewable energy 
power plants will be constructed in the next few 2015, the Department of Energy had awarded 622 
renewable energy service contracts, which had an 
aggregated total capacity of almost 10,000 MW. 
The NREP is designed to undergo a biennial review 
that it initiates itself and can be revised as necessary. 
It was first reviewed in 2013 but was not updated. 
The primary recommendation of that review was 
to fast-track the enforcement of the FiT and RPS 
(Department of Energy, 2013). The NREP is once 
again under evaluation, and the launch of an improved 
NREP is expected thereafter. This revised design and 
active NREP implementation would be expected 
to accelerate and advance renewable energy 
development. 
Mapping out administrative procedures for 
on-grid solar PV project development35
With the proper policies in place, private sector 
interest in renewable energy has been high. Yet the 
permitting procedures, administrative applications 
and regulations on grid interconnection designed 
by relevant government agencies are complex. The 
complexity makes the project development process 
tedious, and this has become a barrier to renewable 
energy project development in the Philippines. 
In addition, there is a lack of harmonisation and 
standardisation of administrative processes at the 
regional and local level. This is complicating compliance 
with the requirements and creating additional delays 
and cost to the project developer.
What is more, administrative barriers make a financial 
impact on the overall costs of renewable energy 
projects. Administrative costs indirectly affect soft 
cost components such as capital costs and profit. 
High administrative costs indicate risks, which reduce 
the predictability and cost security of the renewable 
energy project. Financing institutions thus usually 
demand a risk premium, which will raise capital costs.
To provide a clear overview of the administrative and 
regulatory requirements for on-grid solar PV project 
development in the Philippines, the Department of 
Energy and GIZ have developed the Solar Photovoltaic 
(SPV) Guidebook. This has subsequently been split 
into two electronic guidebooks (e-guidebooks) under 
Solar PV Project Development in the Philippines. This 
maps out the administrative procedures for on-grid 
solar PV project development. It was created under 
the “Support of the Climate Change Commission” 
project funded by the International Climate Initiative 
of the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, 
Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety 
(Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz, Bau 
und Reaktorsicherheit).
The SPV Guidebook analysed the legal and 
administrative milestones and the procedures 
necessary for granting incentives and other privileges 
specified in Chapter VII of the Renewable Energy Act 
of 2008 and in Section 18 of the Rules and Regulations 
Implementing RA No. 9513. The assessment process 
has verified the outcome of the guidelines and 
measured the efficiency of compliance. This will further 
unblock a possible impasse during the process and 
will provide the avenue for necessary improvement. 
Ideally, investment policies and administrative 
guidelines should be predictable and easy to comply 
with if they are to generate interest from the private 
sector. The guidelines should ensure clear business 
direction and niche market opportunities including 
the assurance of long-term company existence. 
Strong business policy and legal support will build 
investor confidence.
Since the regulation in the Philippines is mostly the 
same for other renewable energy technologies, the 
SPV Guidebook can be used as a reference tool 
for project development for the other renewable 
energy resources. More information is available on 
the ASEAN RE Guidelines web platform at www.
re-guidelines.info (Renewable Energy Support 
Programme for ASEAN, 2014).
A project developer can pursue four major types 
of business models for on-grid solar PV projects, 
namely FiTs, a Power Supply Agreement (PSA) with 
distribution utilities, commercial contracting and netmetering. Table 4 below gives a comparative overview 
of project development for the four business models 
and their milestones. In general, the table also holds 
true for other renewable energy projects, such as 
wind, hydropower or biomass.Table 4. Comparative overview of project development for on-grid solar PV 
Milestones Business models
Project development phases
Milestone documents/certificates/contracts/
agreements
FiT
Direct 
negotiation
PSA
Competitive 
selection
B2B
Commercial 
contracting
Net-metering
application
1 Project preparation
1.1 Renewable energy application X X X
1.2 Net-metering application to the distribution utility X
1.3 Renewable energy service contract X X X
2 Pre-development preparation
2.1 BOI Project Registration X X X
2.2 NCIP Certificate X X X
2.3 DENR Environmental Compliance Certificate X X X
2.4 DENR Permit to Operate X X X
2.5 DAR Order of Conversion X X X
2.6 LGU Resolution of Support from host barangays X X X
2.7 LGU Resolution of Support from host municipality and 
provincial government XXX
2.8 LGU Building Permit (submit to distribution utility) XXXX
2.9 LGU Electrical Permit (submit to distribution utility) XXXX
2.10 Distribution impact study (performed by distribution 
utility) X
2.11 LGU Certificate of Final Inspection (submit to 
distribution utility) X
2.12 Department of Energy Certificate of Confirmation of 
Commerciality XXX
3 Development
3.1 Department of Energy Confirmation of 
Electromechanical Completion XXX
3.2 Department of Energy Certificate of Endorsement for 
FiT Eligibility X
3.3 ERC Certificate of Compliance X X X X 
4 Registration and connection
4.1 NGCP/distribution utility Connection Agreement X X X
4.2 NGCP Transmission Service Agreement X X X
4.3 NGCP/distribution utility Metering Service Agreement X X X
4.4 TRANSCO Renewable Energy Payment Agreement X
4.5 Registration on the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market X X X
4.6 Registration on the Interim Mindanao Electricity 
Market (in Mindanao alone, which has no wholesale 
electricity spot market)
X
4.7 Distribution utility PSA X X
4.8 ERC PSA approval X
4.9 Distribution utility Connection Agreement X X
Source: GIZ2013The involvement of various government agencies in 
the permitting process, such as the ERC, Department 
of Energy and the Department of Environment 
and Natural Resources, ensures a comprehensive 
regulatory process. However, it makes it tedious as 
investors/developers are obliged to follow all the 
procedures including the timelines and milestones 
of the agencies concerned. People usually express 
doubts about the process when authorities do not 
react promptly, a public authority uses its discretion 
improperly, or simply as a result of the high number 
of public authorities involved. In one public forum, 
a solar developer revealed that no less than 160 
signatures were needed for its project before it 
was able to start construction. It revealed that the 
permitting process took almost three years while 
actual construction (over 20 MW of solar PV) took 
less than a year.
The milestones for each phase of the project cycle 
(especially for solar projects) are presented below.
Project preparation
The renewable energy developer has to prepare 
and submit its response to the legal, technical and 
financial requirements to the Department of Energy 
to show its serious intention to develop the project. 
During this stage, the renewable energy developer 
assesses a suitable location for solar project 
development. Necessary data/information have 
to be collected, and desk studies and site surveys 
carried out. 
A so-called “blocking system”, which allocates 
specified areas for development, determines 
whether permission is given to develop a renewable 
energy project in the Philippines. In practice, the 
developer must apply to the Department of Energy 
with a request for a Renewable Energy Service 
Contract. This entitles the developer to fiscal and 
non-fiscal incentives under the Renewable Energy 
Act, provided all other requirements are met.
Pre-development
This phase is crucial, especially under the milestone 
approach through which the Renewable Energy 
Service Contract is terminated if the developer does 
not satisfy all the requirements within 12 months. 
Numerous permits or licences must be obtained from 
of Agrarian Reform, National Commission on 
Indigenous People and local government units. 
Financial support must be secured and mobilised 
from financial institutions or investors. A financial 
closure must be reached in order to commence 
physical construction and equipment procurement 
and go on to the next phase (development stage). 
Development
After securing the Department of Energy 
Certificate of Conversion from pre-development 
to development, the renewable energy developer 
proceeds with the construction of the plant. In 
the development stage the developer will work 
on the financial closure, equipment procurement 
and physical construction of the solar PV power 
plant. When the power plant construction reaches 
electromechanical completion (about 80% of 
the way through the project) the Department of 
Energy conducts final inspection. Several permits/
certifications must be obtained especially before the 
solar PV plant can begin its commercial operation. 
Where solar PV projects use FiTs, the Certificate 
of FiT Eligibility must be issued by Department of 
Energy and endorsed to the ERC. Where solar PV 
projects use a PSA between the distribution utility 
and the developer, ERC approval is required for the 
PSA. In both cases the solar PV project developer 
must obtain a Certificate of Compliance from 
the ERC which allows the power plant to go into 
commercial operation. 
Registration and connection
The solar PV project developer must obtain an 
approval, allowing the power plant to be connected 
to the grid through a connection agreement. The 
agreement will allow the developer to connect 
the power plant to the power grid. Where the 
power plant is to be connected to the distribution 
network, the renewable energy developer must 
seek approval from the relevant distribution utility 
owning the franchise in the area. Where the power 
plant is to be directly connected to the national 
transmission grid, the solar PV project developer 
secures a connection agreement with the national 
grid company, NGCP. After a connection permit is 
secured, a service agreement must be applied for. 
Two agreements constitute the service agreement: 
a transmission service agreement and a metering except for embedded systems, where this is carried 
out by the distribution utility owning the distribution 
system. This means a metering agreement must be 
signed between the renewable energy developer 
and either NGCP or the distribution utility.
Financing initiatives supporting renewable 
energy developers
Although there has been strong growth in renewable 
energy project applications and installations, the 
majority of private renewable energy projects 
is funded by corporate balance sheets rather 
than project finance. Local commercial banks are 
recognising the business potential of renewable 
energy and are becoming more open to lending to 
renewable energy projects. Nevertheless, the high 
risk perception associated with renewables means 
lending terms for renewable energy projects are 
still conservative, especially for new renewable 
energy players still establishing their financial track 
record (Milo, 2013).
While the bulk of the total project cost is allotted 
to the actual construction of the renewable energy 
power facility, significant expenses are also incurred 
during the pre-development or preparatory phase 
of the project cycle. Pre-development activities 
include conducting feasibility studies, detailed 
engineering design, permitting, public consultations 
and other preparatory activities. 
At this early stage of project development, there 
are very few sources of local financing. Larger 
companies can finance their own pre-development 
activities but this is challenging for newer and 
smaller companies. In this context, governmental 
financial institutions, particularly the Land Bank of 
the Philippines and the Development Bank of the 
Philippines, offer special loan packages or strategies. 
These help developers fund the renewable energy 
preparatory phase as described below.
1. Development Bank of the Philippines. This 
provides loans for preparatory activities and 
can provide 0% finance for feasibility studies for 
renewable energy projects. These type of loans 
are usually bundled or tied in with the main 
project loan (Cruz, 2014). 
2. Land Bank of the Philippines. This is the 
Programme and Fund Manager for the Project 
Preparation Fund created by the United Nations 
Development Programme’s project, entitled 
Capacity Building to Remove Barriers to 
Renewable Energy Development (CREDP). The 
Project Preparation Fund is a partial loan fund 
that provides 0% loan interest for up to 50% 
of the project preparatory costs (Center for 
Environment Studies and Management, 2011) 
(Calado and Ramos, 2014). 
The Development Bank of the Philippines and the 
Land Bank of the Philippines have provided sizeable 
loans for renewable energy and other environmental 
projects over the years. They are the largest providers 
of local debt financing for renewable energy 
projects (Milo Sjardin, 2013). Both governmental 
financial institutions are recipients of most Official 
Development Assistance (ODA) funds intended to 
provide financial support to developmental projects, 
including clean energy projects. The evaluation 
process and lending terms are generally the same 
if the governmental financial institutions are using 
their internal funds (Cruz, 2014) (Calado and Ramos, 
2014). The Development Bank of the Philippines 
and the Land Bank of the Philippines are able to 
offer loans with long tenor but the interest rates are 
usually level with commercial rates. 
The Environmental Development Project is the 
Development Bank of the Philippines’ primary lending 
facility for green investments. In addition to renewable 
energy, it supports investments in industrial pollution 
prevention and control, solid and hazardous waste 
management, and water supply and sanitation. It is 
funded by a JPY 24.8 billion (USD 210 million) loan from 
the Japan International Cooperation Agency. In 2014, 
the Environmental Development Project approved 
17 renewable energy loan applications amounting to 
PHP 5.8 billion (USD 129 million) (Development Bank 
of the Philippines, 2015). 
The challenge for project developers is to access 
funds from local banks. Financial institutions require 
proponents to put up 25%-30% of the total project 
cost as equity share. Some companies are unable 
to raise domestic equity, while foreign ownership is 
constitutionally limited to 40%. Local commercial banks, including Bank of 
the Philippine Islands, Banco de Oro and Rizal 
Commercial Banking Corporation, have funded 
renewable energy projects mostly through 
corporate debt financing. Project finance is not yet 
widely adopted for renewable energy. New and 
smaller industry players thus do not find it easy to 
secure debt for project development. 
The Bank of the Philippine Islands is one of the 
more aggressive commercial banks funding clean 
energy projects. It works with the International 
Finance Corporation’s Sustainable Energy Finance 
Program to provide financing for energy efficiency 
and renewable energy projects. In 2013, the Bank of 
the Philippine Islands and the Sustainable Energy 
Finance Program reported total outstanding loans 
of PHP 9.77 billion (USD 232 million) to clean energy 
projects. The credit risk instruments provided by 
the Sustainable Energy Finance Program are an 
effective risk mitigation mechanism that allows 
the Bank of the Philippine Islands to finance clean 
energy projects (Gatdula, 2014). 
The United Nations project entitled Capacity 
Building to Remove Barriers to Renewable Energy 
Development project, known as CBRED, initiated 
a Loan Guarantee Fund to spread the risk among 
the guarantor, lender and borrower-proponent of 
renewable energy projects. The Local Government 
Unit Guarantee Corporation (LGU Guarantee) is 
the fund manager for the Loan Guarantee Fund. 
This guarantee fund was designed especially for 
renewable energy projects as a financial instrument 
mitigating risk to encourage more banks to lend to 
renewable energy. However, Loan Guarantee Fund 
coverage is limited to PHP 20 million (USD 0.47 
million), which is appropriate for smaller renewable 
energy projects (Center for Environment Studies 
and Management, 2011). 
Since its inception in 2008, the fund has guaranteed 
one mini-hydropower project in Mindanao, which 
is now operating. LGU Guarantee Corporation 
is also the Guarantee Program Manager of the 
World Bank’s Electric Cooperative Partial Credit 
Guarantee Program. This is intended to provide 
partial credit guarantee to electric co-operatives 
for power distribution system upgrades, including 
renewable energy projects implemented by or 
in joint partnership with electric co-operatives 
or renewable energy projects whose power offtaker is an electric co-operative. An additional 
USD 40 million from the World Bank’s Philippine 
Renewable Energy Development Project expands 
the Electric Cooperative Partial Credit Guarantee 
Program (LGU Guarantee Corporation, 2013).
Renewable Portfolio Standard
The RPS is a policy instrument obliging the power 
suppliers to produce or acquire a certain percentage 
of electricity from renewable energy sources. It was 
required as one of the policy mechanisms mandated 
by the Renewable Energy Act of 2008 (RA No. 
9513). Its purpose is to contribute to the growth 
of renewable energy by diversifying energy supply 
and to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
However, it is not fully operating despite public 
consultations and technical working group 
meetings across the country in 2011-2013. The 
delay was due in part to the thrust created by the 
FiT implementation in 2012. Over recent years, like 
other countries experiencing the mounting pressure 
of FiTs on the governmental budget, the Philippines 
has been seeking an alternative policy tool that can 
be sustained over the long term.
The Philippine Department of Energy thus revived 
the RPS and issued draft RPS rules in the form of 
a draft government circular in June 2016. Proposals 
called for at least a 30% share of renewables in 
the country’s installed total power generation 
capacity, with the continued support of other policy 
instruments such as FiTs. The NREB and Department 
of Energy are working closely together and engaging 
with other stakeholders to advance the development 
of RPS and the implementation rules. 
About half the rural population 
and a fifth of households 
without electricity are found in 
remote or isolated areas3.3 Renewable-powered mini/
microgrids
It has been widely recognised that meeting demand 
for electricity in rural/remote areas by extending 
the main grid would be increasingly difficult and 
uneconomic, if not completely impossible. This is 
due to increasing connection costs per consumer, 
low-level economic activities and associated high 
costs encountered when managing rural systems. 
This is largely the case with the electrification of 
rural and isolated areas in the Philippines, usually 
islands. 
About half the rural population lives in these types 
of remote/isolated areas, including about 20% of the 
households without electricity access. Many areas 
connected to the mini- or microgrids powered mostly 
by diesel have electricity only four to seven hours per 
day due to operational and economic constraints. 
Owing to these remote or isolated locations, the 
diesel is usually very expensive, creating high 
electricity prices for end-users. To achieve the 90% 
household electrification rate – the target set by the 
government – many regions would have to make 
greater efforts to provide electricity. This would at 
least meet basic needs through stand-alone power 
generation facilities such as solar home systems.
In most cases, stand-alone power generation 
systems are unable to deliver the reliable high/
near-grid quality electricity essential to supporting 
productive use, creating new businesses and 
generating revenues/incomes. There has been a 
sharp decline in renewable energy system costs, 
and interest is growing from private sector, known 
as the QTP in the Philippines. This sector wishes 
to provide electricity services to the rural and 
isolated areas, particularly the remote and unviable 
villages. Hybrid micro/mini-grid systems36 with 
diesel and renewable energy sources are able to 
meet the technical requirements for industrial and 
commercial applications and thus generate the 
sustained demand for energy supply. 
However, only three private companies i.e. Power 
Source Philippines, DMCI Power and Sabang 
Renewable Energy Corporation have thus far taken 
action and operate as an “alternative electricity 
provider”.37 They serve Rio Tuba, Palawan and 
Malapascua Island in Daanbantayan, Cebu, Semirara 
Island in Antique and Sabang, and Puerto Princesa City. 
Clearly, there is a gap between policy design and 
reality. The reasons behind the lack of private 
sector engagement merit further investigation. 
A study of this kind will help identify incentives 
and policy measures that need to be put in place, 
and the needs for further improvements in the 
legal and regulatory frameworks. This will allow 
and encourage the private sector, or “alternative 
electricity provider”, to participate in and scale 
up the business of providing electricity services to 
remote and unviable areas in the Philippines. 
36 Mini/microgrid is a modern concept for a small-scale 
 decentralised generation system with the capacity to integrate 
 different energy sources and energy storage technologies on 
 a modular basis. It can operate off the main grid or be integrated 
 into a grid-connected model. In rural settings, it typically 
 operates in off-grid mode. 
37 Reference to the term used by SolarPower Europe.NorthWind Po
er Deelopment Corportion’33MW KEY CHALLENGES AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
North Lon Reneble EnergCorportion’81 MW 04
The Philippines has rapidly ramped up its renewable energy deployment in recent 
years, particularly since the FiTs have been introduced, attracting a great deal 
of attention from the private sector. However, this has brought about a variety 
of challenges that could obstruct the further development of renewable energy 
resources in the country. 
This chapter discusses some of the priority concerns identified from literature 
reviews and the insights gained from respondent interviews, focus groups and 
multi-stakeholder round table discussions. We present general recommendations 
as well as specific recommended action to deal with them. 
The RRA process co-ordinates development partners, financial institutions and 
the private sector in contributing to the formulation and implementation of an 
articulated list of activities and initiatives identified by the stakeholders and 
experts in the RRA. 
4.1 Political commitment
Challenges
Since the Renewable Energy Act was signed in 2008, the Philippines has made 
remarkable progress in renewable energy development. However, the government 
has given many private sector stakeholders mixed signals. On the one hand it called 
for an increase to investment in renewable energy, especially from the private sector. 
On the other it expressed concern about the high capital costs of renewable energy 
and variability of its supply. The government has reiterated that its energy sector 
objective has always been reliable power that is “preferably clean” and “reasonably 
priced”. This has caused some confusion in the renewable energy industry. Private General recommendation
Strong political commitment is an extremely 
important factor for nurturing a healthy and sustained 
market for renewable energy development. This 
commitment should not only be clear and strong 
but also consistent and able to withstand changes 
of administration. This would guarantee investor and 
developer confidence in the Philippine government 
as a reliable partner in the investment or development 
of renewable energy projects. 
Recommended action: 
Raise awareness to ensure sustained 
political commitment
In the Philippines, public awareness plays a 
very important role in influencing the political 
commitments, decisions and orientation of public 
policies. For a country with the second highest 
electricity tariffs in the region, the economic 
benefits of adopting renewables are of great 
interest to the public. This is especially the case 
in rural areas and islands, where fuel costs are 
prohibitively high, and is one of the important 
economic factors explaining electricity service 
provision disruption. The renewable energy sources 
have proved the most cost-effective options in 
these settings thanks to the near-zero marginal 
production costs of electricity. Costs of certain 
renewable energy technologies, especially solar PV, 
have fallen dramatically. If capital costs could be 
bought down with support from the government, 
affordability could be significantly improved. 
Different stakeholders should launch a series of public 
campaigns with the assistance and participation 
of the development partners allocating resources 
to the endeavour. Educational programmes could 
be set up to provide real examples to the public 
and can also be used to provide practitioners with 
hands-on experience. 
4.2 Grid infrastructure study
Challenges
The Philippines has taken the lead in the region and 
introduced a comprehensive set of policy tools and 
interest from investors and developers means there 
is a surplus in applications for renewable energy 
projects, especially for solar PV. 
This poses a growing challenge for the grid 
operators. It is particularly tough in areas where the 
grid is relatively weak or demand is low while variable 
renewable energy resources are geographically 
distributed across a small area. One example is 
Northern Luzon, which offers 337 MW of installed 
generation capacity from wind resource, most of 
which is on its northern coastline. According to the 
national grid corporation NGCP, frequency limit 
violations increased by more than one-third in 2015 
compared to the previous year and were caused 
partly by the rapid increase in variable renewables 
in the main grids. This indicates mounting stress 
on the Philippines power system. In some areas, 
solar and wind power have to be curtailed to 
ensure reliable grid operation. Although the share 
of variable renewables in the main power grids is 
comparatively low, evidence of grid instability is 
emerging and has to be addressed. 
General recommendation
Variability is the primary technical challenge 
experienced by variable renewable energy sources. 
A low share does not cause much concern for the 
grid operator. However, when there is an expansion 
in renewable energy generating capacity in the grid, 
its operators have to deal with variability on both 
the demand and supply side, particularly in the 
case of utility-scale solar PV and wind parks. This 
requires new capabilities and methods to control 
and regulate the power system to ensure reliable 
power supply. 
To accomplish this goal, further intelligence on 
the power system condition is needed through 
a grid infrastructure assessment examining grid 
stability at a time when variable renewable energy 
penetration is high. 
Recommended action: 
Assess the country’s grid infrastructure 
A comprehensive grid evaluation is recommended 
concentrating on grid stability in Luzon, Visayas as power flow and stability analysis in response to 
solar or wind generation inputs at various points 
and different penetration levels. This will provide 
a better understanding of the impact of variable 
renewable resource connection on the grids and thus 
minimise potential grid operation problems. Load 
profiles and future electricity demand should also be 
part of the study. The existing and pipelined utilityscale and small-scale variable renewable energy 
generation projects, primarily solar PV, also need to be 
investigated. This should be aligned with research into 
the need to improve the transmission and distribution 
grids, enabling the networks to be more flexible and 
resilient and to respond quickly to variations and 
abnormal situations. An islanded model of mini/
microgrids in the bulk power system could be one 
option for designing and configuring the future grid. 
The results should produce proactive energy 
planning including the generation, transmission and 
distribution network. This provides the standards 
and guidelines for future solar PV grid-connected 
systems. 
The completion of this recommended study should 
be followed by a training programme. This would 
equip the utilities with the knowledge necessary to 
understand the results and also modify the model 
when there are changes to the grid. 
4.3 Institutional capacity analysis
Challenges
The Renewable Energy Act provides a legislative 
framework for renewable energy development in 
the Philippines including the institutional set-up. 
The Renewable Energy Management Bureau and 
NREB are the primary architects of the country’s 
renewable energy sector. However, a number of 
key stakeholders are playing an important part in 
the development of the renewable energy sector in 
the Philippines, particularly in engaging renewable 
energy developers. They include, for instance, 
the ERC, TRANSCO, the National Electrification 
Administration, NPC and its branch focusing on 
off-grid electrification (SPUG), as well as local 
government units.
institutions against a backdrop of rapid renewables 
deployment in the Philippines. This is due largely to 
the mismatch between physical project applications 
or installations and institutional capacity-building. 
Nonetheless, this matter has been recognised and 
to an extent dealt with. For instance, the Renewable 
Energy Management Bureau had scaled staff down 
to about 80 in 2008-2014 but this increased by 
50% in 2014-2016, providing it with sufficient staff 
to perform its duties. This is an indicator of the 
renewable energy boom in the Philippines. 
Yet the rapid growth of renewables requires capacity 
improvement in all the relevant institutions, not 
just the Renewable Energy Management Bureau. 
New and emerging issues are also likely to further 
require the bureau’s attention and capacity, though 
not quite yet. 
To some extent, this has contributed to the 
further increase in renewable energy projects that 
have received service contracts. Without a clear 
institutional framework guiding and explaining the 
role of each player, the implementation of the NREP 
has not been easy.
General recommendations
A well designed and functional institutional framework 
helps sustain renewable energy programmes including 
NREP, mainstream the administrative procedure and 
identify the areas across the renewable energy sector 
in which an effective capacity-building programme 
may be needed. 
A thorough assessment and analysis is thus 
recommended on renewable energy institutional 
structure, including mandates, the capacity of each 
agency or stakeholder, and the interaction/coordination between them. 
Recommended action: 
Examine institutional capacity in the 
Philippine renewable energy sector
A thorough institutional capacity assessment of 
the Department of Energy Renewable Energy 
Management Bureau and other key relevant 
agencies and stakeholders is recommended. This NREP. It compares this to the current functions and 
capacity of the concerned agencies, co-ordinating 
mechanisms in place, and new and emerging 
challenges in Philippine renewable energy 
development that would require new sets of skills 
and staff to address. 
More specifically, it evaluates the Renewable 
Energy Management Bureau current capability 
and established expertise against the mandates, 
and builds on them. It identifies the existing skills 
of current personnel, analysing its wide network 
to intensify collaborative action, and exploring 
the efficient use of available resources. This 
recommended action will also consider the need 
and possibility for creating a third-party entity 
supporting the Renewable Energy Management 
Bureau on service contract review of application 
submitted by developers for the request of 
authorisations of permits. This will be based on 
the preliminary results of the institutional capacity 
and the future needs assessment. This will help 
improve the ability of the other key stakeholders in 
the sector to function and perform in a co-ordinated 
fashion.
The study results will yield recommendations to 
enhance capacities, which will be presented to the 
Department of Energy and other governmental 
agencies most relevant to institutional development 
affecting renewable energy in the Philippines. 
The results can be also presented to development 
partners for the purpose of designing more 
effective capacity-building programmes aided by 
various technical assistance programmes.
4.4 National mini/microgrid study
Challenges
About 6.1 million households have no electricity 
in the Philippines, most of whom are farmers and 
fishermen who live in remote, unviable areas and 
islands. Unviable areas have been defined as a 
geographical area within the franchise zone of a 
distribution utility where immediate distribution line 
extension is not feasible. Because of the country’s 
geography, achieving 90% household electrification 
by 2017 is not easy, especially if it involves connecting 
Mini-grids can be a viable and cost-effective solution 
to electrification where the distance from the main 
grid is too great and the population density too low 
to justify a grid connection on economic grounds. 
Mini-grids provide an improved service compared 
to household systems. Depending on local resources 
and technologies employed, they can be as good 
as a well functioning grid. From a long-term and 
development perspective, it thus makes sense 
to deploy mini-grid installations in areas with no 
electricity. Renewable energy systems, and especially 
both solar PV for power generation and run-of-river 
small hydropower, have become highly cost-effective 
compared to mini-grids powered by diesel gen-sets. 
This is due to falling technology costs.
For areas with mini-grids already installed, high and 
volatile fuel costs make it more difficult to produce 
continuous electricity. For instance, diesel in some 
islands can exceed USD 1.3 per litre, nearly 60% 
more expensive than the Philippines average due 
to the high transportation cost. High expenditure 
on diesel fuels for rural electrification resulted in a 
shortfall of USD 70 million in operational costs in 
2011, according to the Philippines NPC. This has also 
contributed to very limited service in most of the 
islands, lasting between four and 12 hours. 
These diesel-fuelled power facilities can be 
retrofitted or hybridised with renewable energy 
technologies if substantial energy resources are 
available. The Philippine long-term energy scenario 
states that it will remain substantially dependent on 
imported oil for the next two decades. Renewablepowered or hybrid mini-grids will thus improve 
national energy security.
In this context, a number of studies related to minigrids have been conducted with support from 
different development partners. However, those 
studies either examined mini-grid potential at the 
project, community or island level, or a particular 
policy or scheme relevant to mini-grids or offgrid electrification. At the national level, there is 
little understanding of why mini-grids powered by 
renewables are strategically important to energy 
security nor what the current regime requires to 
mainstream such mini-grids in future. Nevertheless, 
the whole spectrum of issues related to mini-grids potential, the policy and regulatory framework, 
technological options, business models, and social 
and economic benefits. 
General recommendation
Establishing an enabling environment for minigrids based on renewable energy is recommended; 
it would shift the model for universal energy 
access and increase energy security. To achieve 
this objective, a comprehensive national study 
on mini-grids powered by renewable energy is 
recommended. 
Recommended action: 
Study potential for renewable electrification 
through mini- and microgrids
The recommended study should estimate physical 
potential and cover the policy and regulatory 
framework, technological options/guidelines and 
business models. This will yield an understanding 
of the long-term social and economic benefits 
that such systems can generate for the whole of 
society. Its geographical focus is on islands and 
remote regions with no electricity, where mini-grids 
powered by renewables can be economically viable 
and also encourage rural development. 
The recommended study will also research 
potential sites for mini-grids and explore renewable 
energy technology options and available resources 
for power supply. It will identify problems and 
barriers, and come up with alternative approaches 
and recommendations to promoting renewable 
energy in off-grid areas, especially in the electric 
co-operative franchise areas. This is where the 
sites with high mini-grid potential are to be found. 
Mini-grids offer abundant benefits, including the 
ability to restore power more easily after a disaster, 
improved quality of life and new opportunities for 
income generation when providing power to rural 
areas. All these impacts should be studied. 
The study will generate recommendations for 
developing the policy and regulatory frameworks 
necessary to promote mini-grid investments and to 
facilitate private sector engagement. Annex 1. Summary of rural electrification projects in the Philippines
No. Project name Partners Brief description 
1 USAID AMORE project
USAID, barangay 
renewable energy 
community 
development 
associations 
This project provided renewable energy systems to 
remote off-grid communities in Mindanao affected 
by conflict and with no electricity. It consulted 
with the relevant communities throughout project 
implementation, and organised and trained 
the barangay renewable energy community 
development associations. They were shown how 
to operate and maintain renewable energy systems, 
sell solar systems and manage the community’s 
operation and maintenance funds, which it had 
raised itself. The profit earned from selling systems 
is reinvested in new systems.
2.
Philippine Rural 
Electrification Service 
Project
NPC-SPUG
This project successfully provided electricity to 5,129 
households in 108 barangays using PV systems, and 
12,183 households in 102 barangays using a dieselfired mini-grid system. It was intended to be passed 
on to a QTP upon completion in 2009. However, 
there was no interest in carrying the responsibility 
further. NPC-SPUG currently acts as an interim 
QTP for the Philippine Rural Electrification Service 
Project areas (Department of Energy, 2012).
3.
Solar Power 
Technology Support 
Project
Department of 
Agrarian Reform, 
Government of Spain
This project is an integrated social fund and 
agricultural support project. It used PV energy 
systems as enabling technology for agricultural and 
rural enterprise development in agrarian reform 
communities.
4.
Philippine National Oil 
Company Solar Home 
Distribution Project
Philippine National Oil 
Company
This project aimed to distribute 15,000 solar home 
systems. It bears 60% of the total cost of the 
system while the remaining 40% is paid by the 
end-users. The Philippine National Oil Company 
partnered with local microfinance institutions to 
help the beneficiaries pay for their solar home 
systems in instalments with minimal interest. Using 
this approach, the maintenance and upkeep of the 
solar systems was sustained.Annex 2. Overview of the Renewable Energy Act of 2008
The Renewable Energy Act 2008 (Republic Act 
No. 9513) is the first comprehensive renewable 
energy legislation enacted in Southeast Asia. The 
Act co-ordinates with and provides support to 
other Philippine government policies. The objective 
is to ensure the provision of reliable indigenous 
renewable energy sources to replace imported 
fossil fuels. Its approach is to create an enabling 
environment to make renewables financially 
attractive to investors by providing fiscal incentives 
and implementing non-fiscal economic instruments.
To achieve the desired target, the Renewable 
Energy Act created two important institutions 
tasked with policy planning and implementation. 
The Department of Energy Renewable Energy 
Management Division was transformed into the 
Renewable Energy Management Bureau. This is the 
policy development, planning and implementation 
arm supporting the growth of the renewable 
energy industry as mandated by Section 32 of 
the Renewable Energy Act. It also has the task of 
supervising and monitoring the activities of other 
governmental agencies related to renewables, as 
well as monitoring private entities to ensure they 
comply with existing rules. 
The second arm is known as the National Renewable 
Energy Board (NREB). It was created pursuant 
to Section 27 of the Renewable Energy Act. The 
NREB is a multi-stakeholder body composed of 
one representative each from various government 
agencies, renewable energy project developers, 
distribution utilities, electric co-operatives and 
governmental financial institutions, NGOs and 
others. Its activities are supported by a technical 
secretariat at the Department of Energy Renewable 
Energy Management Bureau. Its role is advisory 
in nature, gathering inputs from its members, 
recommending specific action for implementing 
policies and programmes, and overseeing the use 
of the Renewable Energy Trust Fund.38
The Renewable Energy Trust Fund was also 
established under the Renewable Energy Act with 
the aim of financing the activities that accelerate the 
exploration and commercialisation of the country’s 
renewable energy resources in line with Section 28 of 
the Renewable Energy Act. Eligible activities under 
the Renewable Energy Trust Fund are renewable 
energy resource assessment, capacity-building and 
technical research on emerging renewable energy 
technologies such as ocean energy. The Rules and 
Regulations Implementing RA No. 951339 identify 
the monetary sources of the Renewable Energy 
Trust Fund. They include:
• proceeds from emission fees collected from all 
generating facilities (RA No. 8749 Philippine 
Clean Air Act)
• 1.5% of the net annual income of the Philippine 
Charity Sweepstake Office
• 1.5% of the net annual income of the Philippine 
Amusement and Gaming Corporation
• 1.5% of the net annual dividends remitted to the 
National Treasury by the Philippine National Oil 
Company and its subsidiaries
• 1.5% of the proceeds of the government share 
collected from the development and use of 
indigenous non-renewable energy resources
• contributions, grants and donations made to the 
Renewable Energy Trust Fund
• any revenue generated from the utilisation of 
the Renewable Energy Trust Fund
• proceeds from fines and penalties imposed 
under the Renewable Energy Act.
38 The Renewable Energy Trust Fund has yet to be established 
 and will be described below.
39 The text of these implementing Rules and Regulations is 
 available at www.doe.gov.ph/sites/default/files/pdf/issuances/ 
 dc2009-05-0008.pdf.In addition to the institutional frameworks it created, 
the Renewable Energy Act introduced a number 
of fiscal and economic incentives in Chapter VII. 
To make use of the fiscal privileges and incentives, 
renewable energy project developers, manufacturers, 
fabricators and suppliers of locally produced 
renewable energy equipment must register with 
the Department of Energy Renewable Energy 
Management Bureau and Board of Investments. 
They must also secure Certificates of Endorsements 
from the Renewable Energy Management Bureau for 
each transaction. The fiscal incentives and privileges 
of renewable energy development are listed below.
• Income tax holiday valid for the first seven years 
of commercial operations. 
• Duty-free imports of renewable energy 
machinery. This incentive is valid for ten years 
after a certification of entitlement to incentives 
is issued.
• Special realty tax rates on equipment and 
machinery. These taxes on civil works, 
equipment, machinery and other improvements 
exclusively used for renewable energy facilities 
cannot exceed 1.5% of their original costs. 
• Net operating loss carry-over. The operating 
loss by the renewable energy developer in the 
first three years after the start of commercial 
operation is carried over as a deduction from 
gross income for the next seven consecutive 
taxable years. 
• Corporate income tax rate of 10% on net taxable 
income. This is valid after the income tax holiday.
• Accelerated depreciation of plant, machinery 
and equipment used for the exploration, 
development and utilisation of renewable energy 
resources. These can be depreciated using a rate 
not more than twice the rate which would have 
been used otherwise.
• Zero percent (0%) Value Added Tax on sales 
of fuel or power generated from renewable 
sources.
• Tax credit on domestic capital equipment and 
services. This tax credit is equivalent to 100% of 
of the combined Value Added Tax and customs 
duties on renewable energy machinery and 
equipment had these items been imported. 
This is given to a renewable energy project 
developer that purchases them from a domestic 
manufacturer or supplier.
• Cash incentive for missionary electrification. 
Developers of renewable energy projects for 
missionary electrification are entitled to a cash 
incentive per kilowatt-hour rate generated.
In addition to fiscal incentives, the Renewable 
Energy Act has also provided for economic or 
non-fiscal stimuli to create a friendlier market for 
systems based on renewable energy. The renewable 
energy policy mechanisms to be implemented are 
explained below.
• Renewable Portfolio Standards. This policy 
requires electricity generators, distribution 
utilities or suppliers to source or produce a 
specified portion of their electricity supply 
from eligible renewable energy sources. This 
will be imposed on all electric power industry 
participants serving on grid areas, on a per grid 
basis upon determination by the NREB (Section 
4 of the Rules and Regulations Implementing 
Republic Act No. 9513). The NREB sets the 
required minimum percentage that must 
generated from renewable energy resources. 
o The RPS rules have been drafted by the 
Department of Energy and will be finalised 
when the minimum percentage of required 
renewable energy generation has been set 
by the NREB. The NREB’s guiding target 
in setting the RPS is to bring the share of 
renewable energy to the power generation 
mix to at least 35% by 2030 (NREB 48th 
Minutes of Meeting, 2014).
• Renewable energy market (REM). Under the 
Renewable Energy Act (Section 4), “Renewable 
Energy Market” (REM) refers to the market where 
the trading of renewable energy certificates 
equivalent to an amount of power generated Act No. 9513 (Section 10) further specifies: 
“the REM shall be a sub-market of the WESM 
[Wholesale Electricity Spot Market] where 
the trading of Renewable Energy Certificates 
may be made.” The renewable energy market 
will facilitate the compliance of electric power 
participants to the RPS. A renewable energy 
registrar will be established and operated by 
the Philippines Electricity Market Corporation 
(PEMC). It will issue, keep and verify renewable 
energy certificates corresponding to energy 
generated from eligible renewable energy 
facilities. Electricity generators, distribution 
utilities or suppliers not be able to meet the 
required minimum generation of renewable 
energy can purchase renewable energy 
certificates to make up for the gap and comply 
with the RPS (Section 8, Renewable Energy Act). 
o The renewable energy market is still being 
set up. Its implementing rules are still being 
finalised. The Department of Energy and 
PEMC formed a joint steering committee to 
formulate its framework and rules and to 
set it up as a sub-market of the Wholesale 
Electricity Spot Market (Department Order 
DO 2010-06-0012). 
• Feed-in Tariff. Applicable only to solar, wind, 
biomass and run-of river hydropower, the FiT 
guarantees fixed tariffs for not less than 12 
years for these resources (Section 7, Renewable 
Energy Act). The FiT rates proposed by the NREB 
for the capacity allocations were approved by 
the ERC in 2012 (ERC Resolution No. 10, Series 
of 2012). The rate for wind projects was cut in 
October 2015 to PHP 7.40/kWh for the additional 
installation target of 200 MW.
• Renewable energy power plants are deemed 
eligible for FiTs once a Certificate of Compliance 
has been issued by the ERC. Own-use generating 
plants, and renewable energy plants operating 
commercially before the establishment of the 
FiT, were not eligible under this scheme. Inclusion 
was made on a first-come first-serve basis 
until the capacity allocations had been filled. 
Payments are charged to all electricity end-users 
as a uniform fee entitled a FiT-Allowance (FiTAll). This covers the FiT payments to renewable 
energy power generators. As the designated 
fund administrator for FiT-All, TRANSCO 
disburses the appropriate FiT payments to the 
corresponding renewable energy generator 
(ERC Resolution series No 16, 2010).
o Solar and wind power associations requested 
an increase in their cap allocations even 
before the FiT system was introduced. In 
2015, a large volume of solar energy projects 
in progress coincided with a looming power 
supply crisis caused by the El Niño effect, 
which can reduce hydropower generation. 
The Department of Energy thus increased 
the FiT installation targets for solar from 
50 MW to 500 MW (Department of Energy 
Certification, April 2014). Increasing the solar 
capacity allocation is expected to encourage 
more solar power plant development, helping 
alleviate power supply deficiency. The ERC 
approved the solar FiT rate of PHP 8.69/kWh 
(ERC Resolution series No. 06, 2015) for the 
additional solar installation target.
o The Department of Energy increased the 
capacity allocations for wind power plants to 
400 MW (Department of Energy Certification, 
April 2015) since the wind FiT had already 
been oversubscribed. The ERC accordingly 
approved a FiT rate of PHP 7.40/kWh 
(ERC Resolution series No. 14, 2015) for the 
additional increase. The table below shows the 
number of eligible FiT projects and their total 
installed capacities under the FiT scheme.Table 5. Eligible FiT projects, January 2015
Capacity 
allocation/ 
installation target 
(MW)
Number of 
eligible projects
Total approved 
FiT capacities
Subscribed 
allocation (%)
Biomass 250 5 21.651 6%
Hydropower 250 3 12.60 5%
Solar 500 1 22 4%
Wind 200 3 249.9 124%
Source: Philippine Department of Energy, January 2015
• Green Energy Option. The Green Energy Option 
scheme provides the end-users with the option 
to choose renewable energy resources as their 
sources of energy. Once the Department of 
Energy has ascertained its technical viability, 
end-users may directly contract from renewable 
energy facilities their energy requirements 
distributed through their respective distribution 
utilities (Section 9, Rules and Regulations 
Implementing Republic Act No. 9513). 
o The rules and mechanics of the Green Energy 
Option are being finalised by the Department 
of Energy with inputs from the NREB and 
must be approved by the ERC before it can 
be implemented.
• Net-metering. “Net-metering is a consumerbased renewable energy incentive scheme 
wherein electric power generated by an enduser from an eligible on-site Renewable Energy 
generating facility and delivered to the local 
distribution grid may be used to offset electric 
energy provided by the DU [distribution utility] 
to the end-user during the applicable period” 
(Section 7, Rules and Regulations Implementing 
Republic Act No. 9513). This is limited to 
small capacity generation not greater than 
100 kW. The distribution utility is entitled to 
any renewable energy certificate resulting from 
net-metering agreements with its customers 
that it may use to comply with the RPS 
requirements. 
o The ERC adopted the rules enabling the netmetering programme for renewable energy 
on 27 May 2013 (Resolution No. 9, Series 
of 2013) and implemented them by July 
2013. Thus, net-metering is the first policy 
mechanism to be implemented under the 
Renewable Energy Act.
o The private distribution utilities Meralco, 
VECO and Davao Light have already accepted 
and entered net-metering agreements with 
some of their power generation consumers. 
o A net-metering guidebook was developed 
by GIZ to assist interested electricity endusers to enter into net-metering agreements 
with their distribution utilities (www.doe.gov.
ph/netmeteringguide/).REFERENCES
German International Cooperation Agency (Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit) (GIZ) (2012), 
ASEAN Guideline on Off-grid Rural Electrification Approaches, GIZ, published under GIZ Renewable Energy 
Support Program (RESP), Jakarta, Indonesia
Somani, S. et al. (2013), The Energy Report, Philippines: Growth and Opportunities in the Philippine Electric 
Power Sector, 2013-2014 edition, KPMG Global Energy Institute, Manila, Philippines.
Asian Power (2013), “Country Report: Philippines”, Charlton Media Group, Singapore viewed 27 April, 2014, 
available at http://asian-power.com/sites/default/files/asianpower/print/APApr_2013_lores%206.pdf. 
Philippine Department of Energy (2012), 21st EPIRA Implementation Status Report,(Period Covering May 
2012 to October 2012), available at www.doe.gov.ph/sites/default/files/pdf/electric_power/power_industry_
reforms/21st_epira_status_report.pdf. 
Foley, G. and Logarta Jr., J. (2007), Chapter 3: Power and Politics in the Philippines, in the book titled” the 
Challenge of Rural Electrification: Strategies for Developing Countries”, edited by Douglas F. Barnes, Earthscan, 
New York
Philippine Department of Energy (2004), Department Circular No. DC 2004-01-001 Prescribing The Rules 
and Procedures for Private Sector Participation in Existing NPC-SPUG Areas Pursuant to Rule 13 off the 
Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Electric Power Industry Reform Act o 2001 (EPIRA-IRR), available 
at: www.doe.gov.ph/department-circular-no-2004-01-001
Philippine Department of Energy (2012a), 2012-2016 Missionary Electrification Development Plan (2012 MEDP), 
available at: www.doe.gov.ph/2012-2016-MEDP
Rural Power Project (2014), Information Materials: Rural Power Development-Empowering Rural Communities 
through Access to Sustainable Energy, Department of Energy, Manila, Philippines, viewed 18 March, 2014, (www.
doe.gov.ph/microsites/rpp/infomats%20into%202.htm). 
Alliance for Mindanao Off-grid Rural Electrification (2014), “Making Lives Brighter in Rural Communities”, 
retrieved 11 March, 2014, Mindanao, the Philippines (http://amore.org.ph/what-we-do/making-lives-brighter).
World Bank (2012), “Implementation Status & Results, Philippines Rural Power Project (P066397)”, viewed 18 
March, 2014 (www.worldbank.org/projects/P066397/rural-power-project?lang=en). 
National Electrification Administration (2015), Status of Energization,
National Power Corporation Small Power Utilities Group (NPC-SPUG) (2015), NPC-SPUG Electricity Rate, 
available online at www.napocor.gov.ph/index.php/2013-09-13-01-23-51/spug-rates. 
Department of Energy (2012), 2012-2017 Missionary Electrification Development Plan (MEDP), Department of 
Energy, Manila, Philippines.
Bertani, R. (2015), “Geothermal Power Generation in the World 2010-2014”, updated report, Proceedings of the 
World Geothermal Congress 2015, Melbourne, Australia, 19-25 April 2015, available at https://pangea.stanford.Elliot, D., et al. (2001), Wind Energy Resource Atlas of the Philippines, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 
Golden, CO, US.
De Guzman, R. (2014), “Biomass Resource Assessment for Selected Sites in Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao”, 
Powerpoint presentation, Department of Energy Renewable Energy Management Bureau,
Ragudo, T. (2011), Status of Adoption of UPLB Flatbed Dryer, International Society for Southeast Asian 
Agricultural Science, Los Baños, the Philippines
International Energy Agency (2015), World Energy Outlook 2015, OECD/IEA, Paris, France. http://www.
worldenergyoutlook.org/weo2015/
Department of Energy (2012), Philippine Energy Plan 2012-2030, Department of Energy, Manila, Philippines, 
available at https://www.doe.gov.ph/pep/philippine-energy-plan-2012-2030
GIZ (2013), Administrative Procedures: Rules and Processes for On-grid PV Project Development in the 
Philippines, developed by Eslareon, available at www.giz.de/fachexpertise/downloads/giz2013-enadministrative-procedures-philippines-on-grid.pdf. 
Milo Sjardin, M. K. (2013), “Renewable Energy in the Philippines: Financial Flows and Barriers for Investment”, 
presentation made during the interim workshop for the Analysis and Investment for Low-Emission Growth 
(AILEG) Project for the Philippine Government, Manila, Philippines. 
Department of Energy (2014), Installation Target of Solar Energy Generation Under the Feed-In-Tariff System, 
Department of Energy Certification, Manila, Philippines.
Department of Energy (2015), Installation Target of Wind Energy Generation Under the Feed-In-Tariff (FiT) 
System, Department of Energy Certification, Manila, Philippines.
NREL, 2015. Philippines Geospacial Toolkit. Available online at https://maps.nrel.gov/gst-philippines/#/?aL=p
U2Lqp%255Bv%255D%3Dt%26pU2Lqp%255Bd%255D%3D1&bL=groad&cE=0&lR=0&mC=15.580710739162123
%2C121.651611328125&zL=7 
NREL, 2014. Philippines Wind Resource Maps and Data, available online at www.nrel.gov/international/ra_
philippines.html. 