File Name: PHL-NEEP-2017-EN
Year: 2017
Country Name: Philippines
Country Code: PHL
Category: NEEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2017
Start Year: 2017
End Year: 2040
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Energy 
Efficiency and 
Conservation
Roadmap
Philippines
2017-2040The Philippines
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Roadmap 
2017-2040
Disclaimer
This report may be reproduced in whole or in part and in 
any form for educational or non-profit purposes without 
special permission from the copyright holders, provided 
acknowledgement of the source is made. We would appreciate 
receiving a copy of any publication that uses this publication as 
a source. No use of this publication may be made for resale or 
for any other commercial purpose whatsoever without prior, 
individual permission in writing.
This document was developed with the assistance of the 
European Union under the SWITCH Policy Support Component 
Philippines. The contents of this publication are the sole 
responsibility of the authors and implementing consortium and 
can in no way be taken to reflect the views of the European 
Union.
The SWITCH Policy Support Component Philippines is part of 
the EU SWITCH-Asia Programme. EU SWITCH-Asia is the largest 
programme in Asia focussing on sustainable consumption 
and production (SCP) as an approach to development. The 
programme promotes economic prosperity and poverty 
reduction in Asia by encouraging a sustainable approach to 
growth with positive environmental and social impacts.
The EU SWITCH-Asia Programme:
http://www.switch-asia.eu
Developed with the support 
of the European Union 
SWITCH-Asia Programme
Published by
Republic of the Philippines
Department of Energy
Energy Center
Rizal Drive, Bonifacio Global City, 
Taguig City, 1632, Metro Manila
Philippines
www.doe.gov.ph
Copyright © 2017 
Department of Energy, Philippines
ENERGY UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT BUREAU
Authors
Mr Mark Lister (Technical Expert)
Ms Maria Balamiento and Mr Alex Arter (Energy advisors)
ECCI (Graphics and layout)
Dr Channa Gunawardena (Team Leader)
Dr Rona Chandran (Editor)Contents
PLANNING: BACKGROUND 
 Introduction
 Review of existing energy efficiency and conservation policies, targets and objectives 
 National and international policy cohesion 
 Policy instruments
EMBARK: TOWARDS AN ENERGY EFFICIENCY PHILIPPINES
 Intendment
 Overview and milestones
 Monitoring progress
1
2
LIST OF ACRONYMS
FOREWORD
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
2.1
2.2
2.3
LIST OF FIGURES
1 Roadmap development process
2 Philippine government strategies and priorities for energy efficiency
3 Types of policy instruments
4 Indicative energy efficiency targets
5 Overview of Energy Efficiency & Conservation Roadmap for the Philippines, 2017-2040
FIGURE
6
8
10
11
12
14
23
6
9
11
13
14
2
3
4
5List of Acronyms
AEMAS
APEC
ASEAN
COP
DOE
DOTC
DOTr
DPWH
DSM
DTI-BPS
EE
EE&C
EUMB
ESCO
I-O
IEA
LGU
LGUs
M&E
MEPS
NAMAs
NEECP
NGO
OVI
PEEP
PIEEP
RBM
SDG
UNIDO
VAC
ASEAN Energy Management Scheme 
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Conference of Parties
Department of Energy 
Department of Transportation and Communications
Department of Transportation 
Department of Public Works and Highways
Demand Side Management
Department of Trade Industry-Bureau of Product Standards 
Energy Efficiency
Energy Efficiency & Conservation
Energy Utilization Management Bureau
Energy Service Companies 
input-output 
The International Energy Agency 
Local Government Unit
Local Government Units 
Monitoring and Evaluation
Minimum Energy Performance Standards 
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions 
National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Program 
Non-Governmental Organization
Objectively Verifiable Indicators
Philippine Energy Efficiency Project 
Philippine Industrial Energy Efficiency Project 
Results Based Management
Sustainable Development Goals
United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
Ventilation, air-conditioning and coolingForeword
Unfortunately it has been brought to global 
attention that most economies are culpable of 
overzealous energy consumption in the pursuit 
of modernization and development. Therefore, to 
play its part as a global entity, the Philippines places 
great priority to reverse and reduce excessive 
energy consumption by strategic and pragmatic 
approaches towards human development and 
green growth to ultimately ensure Philippines is 
a nation that is in harmony with the environment 
and nature. 
We shoulder the shared responsibility of ensuring our 
planet remains inhabitable and safe. This is a collective 
obligation that every nation plays an indispensable role. 
The Philippines Energy Efficiency Roadmap 
2017-2040 is a compact yet comprehensive 
document that we strongly believe will steer us 
towards achieving our mission to improve the 
quality of life of the Filipino by formulating and 
implementing policies and programs to ensure 
sustainable, stable, secure, sufficient, accessible 
and reasonably-priced energy. It calls upon us to 
view and plan development and the accompanying 
processes through more informed and 
responsible perspectives. The commencement of 
this document is to corroborate and strengthen 
the various ongoing initiatives in the Philippines 
to ensure that collectively as a nation we are able 
to achieve our goals towards sustainable growth 
for the well-being of the present and future 
generations to come.Acknowledgements
The Philippines has always been open and 
receptive towards collaborative projects with the 
best interest of the Filipino people, the nation 
and global agendas. The EU SWITCH-Asia Policy 
Support Component has provided the platform for 
officials, experts, academics and consultants the 
opportunity to deliberate and discuss pertinent 
issues and the way forward to ensure sustainable 
consumption and production is incorporated into 
national development plans. The whole program 
has been a dynamic process than has managed 
to bring together various stakeholders to share, 
discuss and plan towards a common goal. This 
exercise will also help to avoid unnecessary 
duplication and to reduce less effective silo 
initiatives which in turn will encourage prudent 
financial management and increase efficiency. 
We are appreciative to be part of the 
SWITCH-Asia Program which is the largest 
EU Program on Sustainable Consumption 
and Production (SCP) in Asia. 
We acknowledge the multi-faceted challenges 
faced in completing the Philippines Energy 
Efficiency Road Map 2017-2040 and the endless 
dedication of many individuals. We would 
like to extend deepest gratitude on behalf of 
the Department of Energy, Philippines. Our 
appreciation goes out to the committed technical 
team; Dr. Channa Gunawardena the team leader, 
Mr. Mark Lister who served as a consultant, Mr. 
Alex Arter and Ms. Maria Balamiento the energy 
advisors, the design team of ECCI Corporation 
and Dr. Rona Chandran the editor. This initiative 
would not have been possible without the 
financial support by the European Union under 
the SWITCH-Asia Policy Support Component 
Philippines. 
Maraming Salamat PoExecutive Summary
The Philippines Energy Efficiency and Conservation 
Roadmap 2017 – 2040 provides a framework for 
building an energy-efficient nation and in making 
energy efficiency and conservation a way of life 
for all Filipinos. Energy efficiency will advance the 
country’s economic development and help ensure 
energy security, optimal energy pricing and 
sustainable energy systems. The development of 
this Roadmap commenced with a review of the 
energy demand context of the Philippines and its 
current energy efficiency programs. This review 
considered the effectiveness of current programs, 
identified gaps and unrealized opportunities 
based on international best practice.
A first version of the Roadmap was completed in 
2014. However, it has been deemed essential to 
revise the roadmap in 2016 prior to publishing. 
This Roadmap is a consolidated national level 
document of policy instruments to enhance 
energy efficiency in the Philippines for the period 
2017 to 2040. It integrates identified opportunities 
with existing energy efficiency policy instruments 
and strategies. The document also incorporates 
the priority goals of the current administration 
(2017-2022). 
 
The Philippines has dedicated programmatic activities 
to advance energy efficiency since 2004. Over the last 
decade there have been numerous energy efficiency 
policy initiatives by the Government; while these 
initiatives have been consistent and complimentary, 
room to narrow gaps and improve implementation and 
monitoring exists. 
The first part of this document sets the background 
to the integration process and the development of 
the road map. Policy targets, opportunity, priority 
areas and further considerations are discussed. 
The second part of the document embarks on 
the road map with introductory statements of 
objectives and targets. This is followed by short, 
medium and long term strategies to achieve the 
stated objectives.
The successful attainment of the goals and targets 
set is highly dependent on the corresponding 
and complementing sector-based action plans, 
which will detail the approach of implementing 
the recommendations of the roadmap, including 
allocating roles and responsibilities and financial 
resources.Planning: Background
The Philippines Energy Efficiency and Conservation Roadmap 2017-2040 (the Roadmap) is a detailed 
outline of the strategic plans and actions required to create a more energy-efficient Philippines 
across all sectors of economic activity. The road map was developed based on a pragmatic review 
of current state with respect to implementation and existing policies, targets and opportunities. 
Key stages involved in the development of the road map were:
1
Identification -
New Opportunities
Integration - Current Plans 
& New Opportunities
Analysis - Long Term Plans & Targets 
(documentation and consultation)
Evaluation - Execution & Targets 
Achieved
Review Foresight
1.1 IntroductionPhilippines Energy 
Efficiency and 
Conservation Roadmap
2017-2040
Action Point
Setting -Targets, Milestones
Plotting - Milestones
Ascertain - Enablers
Figure 1 Roadmap Development Process Review of existing energy efficiency 
policies, targets and objectives
Setting the scene 
Targets
The Philippine Government has emphasized on 
energy efficiency since 1975 via a wide range of 
statements of strategic intent on energy efficiency 
(Annex 1) and the Republic Act 7638 which was 
the basis for the formation of the Department of 
Energy (DOE). These statements have both built 
on and augmented the mandates given to the 
DOE and other bodies to pursue energy efficiency 
activities at various levels. 
The Philippine Government has emphasized on 
energy efficiency since 1975 via a wide range of
statements of strategic intent on energy 
efficiency (Annex 1) and the Republic Act 7638 
which was the basis for the formation of the 
Department of Energy (DOE). These statements 
have both built on and augmented the mandates 
given to the DOE and other bodies to pursue 
energy efficiency activities at various levels.
The Philippines has two long term statements 
on energy efficiency clearly documented in 
the National Energy Efficiency & Conservation 
Program (NEECP). These existing statements 
remain highly relevant and served as a concrete 
platform for this roadmap. 
In more recent times, the 2008 Philippine Energy 
Summit discussion on Energy Efficiency and 
Conservation resulted in the drafting of several 
major priority action plans. 
1.2 
To make energy 
efficiency and 
conservation (EE&C) 
a way of life.
OBJECTIVE
Judicious conservation 
and efficient utilization of 
energy resources through 
adoption of the cost-effective 
options toward the efficient 
use of energy to minimize 
environmental impact. 
POLICY 
NEECPFigure 2 Philippine Government strategies and 
priorities for energy efficiency 
Short Term
Medium Term
Long Term
Energy Savings by 2040 over 2005
Baselin
e
• Conduct Market Demand Scoping
• Advocate the legislation of the 
EE&C Bill
• Establish Cross Sectoral Energy 
Performance and Rating Systems
• Create business tool kit of ESCOs
• Create enabling 
mechanisms for 
private sector 
participation • Institutionalize 
EE&C 
Knowledge 
Management 
System
• Enhance 
Demand Side 
Management 
mechanisms
• Integrate 
EE&C in the 
learning and 
education 
systems
• Mainstream 
EE&C at LGU 
level
• Develop 
advanced 
EE&C R&D 
capacity
Measurable reduction in Energy Intensity &
Co
n
s
u
m
ptio
n
p
er ye
ar vs. Bus
ni ess
As
Usual
B(
AU)
Industry
Development
Sustaining
Strengthening
Government
Commercial
Residential
Transport
Industrial
• Collaborate with stakeholders for 
expanded financing models for EE&C 
Projects
• Intensify,information, Education & 
Communication (IEC) Campaign on 
EE&C Practices
• Integrate EE&C at LGU level
Strengthening policies, programs 
and institutional structures
Providing market signals
Mobilizing and rationalizing 
private sector participation
* This is a visual representation of the 
Government’s strategy under Philippine 
Energy Plan 2017-2040.
The original version of this is made 
available in page 25.National and international
policy cohesion
National policy cohesion
The Roadmap has aimed to align the Government’s 
cross-sectoral and long-term planning and 
strategy documents that have relevance to energy 
efficiency, including numerous transport strategies, 
industry strategies, the Philippine Development 
Plan and National Climate Change Action Plan, 
while still acknowledging the specific emphasis of 
each of these plans.
The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Peer 
Review of Energy Efficiency policies completed in 
2012 set out fifty-four recommendations for future 
energy efficiency action for the Philippines, which 
have been considered in the development of a 
revised Roadmap.
1.3 
International policy 
cohesion
ASEAN Plan of Action for Energy Cooperation 
2016-2025 (APAEC) This plan, endorsed by all 
ASEAN member states, aims to reduce energy 
intensity in ASEAN by 20% until 2020.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) in October 
2013 released a series of recommendations on 
how to unlock energy efficiency in buildings, 
appliances, transport and industry, as well as 
end-use applications such as lighting in Southeast 
Asia. It is mostly concerned with energy supply 
scenarios for the region. However it strongly 
acknowledges that energy savings can be a very 
important and cost-effective source of additional 
energy “supply” for the region and also deliver 
substantial economic gains. The Roadmap is 
consistent with this.
Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) The Roadmap is consistent 
with the SDGs especially with Goal 
7 which sets to ensure universal 
access to affordable, reliable and modern energy 
services and expand infrastructure and to upgrade 
technology for supplying modern and sustainable 
energy services for all in developing countries, 
in accordance with their respective programs of 
support by 2030.
Conference of Parties (COP) climate 
change negotiations: The Roadmap 
supports the Philippines position at 
the COP21 and COP22 climate change 
negotiations.
Secretary Emmanuel M. de Guzman, Vice chair of 
the Climate Change Commission and head of the 
Philippine delegation to COP 21 (Paris, 2015) stated: 
”Our Paris Agreement may not be as perfect as we 
wished it to be, but it is essentially an acceptable 
accord. We can build on it and make it better over 
time. We must now focus on its implementation 
and on the compliance procedures and will 
engage in the process.” 
Assistant Secretary Evelyn Cruzada, Office of 
the Philippine Cabinet Secretary, Republic of the 
Philippines declared the Philippines position for 
COP 22 (Marrakesh, 2016): “In essence adaptation, 
mitigation, including economic growth do not have 
to be separate activities or choices. These objectives 
can all be achieved given the right approach.”
The Roadmap supports the Philippines 
commitments at COP21 and COP22 by providing a 
consistent and holistic approach for implementing 
energy efficiency measures in the short, medium 
and long term. These measures support 
economic development and competitiveness by 
promoting energy efficiency and security across 
key economic sectors of the country.1.4 Policy instruments
How targets and milestones will be achieved
Policy instruments are tools that the government can use to effect desired changes. These changes 
should target the main players of the economy, namely the consumers and the producers (business). 
Key policy instruments which can support the implementation of Energy Efficiency (EE) strategies are 
depicted in figure 3 below. 
Figure 3 Types of policy instruments
Regulatory instruments
Laws, regulations, administrative 
orders, circulars, guidelines
Regulation is the strongest intervention 
which a government can choose to influence 
the operating conditions of a market. Regulatory 
instruments are the most commonly used policy 
instruments in modern economies. They are 
mandatory by nature and can influence positively 
the behavior of consumers and producers.
Economic instruments
Loans, taxes, incentives, subsidies, 
grants, awards, commercial funding
A range of economic instruments 
need to be harnessed to increase energy efficiency 
implementation. Alignment of economic signals 
with desired outcomes, including elimination of 
subsidies and cross-subsidies, or the creation of 
pricing incentives, sends clear signals to provide 
incentives for energy efficiency. It is critical to 
assess if the desired behavior continues once 
the economic instrument is removed. Economic 
instruments deploy their maximum effectiveness 
often in tandem with regulatory instruments.
Hybrid instruments
Pilot projects, programs
Hybrid instruments focus on activities 
such as projects or pilots with a fixed 
time period. They sometimes combine functions 
of two or more instruments typically education, 
information and partnership. 
Information instruments
Information resources, communication 
campaigns, dissemination platforms, 
public information activities
Public awareness requires effective communication 
campaigns. Communication needs collaboration 
between the Government as the main source of 
information in cooperation with non-government 
stakeholders and the private sector. To promote 
energy efficiency effectively content must be 
customized for specific target audiences and 
disseminated via effective channels. 
Partnership instruments
Networks, partnerships, platforms, 
stakeholder forum
Partnership instruments deal with 
creating working arrangements between a variety 
of stakeholders including within the Government 
and between the Government and other 
stakeholders such as industry, Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs), academia.
Education instruments
Curricula, guidelines, teacher training, 
school programs, industry training, 
capacity building 
Education is a critical instrument to accompany most 
energy efficiency initiatives. It can take numerous 
forms such as integration in secondary and tertiary 
education curricula, training of trainers programs and 
capacity building for government, industry and Energy 
Service Companies (ESCOs).Embark: Towards 
an Energy Efficiency 
Philippines
2
2.1 Intendment
2017 3.5%
80% 2040
The Roadmap provides a consistent 
and cohesive approach to guide 
the Philippines in its national 
energy efficiency approach. It aims 
to support the country’s economic 
development through efficiency 
gains and ensure energy security 
through a 3% reduction in energy 
intensity across key economic 
sectors. 
Annual 
Growth 
Rate
Energy demand is forecast to grow 
by 80% between 2017 and 2040, at 
an average annual rate of 3.5%. This 
will be driven by population growth of 
approximately 32% over this period. 
Transport, buildings and industry will 
be the dominant energy use sectors.
Energy 
DemandImplied annual % savings 
(total savings by 2040)
Annual energy saved 
by 2040 (KTOE)
Economy-wide improvement 
in energy intensity 3%
* This level of efficiency improvement is assumed through endogenous technology advancement; no initiatives are proposed 
for the agricultural sector given its small percentage share of national energy use.
4,500
3,000
1,000
1,200
300
10,000
1.9%
1.3%
1.2%
1.9%
0.9%
1.6%
(25%)
(15%)
(20%)
(25%)
(10%)
(24%)
Transport
Industry
Residential
Commercial
Agriculture
Total
Indicative energy efficiency targets
Figure 42.2 Overview and milestones
The diagram below presents 
the framework of the 
Philippines Energy Efficiency 
and Conservation Roadmap, 
2017- 2040. The framework, 
which consists of drivers and 
sectoral strategies, builds on 
the Philippine Government 
strategies and priorities for 
energy efficiency.
• Minimum Fuel Efficiency Ratings developed 
• Risk management on vehicle conversion, 
e-vehicle programs
• Re-formulated coordination mechanisms
• F
• P
• D
Sectoral
Strategies Short Term (2017-20)
• Develop sectoral programs for EE in energy 
intensive industries
• Minimum Energy Performance (MEP) for motors, 
and other industrial devices
• Reporting by designated energy consumers
• U
• Im
• R
• E
d
• Minimum Energy Performance for appliances
• Building envelope measures – cool roofs and 
insulation
• D
p
• S
• Reformulate group to oversee EE measures in 
Building Code
• Retro-commissioning program for existing buildings
• Benchmarking and ratings for building information 
& reporting 
• E
b
• E
• Support passage of Enercon Bill
• Establish EE database, data collection regime, 
M&E framework
• Stronger coordination with local government and 
private sector
• Information & education campaigns
• N
s
• E
• E
Roadmap Objectives:
To support the country’s economic development through effi
Drivers
• Sending market signals to provide incentives for EE
• Strengthening existing policy, advocacy, programs and in
Cross-Sectoral
Commercial
Buildings
Transport
Residential
Buildings
Industry
Figure 5• Financial incentives for EE through vehicle taxes
• Promotion of key vehicle technologies
• Driver education and fleet management programs
• EE programs beyond road transport (passenger 
and cargo ships, aviation fuels)
• Reintegration of urban planning and transport 
energy use
• Congestion taxes
Medium Term (2021-30) Long Term (2031-40)
• Update MEP for industrial devices
• Implement demand side management programs 
• Review of energy pricing
• Enhanced reporting & management for 
designated energy consumers
• Review inward investment rules for EE to 
remove distortions
• Develop role of utilities as key implementation 
partners and information providers 
• Specific EE programs for low-income households
• Towards energy efficient housing precincts
• Inclusion of EE measures in residential 
Building Code
• EE measures for inclusion in national and regional 
building codes
• Enhance benchmarking and ratings 
• Incentive funds in place for EE, including 
private financiers
• Mandatory disclosure of commercial building 
energy intensity
• National strategy for efficiency in power supply 
sector
• Establish enforcement regimes
• Enhanced reporting and monitoring 
• Enhanced institutional arrangements
• Enhanced predecessor activities
nt through efficiency gains and ensure energy security with a reduction in energy intensity across key economic sectors.
s for EE
grams and institutional structures
• Harnessing private sector /partner finance
• Enabling innovation and new technologiesShort Term (2017-2020)
Closer support to manage identified risks in vehicle conversion and 
e-vehicle/e-trike programs – initiatives to target key energy use subsectors in transport such as tricycle and taxi fleets. 
Fuel Efficiency Ratings developed for light-duty vehicles, vans/ jeepneys, 
tricycles and heavy vehicles (trucks) – a long-stated objective, this could 
be a very effective mechanism for increasing the efficiency of vehicles in 
a given category, though its impact through new vehicles could take time.
Re-formulated coordination mechanisms with other agencies – reinstating 
talks and coordination bodies with Department of Trade Industry-Bureau 
of Product Standards (DTI-BPS), Department of Transportation (DOTr) and 
other agencies regarding road transport fuel efficiency will be important 
to implement and align with overall energy efficiency goals. 
Minimum Energy Performance for industrial devices – Minimum Energy 
Performance (MEP) will be introduced for electric motors and other 
industrial devices like pumps. Motors are the largest end-user of electricity 
in the world, accounting for nearly half of global electrical energy use (IEA, 
2011). The applications for these motors cover almost every stage of 
manufacturing and processing, and also extend to commercial buildings. 
MEP for motors shall incrementally be introduced in a time phased 
manner to keep pace with best practices internationally (e.g. IE2 and IE3).
Reporting by designated energy consumers – energy consumers utilizing 
energy above designated thresholds shall be mandated to provide annual 
reports on their energy consumption. These reports shall gradually be 
extended to include plans for energy efficiency measures.
Develop sectoral focus programs to facilitate EE in energy intensive 
industries (cement and construction, sugar) – specific programs for 
energy intensive industries need to be developed. Sugar processing and 
cement/construction are suggested as first priorities. This could include 
specific expertise and advice for industry on motors and drives, or on 
efficient cement production through dry kiln processes, and facilitation 
of industry-specific retrofit project development.
Transport Sector
Manufacturing 
SectorReformulate group to oversee EE measures in building code – inclusion 
of EE measures in the national building code is a key policy measure for 
better performance of commercial buildings. In the short term, working 
group discussions need to be re-invigorated between departments 
especially the DOE and Department of Public Works and Highways 
(DPWH).
Retro-commissioning program for existing buildings – this would involve 
supplementing existing training workshops and seminars with stronger 
information and guidance on building management systems, to ensure 
that available energy savings are realized without the need to allocate 
budget to building retrofit.
Benchmarking and ratings for building information and reporting – 
while not saving energy directly, this benchmarking activity is essential 
to future efforts to measure and monitor energy efficiency activity, and 
to specify thresholds for building performance in the Philippine Building 
Code. It is also a key contributor to processes such as the development 
of Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) by the Climate 
Change Commission.
MEP for appliances – continuation of the successful MEP approach 
on key energy-using residential appliances such as air-conditioners, 
refrigerators, televisions, washing machines.
Building envelope measures – along with ongoing rollout of lighting 
retrofit and efficiency programs that have been successful in the past 
such as the ‘cool roofs’ and insulation program by the Philippine Energy 
Efficiency Project (PEEP) in partnership with utilities could aim to redirect 
spending on household-level building material provision (insulation, 
roofing materials) to create improvements for better efficiency. It is 
noted that enforcement will be implemented through Local Government 
Units (LGUs), which requires building implementation capacity. 
Support passage of Enercon Bill – the bill sets out a number of crucial 
and enforceable measures to improve on data collection, information 
and consideration of larger scale EE opportunities. It also bestows 
authority on the DOE to pursue EE action more concertedly with other 
agencies and organizations. 
Commercial 
Buildings Sector
Residential 
Buildings SectorCross-Sectoral
Build stronger coordination with LGUs and private sector - given 
decentralized decision making processes in the country, it is important 
that stronger coordination is achieved with other levels of government and 
the private sector. This is especially true of the links with local government 
units/city governments, which have a pivotal stake in implementation of 
key initiatives like the e-trike project and the enforcement of EE measures 
in the building code. Relevant partnerships should be established with 
private sector via business organizations like Chambers of Commerce 
and industry associations.
Establish EE database, data collection regime and monitoring and 
evaluation framework – this is a high priority task that must materialize 
regardless of the status of the Enercon Bill and its passage. While the 
Bill sets up a data collection mechanism for large energy users, a more 
comprehensive data collection framework is required such as how the 
data will be assembled and used to monitor progress towards EE targets. 
Conduct information and education campaigns – information campaigns 
will develop specific messages for specific target groups (e.g. government, 
local government, private sector and consumers). Messages shall be 
disseminated via the most effective channels including ongoing schemes 
such as the power patrol, social media, mass media and localized events. 
Education campaigns shall focus on teacher training, integration of EE in 
curricular, school programs and stronger linkage with the environmental 
education program of the DENR. Medium Term (2021-2030)
Financial incentives for EE through taxes – a key means of enforcement of 
vehicle standards is through fiscal measures such as vehicle registration 
and other road taxes. Concessional payments/penalties can be linked to 
ownership of vehicles that meet or do not meet prescribed standards. In 
the long run, congestion taxes in dense urban areas will be explored.
Promotion of key vehicle technologies – overcoming the rolling resistance 
of tires and the operation of cooling and lighting systems can consume a 
significant proportion of transport fuel. Improved promotion and use of 
these non-engine vehicle components can be promoted to increase fuel 
efficiency.
Driver education and fleet management programs – driver education 
programs and larger-scale fleet management for larger corporates, 
government and freight companies are also cost effective measures for 
improving fuel efficiency.
Update MEP for industrial devices – update for existing industrial devices 
will be pursued in line with international best practices. Other devices 
such as fans, chillers, boilers, furnaces and industrial ventilation, airconditioning and cooling (VAC) systems will be added to the MEP regime 
in line with international trends and best available technology.
Facilitating example business models including ESCOs and finance 
– as part of capacity building efforts for ESCOs, the DOE can facilitate 
the execution and promotion of successful industrial case studies that 
demonstrate how energy services have been procured, and the financial 
model deployed.
Implement demand side management programs – international best 
practice links economic instruments to the use of energy by large 
consumers during times of peak demand. The Philippines has a 
sophisticated wholesale electricity market that would enable delivery 
of such programs. Lower tariff rates could be imposed during off peak 
hours and higher rates during peak hours to encourage less power usage 
during peak hours.
Transport Sector
Manufacturing 
SectorCommercial 
Buildings Sector
Residential 
Buildings Sector
Enhanced reporting and management by designated energy consumers 
– the regime of mandating energy consumers utilizing energy above 
designated thresholds to pro-vide reports and measures will be enhanced 
in line with best practices. Measures can include energy audits, integration 
of renewable energy generation by these consumers and awareness 
activities for the surrounding community. 
Review of energy pricing models – it is widely acknowledged that high 
electricity tariffs in the Philippines curtail the use of energy to some 
extent. However, through further pricing and tariff structure reform it 
may also be possible to promote efficiency for large users more directly.
EE measures included in national building code – the inclusion of 
efficiency measures in the national building code can create impact on 
a large scale, based on the existing Guidelines for Energy Conserving 
Designs of Buildings. There are many international reference points 
for the successful inclusion of energy efficiency measures into building 
codes. This will need a strong enforcement regime in order to be 
effective.
Promote benchmarking and building ratings – A number of initiatives are 
in place which have developed ratings for commercial buildings. Such 
ratings and minimum benchmarking measures need to be scaled up 
with a focus on mandating their use in the transactions of commercial 
buildings (sale and lease).
Develop role of utilities as key implementation partners and information 
providers – electric utilities and fuel providers are uniquely placed at 
the customer interface and can play an important role in information 
provision and energy efficiency awareness. Experience in other countries 
suggests that provision of energy usage information and targeted advice 
is a cost effective way to achieve a reduction in energy use. 
Specific EE programs for low-income households – consideration can be 
given to the types of measures that may be most beneficial and practical 
to low income households, in an effort to ensure relevance to the majority 
of the residential sector, and as a way of integrating the EE and poverty 
reduction objectives of government. Cross-Sectoral
National strategy for efficiency in power supply sector – energy 
consumed by the power supply industry is significant. A detailed strategy 
setting out cost-effective opportunities, priorities and expected savings 
is necessary to guide further actions.
Establish enforcement regimes – while the Philippines has established 
a range of efficiency standards for energy-using equipment and 
appliances, and plans to do so for vehicles and other equipment, it 
will be of increasing importance that compliance with the standards is 
enforced if projected efficiency gains are to be realized. 
Enhanced reporting and monitoring – Earlier work on data collection and 
M&E should be enhanced in the medium term with the development of 
improved indicator systems and reporting, including the dissemination 
of performance results to stakeholders.
Long Term (2031-2040)
EE programs beyond road transport (passenger and cargo ships, 
aviation fuels) – road transport is the focus of transport efficiency 
given its dominance, however substantial opportunities also exist in 
the longer term to address efficiency in air and sea transport.
Reintegration of urban planning and transport energy use – building 
on measures introduced to the building code, strengthened ties with 
LGUs and improved coordination mechanisms on EE across agencies, 
in the long term the Government must aim for EE to be fully and 
systematically considered in city planning processes.
Regulatory and economic instruments - such as congestion charges or 
emission taxes will be explored particularly for major urban areas like 
Metro Manila.
Review inward investment rules for EE to remove distortions – the DOE 
has stated an objective to ensure that new entrants and new investments 
in industrial plant in the Philippines uses best practice with regard to EE. 
In the longer term, it may be appropriate to examine whether certain 
industrial practices can be encouraged through agreements, restrictions 
and incentives negotiated with inward investors.
Transport Sector
Manufacturing 
SectorCommercial 
Buildings Sector
Residential 
Buildings Sector
Cross-Sectoral
Incentive funds in place for EE, including private financiers – in the long 
term, following capacity building for the ESCO sector and an increased 
ability for the commercial finance sector to take EE risk, government 
can facilitate the creation of a private sector fund or revolving fund that 
creates a funding pathway for building retrofits. 
Mandatory disclosure of building performance – efforts to increase existing 
building ratings penetration will enable a stronger regime of information 
requirements for commercial buildings, specifically a requirement to 
disclose building performance on the sale or lease of a building. This 
information sends an important signal to the market and experience 
has shown that it can drive uptake of efficient building practices and can 
create financial returns for EE buildings through differential rental rates.
Towards EE housing precincts – in the long term, there is scope to consider 
development of EE precincts at the barangay level or local energy supply 
cooperative level. This may allow for more sophisticated measures to 
support EE, such as group purchasing of EE equipment, on-bill financing 
models, and decentralized or on-site energy generation.
Inclusion of residential measures in building code – following on from 
the inclusion of EE measures for commercial buildings in the national 
building code, measures for residential housing can also be introduced. 
This is more difficult based on less stringent controls and enforcement 
for standard of residential housing in the country.
Enhanced institutional structure – The cross nature and scale of activities 
can justify the strengthening of the DOE to act as a focal point with a clear 
legislative mandate to lead and administer the EE activities of Government 
across all agencies. It is also noted that the Enercon Bill contains some 
provisions in this regard.2.3 Monitoring Progress
Data collection 
and management
The current National Energy Consumption Database requires 
strengthening. A more comprehensive data collection and management 
platform must consider:
• Identification of key data sets – both at a macroeconomic level and 
by target sector
• Identification of data sources (contributor organizations and bodies)
• Establishment of data collection protocols and responsibilities
• Consistency of data storage, including selection of an appropriate 
data management platform
• Ensuring data quality and checking/control procedures
• What resources will be needed at each stage of data management
• Identification of who will be responsible for data analysis, and 
against which parameters analysis will be applied
• Identification of to whom and how often results will be 
disseminated.
As a separate effort in establishing data management and commencement 
of reporting, it is desirable for the Philippines to undertake an Energy 
Intensity Study with the explicit aim of separating efficiency effects from 
the effect of changing economic composition when measuring energy 
intensity.
Appropriate M&E systems, processes and resources are an important 
prerequisite to ensure that activities supporting this Roadmap can be 
monitored and steered towards achieving their intended results and 
objectives. 
To this effect an M&E system will be established with the objectives to:
• Systematically assess performance of EE activities across relevant 
levels and at suitable time intervals
• Establish quantifiable Objectively Verifiable Indicators (OVIs) and 
targets at the result and activity levels
• Support decision making by DOE and planning of result areas, 
activities and specific subactivities
• Orient the implementation of EE programs towards a Results Based 
Management (RBM) approach as opposed to an activity driven 
approach
• Support performance assessment of EE as per government 
requirements, government ratings and in alignment with 
international donor best practices
Monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E)• Integrate monitoring and learning across policy instruments, 
programs and amongst implementing stakeholders
• Contribute to improved quality and management EE
The establishment of an M&E system would involve the following activities:
• The development of a M&E strategy including a M&E Framework and 
criteria
• Development of specific tools such as indicator systems, results 
frameworks and theory of change models to measure progress 
towards targets 
• Establish data gathering strategies as described in the previous 
section
• Conduct of baseline surveys, where baseline information is missing
• Gathering of M&E data to assess progress using tools established
• Establish systematic reporting procedures
• Outreach of results within DOE, other Government decision makers 
and broader stakeholders
• Learning processes to identify factors which determine performance 
and introduce improvements
• Follow up and corrective action as required which inform future 
work plans, programs and projects
The Roadmap proposes consolidated evaluation of progress to be 
reported publicly every 2 years, with the first report compiled by the end 
of 2018.
Reportingyear vs. Business As Usual (BAU)
Measurable reduction in Energy Intensity & Consumption per 
References
APEC Energy Working Group (2012), Peer Review on Energy Efficiency in the Philippines, 
First Draft Report, May 2012
APEC (2007), Sydney APEC Leaders’ Declaration on Climate Change, Energy Security and Clean 
Development, September 2007, accessed at http://www.apec.org/Meeting-Papers/LeadersDeclarations/2007/2007_aelm/aelm_climatechange.aspx 
IEA (2011), Energy-Efficiency Policy Opportunities for Electric Motor-Driven Systems
IEA (2013), Southeast Asia Energy Outlook, October 2013
IFAD (2013), ‘A Guide for Project M&E’, accessed at http://www.ifad.org/evaluation/guide/index.htm 
Philippine Government strategies and priorities for energy efficiency
• Conduct Market 
Demand Scoping
• Advocate the 
legislation of the 
EE&C Bill
• Establish Cross 
Sectoral Energy 
Performance and 
Rating Systems
• Create business tool 
kit of ESCOs
• Collaborate with 
stakeholders for 
expanded financing 
models for EE&C 
Projects
• Intensify,information, 
Education & 
Communication (IEC) 
Campaign on EE&C 
Practices
• Integrate EE&C at 
LGU level
• Create enabling 
mechanisms for 
private sector 
participation
• Enhance Demand 
Side Management 
mechanisms
• Integrate EE&C in 
the learning and 
education systems
• Mainstream EE&C at 
LGU level
• Institutionalize 
EE&C Knowledge 
Management 
System
• Develop advanced 
EE&C R&D 
capacity
Providing market signals
Strengthening policies, programs and institutional structures
Mobilizing and rationalizing private sector participation
Transport
Industrial
Commercial
Residential
Government
Industry
Development Strengthening sustaining
short term medium term long term Energy savings by 2040 
over 2oo5 baseline
* Original version of the representation on page 9Developed with the support 
of the European Union 