File Name: PLW-NEP-2010-EN
Year: 2010
Country Name: Palau
Country Code: PLW
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2010
Start Year: 2010
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

FOREWORD 4
INTRODUCTION 6
1.0 IMPROVED INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR ENERGY SECTOR MANAGEMENT 9
2.0 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND ENERGY CONSERVATION 13
3.0 RENEWABLE ENERGY 15
4.0 IMPORTED FUELS AND HYDROCARBONS 19
5.0 ELECTRIC POWER 21
ACRONYMS 24Palau, like the rest of the world, faces two major energy challenges. The first is to deliver clean, secure, affordable energy for all citizens of Palau while treating the 
environment responsibly. The second is to respond to the risks of climate change 
by adaptation to changes and by mitigation through reducing the greenhouse 
gases caused by the production and use of energy. In addition Palau faces a 
challenge that it shares with other small island countries, namely it’s extremely 
high dependence from imported fuels.
This National Energy Policy which has been developed in an inclusive and 
participatory process clearly sets out the government’s policy vision. It forms the 
basis for a strategic action plan which ensures that the policy vision becomes 
a reality. This policy should also provide guidance for a unified and integrated 
energy sector management and set forth the foundation for Palau’s energy future. 
The vision is for a reliable and resilient energy sector delivering Palau sustainable, 
low emissions energy services, by:
Providing clear direction on the future of Palau’s energy sector
Appropriate regulation to securely deliver energy services at competitive prices
Maximizing costeffective energy efficiency and renewable energy resources 
H.E. Johnson Toribiong
President of the Republic of Palau
Promoting environmentally sustainable energy technologies with the aim to substitute imported fossil fuels
Supporting consumers through the transition towards a new energy sector.
Adjustments have to be introduced at multiple policy levels to effectively promote clean, reliable, efficient and 
sustainable energy for all citizens of Palau. The National Energy Policy and its Strategic Action Plan will guide the 
public and private sectors of Palau in cooperation and our regional and international development partners to 
establish a sustainable energy sector. Through implementation of this policy Palau will become an international 
leader in creating a green and renewable energy society. 
 
 H.E. Johnson Toribiong
 President of the Republic of Palau 
 Date: This policy has been developed by a working group with representatives from the Office of the President; 
the Office of Environmental Response and Coordination 
(OERC); the Ministry of Finance; the Ministry of 
Natural Resources, Environment, and Tourism; a 
member of the Senate and a member of the House 
of the 8th OEK; The Ministry of Public Infrastructure, 
Industry and Commerce; Ministry of State; Palau Public 
Utilities Corporation (PPUC); members of the Oil and 
Gas Taskforce; The Bureau of Public Works; Palau 
Chamber of Commerce; the Palau Community Action 
Agency (PCAA); the National Development Bank of 
Palau (NDBP); Shell Palau; the European Union (EU); 
the United Nations Development Program (UNDP); 
the Palau Automated Land and Resource Information 
Systems Office (PALARIS); the Japan International 
Cooperative Agency (JICA); Palau Community College 
(PCC); and the Chamber of Commerce (CoC). 
This process began in April 2009 and was guided by 
an executive committee composed of members from 
of the President. This document has been refined in 
a series of consensus building workshops. Additionally, 
consecutive drafts have been circulated amongst the 
working group members for review and input. 
An energy sector review that was undertaken as an 
initial step in this project has shown that energy is a 
vital resource underpinning all aspects of our society 
and fundamentally influencing Palau’s environmental 
sustainability. Being almost 100 % dependent on 
imported energy, Palau is highly vulnerable to 
international energy market movements and price 
volatility. Palau’s energy security is not guaranteed and 
energy supply interruptions undermine economic growth 
and social development. Palau is a small country lacking 
significant economies of scale and has dispersed outer 
islands’ populations that are difficult to serve.
In addition, environmental vulnerability through climate 
change is significant. Extreme weather events and sea 
level rise pose serious threatsparticularly for the low
products can have long-term negative effects on the 
country’s fragile island ecosystems which at the same 
time provide the basis for economic development and 
prosperity of Palau’s citizens.
The development of renewable energy resources and 
energy efficiency has been limited by the availability 
of appropriate technology and insufficient institutional 
capacity. In addition there has been a lack of appropriate 
and innovative financing that supports a market driven 
development of local, renewable energy resources.
Addressing energy sector issues requires collaborative 
leadership, adequate institutional arrangements, 
common goals, political will, and a shared national 
vision. This vision has been outlined in the Medium 
Term Development Strategy which provides a general 
economic development framework for the Republic 
of Palau. This Energy policy is linked to government 
policies on economic development, sustainability, 
climate change; infrastructuretransportresource 
Around the world, there is a growing sense of urgency 
about the need to address the serious challenges of 
climate change. For Palau, there are four main climate 
change challenges. Palau needs to:
Prepare for, and adapt to, the impacts of changes 
in our physical environment, by responding to the 
risks and taking advantage of the opportunities they 
present
Control and reduce our own greenhouse gas 
emissions
Support international initiatives on greenhouse gas 
emissions, through implementation of the Kyoto 
Protocol and other climate change conventions
Achieve the objectives above at the lowest possible 
long-term cost.
Another challenge is security of energy supplySecurity and demand-side management can help ensure both
reliability and resilience. 
For a small economy such as Palau, some circumstances, 
however, are too costly to insure against. A trade-off 
has to be made between different price levels and 
different levels of security and reliability. Finding the 
right balance is an ongoing task involving government, 
producers and users of energy. The government believes 
a combination of competitive markets with backstop 
measures and effective regulation of suppliers is the 
best means of protecting the security of Palau’s energy 
supplies. The government believes the principles and 
initiatives set out in this document for the five key policy 
areas will lead Palau to a sustainable, low emissions 
energy system for generations to come. Making the right 
choices today will enable Palau to provide a sustainable 
energy supply for its future.
sector management
Policy Summary: Provide an Energy Administration 
with the authority and support required for effective 
and transparent implementation of the National Energy 
Policy and the related Strategic Action Plan.
Policy Details:
In order to create an adequate institutional framework 
an Energy Act to determine functions and authority 
required for effective Energy Administration will be 
developed and enforced. The Act will be based on 
the National Energy Policy and determine roles and 
responsibilities in the energy sector.
The Energy Administration will be located at an 
appropriate level in Government and be allocated with 
adequate human and financial resources to effectively 
ddiil liA 
for the development of skills and capacity necessary 
to review, update and implement the energy policy 
framework.
The creation of a National Energy Committee (NEC) 
will assist in the implementation of the National Energy 
Policy. The NEC will convene at least twice a year 
and issue a progress report on new initiatives and the 
status of energy projects and the financial status of the 
National Energy Policy at the end of each fiscal year.
The NEC will consist of representatives of appointed by
The Office of the President
The Senate
The House
The Chamber of Commerce
PPUCDevelop, regularly update and manage national 
energy database to support effective analysis and 
policy development.
Monitor and regulate energy matters such as 
operators’ licences, grid access codes, equipment 
standards, tariffs and import rules for energy 
equipment.
Full participation of the Head of the Energy 
Administration in oversight of PPUC as ex officio 
member of the PPUC board.
Provision of technical expertise to PPUC, the 
Government and the general public in accordance 
with the National Energy Policy and in line with 
international best practices.
Educate and continue creating public awareness 
about relevant energy issues related to the National 
Energy Policy.
in implementation and management of energy 
projects through dialogue and outsourcing of 
activities.
Support coordination of donor initiatives in the 
energy sector and ensure compatibility of donor 
funded projects with the National Energy Policy and 
its related Strategic Action Plan.
Scrutinize all unsolicited proposals for energy sector 
projects.
The Energy Administration will also ensure the 
continuous and active cooperation of Palau within 
the framework of energy initiatives within Micronesia, 
the wider Pacific region and globally. This will include 
initiatives under the Framework for action on Energy 
Security in the Pacific, the Green Energy Micronesia 
(GEM) initiative and various Climate Change initiatives 
in the UNFCCC framework including promotion of fast 
action to mitigate climate change in the near and long Policy: Recognizing that improving the efficiency of 
energy use has greater short term value on reducing 
consumption of fossil energy than any other action, 
taxes and policies will be revised to encourage the 
import and sale of appliances, vehicles and boats 
having the highest energy efficiency; develop energy 
efficiency standards for new buildings and renovations 
including homes, businesses and government premises. 
The policy target is set at a 30 % reduction in overall 
national energy consumption by 2020.
Policy Details:
Investment should occur in energy efficiency measures 
where this is cheaper than the long-term costs of building 
extra generation capacity, including environmental 
costs. It will therefore be ensured that the stock of 
more energy-efficient equipment within government, 
businesses, and private homes (e.g. refrigeration, air 
by purchasing energy efficient equipment. 
The government expects measurable and substantial 
improvement of energy efficiency by 2020, in at least 
80% of households, businesses and government 
buildings. To achieve this, innovative financing 
mechanisms and incentives through the banking sector 
for energy efficiency investments by households and 
businesses will be established and improved. To show 
technical options for energy efficiency measures in the 
housing sector all new and refurbished government 
buildings will incorporate energy-efficient designs such 
as shading and orientation of buildings to reduce 
heating of buildings and reflective roof paint and 
attic heat radiation barriers to reduce the need for air 
conditioning.
Ongoing activities such as the Palau Energy conditioners and washing machines. 
An import tax scheme will be developed and introduced 
that provides incentives for the importation of efficient 
equipment and discourages the import of inefficient 
appliances, vehicles and machinery. 
Oil, and products derived from oil, will remain an 
important source of transport energy for Palau for many 
years. Palau’s own oil and gas reserves have not been 
explored and it is unlikely that domestic fuel needs will be 
met by our own fossil resources in the foreseeable future. 
Thus, key areas for reducing fossil fuel consumption in the 
transport sector include: significantly increasing vehicle 
efficiency, using more efficient modes of transport, and 
travel demand management through smarter planning. 
This requires a fleet of energy-efficient vehicles that are 
well-maintained and are constantly improving. In order 
to monitor the energy profile of the transport system a 
database of all operational vehicles by class, make and 
fuel usage will be mandated. Practical guidelines will 
be established and enforced for the efficient use and 
The establishment of energy efficient public transport 
system for urban and rural areas with particular emphasis 
on reducing energy consumed commuting to the new 
Capitol facilities will be promoted and encouraged. Policy: Renewable energies have the potential to 
reduce dependency on imported fuels and to reduce 
the countrys vulnerability towards price shocks. 
Renewable energies will therefore be promoted so that 
such energy will provide a minimum of 20% of electrical 
energy generated in Palau the end of 2020. Promotion 
of renewable energy use will continue with the aim to 
completely substitute all fossil fuel use on the long term, 
reducing Palaus carbon footprint to a minimum.
Policy Details:
Investment in renewable energy is important to reduce 
the negative economic, social and environmental 
impacts of energy production and consumption 
in Palau. Currently, renewable energy contributes 
relatively little to the energy sector. All options for 
promoting renewable energy will be explored including 
net metering programs, feed-in tariffs and portfolio 
still be unacceptably high, compared to future benefits. 
Therefore, setting targets and regulating prices alone 
will be not sufficient if a green, renewable energy 
system is the long term goal. Concessionary finance 
and targeted subsidies may therefore be required for 
household investors and independent power producers.
Given that renewable electricity technologies have 
to compete with electricity tariffs, that are low in 
comparison to current generation cost for renewable 
energy, funding will be needed. Possible sources, both 
locally and internationally, will be identified. The extent 
to which these are utilised will determine the future mix 
of renewable energy in Palau.
In order to prepare a nationwide renewable energy 
promotion, the national potential for all renewable 
energy sources (biomass, hydro, ocean, solar, waste, analyse, plan, develop, implement and manage 
renewable energy systems will be improved through 
education, training and knowledge management.
In order to avoid disappointing performance of 
technologies it will be required that technologies for use 
in Palau be certified by the Palau Energy Administration. 
To qualify for promotion, technologies need to be 
commercially proven in tropical islands through 
installations of a similar type and size as those to be 
deployed in Palau. It will be mandated that proven 
renewable energy technologies be integrated in all 
outer island energy development by 2020.
Decentralized, renewable energy generation will 
be promoted through net metering and grid access 
legislation backed by the development of a list of eligible 
equipment and guidance for developers in terms of 
what types and sizes of projects can be accommodated 
in Palau’s small electricity system. Net metering will be 
introduced in such a way that the power utility PPUC 
In order to streamline administration for renewable energy 
investments a standard power purchase agreement for 
larger independent power producers will be developed. 
In order to protect the national interest, all unsolicited 
renewable energy proposals offered to government 
will be scrutinized by the Energy Administration (PEO). 
A standardization of renewable energy equipment will 
be developed. In order to facilitate co-operation a list 
of priority projects will be developed and presented 
to Palau’s development partners in order to maximize 
benefits of renewable energy investments for Palau.Policy: Recognizing the cost of total national dependence 
on imported petroleum fuels, international standards will 
be developed and enforced for any storage, handling 
and transport of petroleum products. Opportunities and 
mechanisms for obtaining competitive fuel prices will 
be pursued. Further, the Government will ensure that 
there are fair wholesale and retail fuel prices and it will 
require suppliers to regularly provide data on imports 
and sales by product. A high priority will be given on 
developing the legal framework and capacity to ensure 
that Palau’s benefits from hydrocarbon exploration and 
production are maximized.
Policy Details:
A framework and road map to promote the development 
of an effective hydrocarbon sector through continuous 
cooperation with the World Bank will be produced. 
In line with the recommendations of the Oil and Gas 
Tk Fthitittil t ftht 
needs will be established. A hydrocarbon code, model 
agreements, and related environmental, operational, 
and tax regulations, taking into account any existing or 
proposed legislation will also be prepared. 
PPUC has a large tank farm for storage of petroleum 
products. This asset is currently only used to a minor 
extent and some tanks require maintenance and 
repair to become operational again. A strategy will be 
developed to maximize value of PPUC’s unused storage 
capacity to lessen cost of maintenance and pass the 
savings to consumers.
Safe and environmentally sound storage and distribution 
of petroleum products including effective spill and 
containment response procedures and required product 
industry standards and safety measures will be mandated 
and maintained all the time.and monitoring of petroleum supply contracts, including 
likely costs and benefits of participation in the proposed 
PIFS bulk fuel purchase scheme will be arranged. To 
obtain competitive fuel prices, the value of other models 
of regional cooperation in joint procurement will be 
considered.
In close coordination with the activities aiming to 
establish an institutional framework for oil and gas 
exploration expertise will be developed within the 
government as appropriate to tender, negotiate and 
monitor petroleum supply contracts.
In order to protect consumers of LPG/propane a pricing 
study will be arranged to determine benefits and costs 
of a mechanism to establish allowable wholesale and 
retail price margins, and develop clear pricing and 
price monitoring system for Koror, Babeldaob and outer 
islands. In addition, proper technical regulations shall 
be implemented to ensure the safe operation of all LPG/
propane distributors
Policy: Laws and regulations will be introduced to 
ensure security, reliability and efficiency of electricity 
supply. PPUC will be allowed to recover all cost 
associated with the supply of electricity. Private sector 
participation in electricity supply will be encouraged 
through a transparent enabling framework. 
Policy Details:
It is in Palau’s longer-term economic and environmental 
interests to meet increases in electricity demand through 
an economic mix of renewable energy sources that will 
meet our security objectives. For the foreseeable future, 
a secure electricity supply through fossil fuel based 
generation and an increased use of new renewable 
sources will be maintained. Some initiatives to improve 
the security of Palau’s electricity system would cost 
more, such as paying for additional levels of reserve 
generation to be available for peak demand or for 
hdld tf tThtill 
PPUC will be enabled to move towards standardization 
of its generation and distribution equipment and reliably 
supply electricity at least cost through development 
and implementation of an integrated power sector 
development plan. This plan will also optimize new 
investment with respect to cost for energy security and 
benefits of uninterrupted supply.
Opportunities for PPUC to diversify its range of services 
beyond electricity supply will be explored. PPUC could 
become an energy service company that not only 
provides electricity but also other energy forms such 
as LPG for cooking and other uses. Financing services 
for renewable energy equipment such as solar water 
heaters and decentralized power generation are 
possibilities that are being explored in cooperation with 
the National Development Bank of Palau.
At tPPUC’liifitlhihthlevel of skills necessary to effectively operate, maintain 
and repair its technical equipments.
PPUC will be allowed to recover the total costs of supply 
in all island systems by establishing a tariff structure with 
a lifeline tariff that benefits low-income and outlying state 
consumers without adversely affecting PPUC income. 
Alternatives to diesel fuel for power generation with a 
focus on outer island supply in order to reduce PPUC’s 
financial losses in these systems will be developed where 
economically sound.
In order to ensure revenue collection in a fair and 
equitable way all PPUC customers will be converted to 
pre-paid metering. PPUC will hand over cost savings 
achieved through the pre-paid metering program to the 
consumers.
In order to promote decentralized renewable energy 
generation within the PPUC system, appropriate 
technical standards and regulations for private electricity 
Private sector participation options in electricity supply 
will be carefully studied and encouraged whenever 
appropriate and economically sound. AC Alternating Current
ACP African, Caribbean, Pacific countries 
(associated with EU)
ADB Asian Development Bank
ADO Automotive diesel oil
BPW Bureau of Public Works
CIF Cost+insurance+freight
COFA Compact of Free Association
CPI Consumer Price Index
CROP Council of Regional Organisations of the 
Pacific
CTF Compact Trust Fund
DC Direct Current
DSM Demand Side Management
EDF European Development Fund
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
EIRR Economic Internal Rate of Return
ENSO El Niño/El Niña oceanic climate cycle
EQPB Environmental Quality Protection Board
EU European Union
FY Fiscal Year
FSM Federated States of Micronesia
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEF Global Environment Facility
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GEM Green Energy Micronesia
GWh Giga watt hours
IFC International Financial Center
IPP Independent Power Producer
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency
kV Kilo-Volts (thousands of volts)
kVA Kilo-Volt-Amperes (Thousands of Volt Amperes of power)
kW Kilo-Watt (Thousands of Watts of power)
kWh Kilo-Watt-Hour (Thousands of Watt Hours 
of energy)
kWp Kilo-Watts peak power (at standard conditions) from PV panels 
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MNRET Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment 
and Tourism
MPIIC Ministry of Public Infrastructure, Industries 
and Commerce
MDG Millennium Development Goals
MoE Ministry of Education
MOPS Mean of Platts Singapore Published Price
MoS Ministry of State
MSC Micronesian Shipping Commission
NEP National Energy Plan
NEC National Energy Committee
NDBP National Development Bank of Palau
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
OEK Olbiil Era Kelulau (legislature)
OERC Office of Environmental Response and 
Coordination
O GTF Oil & Gas Taskforce
OP Office of the President
OPS Office of Planning & Statistics
PALARIS Palau Automated Land and Resource 
Information Systems OfficePCAA Palau Community Action Agency
PEO Palau Energy Office
PHA Palau Housing Authority
PIC Pacific Island Country
PICTA Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement
PIEPSAP Pacific Islands Energy Policies and Strategic 
Action Planning
PIFS Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat
PPA Power Purchase Agreement
PPUC Palau Public Utilities Corporation
PV Photovoltaic
RMI Republic of the Marshall Islands
ROP Republic of Palau
SEDREA Social and Economic Development through 
Renewable Energy Applications
SPPA Small Power Purchase Agreement
USDA United States Department of Agriculture
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
Printing & type-setting of this document is funded by North-REP
Palau Energy Office
P.O.Box 1471
Koror, Palau 
96940
Tel: (680) 488-1281
Fax: (680) 488-2536
Ministry of Public Infrastructure, 
Industries & Commerce
P.O. Box 1471
Melekeok, Palau
96940
Tel: (680) 767-2111
Fax: (680) 767-3207
Contact details