File Name: PLW-NSAPES-2009-EN
Year: 2009
Country Name: Palau
Country Code: PLW
Category: NSAPES
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2009
Start Year: 2009
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Republic of Palau
Strategic Action Plan Energy Sector
A Framework for the Implementation of Palau’s National Energy Policy
Palau Energy Policy Development Working Group
Koror, Republic of Palau
October 2009LIST OF ACRONYMS .....................................................................................3
1.0 FOREWORD..........................................................................................5
2.0 INTRODUCTION....................................................................................6
2.1 Background................................................................................................................................6
2.2 Palau’s Energy Sector ...............................................................................................................7
3.0 POLICY AND STRATEGIC PLAN.........................................................9
3.1 Targets........................................................................................................................................9
3.2 Relation between Policy and Strategic Action Plan................................................................9
3.3 Project Development ...............................................................................................................10
4.0 PLANNING ASSUMPTIONS...............................................................11
4.1 Institutional Arrangements ....................................................................................................11
4.2 Energy Demand Forecast........................................................................................................11
4.3 Political Risk ............................................................................................................................12
4.4 Technological Development....................................................................................................13
4.5 Climate Change .......................................................................................................................14
4.6 Continued Availability of Funding from Development Partners........................................14
4.7 Monitoring and Evaluation ....................................................................................................14
5.0 STRATEGIES AND ACTIONS ............................................................15
5.1 Improved Institutional Arrangements for Energy Sector Management ............................15
5.2 Energy Efficiency and Energy Conservation........................................................................19
5.3 Renewable Energy...................................................................................................................22
5.4 Imported Fuels and Hydrocarbons........................................................................................25
5.5 Electric Power..........................................................................................................................28
6.0 PROJECT PIPELINE...........................................................................316.1 Energy Conservation...............................................................................................................32
6.2 Renewable Energies ................................................................................................................35
6.3 Electric Power..........................................................................................................................45
List of Acronyms
AC Alternating Current
ACP African, Caribbean, Pacific countries (associated with EU)
ADB Asian Development Bank
ADO Automotive diesel oil
BPW Bureau of Public Works
CIF Cost+insurance+freight
COFA Compact of Free Association
CPI Consumer Price Index
CROP Council of Regional Organisations of the Pacific
CTF Compact Trust Fund
DC Direct Current
DSM Demand Side Management
EDF European Development Fund
EEZ Exclusive Economic Zone
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
EIRR Economic Internal Rate of Return
ENSO El Niño/El Niña oceanic climate cycle
EQPB Environmental Quality Protection Board
EU European Union
FY Fiscal Year
FSM Federated States of Micronesia
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEF Global Environment Facility
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GEM Green Energy Micronesia
GWh Giga watt hours
IFC International Financial Center
IPP Independent Power ProducerIUCN International Union for the Conservation of Nature
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency
kV Kilo-Volts (thousands of volts)
kVA Kilo-Volt-Amperes (Thousands of Volt Amperes of power)
kW Kilo-Watt (Thousands of Watts of power)
kWh Kilo-Watt-Hour (Thousands of Watt Hours of energy)
kWp Kilo-Watts peak power (at standard conditions) from PV panels 
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MNRET Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment and Tourism
MPIIC Ministry of Public Infrastructure, Industries and Commerce
MDG Millennium Development Goals
MoE Ministry of Education
MoF Ministry of Finance
MOPS Mean of Platts Singapore Published Price
MoS Ministry of State
MSC Micronesian Shipping Commission
NEP National Energy Plan
NEC National Energy Committee
NDBP National Development Bank of Palau
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
OEK Olbiil Era Kelulau (legislature)
OERC Office of Environmental Response and Coordination
OGTF Oil & Gas Taskforce
OP Office of the President
OPS Office of Planning & Statistics
PALARIS Palau Automated Land and Resource Information Systems Office
PCC Palau Community College
PCAA Palau Community Action Agency
PEO Palau Energy Office
PHA Palau Housing Authority
PIC Pacific Island Country
PICTA Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement
PIEPSAP Pacific Islands Energy Policies and Strategic Action Planning
PIFS Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat
PPA Power Purchase Agreement
PPUC Palau Public Utilities Corporation
PV Photovoltaic
RMI Republic of the Marshall Islands
ROP Republic of Palau
SEDREA Social and Economic Development through Renewable Energy 
Applications
SGP GEF Small Grants Programme
SPPA Small Power Purchase Agreement
USDA United States Department of Agriculture
UNDP United Nations Development Programme1.0 Foreword 
Palau, like the rest of the world, faces two major energy challenges. The first is to 
deliver clean, secure, affordable energy for all citizens of Palau while treating the 
environment responsibly. The second is to respond to the risks of climate change 
by adaptation to changes and by mitigation through reducing the greenhouse 
gases caused by the production and use of energy. In addition Palau faces a 
challenge that it shares with other small island countries, namely it’s extremely 
high dependence from imported fuels.
This Strategic Action Plan for our Energy Sector has been developed in an 
inclusive and participatory process involving more than 30 public and private 
sector agencies. It forms the basis for our strategic actions which will ensure that 
the policy vision becomes a reality. The National Energy Policy and this Strategic 
Action Plan should also provide road map towards a greener and less vulnerable 
energy future for Palau. The vision is for a reliable and resilient energy sector
delivering Palau sustainable, low emissions energy services, through:
 Providing clear direction on the future of Palau’s energy sector
 Appropriate regulation to securely deliver energy services at competitive 
prices
 Maximizing cost-effective energy efficiency and renewable energy resources
and conservation of energy while safeguarding our environment 
 Promoting environmentally sustainable energy technologies with the aim to 
substitute imported fossil fuels
 Supporting consumers through the transition towards a new energy sector.
Adjustments have to be introduced at multiple policy levels to effectively promote 
clean, reliable, efficient and sustainable energy for all citizens of Palau. The 
National Energy Policy and its Strategic Action Plan will guide the public and 
private sectors of Palau in cooperation and our regional and international 
development partners to establish a sustainable energy sector. Through 
implementation of this policy Palau will become an international leader in creating 
a green and renewable energy society. 2.0 Introduction
2.1 Background
Energy is a vital resource underpinning all aspects of our society and 
fundamentally influencing Palau's environmental sustainability. Being almost 100 
% dependent on imported energy, Palau is highly vulnerable to international 
energy market movements and price volatility. Palau’s energy security is not 
guaranteed and energy supply interruptions undermine economic growth and 
social development. Palau is a small country lacking significant economies of 
scale and has dispersed outer islands’ populations that are difficult to serve. This 
Energy Sector Strategic Action Plan (SAP) is a dynamic document based on the 
National Energy Policy of Palau. It reflects the reality of market uncertainty and 
will be regularly updated and reviewed to consider past successes, failures and 
lessons learned. Actions and strategies will be adjusted accordingly.
Addressing energy sector issues requires collaborative leadership, smart 
planning, adequate institutional arrangements, common goals, political will, and a 
shared national vision. It is necessary to incorporate data collection efforts, 
including market assessment and market potential studies to enhance the 
technical processes of the energy sector long-term procurement planning. The 
Strategic Plan presented here summarizes the efforts of the Energy Working 
Group which has compiled the plan in a collaborative and inclusive exercise 
stretching from April to October 2009. 
Energy Sector strategic planning exercises have to maintain a high level of 
flexibility in order to react to fluctuations in international markets. The following 
graph shows price volatility on the international crude oil market that the world 
has experienced in the last 12 months. It is clear that under such market 
conditions a high level of responsiveness and flexibility is an absolute must. The 
chart below showing the development of the world market price for crude oil 
illustrates the market volatility that energy planners have to deal with.Moreover, technology may also change rapidly and planning efforts have to consider 
these changes in the areas of both conventional and renewable energy. 
Considerable benefits can be achieved through early adoption of new technologies. 
2.2 Palau’s Energy Sector
The Republic of Palau relies heavily on imported fuels for commercial energy needs 
including 100% of transport and electricity generation (the chief uses), and a majority 
of household use including cooking, transport, refrigeration, and lighting. Petroleum 
products are supplied in small quantities via coastal tankers (5,000 - 6,000 tons) from 
Guam by Mobil and Shell. Current annual import is estimated around 12 million 
gallons. Petroleum product pricing is not regulated. Oil companies build their retail 
prices based on Singapore MOPS prices (Mean of Platts Singapore Published Price) 
plus cost of supply plus profit. According to the Shell representative target rate of 
return on investment is 15%- 20%. Diesel and gasoline are both moderately taxed at 
a rate of $0.05/gal.
In the last two years, price volatility for petroleum has been high with an upward trend 
until mid 2008 and a sharp drop as a result of the global recession. International 
crude oil prices increased from US$50/bbl in mid June 2005 to above US$140/bbl in 
June 2008. Reasons for these price developments are complex but despite the 
significant drop in world market prices due to weakening demand, it does appear that 
an era of ‘cheap oil’ (less than US$ 50/bbl) is over. After hitting a bottom of less than 
40 US$ towards the end of 2008, crude and product prices have been on the rise 
again and are currently around US$ 70. At these price levels fuel imports will remain 
a major component of the country’s import bill. Petroleum storage capacity in Palau is 
approximately 10 million gallons of product, PPUC has 6 million gallon of storage, 
most of which is in need of rehabilitation.
There is a high probability that Palau has exploitable hydrocarbon reserves. The first 
petroleum exploration license was signed in 1977. Since then, there has been 
continued interest in exploring Palau’s territorial waters for the potential of oil and 
gas. Currently, one company has petroleum licenses with the States of Kayangel, 
Hatahobei, and Angaur respectively. However, to date, no exploratory drilling has 
occurred. Taking into account Palau’s need to develop an oil and gas sector that 
conforms to international standards and regulations as well as its socioeconomic 
reality, the Executive Branch requested the assistance of the World Bank (WB) Oil, 
Gas, and Mining Policy Division. 
Electricity is supplied by the Palau Public Utilities Corporation (PPUC). The utility was 
established under the PUC act of February 1994 and is owned by the Government 
but operated as a commercial enterprise. PPUC is required to break even on 
operating and maintenance costs. PPUC is currently led by a CEO and consists of 
six departments headed by six managers (Generation, Distribution, System Control, 
Business Office, Accounting and Finance, Auxiliary Services. Total staff of PPUC is 
currently 130. PPUC is supervised by a board of directors who are appointed by the 
President. In the past, it was observed that the board repeatedly acted outside its 
supervisory role and interfered with day to day operations.PPUC has a current installed capacity of a little over 35 MWs, with power plants 
located at Malakal, Aimeliik, Peleliu, Angaur, and Kayangel. The Malakal and Aimeliik 
plants supply power to a central grid on the islands of Koror and Babeldaob. The two 
13.8 kV distribution grids are interconnected by a 34.5 kV undersea cable. In addition 
to PPUC’s generators there are approximately 5 MW installed at Hotels, large stores 
and two fish processing plants. These facilities generate their own power when 
PPUC cannot supply total demand of the grid.
PPUC has been continuously unable to supply the total demand for electric power 
and has often had to resort to power rationing. The economic cost of un-served 
demand is significant, considering the disruptions that affect the household, public 
and commercial sectors. The cause for the continued power interruptions is
inadequate maintenance of the utility’s generation assets resulting in a shortfall of 
approximately 1.5 MW during peak hours. The situation is exacerbated by the lack of 
standardization and related high O&M cost. Power disruptions reduce PPUC’s 
revenues and undermine their financial position. The utility has recently gone through 
a change in management and board and the new management has taken immediate 
action to address the crisis. Although the crisis has been mitigated in the meantime, 
PPUC is still extremely vulnerable to generator break-downs. 
Electricity demand as recorded and billed by PPUC has not grown significantly over 
the last 10 years. It has been more or less stagnant at 80 GWh per annum. Peak 
load is about 15 MW and occurs in the evening hours. In contrast to energy demand, 
the number of accounts has shown significant growth at an average rate of 4.5% per 
annum between 2001 and 2007 with the commercial sector showing the largest 
growth of 7.5%. It should be noted that growth in energy demand may be disguised 
as in recent years more and more power has been generated by large users in the 
tourism and commercial sectors.
The Palau Energy Office (PEO) located at the Ministry of Infrastructure, Industry and 
Commerce is the government agency dealing with some energy sector issues. It acts 
as an international contact point and represents Palau in overseas energy meetings. 
It also acts as a project management unit for some renewable energy and energy 
efficiency projects. The PEO initiated the Palau Energy Conservation Strategy 
(PECS) in response to Executive Order 234 of 2005. 
A number of studies have noted that the institutional arrangements for energy sector 
are inadequate. With no operational budget, no clear legal mandate and only one full 
time officer the Energy Office has limited capacity to influence the energy sector 
management The PEO has no regulatory function. The PEO requires strengthening 
through the establishment of a clear mandate, appropriate resource allocation and 
adequate capacity building. The PEO should focus on policy, sector planning, 
regulation and knowledge management and delegate project implementation 
activities to technical agencies such as PPUC.
The Office of the President has appointed an Advisor to the President on Energy 
matters and the Acting Director for the Office of Environmental Response and 
Coordination (OERC) acts as focal point for energy in Palau. The role of the focal 
point is screening projects and policies in the sector.3.0 Policy and Strategic Plan
3.1 Targets
The National Energy Policy states the Government's policies for the planning and 
management of the nation's energy sector over the next 10 years. The rationale for 
this time horizon is the 20:30:30 policy target that has been formulated. This policy 
target envisions a 20 % contribution of renewable energy to the energy mix by 2020 
and a 30 % reduction in energy consumption though energy efficiency and 
conservation efforts. Currently, renewable energy only makes a small contribution of 
less than 1 % towards Palau’s total energy supply and experiences are limited to 
solar PV and solar hot water units. 
Achieving a target of 20% by 2020 will require expansion into other forms of 
renewable energy such as wind, waste (landfill gas), hydropower and perhaps 
marine energy (wave energy and currents). At current world market prices for fuel 
and local tariffs for electricity, only solar water heaters can be considered financially 
viable options. I.e. an increased renewable energy contribution will require subsidies 
or increases in electricity tariffs. Financing a transition towards a greener energy 
through tariff increases is not considered feasible, given the state of Palau’s 
economy and it is hoped that development partners will assist closing the gap 
between supply cost for renewable energy and conventional energy. In the field of 
energy conservation, numerous efforts under way to improve energy efficiency both 
on the supply and demand side. Achieving a 30 % reduction in primary energy 
consumption by 2020 is feasible but will require more efforts in demand and supply 
side management, improvements in transport sector efficiency and the introduction of 
regulations that curb wasteful practices.
3.2 Relation between Policy and Strategic Action Plan
The National Energy Policy (NEP) provides explicit framework within which public 
and private energy sector participants can make informed planning and investment 
decision. The policies also define the nature and extent of Government's control and 
management of the energy sector.
The purpose of the Strategic Action Plan (ESSAP) is to restate Palau's energy 
policies in the form of a more detailed action program including specific targets and 
guidelines. It will provide the blueprint for Government's in planning and management 
of energy programs over the life of the policy statement. It also provides indicators to 
measure progress in the implementation of the NEP and the SAP. The SAP does not 
override existing strategic plans such as the Palau Energy Conservation Strategy 
(PECS) the Energy Efficiency Action Plan or PPUC’s Strategic Plan. These initiatives 
are seen as an integral part of this SAP and their progress and achievements will be 
monitored under the framework of the overall plan.
While some of the targets may take longer to achieve than others, it is important that 
Government remain committed to its National Energy Policy as a whole and, most importantly, provide the institutional and administrative resources necessary to 
achieve its policies. 
In many cases, these policies, strategies and guidelines will appear self-evident. 
However, it remains essential for Government to have them committed to paper and 
adopted at the most senior level if they are to become, and to remain, the focus of 
Government's longer term planning and management of Palau’s energy sector.
Aligning this planning effort with related statewide long-term resource plans, such as 
those associated with water, environment, land use, and greenhouse gas mitigation 
is considered a prerequisite for its successful implementation. 
Moreover, strategic success demands a parallel approach of planning and doing. It is 
obvious that strategic implementation is much more important than strategic 
planning. Implementation requires the work of the entire nation, whereas strategic
planning only requires the planning team. Part of the challenge of planning often 
stems from the failure to link the plans with ongoing implementation. Regularly 
evaluating performance with respect to the goals and strategies established in the
current Plan is a necessary prerequisite for the success of the project.
3.3 Project Development
The development of the project pipeline is fully integrated with the policy and 
strategic planning described above. Activities follow the guidelines and assumptions 
provided and include a review of all data and information on energy sector projects 
that have been implemented or are under implementation. Broad consultations have 
been undertaken in order to establish a preliminary list of project ideas for further 
assessment and ranking. Focus was given to renewable energy and energy 
efficiency projects. Conventional projects in the area of power generation/distribution 
and petroleum products have been included if justified (urgency, good economic 
performance, significant contribution to energy security). 
Project priorities have been developed using a transparent ranking method that 
includes criteria such as:
 technical feasibility
 economic performance (least cost supply)
 social impacts
 environmental characteristics 
 probability to attract finance. 
Project development will also include an assessment of risks associated with the 
proposed actions and projects. 
As with the policy and strategic planning we expect several feedback loops during 
stakeholder consultations and we will aim at integrating these with the consultations 
on policy as the two aspects are closely linked.4.0 Planning Assumptions
Energy Planning takes place under a great deal of uncertainty and has to rely on a 
set of assumptions. This set of assumptions has to be reviewed on a regular basis 
and adjusted when required. It will be an important task for the NEC and PEO to 
regularly review the assumptions discussed in the following and ensure that these 
assumptions are valid:
4.1 Institutional Arrangements
The Working Group noted that past institutional arrangements for energy sector have 
been inadequate. Ultimately the consensus has been that the Energy office would be 
best positioned to implement energy related policies and regulations as an 
independent authority. At the minimum, it is necessary to establish the PEO as a 
Division or Bureau with a regular budget allocation. It should be noted that effective 
institutional arrangements are a precondition for maximizing Palau’s benefits from 
funding opportunities that are available to Palau from a number of resources. Donors 
have also shown willingness to support the Government with technical assistance 
and temporary funding of staff. 
4.2 Energy Demand Forecast
Energy demand will only see moderate growth rates of about 5% annually in both the 
fuel and the electricity sector. This is due to:
 Current per capita consumption in Palau is considerably higher than in all 
other Pacific Island Nations.
 Electrification rates are near 100 % and no significant incremental growth can 
be expected from new customers.
 The policy of cost covering tariffs and the widespread introduction of prepaid 
meters will reduce demand growth.
 Energy conservation programs will show impact from 2012 onwards
 Petroleum prices are unlikely to fall drastically and for the next 2 years an 
average world market price of 100 – 120 US$ per barrel of oil seems to be a 
reasonable guess.
 Even if lower oil prices are going to materialize, this is likely to be associated 
with continued recession and perhaps depression of the world economy, 
which in turn will have a dampening effect on energy demand in Palau and 
elsewhere.
Forecasting electricity demand development in the main grid is however, 
uncertain. Demand increases will be mostly driven be developments in the 
tourism industry and therefore tend to be shown in lumpy increments. Whether or 
not a new hotel will have a major impact on demand also depends on the choice 
of the developers who can either opt for their own generation (as is currently the 
case with some existing larger hotels). It is therefore prudent to also consider a 
low and a high case scenario with respect to demand for peak power and energy. 
A high case scenario would entail growth rates of 7.5 % p.a. and a low case 
scenario would be in the vicinity of 1 %. In this context it should be noted that at 
current electricity rates and fuel cost, self-generation is more expensive than 
connecting to PPUC. I.e. enterprises that have resorted to this solution have done so purely for energy security purposes. The following chart displays the 
band of developments with respect to peak power demand in PPUC’s system. A 
low case scenario of very low growth could materialize in case of a prolonged 
recession of the global economy. Serious conservation efforts could reduce 
demand growth further and result in negative growth. This is in fact intended in as 
a policy target. The high case would be associated with rapid global recovery and 
a significant improvement of Palau’s competitive position as a tourist destination. 
Maximum renewable energy contribution is determined by the systems minimum 
demand and system stability considerations. The higher the contribution from 
erratic renewable energy resources, namely wind and solar, the more planning 
and system integration efforts are required. Current system parameter suggests 
that the main system in Koror and Babeldaob can absorb approximately 9 – 12
GWh per annum without major system integration efforts such as short term 
storage. This represents an installed capacity of renewable energies in the order 
of 4 - 5 MW in case solar and wind are used as the main sources. Hydropower 
and landfill gas use have higher capacity factors than solar and wind and are 
easier to integrate. It should be noted that any serious conservation effort in the 
electricity sector towards the target of 30% will make renewable energy 
integration more difficult as the load profile will be reduced.
Growth Scenarios Peak Demand
PPUC
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Year
MW
4.3 Political Risk
Current government and its successors will maintain cornerstones of the current 
energy policy such as the ‘user pays principle’ or the principle of cost covering 
tariffs. This is due to the facts that:
 Continued subsidies further strain the already difficult fiscal position of the 
Government.
 Consumption subsidies will reduce likelihood of obtaining grants and 
concessionary loans from development partners. Tariffs below cost recovery levels undermine the already difficult financial 
position of PPUC.
The above may not hold if Palau becomes a major producer of hydrocarbons. 
Experience in other countries has shown that the general public expects to 
participate in the wealth created by hydrocarbon production through low energy 
prices.
Current and successive Governments will continue to adhere to good governance 
in the area of procurement and contract awards. Transparency, order, timeliness, 
even-handedness and, where practicable, competition to the process of awarding 
contracts to developers, energy service companies (ESCOs) and fuels suppliers
will prevail. The following guidelines and procedures are recommended:
Transparency: A feature of successful implementation models has been 
transparency. It allows open demonstration of the project’s consistency with the 
national interest, and also encourages participation by more reputable and 
serious developers and suppliers. Transparent processes require an independent 
scrutiny of unsolicited proposals. All unsolicited proposals should be first checked 
by the Energy Administration. In case of doubt, regional organisations such as 
Pacific Power Association have the competence and capacity to assist the 
Government in assessing unsolicited proposals.
Competition vs. Negotiation: Competitive award of contracts should be the rule 
for all energy sector procurement processes. Competitive process ensures
transparency and a fair price. It also serves to discourage less reputable 
operators. The negotiation process tends to have open-ended timelines giving it a 
high degree of uncertainty for developer, purchaser and government. 
Unstructured negotiations are also time-consuming for all participants and often
cause expenditure of resources. Competitive procurement of projects using the 
Independent Power Producer (IPP) modality should be awarded on the basis of 
competition using a Standard Power Purchase Agreement as a basis for
international tenders1. This approach normally results in the best outcome for the 
economy of a country.
Policy over Politics; Policies, once adopted and legislated should take priority 
over day-to-day politics. Politicians are assumed to support the principle that long 
term economic and social benefits derived form well planned strategies and 
actions are more valuable than short term political gains.
4.4 Technological Development
It is assumed that technological development will continue at a historical pace, 
both in the areas of conventional and renewable energy technologies. It is 
assumed that prices for photovoltaic equipment will fall moderately as new 
production capacities will remove the supply constraints experienced over the last 
 
1
PPUC has been provided with a Standard Power Purchase Agreement by the consultant three years. (Capital cost of US$ 7,000 per kW installed grid connected PV and 
supply cost below 0.40 US$/kWh are considered achievable within the next 10 
years). Resource assessments and data collection will be necessary to determine 
technical feasibility and economic performance of hydropower, wind and waste to 
energy option. It is assumed, however, that these technologies have the potential 
to deliver energy at lower cost than solar. If for instance wind energy can supply 
electricity at a modest capacity factor of 16% supply cost (at US$ 3,000 per kW 
installed) would be in the order of 0.25 US$/kWh and thus competitive with diesel 
generation. Landfill gas based generation (assuming the old landfill in Koror can 
be fitted out with a unit of 100 – 150 kW) would supply electricity at cost in the 
order of 0.16 US$/kWh. It is also assumed that ocean energy technology such as 
wave and tidal generators will become commercial technologies within a decade.
4.5 Climate Change
Extreme weather events such as hurricanes and typhoons have damaged and 
destroyed wind generators, photovoltaic equipment, transmission systems and 
other energy technology in the Pacific region and elsewhere. Given the likelihood 
of an increase in frequency of such events in the future, energy technology 
employed in Palau has to be cyclone proof and withstand winds up to 70 m/s.
4.6 Continued Availability of Funding from Development 
Partners
It is assumed that current development partners of Palau will continue to support 
the country with grant aid and concessionary loans. While funding levels after the 
U.S. Compact agreement are likely to fall, new opportunities may emerge from 
green energy initiatives and carbon trading under the Kyoto Protocol and its 
successor. It is also assumed that development partners will respond positively to 
the suggestions and priority actions contained in this plan. 
4.7 Monitoring and Evaluation
For all actions listed in the following strategic plan, lead agencies and 
participating agencies have been identified. The lead agency is responsible for 
the implementation of the respective actions. In addition, implementation 
timelines have been determined for each action. 
It is assumed that the implementation of this Strategic Plan is regularly monitored 
by the National Energy Committee (NEC). At the minimum this committee 
consisting of representatives of the Office of the President, the Senate, the 
House, the Chamber of Commerce, PPUC, PEO, and PCC convenes every six 
months to review progress made in the implementation of the ESSAP. The 
progress review should also include amendments and adaptations to the plan. In the following, strategies and actions will be listed together with performance indicators, implementation arrangements, timeframes and 
budgets. Funding sources may be indicative. 
5.1 Improved Institutional Arrangements for Energy Sector Management
Policy Summary: Provide the Energy Office with the authority and support required for effective and transparent implementation of the 
National Energy Policy and the related Strategic Action Plan.
Strategy 1.1 Establish a fully functional, adequately resourced energy administration
A new energy policy for GoP will induce change and trigger a re-balancing of stakeholders’ positions and will require a re-organization of 
institutional roles and responsibilities. This offers the opportunity to review and reformulate its mandate. At the same time its resources 
need to be improved and a budget needs to be allocated.
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time 
Frame
Budget/ 
Source
1.1.1 Submit final energy policy 
providing a clear mandate to the Palau 
Energy Office
Executive 
Committee for 
NEP 
OEK, PEO, 
OP
Energy policy passed, 
signed into law, participation 
in energy sector decision 
making, participation of 
Head of PEO in oversight of 
PPUC as member of the 
PPUC board
Dec 2009 European Union 
EDF 9
1.1.2 Create a Bureau or Division of 
Energy 
MoF OEK, MPIIC, 
PEO
Bureau or Division created 
and $ Line Item Budget 
allocated
Jan 2010 Ministry of 
Infrastructure 
and Existing 
Petroleum tax
(.05) RPPL
Potential 
Development 
Partnerspolicy, planning and regulatory 
functions and establish appropriate 
mechanisms to delegate project 
implementation and participation in 
training activities to technical 
organizations, the private sector and 
NGOs
NGOsoperators licensed
Regular PEO 
budget, EDF 10, 
SEDERA
1.1.4 Establish a free-standing energy 
committee or Commission, or Advisory 
Group through Executive Order
Office of the 
President
PEO, MPIIC Free-standing Jan 2010 Regular budget
1.1.5 Energy office takes a lead role in 
regional and international cooperation
PEO NEC, OP Promulgation of legislations 
and policies and MOUS and 
joint venture with private 
sector & NGOs
Continuos 
task starting 
Jan 2010
$ 25,000 p.a.
Regular PEO 
budget, EDF 10, 
SEDREA
1.1.6 Design and implement a sectorwide capacity building programNEC PEO, PPUC, 
PCC, MoS, 
MPIIC, PCAA, 
AGs Office 
Number of individuals 
trained, certificates obtained
Continuous 
task starting 
Jan 2010
$200,000
EDF 10 / 
SEDREA 
1.1.7 Align energy policies with other 
resource policies and strategic plans 
and translate into performance-based 
budget
PEO NEC, OP, 
PPUC
Cross references in other 
policies MoUs and joint 
declarations
Continuos 
task starting 
Jan 2010
$ 30,000 p.a.
Regular PEO 
budget
Strategy 1.2 Ensure that all projects, investments and activities in the energy sector produce the 
maximum economic, social and environmental benefits for Palau
In order to ensure economic efficiency in the energy sector there is a need to constantly review energy supply, delivery, and distribution 
methods and make recommendations for efficient operation and reliability. The strategy will address procurement regulations, economics, Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
Source
1.2.1 Develop, regularly update and 
manage national energy database to 
support effective analysis and project 
development
PEO / PPUC –
collocate PPUC 
database w. 
PEO
Oil companies, 
Statistics 
office, 
PALARIS 
Information accessible 
on internet and in 
publications, 
Dec 2010 $ 100,000
Regular PEO 
budget, 
SEDREA project
1.2.2 Coordinate donor initiatives in 
the energy sector and ensure 
compatibility of donor funded projects 
with the National Energy Policy and its 
related Strategic Action Plan
Grants 
Clearinghouse 
Office 
PEO, PPUC, 
OP, MoF, MoS
Donors fund projects 
including in the SAP 
project pipeline
Continuous 
task starting 
Jan 2010
Regular PEO 
budget
1.2.3 Scrutinize all unsolicited energy 
sector proposals offered to GoP
PEO, 
Coordination 
with Office of 
the President 
and the Ministry 
of State
PPUC, Continuos task 
starting Jan 
2010
Regular PEO 
budget, 
developers 
budgets
Strategy 1.3 Encourage private sector participation and competition in the supply of fuels, electricity 
and energy sector services 
An enabling framework for private sector participation in all aspects of energy production and supply will allow a broad range of 
stakeholders including households and businesses to become active participants and investors in the energy sector Building capacity in 
Palau’s private sector 
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
Sourcein training and capacity building 
activities organised by the energy 
office
Energy 
Service 
Company, 
CoC, EQPB, 
BTA, etc.
participation in capacity 
building
budget, 
SEDERA project
1.3.2 Study opportunities and options 
for private sector participation and 
public private partnerships in electricity 
supply 
PEO NEC, OP, 
MoF, MoS
Study on PPP options 
published and accepted 
by NEC and OEK.
Dec 2010 $ 75,000
Special budget 
allocation
1.3.3 Develop a Standard Power 
Purchase Agreement for small, 
independent power producers and 
project developers
PEO NEC, PPUC, 
Attorney 
General, 
OGTF
PPA triggers private 
sector investment in 
power supply
Continuos task 
starting Jan 
2010
Regular PEO 
budget, 
developers 
budgetsPolicy: Recognizing that improving the efficiency of energy use has greater short term impact on reducing fossil fuel consumption of 
fossil energy than any other action, taxes and policies will be revised to encourage the import and sale of: appliances, vehicles and boats 
having the highest energy efficiency; develop energy efficiency standards for new buildings and renovations including homes, 
businesses and government premises. The policy target is set at a 30 % reduction in overall energy consumption by 2020.
Strategy 2.1 Ensure constant improvement of energy efficient equipment, appliances, vehicles and 
housing
Monitoring of utility bills and examination of load profiles, tariff incentives, load factors, energy-use patterns, and specific energy 
consumption figured will present opportunities to reduce consumption or shift loads to off peak periods. 
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
Source
2.1.1 Review current transport 
systems with respect to efficiency 
reliability, and affordability
PEO NEC, MPIIC, 
Customs, 
OPS, Division 
of 
Transportation, 
Bureau of 
Public Safety, 
Shipping 
Agents, MoF
Study published, 
recommendations for 
policy and legislation 
regarding vehicle 
importation
Dec 2010 $ 50,000
SEDREA project
2.1.2 Continue Implementation of the 
Palau Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
and the Palau Energy Conservation 
Strategy 
PEO MRD, PPUC, 
NGOs, MPIIC, 
PCAA, 
promotion by 
Executive 
Branch
Energy savings against 
2008 baseline
Dec 2010 $ 500,000
EU/EDF 9/EDF 
10, SEDREA, 
IUCN
2.1.3 Promote energy efficient housing 
through concessionary finance for 
efficient building features and 
appliances
NDBP PEO, NGOs, 
SGP, USDA, 
Palau 
Housing, OEK, 
Grant Office
Number of loans
Total loan portfolio (US$)
Continuous 
task starting 
June 2009
$ 500,000
IUCN Italian 
Governmentprogram for major equipment and 
appliances (fridges, freezers, aircons, 
lights, washing machines etc)
OEK, PPUClabelled
possibly 
SEDREA and/or 
EDF 10
2.1.5 Adopt an Energy Code for 
inclusion into National Building code
PEO NDBP, PPUC, 
Private, SLM 
MPIIC, OERC, 
OEK – CIP 
Committee
Energy code 
incorporated into building
code, licensed inspectors 
appointed
Dec 2010 Regular PEO 
Budget
Strategy 2.2 Constantly educate general public, government and private sectors on energy efficiency 
and energy conservation opportunities
Public awareness and information campaigns aimed at educating the general public, the private sector and decision makers and public 
servants about energy conservation and energy efficiency will reduce wasteful practices and change consumer behaviour. Special training 
for energy conservation personnel will enhance implementation of conservation measures
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
Source
2.2.1 Design energy conservation 
curricula and training material for all 
educational institutions in Palau
starting with primary school 
PEO NEC, MoE, 
PCC, Media, 
PCAA, Private 
Schools, 
NGOs
Energy conservation has 
become a regular subject 
in Palau’s educational 
system
Dec 2013 $ 120,000
Possibly EDF 10 
and SEDERA 
project
2.2.2 Continue training of Government
ECOs and expand training to include 
private sector and NGO 
representatives
PEO PPUC, NGOs Results of skill survey to 
be performed in 2012
Dec 2012 $ 50,000
EDF 10, 
SEDREA, IUCN
2.2.3 Develop a comprehensive set of 
educational material related to energy 
PEO PEO, NGOs, 
MOE, NDBP, 
PPUCCROP 
Materials developed and 
distributed
Ongoing $50,000 
SEDREA & EDF 
10subregional partners 
2.2.4 Establish an energy conservation 
web site allowing the public to retrieve 
relevant data and information on 
energy efficient equipment, incentive 
programs (concessionary loans) and 
conservation tips 
PEO Energy offices 
Guam Saipan, 
CROP 
agencies, 
SPC, SOPAC, 
US DoE, 
Grants Office, 
SBDC, MoS
Quality information and 
material accessible on 
internet
Dec 2011 $ 20,000
possibly 
SEDREA and/or 
EDF 10Policy:
Renewable energies have the potential to reduce dependency on imported fuels and to reduce the country’s vulnerability towards price 
shocks. Renewable energies will therefore be promoted so that such energy will provide a minimum of 20% of electrical energy
generated in Palau the end of 2020. Promotion of renewable energy use will continue with the aim to completely substitute all fossil fuel 
use on the long term, reducing Palau’s carbon footprint to a minimum.
Strategy 3.1 Compile and assess all data and information necessary to embark upon a widespread 
program of renewable energy promotion and investment
In order to prepare the a nationwide renewable energy promotion the national potential for all renewable energy sources is fully understood 
based upon current and reliable data and information that will be made available to Government, households, businesses and investors. In 
addition, technologies need to be rated and prioritized
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
Source
3.1.1 Assess in detail the national 
potential of renewable energies (solar, 
wind, hydro, ocean, waste, biomass) 
and compile national resource 
database
PEO NEC, PPUC, 
development 
partners, 
PALARIS, 
Database developed and 
accessible for general 
public, data published
Dec 2012 $ 350,000
EDF 10, 
SEDERA project
3.1.2 Develop standards for approved 
and recommended renewable energy 
technologies and compile list of 
certified technologies eligible for 
concessionary finance
PEO MPIIC, private 
sector, NDBP, 
PPUC, PCC
List of recommended RE 
equipment published
Training & Certification 
on RE Technology
Dec 2011 $ 100,000
EDF 10, 
SEDERA, IUCN
3.1.3 Keep current on renewable 
energy technology development and 
update list of recommended 
technologies accordingly
PEO PPUC, MPIIC, 
Private, 
NDBP, PCC
New entries in list of 
recommended 
technologies, seminars 
and conferences 
attended
Continuos task 
starting Jan 
2010
$ 50,000
PEO regular 
budgetinvestments
Investment in renewable energy is important to reduce the negative economic, social and environmental impacts of energy production and 
consumption in Palau. Currently, renewable energy contributes relatively little to primary energy and even less to the consumption of 
commercial energy. A comprehensive enabling framework will create the basis for significant investment in RE.
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
Source
3.2.1 Establish legal and regulatory 
framework for small scale household 
sector investment in renewable energy 
(net metering, grid access)
PEO PPUC, NDBP, 
Palau Housing 
Authority
Net metering bill signed 
into law (should not be 
detrimental to PPUCs 
economic viability and 
should maintain fair 
market prices for 
customers)
Dec 2009 $ 0
3.2.2 Develop Standard Power 
Purchase Agreement for medium 
scale renewable energy investments 
PPUC PEO, MPIIC, 
private sector, 
PPUC, NDBP
SPPA drafted and 
published
Promotion campaign
Signed agreement
Private developers 
investing in IPP projects
Dec 2011 $ 100,000
PPUC Regular 
Budget
3.2.3 Identify and develop medium 
scale projects conducive for IPP 
investment (hydro, wind) and tender 
projects competitively
PPUC PEO, NGOs, 
PCC
Approved
Project identified & 
tendered
Continuos task 
starting Jan 
2010
$ 50,000
PPUC regular 
budget
3.2.4 Establish innovative financing 
mechanisms and subsidy schemes to 
facilitate high up-front investments 
necessary for renewable energy 
NDBP PEO, NEC Loan volume disbursed 
for renewable energy 
finance
Dec 2015 $ 1,000,000
SEDERA3.2.5 Explore all carbon finance 
opportunities for renewable energies
PEO, OP NDBP, MoF, 
MoS
Study on carbon finance 
opportunities published
Dec 2011 $ 20,000
Possibly 
SEDERA
3.2.6 Educate general public on 
renewable energy opportunities
PEO CROP 
agencies, 
NGOs, NDBP
Quality information and 
material accessible on 
internet
Dec 2011 $ 100,000 
SEDERA or 
EDF 10
Strategy 3.3 Prepare and implement a project pipeline of priority renewable energy projects and seek 
funding for priorities
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
Source
3.3.1 Convert outer island power 
supply systems to hybrid configuration 
and operate systems in efficient mode
PPUC PEO, Resp. 
St. Govts
Fuel consumption 
reduced to 50 % of 2009 
baseline
Dec 2016 $ 3,000,000
EDF 10, other 
donors
3.3.2 Explore opportunities for waste 
to energy project on Koror Babeldaob
PEO PPUC, PW 
Koror State 
Govt.
Study published Dec 2012 $ 80,000
EDF 10, 
SEDERA, IUCN
3.3.3 Promote solar hot water systems 
for all new high cost residential and 
commercial buildings
NDBP Private sector, 
NDBP, Palau 
Housing 
Authority
Number of solar water 
heaters installed
Continuous 
task starting 
Jan 2010
PEO regular 
budget
3.3.4 Design and implement pilot 
projects for small and medium scale 
wind energy generation (2 - 100 kW) 
once study proves feasible for wind 
PEO NEC, PPUC, 
Palau Housing 
Authority
kW of wind energy 
connected to the grid
Dec 2014 $ 300,000
EDF 10
3.3.5 Develop and apply a standard PEO & PPUC NEC, regional 
ii
Study on carbon finance Dec 2011 $ 20,000proposals offered to the government
Standard procedures 
published 
3.3.6 Implement a grid connected 
solar project on Koror with a high 
educational impact
Palau Olympic 
Committee
PEO, PPUC, 
MCCA
Power consumption of 
POC reduced by 90%
Dec 2010 $800,000 
Possibly EDF 10
3.3.7 Engage with all development 
partners in order to promote priority 
projects of the SAP
PPUC PPUC, NEC, 
MoF, OP, 
MPIIC, MCCA
Donors accept projects 
from pipeline
Continuous 
task starting 
Jan 2010
$ 0
5.4 Imported Fuels and Hydrocarbons
Policy: Recognizing the cost of total national dependence on imported petroleum fuels, international standards will be developed and 
enforced for any storage, handling and transport of petroleum products. Opportunities and mechanisms for obtaining competitive fuel 
prices will be pursued. Further the Government will ensure that there are fair wholesale and retail fuel prices and it will require suppliers 
to regularly provide data on imports and sales by product. A high priority will be given on developing the legal framework and capacity to 
ensure that Palau’s benefits from hydrocarbon exploration and production are maximized.
Strategy 4.1 Ensure that both continued reliance imported fuels and any eventual production of 
hydrocarbons within Palau’s territory support cultural, economic, social and environmental 
development throughout the Republic of Palau
A hydrocarbon code, model agreements, and related environmental, operational, and tax regulation, taking into account any existing or 
proposed legislation will be prepared. This legal framework will be developed under OERC and will also cover other aspects of petroleum 
supply
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
SourcePCS, 
Petroleum 
Suppliers
Private sector engaged 
in exploration activities
$423,000
4.1.2 Monitor and pursue sub-regional 
bulk procurement initiative between 
FSM, RMI & ROP
MSC OTGF, PPUC, 
Petroleum 
Suppliers
Regional procurement 
initiative established
June 2010 IFC
4.1.3 Establish a supply and demand 
information for all class, grades and 
categories of petroleum products for 
integration into National Energy Sector 
database
MPIIC / PEO OPS, 
Petroleum 
suppliers, 
PPUC, MoF, 
Shipping 
Agencies, Port 
Operators
Information accessible 
on internet and in 
publications
Dec 2011 PPUC / 
SEDREA
4.1.4 Provide training opportunities for 
appropriate representatives on 
petroleum production and contract 
negotiations for emerging countries
NEC PPUC, PEO 
Petroleum 
Suppliers, 
MoS, MPIIC, 
UNDP, OGTF
Number of people trained 
and certificates obtained
Continuous 
task starting 
Jan 2010
$200,000
World Bank and 
development 
partners
Strategy 4.2 Encourage competition in the supply and distribution of fuel and ensure that products 
quality and storage facilities meet the required minimum national and international 
standards
International oil companies have up until now ensured that product and safety standards be maintained. The emergence of new players in 
the fuel supply area requires actions aimed to maintain these standards in the presence of local and/or regional suppliers 
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
Sourcemonitor statistics 2010
Regular PEO 
budget
4.2.2 Develop oil spill/accident 
response procedures for all major 
handlers/users of petroleum products
NEMO / EQPB PPUC, oil 
companies, 
BMR, PEO, 
Marine Law, 
MoJ, MoH, 
OERC
Petroleum and 
Environmental Safety 
Regulations established
Response procedures 
published Quarterly
Ongoing trainings/drills
Inventory of spill equip
Dec 2011 $ 15,000
Regular PEO 
budget
4.2.3 Conduct awareness training on 
safety issues pertaining to handling, 
transportation, storage, quality and 
use of petroleum products
EQPB Oil companies, 
PPUC, NGOs, 
NEMO, 
Customs, 
MPIIC, MoJ
Awareness campaign 
conducted
Every 6 months
starting 2010
$25,000
OEK / 
Development 
Partners
4.2.4 Rehabilitate PPUC tank farm and 
conduct study on maximising 
economic benefits from its use
PPUC PEO, oil 
companies, 
EQPB, 
Aimeliik St. 
Govt., MSC, 
World Bank, 
JICA
Schedule of Rehab.
Fuel Contracts/MOU
Dec 2011 $ 1,000,000, 
PPUC, possibly 
private investors Policy Summary: Laws and regulations will be introduced to ensure security, reliability and efficiency of electricity supply. PPUC will be 
allowed to recover all cost associated with the supply of electricity. Private sector participation in electricity supply will be encouraged 
through a transparent enabling framework.
Strategy 5.1 Establish a regulatory framework and tariff regime that underpins PPUC’s commercial 
viability and ability to effectively plan and implement necessary upgrading of its assets
On the basis of PPUC’s revised strategic plan developed with JICA assistance, the regulatory framework needs to be improved and 
strategic planning of PPUC performed in an integrated manner. All means to ensure timely collection of adequate revenues need to be 
explored
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
Source
5.1.1 Conduct an independent tariff 
review for PPUC including its outer 
island operations as well as 
Independent Power Producers (IPPs)
PEO NEC, PPUC, 
UNDP, IPPs
Tariff regime including 
adjustment formula 
approved by OEK 
December 
2009 / ongoing
$ 100,000
SEDREA project
5.1.2 Regularly and automatically 
implement tariff adjustments as 
recommended in tariff study and also 
explore fuel price hedging
PPUC NEC, PEO Response procedures 
published
Semi-annual 
adjustment / 
monthly 
tracking 
beginning Jan 
2010
$ 0
5.1.3 Install pre-paid meters for all 
PPUC customers and conduct 
awareness campaign on benefits of 
pre-paid metering
PPUC PEO, Pacfic 
Power 
Associations
Number of pre-paid 
meters installed
Arrears reduced
Appropriate prepaid 
meter specs available 
Dec 2010 $ 500,000 
Regular PPUC 
budget, 
SEDREA for 
awareness
5.1.4 Develop and up-date an 
integrated system management and 
expansion plan for PPUC
PPUC PEO, NEC, 
JICA
Revised Plan approved Annually every 
July
$ 150,000
JICAby end of 2013
Operational parameters include quality of power supply, reduction of un-scheduled outages, reduction of technical and non-technical 
losses, and appropriate staffing levels 
Actions Leading 
Agency
Participating 
Agency(ies)
Performance Indicators Time Frame Budget/ 
Source
5.2.1 Procure and install more efficient 
generation equipment for power 
systems on Peleliu, Angaur and 
Kayangel
PPUC PEO Equipment 
commissioned, specific 
fuel consumption 
improved to 11 kWh per 
gallon of diesel
Dec 2009 $ 200,000
PPUC budget
5.2.2 Procure and install two 2 MW 
emergency capacity to increase 
reserve margin of main system 
PPUC PEO Equipment installed, 
planned and un-planned 
generation outages 
reduced to less than 3 %
Feb 2010 $ 2,000,000
(second-hand)
PPUC budget
5.2.3 Rehabilitate generation 
equipment and perform deferred 
maintenance on all generator sets
PPUC PEO Available capacity 
increased to 20 MW
Dec 2012 $ 7,000,000 
Regular PPUC 
budget
5.2.4 Systematically upgrade PPUC’s 
generation assets in line with PPUC 
expansion strategy
PPUC PEO, NEC, 
JICA
20 MW new generation Two Phases 
@10MW:
Dec 2012
Dec 2015
$ 40,000,000
PPUC, possibly 
JICA
5.2.5 Upgrade PPUCs distribution 
system
PPUC PEO, NEC, 
JICA
Improved and stable 
power grid for Babeldaob
2015 100,000,000
PPUC, multilateral lenders
5.2.6 Promote and enhance academic, 
professional, and apprentice training 
and develop/exchange of technologies 
and technological information
PPUC PPA, PCC,
Equipment 
Suppliers, 
Palau National 
Scholarship 
Trained and qualified 
local mechanical and 
electrical engineers
Improvement in 
Ongoing $ 500,000
PNSB, DOI, 
PPUC, PPA, 
SEDREA 5.2.7 Create strong incentives and 
compensation to attract local 
employment
PPUC/ PPA PPUC Board, 
Regional: 
FSM, RMI, 
GUAM (Power 
Co.)
Retain local skills and 
expertise
Ongoing 100,000,000
ND
5.2.8 Analyse in detail reasons for 
technical losses and implement loss 
reduction program 
PPUC / PPA PEO Losses reduced by 
replacement of inefficient 
power equipment
Priority list of equipment 
published
PPA Study (DOI) 
completed / results
Ongoing 
internally
Jan 2010
PPA/DOI 
(Regional 
Initiative)
5.2.9 Move to Renewable Energy 
Platforms
PPUC/ PEO PPA 30% by 2020 2020 100,000,000
PPUC / multilateral lendersg py pjy 
Palau’s energy sector. Hydrocarbon sector projects have not been included in the project pipeline 
as the legal framework for such projects has not yet been finalized. The level of formation on 
individual projects may vary as the projects are in different stages of development. Most projects 
sheets listed in the following pipeline require further refinement. 
Typical implementation arrangements include resource assessments, feasibility and engineering 
studies to determine the final design of the project. It is intended to follow the least cost supply 
principle as far as donor preferences and other constraints allow this. Then a competitive 
procurement of equipment and services will follow. This Strategic Plan fully subscribes to the 
principle of competitive procurement at all levels.
Unsolicited proposals require scrutiny by independent experts followed by price tests (competitive 
tenders) once technical feasibility and economic performance has been established.Koror Wastewater Systems Improvements
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
 High cost of energy due to outdated sewer pumps
 Excessive and costly maintenance and repair due to aging and old pump systems
 Raw sewer spilling into the mangrove areas and surrounding water
 Potential source for spreading of diseases
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
 Reduce fuel consumption and lower cost of energy for ROP Government
 Clean environment and clean water to support ocean based sustainable livelihood
 Healthy community
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
Replacement of 12 sewer pumps and 3 backup power generators in various locations throughout 
communities in Koror State. The project will eliminate occasional raw sewage spill to the mangrove areas 
and the surrounding ocean; with the location of the sewer pumps located directly in the communities, with 
some sites that are only few meters away from private homes, break down or malfunctioning of the sewer 
pump would cause direct spillage of the raw sewer in the driveways and walkways. These spillage or 
overflow of contaminated water and raw sewage can cause health issues, contaminate fishing grounds and 
close swimming areas that could have negative impact in our tourism industry.
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Securing funding for implementation
Installation of new sewer pumps
Installation of new power generator backup
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
Lower energy consumption and reduction of billing cost to the ROP Government
Healthy community
Cleaner environment
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Verify demand increase on wastewater system M M
Equipment maintenance (capacity building) H M
Purchasing of wrong pumps and back-up generators H M
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Survey location / Design 1
Procurement and delivery of equipment 6
Installation / Operational / Lifetime Continuous
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
TBD 1,500,000.00
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
Ministry of Public Infrastructure, Industries and Commerce / Bureau of Public Works
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
No funding, looking for interested donor / development partner
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
Highggy y gy
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
Wasteful enrgy use and inefficient energy consumption
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Reduce wasteful practices
Change consumer behavior
Enhance implementation of conservation
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
Design energy conservation curricula & training programs
Develop a comprehensive set of educational materials
Establish an energy conservation website/ programs
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
 Secure funding
 Establish partnerships
 Collect data
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
Energy conservation valued
Investments in RE technologies & energy efficient equipment
Reduction of fossil fuel consumption
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Unreliable information sources High Medium
Lack of appropriate funding High Medium
Lack of collaboration with agency cooperation High Medium
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 12-36 months
Construction and delivery? 12-36 months
Operation/Lifetime Ongoing
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
TBD
Total 700,000
BRESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Concept moving towards implementation (design)
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
Medium - Highyp
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
 Carbon footprint
 Cost of energy
 High dependency from fossil fuels
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Install PV system for Koror airport connected to the grid to reduce reliance on fossil fuels and reduce carbon 
footprint
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
Pilot project of grid connection, a PV system of 160KW to interconnect with main grid with greatest 
potential for population growth. 
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Feasibility has been done, funding has been provided with implementation to follow shortly
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
1. Greatest potential for population growth w. less dependency on fossil fuels
2. High visibility
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Maintenance H H
Vandalism M L
Natural disaster H L
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 3
Construction and delivery? 6
Operation/Lifetime 180
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
JICA 4,000,000
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PEO / PPUC
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Funded through JICA, awaiting implementation
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
HighPeleliu Renewable Energy Hybrid Systems
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
 High Cost of electricity supply for Outer Island systems (PPUC looses $ 600,000 each year in Outer 
Island systems
 High environmental vulnerability of Outer Island eco-systems (risk of fuel spills)
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Reduce fuel consumption and operating cost of Peleliu power system
Optimize load management and decrease specific fuel consumption
Introduce demand side management and increase awareness amongst consumers 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
A solar-diesel hybrid system including a 125 kW PV system and dispatchable short term storage (batteries) 
will be installed. Technicians will be trained in system operation and maintenance, particularly in optimizing 
dispatch of the battery unit in order to ensure operation of the diesel units at low specific fuel consumption 
points. An education campaign for the consumers will raise awareness regarding demand management and 
potential for energy conservation on the demand side. Monitoring of the project will allow to quantify 
impact of the intervention against the pre-project baseline and provide input for planning of similar 
measures 
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
1. Design study and tender documents for international competitive bidding for supply and installation
2. Installation of smaller diesel units by PPUC (under way)
3. Securing of funding for operation
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
1. Security of Peleliu power supply enhanced through renewable energy utilization
2. Reduction of specific fuel consumption for power generation by 35%
3. Reduction of electricity cost for consumers
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Unchecked demand increase may outstrip renewable capacity M M
Technical failure through poor choice of hardware and or contractor H M
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 1
Construction and delivery? 12
Operation/Lifetime 180
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
Not determined, possible project for EU Energy Facility 2,000,000
TOTAL 2,000,000
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC in cooperation with PEO
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Project concept only, no design, no funding
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
HighAngaur Renewable Energy Hybrid Systems
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
 High Cost of electricity supply for Outer Island systems (PPUC looses $ 600,000 each year in Outer 
Island systems
 High environmental vulnerability of Outer Island eco-systems (risk of fuel spills)
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Reduce fuel consumption and operating cost of Angaur power system
Optimize load management and decrease specific fuel consumption
Introduce demand side management and increase awareness amongst consumers 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
A solar-diesel hybrid system including a 50 kW PV system and dispatchable short term storage (batteries) 
will be installed. Technicians will be trained in system operation and maintenance, particularly in optimizing 
dispatch of the battery unit in order to ensure operation of the diesel units at low specific fuel consumption 
points. An education campaign for the consumers will raise awareness regarding demand management and 
potential for energy conservation on the demand side. Monitoring of the project will allow to quantify 
impact of the intervention against the pre-project baseline and provide input for planning of similar 
measures 
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Design study and tender documents for international competitive bidding for supply and installation
Installation of smaller diesel units by PPUC (under way)
Securing of funding for operation
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
Security of Angaur power supply enhanced through renewable energy utilization
Reduction of specific fuel consumption for power generation by 35%
Reduction of electricity cost for consumers
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Unchecked demand increase may outstrip renewable capacity M M
Technical failure through poor choice of hardware and or contractor H M
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 1
Construction and delivery? 12
Operation/Lifetime 180
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
Not determined 800,000
TOTAL 800,000
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC in cooperation with PEO
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Project concept only, no design, no funding
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
HighKayangel Renewable Energy Hybrid Systems
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
 High Cost of electricity supply for Outer Island systems (PPUC looses $ 600,000 each year in Outer 
Island systems
 High environmental vulnerability of Outer Island eco-systems (risk of fuel spills)
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Reduce fuel consumption and operating cost of Kayangel power system
Optimize load management and decrease specific fuel consumption
Introduce demand side management and increase awareness amongst consumers 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
A solar-diesel hybrid system including a 30 kW PV system and dispatchable short term storage (batteries) 
will be installed. Technicians will be trained in system operation and maintenance, particularly in optimizing 
dispatch of the battery unit in order to ensure operation of the diesel units at low specific fuel consumption 
points. An education campaign for the consumers will raise awareness regarding demand management and 
potential for energy conservation on the demand side. Monitoring of the project will allow to quantify 
impact of the intervention against the pre-project baseline and provide input for planning of similar 
measures 
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
4. Design study and tender documents for international competitive bidding for supply and installation
5. Installation of smaller diesel units by PPUC
6. Securing of funding for implementation
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
Security of Kayangel power supply enhanced through renewable energy utilization
Reduction of specific fuel consumption for power generation by 35%
Reduction of electricity cost for consumers
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Unchecked demand increase may outstrip renewable capacity M M
Technical failure through poor choice of hardware and/or contractor H M
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 1
Construction and delivery? 12
Operation/Lifetime 180
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
Not determined 450,000
TOTAL 450,000
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC in cooperation with PEO
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Project concept only, no design, no funding
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
HighEnergy conservation and Renewable Energy to Support Sport and Environment in Palau
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
The Palau Olympic Committee as operator of Palau’s sports facilities is financially burdened by high energy 
cost to operate sports facilities such as racetrack, swimming pool, gym and baseball field.
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
1. To promote sustainable, green energy through an awareness campaign based on the theme ‘Youth, Sport 
and Environment’. 
2. To reduce PNOC’s energy cost by 90% through energy conservation and renewable energy use.
3. To reduce PNOC’s overall electricity consumption by 10 % through energy conservation measures
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
The first technical component is reducing electricity consumption through conservation measures by 10 – 15 
%. This can be achieved without any decline in the utility of the facilities. A full energy audit will be 
conducted for all PNOC facilities in co-operation with the Palau Energy Office in order to determine the 
exact nature of the most promising conservation measures. In order to compensate for the total average 
monthly consumption after energy conservation measures, a solar installation of 115 kW peak will be 
required.
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Secure Funding under EDF 10 or other donor facility
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
1. Increased conservation awareness of amongst young people in Palau
2. Reduction of PNOC’s fossil energy consumption to zero
3. Cost saving of US$ 80,000 – 100,000 p.a. for PNOC
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Shortfall in net energy supply* M L
Lack of capacity within PEO M H
* output estimates conservative
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 2
Construction and delivery? 9
Operation/Lifetime 240
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
EDF 10 1,200,000
PNOC 80,000
Total 1,280,000
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PNOC in close cooperation with PPUC and PEO
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Proposal developed and submitted to donor
Priority (High, Medium Low?)Ngiwal State renewable energy pilot project Phase 1
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
 Increasing fuel cost
 Increasing dependency on fossil fuel
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Decrease electricity bill for local government and the community 
Reduce carbon footprint
Reduce fossil fuel dependency
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
Convert 100% of the local government facilities into renewable energy (solar) and provide supplemental 
power supply to the elderly and persons with limited income.
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Feasibility Study
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
1. Reduce electrical billing cost to the local government
2. Reduce electrical billing cost to the elderly and persons on limited income
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
New sub-division development (housing project) High High
Lack of technical expertise High High
Excessive cost due to import shipping cost Medium Medium
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 1
Construction and delivery 12
Operation / Lifetime Ongoing
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
Donor / other sources to be determined 1,800,000.00
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
Palau Energy Office (Admin Agency) and PPUC (implementing)
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Concept – No design – no funding
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
MediumAssessment of Hydro Resources on Babeldaob
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
 Inadequacy of power supply of Babeldaob
 High cost of power generation
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Reduce cost and align existing power supply
Provide efficient and reliable power source
Supplement to existing power supply and alternate to fossil fuel
Untapped resources can be used as alternative energy
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
Hydro power system of 100 kW – 300 kW installed at primary locations and coordinated with PPUC for 
operation and maintenance. Training in place with developing partners in Hydro power system and transfer 
of technology. An education awareness program for the consumers regarding the power source of hydro as 
alternative energy should be launched. Necessary infrastructure would need to be constructed.
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
1. Conduct feasibility study
2. Adopt / design study and intended document for bidding process
3. Funding
4. Hydrological measurement and site surveys
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
1. Security of Babeldaob power supply enhanced for renewable energy utilization
2. Major consumer savings
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Drought H L
Acquisition of land H H
Limited specialized /technical manpower H M
Accessibility to site M M
Destruction of environmental and habitat surrounding H H
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 4
Construction and delivery? 36
Operation/Lifetime Ongoing
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
EU 500,000.00
Development Partners/ Donor Organizations
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC / MPIIC / PEO
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Project Concept
Priority (High, Medium Low?)Wind Resource Assessment
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
 Palau is committed to reduce carbon footprint and lessen dependency from fossil fuels
 Wind is a resource available but its real feasibility has not been assessed
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Conduct wind study to identify if there are any feasible wind alleys in Palau and if there are then, then 
conduct a viability study for distribution.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
1
st Phase: 2 year study with measuring towers in selected study sites. A minimum of 4 sites pre-determined 
in outlying states
2
nd Phase: If wind alleys are feasible then comparative cost-benefit analysis considering distribution
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Funding / Determine Sites
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
 Reduction of fuel consumption
 May reach where there is no grid
 Replenishes grid (overall energy production)
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
High maintenance cost (assess effect on marine environment) M H
Technical capacity H M
Volume needed to make cost effective H M
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 3
Construction and delivery? 3
Operation/Lifetime 24
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
EDF 10 250,00.00
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PEO
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Pending funding and site assessments
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
Highpppy ggpy
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
Aging generators are prone to break downs, Insufficient reserve capacity to meet demand 
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Bridge capacity until base load generators are replaced, 
Standby capacity
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
Procurement and installation of 2x2 MW to 2x5 MW second hand generator sets in Malakal power plant
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Selection of equipment and contractor 
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
1. Provide necessary capacity for system stabilization and high quality power supply
2. Provision of reserves capacity will minimize system outage and reduce economic cost of unserved 
electricity demand 
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Second hand generator can incur substantial maintenance cost M M
Breakdown of generators (can be mitigated through warrantee clauses 
in procurement contract)
M M
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 0
Construction and delivery? 6
Operation/Lifetime 120
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
PPUC 2,000,000.00
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Project under way, funded through PPUC, installation expected in 2010
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
HighReplacement of Base Load Generators PPUC 
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
Aging generators – (26 years – 13 year, 10 years) have high specific fuel consumption which in turn forces 
PPUC to charge higher tariffs
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Decrease in average specific fuel consumption, Reduction of generation cost, Enhance reliability of power 
supply
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
Replace 20 MW of capacity by 4x5 MW generators and ancillary equipment in two places.
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
System design study, Identification of funding source
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
1. More efficient electricity generaion will result in lower supply cost which will benefit all consumers of 
PPUC supply
2. Reduction
3. Reduction of energy consumption
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Capacity to maintain new technology M M
Introduction of different generator sets may induce higher level of 
complexity and higher cost of spare part management
H H
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Design 6-12
Construction and delivery? 12-18
Operation/Lifetime 360
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
JICA -Phase one 20,000,000
PPUC –Phase two
Palau Government
Total 20,000,000
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? HighAirai to Ngechsar connection
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
Single line connectivity only, high loss of load probability in Airai
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
1. Loop grid connectivity
2. Allow secondary connection and redundancy
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
Connect Airai Power distribution lines to Ngeschar system with a 10 Kilometers line
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Field Study, engineering design
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
Grid stability, less outages, reduced economic loss due to unserved power demand
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Lack of funding H M
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Engineering study design 6
Construction 12
Lifetime 240
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
PPUC, MLA 6,000,000.00
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Concept
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
MediumUpgrading of Koror Substation
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
Koror Substation currently requires step down transformation from 34.5 KV to 13.8 KV for distribution 
from Aimeliik power plant. This incurs considerable distribution losses
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Decrease line loss and facilitate distribution from Aimeliik
Enhance system reliability and redundancy
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
Procurement and installation of a 34.5 kV submarine cable and which connects Aimeliik with Koror
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Engineering Study, Design
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
Reduced loss of load probability, reduction of transmission losses and lower supply cost within grid
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Lack of funding H M
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Engineering Design 12
Construction 15
Lifetime 360
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
PPUC, MLA To be determined
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Project Concept
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
HighPower distribution – Ngiwal / Ngaraard
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
Weak grid and high risk of load loss from single line power distribution system
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
1. Enhance gird capacity
2. Reduce risk of load loss 
3. Allow supply of Northern Babeldaob by Capitol generator during outages
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
Connect Ngiwal to Ngaraard with 3 kM high voltage line
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Engineering Study, Design
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
Enhanced grid stability, reduce loss of load probability in Northern Babeldaob
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
Lack of funding H M
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
Engineering, Design, Tender 6
Construction 9
Lifetime 240
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
PPUC budget $1,000,000.00
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Project concept
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
HighSubmarine cable from Aimeliik to Koror (T-Dock)
PROBLEM (What are the compelling reasons that this project should go ahead?)
Single line power distribution system
OBJECTIVES (What are the principal objectives that address the problem?)
Stabilize power distribution system by having redundancy
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (How will these objectives be met?)
A 5KM submarine cable extending from Aimeliik Power plant substation to Koror substation at T-Dock.
PREREQUISITES What must happen before this can proceed?
Study
BENEFITS (What are the social and economic benefits to Palau of doing this?)
RISKS (What might prevent this from fixing the problem?)
Source of risk Consequence
(H/M/L)
Likelihood
(H/M/L)
TIMING (What is the expected timeframe for the key deliverables?)
Description of deliverable / milestone / lead time Time from funding (Months)
FUNDING (What will this project cost, and how accurate is that estimate?)
Source (budget, donor, private investor) Cost US$
RESPONSIBILITY (Which agency will ultimately be responsible for delivering this?)
PPUC
STATUS (Where is the project in its implementation cycle? 
Priority (High, Medium Low?)
Medium