File Name: PNG-NEP-2012-EN
Year: 2012
Country Name: Papua New Guinea
Country Code: PNG
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2012
Start Year: 2010
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

GE
   
   
EOTHERM
   
   
AL
Papua
Nove
ENE
a New Guin
ember 2012
ERGY
ea 
2
Y POLICY
   TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 PAGES
1. PREFACE 4-5 
2. APPLICATION 6
3. POLICY MISSION 6 
4. POLICY OBJECTIVES 6 
5. DEFINTIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS 6-7 
6. COMPLIANCE WITH LEGAL REQUIREMENTS 7-8 
(1) CONSTITUTION 
(2) NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT POLICIES 
(3) MINING ACT 1992 
7. INTERNATIONAL LEGAL REQUIREMENT 8 
8. DEVELOPMENT OF A GEOTHERMAL ENERGY REGULATION AND 
 GUIDELINE 9 
9. PROMOTION OF GEOTHERMAL ENERGY RESOURCES 9 
10. NATIONAL CONTEXT ON GEOTHERMAL ENERGY RESOURCE 9 
11. INSTITUTIONAL GOVERNANCE 10-11 
(1) DEPARTMENT OF MINERAL POLICY & GEOHAZARDS 
 MANAGEMENT 
(2) MINERAL RESOURCES AUTHORITY 
(3) MINING ADVISORY COUNCIL 
(4) INDEPENDENT CONSUMER AND COMPETITION 
 COMMISSION 
(5) PNG POWER LIMITED 
12. SUSTAINABILITY 11 
13. ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION 11-12 
14. DECOMMISSION OF A GEOTHERMAL POWER PLANT AND 
 REHABILITATION 12 
15. GEOTHERMAL ENERGY TENEMENT AND EXPLORATION RIGHTS 12-13 
(1) MINERAL RIGHTS IN GEOTHERMAL ENERGY 
(2) GEOTHERMAL ENERGY EXPLORATION RIGHTS 
16. APPLICATION FOR A GEOTHERMAL ENERGY TENEMENT 13 (1) GEOTHERMAL ENERGY TENEMENTS 
17. GEOTHERMAL ENERGY AGREEMENTS 13-14 
18. FISCAL REGIME 14-15 
(1) TAX CONSIDERATIONS 
19. ROYALTY 15 
20. ADDING VALUE TO SOCIETY 15 
(1) OTHER LANDOWNER BENEFITS 
21. STATE’S ASSISTANCE 15-16 
22. CLEAN DEVELOPMENT MECHANISM 16 
(1) CARBON CREDITS 
23. DATABASE 16-17
24. SOCIAL MAPPING AND LANDOWNER IDENTIFICATION 17 
25. DISPUTE RESOLUTION 17PREFACE 
The mineral growth spiraling from the boom in the extractive industry of Papua New Guinea as 
a result of increase in the mineral explorations and development has the proper credentials to 
shape and revolutionise our socio-economic climate to new and greater heights. Not only has 
Papua New Guinea been extracting minerals onshore but has until recently ventured offshore 
with the realisation of modern technology which has made this become possible. Papua New 
Guinea’s potential has yet again dawn in the area of renewable energy for commercial and 
industrial development particularly with the geothermal energy resources. This commodity was 
not given much prominence in the past but recent developments in its usage in the industry 
have proved that this resource has become very crucial for our development. The only example 
in this jurisdiction of geothermal energy generating power within the mineral industry is 
evidenced by the large scale world class Lihir Gold Mine on Lihir Island, New Ireland Province. 
Papua New Guinea is situated within the ‘Pacific Ring of Fire’ and is an ideal location for 
geothermal energy source. The National Government is committed to reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions due to global warming and utilising the geothermal energy for generating electricity is 
deemed as the way forward. Amongst the technically proven renewable energy technologies, 
geothermal energy development stands out amongst the rest of the renewable energy 
resources because it covers the wider spectrum of the community. Its extraction and 
development does not necessarily require large areas of land unlike the commonly accustomed 
MW hydro. 
This Policy helps in promoting the development of our renewable resources such as geothermal 
energy as an option for electricity generation. It will help guide investors and customary 
landowners (“landholders”) to work together in accordance with the spirit of the National 
Constitution and Vision 2050 to develop Papua New Guinea. 
The National Government is committed to developing geothermal energy projects provided the 
investment climate is conducive to international investors and financiers. The interests of the 
customary landowners on the geothermal potential sites must be considered and management 
packages on spinoff benefits introduced to enhance partnership and cooperation in the 
development of the geothermal resource. In the hindsight, it has become quite evident that any project to be developed comes with 
challenges. This must be addressed through a concerted effort to minimise challenges to a 
manageable level within our existing policy, legislation and regulatory frameworks. Helping to 
providing appropriate and reliable information, community consultation and awareness requires 
team work from all stakeholders. A project development must reflect a collaborative effort from 
all stakeholders, so at the end of the day, individual stakeholders can take ownership of the 
success of a project. 
God Bless Papua New Guinea. 1. APPLICATION 
This Policy Handbook shall be read with reference to the Mining Act 1992 (and its subsequent 
revised amendment) and the Mineral Policy (and its subsequent revised amendment) and 
relates specifically to geothermal energy exploration, extraction and development as an 
alternate energy source in Papua New Guinea. 
2. POLICY MISSION 
To establish a framework that guides and promotes the exploitation, development, production 
and use of geothermal energy resources in Papua New Guinea for power generation, heat to 
underpin energy security, industrial development, environment protection and wealth creation 
for the nation. 
(a) Energy security envisions sustainable and reliable supplies of energy for Papua New 
Guineans at affordable and predictable (relatively stable) prices. 
(b) Environment protection concerns protection of both the local and global environment 
through abatement and mitigation practices. 
(c) Wealth creation encompasses adding value to society in the economic and social 
dimensions. 
3. POLICY OBJECTIVES 
To foster the potential development of geothermal resources in Papua New Guinea. 
(a) Ensure sustainable and reliable supplies of heat for thermal applications and electricity 
(provided) as affordable and relatively stable prices. 
(b) Ensure the exploitation, development and production of the geothermal energy 
resources is developed through effective environment management plan which takes 
into consideration the protection of the environment. 
(c) Add economic and social values (wealth) to society. 
4. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS 
With reference to the Mining Act 1992 (and its subsequent revised amendment) and the 
Mineral Policy (and its subsequent revised amendment), and specific to geothermal energy the 
interpretation of this Policy shall be in its liberal sense and the following specific definitions 
apply: Geothermal energy is the energy derived from the natural flow of heat from the earth, coming 
from natural cooling and natural radioactive decay within the core. It is a non-hydrocarbon 
energy resource and is renewable and sustainable and is considered a mineral for the purposes 
of mining activities. 
“Geothermal resources” are classified as renewable resources, in the form of: 
(i) All products of geothermal processes, embracing indigenous steam, hot water and hot 
brines; 
(ii) Steam and other gases, hot water and hot brines resulting from water, gas or other 
fluids artificially introduced into geothermal formations; 
(iii) Heat or associated energy found in geothermal formations; and 
(iv) Any by-product derived from them. 
“Production” includes the tapping of the energy derived from the natural flow of heat from the 
earth, extraction, obtaining or use of the geothermal energy by applying it for any purpose. 
For the purposes of this Policy, and pursuant to the Mining Act 1992 (and its subsequent 
revised amendment) and Oil and Gas Act 1998, geothermal energy resource is not petroleum 
or a petroleum product. 
5. COMPLIANCE WITH LEGAL REQUIREMENTS 
The following legislations and policies apply in the administration of this Policy: 
(1) LEGISLATIONS 
(a) Constitution of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea.
(b) Mining Act 1992 (and its subsequent revised amendment).
(c) Environment Act 2000.
(d) Land Act 1996.
(e) Mining Safety Act 1977(and its subsequent revised amendment).
(f) Electricity Supply (Government Power Stations) Act 1970
(2) POLICIES 
(a) Mineral Policy (and its subsequent revised amendment). 
(b) National Goals and Directive Principles. 
(c) Medium Term Development Plan 2011 - 2015. 
(d) Development Strategic Plan 2010 - 2030. 
(e) Vision 2050. (3) CONSTITUTION 
Sections 38 - 56 of the National Constitution provides for the regulation and restriction of 
qualified rights of every citizen to the extent necessarily required by an Act of Parliament for 
the purposes of giving effect to the national interest in public order and public welfare. 
In so far as the exploration, development and production of the geothermal energy resource 
is concerned, it is deemed a function of the National Government by virtue of Section 1 of 
the Mining Act 1992, which declares exploration and mining activities to be for public 
purposes and as a matter of national interest. 
(4) MINING ACT 1992 
The State through the National Constitution is vested with the law making powers for the 
regulation and administration of mining activities within Papua New Guinea and none 
others. Mining activities are administered pursuant to the Mining Act 1992 (or its 
subsequent amendment or revision) by the Independent State of Papua New Guinea as the 
guardian of all mineral resources and as a matter of national interest. 
(5) NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT POLICIES 
The National Goals and Directive Principles (NGDPs) in the National Constitution provides 
for the wise use of our natural resources and equal distribution of wealth for all citizens. 
These intentions are made known in the PNG Medium Term Development Plan 2011 - 2015, 
Development Strategic Plan 2010 - 2030 and the Vision 2050 by ‘creating opportunities 
for personal and national advancement through economic growth, smart 
innovative ideas, quality service and ensuring a fair and equitable distribution of 
benefits in a safe and secure environment for all citizens.’
6. INTERNATIONAL LEGAL REQUIREMENT 
This Policy is in compliance with the; 
(a) Kyoto Protocol; and 
(b) United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 7. DEV
The Stat
and the 
geotherm
extractio
8. PRO
The State
promoted
developm
9. NAT
Papua Ne
associate
New Brit
Lamingto
identified
developm
This map
VELOPMENT
te through t
Mineral Reso
mal energy 
n, developm
OMOTION O
e through th
d locally and
ment and pro
TIONAL CO
ew Guinea 
ed with volca
tain, New Ir
on in the N
d areas in t
ment. 
p shows the 
T OF GEOT
the Departm
ources Auth
resources 
ment and pro
OF GEOTHE
he Mineral R
d internation
oduction as a
ONTEXT ON 
is located a
anic activitie
reland and 
Northern Pr
the country
surveys mad
THERMAL E
ment of Mine
hority (MRA)
regulations 
oduction are 
ERMAL ENE
Resources Au
nally to attra
an alternate
GEOTHER
long the ‘Pa
es is eminent
Bougainville
rovince to 
y having the
de to identif
NERGY REG
eral Policy a
shall ensur
and guidel
compliant w
ERGY RESO
uthority shall
act potential 
e energy sou
MAL ENERG
acific Ring o
t. The north
e, and the s
Milne Bay 
e potential 
fy the geothe
GULATION
and Geohaza
re the develo
lines for th
with best pra
OURCES 
l ensure this
 investors fo
urce. 
GY RESOUR
of Fire’ wher
ern zone wh
southern zo
Province’s D
for geothe
ermal active
N AND GUID
ards Manag
opment and
he purposes
actice princip
s energy sou
or its explor
RCES 
re tectonic p
hich extends
one which e
D’entrecaste
rmal energy
e regions in P
DELINE 
gement (DM
d improveme
s of explora
ples. 
urce availabi
ation, extrac
plate movem
s from Mada
extends from
eaux islands
y extraction
PNG. 
PGM) 
ent of 
ation, 
lity is 
ction, 
ments 
ng to 
m Mt. 
s are 
n and 10. INSTITUTIONAL GOVERNANCE 
Institutional roles must be given full recognition and significance in the overall development, 
planning, monitoring and implementation of this Geothermal Energy Policy. The following are 
the responsible government agencies: 
(a) Department of Mineral Policy & Geohazards Management (DMPGM). 
(b) Mineral Resources Authority (MRA). 
(c) Mining Advisory Council (MAC). 
(d) Independent Consumer and Competition Commission (ICCC). 
(e) PNG Power Limited. 
(1) DEPARTMENT OF MINERAL POLICY & GEOHAZARDS MANAGEMENT 
The Department of Mineral Policy & Geohazards Management (DMPGM) is the custodian of 
this Geothermal Energy Policy and is responsible for developing and reviewing the Policy 
from time to time. 
(2) MINERAL RESOURCES AUTHORITY 
The Mineral Resources Authority (MRA) pursuant to the Mineral Resources Authority 
Act 2005 on behalf of the State shall: 
(a) Be the overall implementing and regulating agency for the development of the 
geothermal energy resource. 
(b) Facilitate stakeholder agreements and development agreements. 
(c) Collect and maintain database on geothermal energy resource for Papua New Guinea. 
(d) To sell geo data on the geothermal energy to potential and prospecting investors and 
developers. 
(e) Promote further and proper training of its technical personals in the field of 
geothermal energy resources exploration and production. 
(3) MINING ADVISORY COUNCIL 
The Mining Advisory Council (MAC) is responsible to determine and make recommendations 
to the Minister for Mining on applications made by investors for the exploration and 
production of the geothermal energy resources for power generation purposely for 
commercial and domestic purposes. A representative of the PNG Power Limited or such other expert in geothermal energy is 
required to provide expert opinion and advice to the MAC when dealing with applications for 
geothermal energy resources. 
(4) INDEPENDENT CONSUMER AND COMPETITION COMMISSION 
For the specific purposes of the production and supply of geothermal energy resources 
generating electricity, the Independent Consumer and Competition Commission (ICCC) shall 
be responsible for regulating prices, service standards and in adjudicating disputes related 
to access codes and access arrangements. 
(5) PNG POWER LIMITED 
The State through the Mineral Resources Authority, the developer and the PNG Power 
Limited shall be responsible for formulating the power supply plan for the geothermal 
energy resources to ensure there is ample and affordable supply of heat and electricity for 
domestic usage, commercial consumption and industrial development. 
11. SUSTAINABILITY 
The State must ensure the exploitation of the geothermal energy achieves: 
(a) Equal distribution of wealth and resources as prescribed by the Constitution, the 
National Goals and Directive Principles (NGDPs) and the Vision 2050. 
(b) Sustainable and reliable supplies of form of heat and electricity. 
(c) Encourage long term investment in geothermal power by ensuring commercial stability 
in electricity prices. 
(d) Affordable prices for electricity supplied by geothermal dependent on the supply and 
demand of geothermal energy power. 
(e) Incentives for investment. 
12. ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION 
The State through the Department of Environment and Conservation (DEC) shall ensure: 
(a) Classification of geothermal projects per size of the project and dependant on the 
impact of project on environment to be correctly classified either as Level 1, 2 and 3 
Activities under the Environmental Prescribed Activities Regulation. (b) The developer submits an Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) for the development 
of geothermal energy resources pursuant to the requirements of the Environment 
Act 2000. 
(c) There are adequate and effective mechanisms readily available for the purposes of 
environmental regulation to capture, contain and manage safety and environmental 
hazards surrounding hydrogen sulphide released in the extraction and bacterial 
associated. 
13. DECOMMISSION OF A GEOTHERMAL POWER PLANT AND REHABILITATION 
The project developer is required to produce a detailed Conceptual Decommissioning Power 
Plant Plan (CDPP Plan) at the time of lodging of the application for production. This Conceptual 
Decommissioning Power Plant Plan should take into consideration the socio-economic and 
environmental aspects of the impacted project area and accord effective rehabilitation 
measures. 
14. GEOTHERMAL ENERGY TENEMENT AND EXPLORATION RIGHTS 
Geothermal energy resource is a non-hydrocarbon renewable energy resource and is declared 
as a mineral for all purposes. Specific to its mode of operation in exploiting the geothermal 
energy, the mining tenement approval process, application, administration and regulation shall 
be applied. 
The State through the Mineral Resources Authority and the Papua New Guinea Power Limited 
recognises the need for Institutional Resource Sector Planning (IRSP) in developing the 
geothermal energy resource in: 
(a) Considering and encouraging the use of the appropriate modern technology or the 
best practice available internationally in compliance with the production of geothermal 
energy requirements by extracting, developing and producing the appropriate quantity 
and ultimately the supply of the electricity and heat consistent with international best 
practices. 
(b) Complying with the requirements of the Electricity Industry Policy (EIP). 
(1) MINERAL RIGHTS IN GEOTHERMAL ENERGY RESOURCE 
The Independent State of Papua New Guinea has ownership over all natural reserves of 
geothermal energy within its jurisdiction. 
All geothermal energy mineral rights is vested in the State in determining and permitting 
reputable investors to exploreextractproduce and sell the geothermal energy(2) GEOTHERMAL ENERGY EXPLORATION RIGHTS 
All exploration rights over the geothermal energy resource rests with the Independent State 
of Papua New Guinea and are granted in the form of tenements to persons or companies 
over a fixed term and over a fixed area. 
(a) Reporting 
The National Government encourages transparent reporting of the records of the finds 
from Feasibility Resource Assessment by the developer. 
(b) Consultation 
The National Government encourages appropriate consultation and awareness to be 
carried out before a feasible size of the resource is revealed within the project 
impacted area. 
15. APPLICATION FOR A GEOTHERMAL ENERGY TENEMENT 
The application process for the exploration and production of geothermal energy is as regulated 
by the Mineral Resources Authority. Pursuant to the Mining Act 1992 (and its subsequent 
revised amendment) the application process in general shall be as follows: 
(a) Lodging of tenement application with the Registrar of Tenements. 
(b) Application assessed by the Mining Advisory Council (MAC). 
(c) MAC recommends for approval of or refusal for grant of the tenement. 
(d) Minister for Mining makes a determination on the application. 
(1) GEOTHERMAL ENERGY TENEMENTS 
The tenements available for purposes of geothermal energy exploration and development 
are: 
(a) Exploration License (EL). 
(b) Mining Lease (ML). 
(c) Lease for Mining Purpose (LMP). 
(d) Mining Easement (ME). 
16. GEOTHERMAL ENERGY AGREEMENTS 
The State may enter into the following agreements with the developer and the duly identified 
landowners of the impacted project area(a) Mining Development Contract (MDC) 
(b) Compensation Agreement (CA) 
(b) Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) 
The State is determined to ensure appropriate production and benefit sharing arrangements are 
made between all relevant stakeholders and to encapsulate the sale of and the distribution of 
carbon credits. 
17. FISCAL REGIME 
The applicable fiscal policy in the interim would be as spelt out below, as per the Mineral Policy 
(and its subsequent revised amendment) until a determination is made on the applicable rates 
specifically for the geothermal energy resource: 
(a) Income Tax (resident companies) 
(b) Income Tax (non-resident companies) 
(c) Interest Withholding Tax (onshore lending) 
(d) Dividend Withholding Tax (DWT) 
(e) Allowable Capital Expenditure 
(f) Allowable Exploration Expenditure 
(g) Additional Exploration Deductions 
(h) Interest Deductions 
(i) Tax Credits 
(j) Royalty Rate 
(k) Special Support Grant (by the National Government) 
(l) Production Levy (paid to the Mineral Resources Authority) 
(m) State Equity Participation (optional) 
(1) TAX CONSIDERATIONS 
The State is not obliged to but may promote the development of the geothermal energy 
resource through provision of identified viable tax incentives that is conducive to the 
nation’s economy in consultation with the Department of Treasury (DoT) and the Internal 
Revenue Commission (IRC). 
The State through the Mineral Resources Authority shall make considerations for the 
following: 
(a) Import Duty Exemptions 
To cater for and assist capital hardware specifics including the technology to be used 
particularly for the extraction and production of the geothermal energy resource. The 
list of these items shall be identified by MRA. (b) Import Duty Rebates on Production Plant 
To provide appraisal on the productivity of the plant and facilitate the implementation 
process of production rebate to be made with the importer of the technology (i.e., 
owner of the geothermal plant). The production rebate should be the import duty 
exemption in a variant form and principally the amount otherwise have been 
exempted on this hardware (aggregate) at the time of delivery into the country. 
(c) Other Tax Incentives 
In consultation with the Department of Treasury (DoT) and the Internal Revenue 
Commission (IRC), tax incentives such as Pioneer Industries and rural Industries may 
apply. 
18. ROYALTY 
Subject to Clause 17 of this Policy, royalty generated from the production of geothermal energy 
belongs to the State. The project developer of the geothermal energy shall pay to the 
Independent State of Papua New Guinea a royalty rate (subject to NEC Policy Decision as 
determined from time to time) pursuant to the agreed formula between the State and the 
project developer. 
19. VALUE ADDING TO SOCIETY 
The development of geothermal energy resource will benefit all stakeholders including the 
customary landowners. The State encourages equal participation and benefit distribution for all 
the citizens. 
(1) OTHER LANDOWNER BENEFITS 
Other available landowner benefits identified are: 
(a) Employment. 
(b) Education and Training. 
(c) Local Business Participation. 
(d) Supply and Local Procurement. 
(e) Compensation. 
20. STATE’S ASSISTANCE 
Subject to the project economics and such other relevant considerations, the State may 
consider participating in the following matters: 
(a) State Equity Option. 
(b) Landowner Equity(c) Non Customary Landowners. 
(d) Carbon Credits 
21. CLEAN DEVELOPMENT MECHANISM 
The State through its nominee, Petromin Limited or alternatively the PNG Power Limited may 
apply for and develop geothermal energy resource projects in promoting sustainable socioeconomic development for Papua New Guinea through the Clean Development Mechanism 
(CDM) arrangement consistent with the Kyoto Protocol and the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. 
(1) CARBON CREDITS 
Subject to Clauses 20 and 21 of this Policy, the State through its nominee and in 
consultation with the Mineral Resources Authority, Department of Treasury, Department of 
Environment and Conservation and the Office of the Climate Change shall participate in the 
sale of carbon credits associated with the production of a geothermal energy power plant 
by: 
(a) Equity participating interest in the sale of the carbon credits with the project 
developer. 
(b) Drawing the appropriate funding to achieve the activity outputs subject to the project 
life span. 
22. DATABASE 
The State through the Mineral Resources Authority (MRA) is mandated to retain full and 
accurate information on geothermal energy resource in Papua New Guinea kept by the holder 
of the geothermal energy tenement relating to: 
(a) Boreholes drilled with detailed logs of strata penetrated. 
(b) Results of any geochemical and geophysical analysis. 
(c) Geological interpretation of the records on boreholes drilled and the results of the 
geochemical and geophysical analysis, maps, profiles and diagram charts. 
And not limited to this, any such other information or data relating to the availability of the 
geothermal energy resources, its exploration, extraction, development and production. The 
State has the absolute right over all such information, data and records as the owner of the 
geothermal energy resources. 23. SOCIAL MAPPING AND LANDOWNER IDENTIFICATION 
It is incumbent on the project developer and the State to ensure social mapping of the project 
area is conducted in a prudent and effective manner by correctly identifying landowners of a 
potential geothermal resource area immediately upon the grant of the Exploration License (EL). 
24. DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
Any disputes relating to the development of a geothermal energy project shall be dealt with in 
accordance with the nature of the disputes as follows: 
NOs: NATURE OF DISPUTES 
 
 CONCERNED AGENCIES 
1. Electricity ; ICCC 
; PNG Power Limited 
; MRA 
2. Landowners ; MRA 
; DMPGM 
; Provincial Government 
; Department of Provincial and Local 
Level Government Affairs 
3. Economic ; MRA 
; ICCC 
; PNG Power Limited 
; Department of Treasury 
; IRC 
4. Environment/Safety ; MRA 
; DEC 
; DMPGM 
(1) Any minor issues may be resolved utilising the available resources with guidance from 
the Office of the State Solicitor of Papua New Guinea. 
(2) Where an issue is unresolved through the initial process under (1) above or is of a 
complex nature, then the dispute shall be dealt with through an appointed Arbitration 
Tribunal with an expertise in geothermal energy or the subject of the issue in dispute. POLICY 
The Secr
The Depa
Private M
PORT M
National 
Papua Ne
Telephon
 
Facsimile
REGULA
The Man
Mineral R
P.O. Box 
PORT M
National 
Papua Ne
Telephon
Facsimile
Email: 
Website:
INDUST
The Exec
PNG Cha
PO Box 1
PORT M
National 
Papua Ne
Telephon
Facsimile
Email: 
Website:
Potential
Petroleum
For furth
AND LEGI
retary 
artment of M
Mail Bag 
MORESBY
Capital Distr
ew Guinea 
ne (+675
(+675
e: (+675
ATION: 
aging Direct
Resources Au
1906 
MORESBY 1
Capital Distr
ew Guinea 
ne: (+675
e: (+675
infor@
 www.
TRY REPRE
cutive Office
mber of Min
1032 
MORESBY
Capital Distr
ew Guinea 
ne: (+675
e (+675
ga@p
 www.
 developers
m which offe
her informat
SLATION: 
Mineral Policy
rict 
5) 321 4138 
5) 322 7678 
5) 321 4995
tor 
uthority 
21 
rict 
5) 321 3511 
5) 321 5781 
@mra.gov.pg
mra.gov.pg 
SENTATIVE
r 
nes and Petro
rict 
5) 321 2988 
5) 3217107 
ngchamberm
pngchambe
s are also a
ers a wide ra
ion, please c
y & Geohaza
g
E: 
oleum 
minpet.com.
rminpet.com
dvised to m
ange of assis
contact:
ards Manage
pg 
m.pg
make contact
stance to its
ement 
t with the P
s members. I
NG Chamb
ts address i
er of Mines
s: 
 and 