File Name: PNG-CPD-2017-EN
Year: 2017
Country Name: Papua New Guinea
Country Code: PNG
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 5 to 11 September 2017
Start Year: 2018
End Year: 2022
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
10 July 2017
Original: English
1711555X (E) 020817
Second regular session 2017
5 to 11 September 2017, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Papua New Guinea
(2018-2022)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale ................................ .................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships ................................ ... 4
III. Programme and risk management................................ ........ 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation ................................ ............. 8 
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Papua New Guinea (2018-2022) ................... 9I. Programme rationale 
1. The country programme, 2018-2022, for Papua New Guinea will support the 
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Four issues in the next five 
years will shape the country’s sustainable development: (a) maintaining stability and building a 
vibrant modern nation state; (b) ensuring that natural resources and revenues benefit the 
majority of people, including future generations; (c) climate proofing the country’s sustainable 
development; and (d) successfully implementing the Bougainville Peace Accord.
2. The country’s 7.7 million people are diverse and dispersed;185 per cent live in rural areas, 
spread over 600 islands.2 The topography makes it difficult to access parts of the country, so 
governance and delivery of social services is expensive, weak and uneven.3Papua New Guinea
did not achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 and is ranked 154 out of 188 
countries (low human development) in the human development index 2015. In 2011, 51.5 per 
cent of the population were younger than 19 years of age,
4
and have little voice within the 
formal political system.
5 The poorest, most vulnerable people have one or more of the following 
common attributes, they: live across the borders of two provinces so that no administration takes 
responsibility for them; have few well-educated people in positions of influence to represent 
their voices; have no road connections and very poor access to markets or services; are in wage 
earning positions where they cannot send remittances home; and experience at least one severe 
environmental constraint (annual flooding, steep slopes, high rainfall, poor soils, high altitude or 
high cloud cover) or are on a small offshore isolated island. This is the population UNDP will 
target.
3. The country is undergoing important transitions, including from ‘tradition’ to ‘modernity’ 
where citizens pay taxes and, in return, expect to receive essential services from the state. The 
first key development challenge is government capacity (at national and local levels) and 
legislation and business processes to finance, manage and deliver basic services. Lack of data 
for inclusive, evidence-based development makes it difficult to monitor progress. A 2016 
UNICEF study6found that Papua New Guinea lacked three essential components of effective 
service delivery: (a) popular participation in development; (b) officials trained to perform duties 
at the local level; and (c) a functioning governance system with clear roles, responsibilities, 
accountabilities, monitoring systems, and management and use of funds. UNDP has been 
successful in strengthening government capacities at the subnational level and in supporting 
increased, timely reporting on public expenditure from 33 per cent to 52 per cent through the 
introduction of a new financial management tool.
7 UNDP partnered with the Department of 
Finance in the Phones Against Corruption initiative, which is now being replicated in other parts 
of Papua New Guinea and other countries.8
4. A second development challenge is the lack of social cohesion across the country and the 
high rates of gender-based violence. Women are underrepresented at all levels of governance 
and in decision-making.
9 Currently, there are only three women in Parliament. The 2012 
commonwealth election observation report found that the current system does not adequately 
fulfil women’s right to equality in the political sphere.10 Papua New Guinea ranks 143 out of 
 
1 National Statistical Office, April 2012.
2 The Commonwealth Organization, 2015.
3
Papua New Guinea: Rural service delivery and local governance program, World Bank, 2015.
4 National Statistical Office, April 2012.
5 Department of National Planning and Monitoring, Papua New Guinea summary report of MDGs, 2015, p.44.
6 UNICEF situation analysis of women and children in Papua New Guinea, 2016.
7
PCAB Newsletter, Issue 8, 1 May 2016. (link)
8
Papua New Guinea was winner of the 2013 Excellence in Anti-Corruption Reporting Media Award, Australian 
National University.
9 Committee of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, concluding 
recommendations to Papua New Guinea, 2010, page 8, paragraph 33.
10 DP/DCP/PNG/2
188 countries on the gender inequality index (2015).
11 Two in three women12 experience 
gender-based violence in their lifetime. In remote and rural areas, women and youth are at risk 
of further marginalization. UNDP supported the Government in the development of the first 
ever national gender-based violence strategy endorsed by the National Executive Committee in 
December 2016. The Government has made notable progress in establishing a range of core 
responsive protection services, such as family support centres, police-family sexual violence 
units and police sexual offence squads, the Child Protection Act and a blanket ban on underage 
marriages. Despite having ratified six core human rights treaties, Papua New Guinea still has a 
number of groups with a disproportionate risk of human rights deprivations and violations:
women, children, the elderly, people living with HIV/AIDS, people living with disabilities and 
the geographically isolated.
5. Critical to the country’s political stability is the successful implementation of the 
Bougainville Peace Agreement signed between the Autonomous Region of Bougainville and the 
Government in 2001, following the protracted Bougainville crisis that began in 1998. Using its 
convening power, in 2016 UNDP supported the National Government and the Autonomous 
Bougainville Government to agree on 15 June 2019 as the referendum target date. With support 
from UNDP, the charter for establishing an independent body to conduct the referendum was 
signed between the National Government and the Autonomous Bougainville Government. 
UNDP, UNFPA and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of 
Women (UN-Women) successfully supported political dialogue with groups, such as excombatants, when the need to unify political factions was central to peace and stability in 
Bougainville and other parts of Papua New Guinea.
6. The third development challenge is that the economy has long been divided between a 
formal sector based on exports of natural resources and a large informal sector that relies on 
subsistence farming and other small-scale economic activities.
13 Based on the Household 
Income and Expenditure Survey 2009, it was calculated14 that 39.9 per cent of the population 
live below the upper poverty line.15 With less than 15 per cent of the population connected to 
electricity, there is a need to increase access to clean, reliable energy. The profitable extractives 
sector generates revenue for the country but not significant local employment and no significant 
improvements in the lives of most people.
16 The national human development report 2014, 
“From wealth to wellbeing: Translating resource revenue into sustainable human development”, 
proved important in shifting the debate about extractives to enable leaders to make better
choices for citizens’ wellbeing.
7. The Government is on the path to becoming a strong, effective leader on many issues in 
the Pacific and has wider leadership aspirations in Asia. It will host the Asia Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) Summit in 2018. While firmly rooted in the Pacific, Papua New Guinea 
shares a border with Indonesia and is increasingly developing strong partnerships with China, 
India, Japan, Malaysia, Korea and Singapore. The country has a vast endowment of natural 
resources and geographic proximity to rapidly growing Asian markets, and has been one of the 
world’s fastest growing economies over the past decade. The gross domestic product growth 
rate has been positive since the early 2000s,
17 reaching 9.9 per cent in 2015, though falling to 
3 per cent in 2017.
18 The Government’s Vision 2050 has the goal to “develop and grow the 
manufacturing, services, agriculture, forestry, fisheries and ecotourism sectors from 2010 to 
2050”.19 UNDP launched the first business plan competition for young entrepreneurs, attracting 
 
11 UNDP, gender inequality index 2015.
12 Darko, E., Smith, W. and Walker, D., “Gender violence in Papua New Guinea: the cost to business”, Overseas 
Development Institute, 2015. 
13 Heritage Organization, index of economic freedom, 2017.
14Papua New Guinea poverty profile, based on the Household Income and Expenditure Survey, 2012.
15Upper poverty, defined as food and non-food consumption.
16The national human development report, 2014, p.39.
17 World Bank national accounts data, 2016.
18 more than 300 innovative business ideas, provided training and mentoring, and connected the 
best ideas to potential investors.20
8. The fourth development challenge is climate-proofing the country’s sustainable
development pathway and increasing the resilience of authorities and communities to respond to 
and recover from disasters. Papua New Guinea is vulnerable to floods, droughts (such as the 
1997-1998 and 2015-2016 El Niño weather patterns), frosts, storm surges and king tides, as well 
as extreme winds and waves at sea. Such weather-related events are expected to increase in 
frequency.
21 Located in the “Pacific ring of fire”, communities in Papua New Guinea are prone 
to earthquakes (which cause deadly tsunamis) and a number of active volcanoes. The country 
holds some of the world’s last tracts of mature tropical rainforest and coral reefs. These forest 
and marine ecosystems, combined with a unique array of species that have evolved in isolation, 
make the country one of the world’s most important biodiversity hotspots.
22 Papua New Guinea
is home to over 5 per cent23 of the world’s global biodiversity and 7 per cent of the world’s tuna 
reserves, with many original and untouched terrestrial and marine ecosystems rich in local 
endemic species. With 70 per cent forest cover, the country needs mechanisms to reduce 
emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and to conserve and enhance forest carbon 
stocks. UNDP was instrumental in supporting the adoption of the climate change policy (2014), 
the protected areas policy (2014), the protected areas bill (2016), the protected areas 
implementation plan (2016) and the disaster risk management framework.
9. Based on an independent evaluation of the United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework (UNDAF), 2012-2017, the United Nations comparative advantage in Papua New 
Guinea includes the mandate to act, the capacity to act, and being best positioned to act. The 
analysis concluded that the United Nations has strong relationships with government (all levels),
and that future programming must align to national priorities in the context of the SDGs. The 
analysis revealed that by delivering-as-one and using its partnerships, the United Nations can 
reach the marginalized and vulnerable. To enhance delivering-as-one, the One-UN Programme
is financed through a common budgetary framework. The Joint Programme Steering 
Committee, co-chaired by the Secretary, Department of National Planning and the United 
Nations Resident Coordinator, is the highest level of oversight for the UNDAF. A programme 
coordination committee, comprised of leaders of the four outcome groups, promotes synergies 
and acts as an advisory group to the United Nations country team. 
10. The United Nations is well positioned to mainstream human rights, gender equality and 
women’s empowerment throughout its programmes. UNDP and the United Nations system are 
recognized by bilateral partners and the Government as playing a crucial role in supporting 
development and in convening dialogue on sensitive issues. A mid-term review of the climate 
change adaptation project recommended that, since transaction costs of doing development in 
Papua New Guinea are high, partnerships with United Nations organizations, civil society 
organizations, churches and the private sector are important so that certain geographically 
targeted areas receive the full spectrum of development support. Development interventions 
around certain geographic regions will therefore be prioritized. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
11. The country programme is aligned to the Government’s Vision 2050, the medium-term 
development plan, 2018-2022, and the national strategy for responsible sustainable 
development. The programme is informed by the UNDP strategic plan, 2018-2021, and 
contributes to the UNDAF, 2018-2022. The programme promotes a whole-of-society approach,
which requires innovation and business models from the private sector, mobilization of civil 
 
20 “Kumul game changers business plan competition project review report”, 5 May 2016.
21 Papua New Guinea second national communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change.
22 Mittermeier, R. A., "Biodiversity hotspots and major tropical wilderness areas: approaches to setting conservation DP/DCP/PNG/2
society, and best practices and funding from public and private sectors. UNDP will foster 
innovation and knowledge-generation, including integrated, issues-based approaches to complex 
development challenges. UNDP will act as a connector and platform supporting linkages and 
South-South knowledge-exchanges by bringing the country’s good practices to global and 
regional forums and global innovations to Papua New Guinea, while leveraging UNDP global 
knowledge and expertise. In particular, Papua New Guinea will work with India for renewable 
energy and smokeless stoves; China (through the Papua New Guinea Business Council) for ewaste management; Korea, by making use of the Korean volunteer system in Papua New 
Guinea to reach vulnerable communities; and Singapore, for excellence in the civil service. The 
2018 APEC Summit will offer other entry points for South-South cooperation.
Peace: promoting inclusive governance, justice and peace 
12. Building on its comparative advantage in this area, UNDP will support the accountability, 
transparency, financial management and enhanced public institutional performance of 
government at national and subnational levels. To move towards a more effective public service, 
UNDP will work with the Department of Personnel Management to strengthen the legal and 
policy framework for a professionalized, performance-based civil service and to set up stronger 
accountability measures. Working with the UNDP Global Centre for Public Service Excellence 
in Singapore and through South-South exchanges, UNDP will explore the adoption of global 
good practices into the Papua New Guinea civil service. UNDP will continue to scale up its 
support to build capacities in financial management at the provincial and district levels.
13. In partnership with other United Nations organizations, civil society, media and churches, 
UNDP will address the need for improved social accountability through the use of citizen 
surveys that ensure citizens’ voices are heard on national and local issues, particularly those of 
women, youth and geographically isolated communities. UNDP will continue to support anticorruption strategies by collaborating with the Department of Finance, Ombudsman 
Commission and the proposed independent commission against corruption. 
14. UNDP will work with UN-Women to support the strengthening and deepening of the 
democratic processes for greater engagement and leadership of women and youth, and rurally 
isolated and marginalized groups. This intervention will, in turn, strengthen UNDP interventions 
in climate and environment-related activities. It will support the development of technical skills 
that target management and decision-making in a decentralized context for both members of 
Parliament and local-level government, focused on development priorities that include 
allocation and utilization of public funds, and procurement of and accountability for goods and 
services. UNDP will support the Government to strengthen systems and processes to ensure that 
the Parliament and the Bougainville House of Representatives have the capacity to fulfil their 
duties efficiently and perform their legislative, oversight and representative functions based on 
effective institutional capacities and adequate powers. UNDP and UN-Women will support 
efforts to increase women’s effective participation in politics and in other leadership positions. 
This includes supporting more women candidates to run in elections, building on UNDP success 
in supporting women candidates during the 2015 elections in Bougainville.
15. UNDP and UN-Women will support the Government and partners to implement and 
operationalize the gender-based violence strategy, which provides a roadmap to achieve zerotolerance towards gender-based violence. Together with other United Nations organizations, 
UNDP will play a lead role in mobilizing resources, including setting up the gender-based 
violence council and continuing to roll out the referral protocol that UNDP piloted in 2016 in 
four provinces. 
16. UNDP will offer specific support to the National Government and the Government of the 
Autonomous Region of Bougainville in preparing for the 2019 referendum. UNDP will focus on 
facilitating timely decision-making (before and after the referendum), unification of factions,
and promotion of social cohesion and widespread awareness of referendum-related issues. 
UNDP will provide planning and training assistance to the Bougainville Referendum Bougainville Peace Agreement environment, while coordinating all international assistance to 
the referendum process. UNDP, with UNFPA and UN-Women, will support political dialogue 
with groups, such as ex-combatants, where the unification of political factions is central to 
peace and stability in Bougainville and other parts of the country. UNDP will focus on young 
people as peacebuilders. Ensuring participation and inclusion of women, the United Nations will 
provide a neutral space within which political issues can be addressed and resolved by 
supporting mediation and peace negotiations. 
Prosperity: inclusive and sustainable growth
17. UNDP will support Papua New Guinea stakeholders in SDG prioritization and 
implementation by providing evidence-based policy options and advice/support in strengthening 
institutional coordination mechanism(s) and parliamentary oversight committees, mobilizing 
and engaging civil society, and continuing the United Nations SDG advocacy campaign. 
Particularly important will be localizing the SDGs at the subnational and local levels. The 
UNDP approach will be to support a platform allowing multiple stakeholders to contribute to 
SDG attainment in a coordinated, collaborative way. UNDP will assist in the development of a
roadmap for an integrated national financing framework, identifying potential mechanisms and 
financing options, including private sector financing to implement the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development and national policies. UNDP will work with the Business Council to 
establish an SDG business coalition that will coordinate joint action for SDG achievement. 
UNDP, together with UNFPA, will partner with and provide technical assistance to key 
government departments and agencies, including the Department of National Planning and 
Monitoring and the National Statistics Office. UNDP, in partnership with United Nations
organizations, international financial institutes, civil society groups and private sector, will 
support the availability of reliable SDG data and develop national capacities for its generation 
and analysis and a system to undertake regular, effective monitoring and reporting. This 
includes bringing in innovations to generate an open-data platform with multiple stakeholders to 
monitoring progress towards the Goals.
18. Following GoPNG’s 2016 publication of its small and medium-seize enterprise policy to 
support and foster innovative, high-impact entrepreneurship, UNDP will scale up and support 
interventions in social entrepreneurship, focused on youth. UNDP will seek to strengthen its 
links with the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) and other partners to 
promote financial inclusion, improve financial literacy and support district development 
planning. Building on the national human development report, UNDP will work with extractive 
industries to encourage their contribution to human development in partnership with the 
Business Council. It will work on value chains to provide small farmer communities with 
production options and skills to improve their socioeconomic position in an expanding economy
owing to mineral and gas projects. UNDP will provide support to improve value chain 
performance by enhancing relationships among chain participants.
Planet: sustainable management of natural resources, biodiversity conservation, 
strengthened climate and disaster resilience 
19. Working with development partners, civil society organizations, national-level institutions 
and local governments, UNDP will leverage its comparative advantage to support the 
development of specific measures for climate-change adaptation and resilience-building. UNDP 
has a large climate change portfolio and interventions at the community level to address issues 
such as gender inequality, poverty, widening economic disparity, lack of opportunity for youth, 
geographically isolated groups and communities affected by hazards. Adaptation measures will 
support the resilience of subsistence-level agricultural communities, which are among the 
country’s most vulnerable groups. Recognizing the importance of energy availability and access 
issues, UNDP will pilot renewable energy mini-grid systems.
20. Together with key partners, UNDP will support the Government to develop its disaster 
risk management frameworkin line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk ReductionIt DP/DCP/PNG/2
related information management and early warning systems, and building community resilience 
to disasters. UNDP will support the National Disaster Centre to improve capacities. It will work 
with relevant government institutions and development partners to mainstream disaster risk 
reduction in development planning and improve cross-sectoral collaboration and coordination. It 
will use targeted measures to mitigate risks to most vulnerable populations and reduce urban 
vulnerability to disasters, such as earthquakes, floods and fires. UNDP will continue to promote 
the integration of climate change and disaster risk management as set out in the regional 
framework for resilient development in the Pacific.
24 UNDP will continue to support 
humanitarian coordination and clusters by providing secretariat services to the disaster 
management team.
21. To address challenges related to environmental protection and conservation, UNDP will 
continue its partnership with the Government at national and local levels, civil society and 
development partners to expand the protected areas network, developing legal frameworks on 
conservation, strengthening institutional capacities and establishing a sustainable financing 
mechanism to manage protected areas. 
22. UNDP will help the Government benefit from a potential international REDD+ financial 
mechanism tied to reducing greenhouse gas emission from the forest sector. UNDP will 
prioritize its efforts in reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+)
to guide decision-making in the development of a national strategy and its implementation, 
based on the nature of the country’s forests and grounded in national development goals. 
REDD+ will adapt to and work within local cultural contexts. 
III. Programme and risk management
23. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contribution to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in 
the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal controls 
framework. In accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/9, all direct costs associated 
with project implementation will be charged to the concerned projects.
24. The majority of the country programme will be nationally executed, with some projects 
directly executed by UNDP. It will use the harmonized approach to cash transfers in a 
coordinated fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cash 
transfer modalities, size of disbursements, and scope and frequency of assurance activities may 
be revised during programme implementation, based on the findings of programme monitoring, 
expenditure monitoring and reporting, and audits.
25. The decline in grant-based official development assistance necessitates greater national 
responsibility for financing development using domestic resources, though this will be a 
challenge in Papua New Guinea. In this context, UNDP will expand partnerships with the 
private sector, non-traditional partners and international financial institutions, investing UNDP 
regular resources in innovative solutions while leveraging other funding for scaling-up
assistance. UNDP will convene a business coalition, which will coordinate and leverage 
financing for SDGs. UNDP will continue to support the Government in accessing vertical funds 
for climate change adaptation and mitigation, management of environmental resources and 
biodiversity. 
26. UNDP works on sensitive policy issues, with potential risks to perceptions of its 
impartiality, one of the organization’s greatest assets. There is a risk of delay or inaction on key 
pillars of the Bougainville Peace Agreement, and uncertainty around the referendum in 2019. To 
 
24 mitigate this risk, UNDP will collaborate with counterparts to develop and continually adjust its 
programme-specific risk management strategies based on the institutional context and conflict 
analysis.
27. The 2017 elections will take place during a period of economic downturn, presenting a 
risk to political stability. Changes in government ministers may lead to an uneven policy 
environment. The APEC Summit in 2018, hosted in Port Moresby, presents both an opportunity 
for Papua New Guinea and a risk if government development funds are redirected. UNDP 
projects in 2018 and 2019 can deliver activities through non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) and churches, and can channel certain funds to different provinces depending on buy-in 
and stability. Climate related funds are unlikely to be at risk.
28. Papua New Guinea is frequently impacted by disasters, which often diverts resources from 
development budgets to emergency responses. UNDP, together with United Nations partners
and in consultation with government and community-level partners, will develop and continue 
to update joint disaster preparedness and business continuity plans, relying on different 
modalities, partners and geographical areas for uninterrupted delivery of support. This will 
include risk management strategies that reduce impact on programmes, as well as reprogramming options for the ongoing initiatives.
29. In partnership with the United Nations Department of Safety and Security (UNDSS) and 
the United Nations country team, UNDP will closely monitor safety and security issues and, if 
access to certain areas is difficult or staff are at risk, UNDP will work through civil society 
partners. This will enable UNDP operations to continue, sometimes in remote and isolated 
locations, while prioritizing the safety and security of UNDP staff members and their families.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
30. Monitoring and evaluation of the UNDAF, 2018-2022, is the joint responsibility of the 
Government and United Nations country team, through the Programme Steering Committee and 
four UNDAF results groups. They will prepare annual progress reports, regularly update 
approaches regarding theories of change and their ongoing validity, adjust the plan as necessary 
to the national context, and address barriers to achieving UNDAF results. For this country 
programme, UNDP will monitor and evaluate results at the country programme output level. 
Monitoring and evaluation will build on and support existing national data and information 
systems, ensuring government ownership and sustainability and providing a foundation for SDG 
monitoring. UNDP, UNFPA and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) will put 
considerable effort investing in baseline data and tracking progress at a disaggregated level.
UNDP will use relevant corporate indicators and, as required, make adjustments to the results 
and resources framework to reflect and align with updates to the UNDP strategic plan, 2018-
2021, and the reform agenda of the Secretary-General.
31. UNDP will strengthen its monitoring and evaluation systems and articulate theories of 
change for each project, with causal linkages to outcomes and emphasis on the sustainability of 
programme results. The UNDP gender marker, used to monitor programme expenditures and 
improve planning and decision-making to ensure gender equality, will be better integrated into 
UNDP programmes during this cycle. UNDP will promote disaggregation of data (sex and other 
variables that are relevant) in the projects it is supporting. 
32. UNDP will intensify efforts to communicate stories and real life narratives, using 
innovative, user-friendly formats and social media tools to reach diverse audiences.DP/DCP/PNG/2
Annex. Results and resources framework for Papua New Guinea (2018-2022)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: 1. Security and international relations; 2. Inclusive, democratic, participatory, accountable and transparent governance (SDGs 5, 8, 16, 17).
OUTCOME 1: By 2022, government and non-governmental institutions demonstrate improved transparency, accountability, delivery of justice and promotion of peace and security.
UNDAF outcome indicator(s), 
baselines and target(s)
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines and targets)
Major partners, partnerships 
and frameworks
Indicative resources by 
outcome
(in thousands of United 
States dollars)
Indicator: Rank and score in 
worldwide governance 
indicators
Baseline: (2015)
- Government effectiveness: 
30/100
- Rule of law: 19/100
Target:
- Government effectiveness:
35/100
- Rule of law: 24/100
Indicator:
3 pillars of the Bougainville 
Peace Agreement implemented
Baseline: June 15, 2019 target 
for referendum
Target: National Government 
and ABG joint supervisory body 
meeting agreements;
Resolutions and action plans 
delivered within agreed 
timeframes;
Three pillars of peace 
agreement;
Establishment of independent 
agency to conduct referendum;
Weapons disposal plan and 
strategy implemented;
Good governance assessment 
conducted.
World Bank
Resolutions passed by 
the National 
Government and 
Autonomous 
Bougainville 
Government (ABG)
Joint Supervisory 
Body to enable the 
referendum and postreferendum support
Output 1.1: Institutions have strengthened systems and capacities to 
perform their functions, roles and responsibilities in support of good 
governance, service delivery, democracy, peace and security.
1.1.1 Improvement in parliamentary committees’ performance in roles 
and functions as outlined in their legal framework and legislation against 
qualitative indicator ranking (integrated results and resources framework 
(IRRF) 2.1.1) 
Baseline: Qualitative rating scale TBD in 2018
Target: TBD in 2018 
Source: Parliamentary committee annual reports
1.1.2: Change in citizen perceptions towards quality of service and 
citizen involvement identified through provincial citizen perception 
surveys (data disaggregated by men, women and youth; IRRF 2.4.1)
Baseline: Rating scale TBD in 2018
Target: TBD in 8 provinces
Source: Final citizen perception surveys by local service providers
1.1.3: Number of state entities at national, provincial and district levels 
adopt and implement the integrated finance management system (IFMS) 
to reduce corruption 
Baseline: 6 (2017)
Target: 9 additional 
Source: Department of Finance report
Output 1.2: Increase in women’s participation in decision-making 
and representation in leadership positions.
1.2.1: Number of political parties that commit to supporting female 
membership in parties and in executive roles
Baseline: 7 (2017)
Target: 10 additional 
Source: Reports from political parties
1.2.2: Gender-based violence council established and in operation with 
National Parliament, Bougainville 
House of Representatives, 
Department of Prime Minister, 
Department for Personnel 
Management, Global Centre For 
Public Service Excellence, 
Department for Provincial and 
Local Level Government Affairs 
(DPLGA), Department of Finance 
(DOF), Department for Community 
Development (DFCD), National 
Council of Women, Office for the 
Integrity of Political Parties and 
Candidates, provincial governments 
and district development 
authorities, Family Sexual Violence 
National Committee, Referendum 
Commission, UNCDF, UNFPA, 
UNICEF, Office for the United 
Nations High Commissioner for 
Human Rights (OHCHR), UN 
Women
Regular: 2,900,000
Other: 30,100,000
Total: 33,000,000performance measured against qualitative indicators
Baseline: Gender-based violence council not established yet 
Target: Gender-based violence council operational 
Source: Gender-based violence council annual report
Output 1.3: The Bougainville referendum is supported to conduct 
free and fair elections, and post referendum strategies with the two 
governments are formulated.
1.3.1: Bougainville Referendum Commission (BRC) established 
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Source: Signed BRC charter
1.3.2: Number of strategies developed to implement the outcomes of the 
2019 referendum 
Baseline: No referendum yet 
Target: TBD in 2019 after the referendum 
Source: UNDP report, joint supervisory body
NATIONAL PRIORITY: 1. Human capital development, gender, youth and people empowerment; 2. Institutional development and service delivery; 3. Poverty reduction, wellbeing, livelihoods and 
social protection, access to essential services; 4. Equitable, fair and just – between and within countries and between generations (SDGs: 1, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17).
OUTCOME 2: By 2022, all people in Papua New Guinea, including marginalized and vulnerable populations, benefit from shared prosperity and contribute to growth and development that is equitable, 
inclusive and sustainable.
Indicator: Percentage of nonresource gross domestic product 
in per capita real growth rates 
Baseline: 
1.7% (2012-2015)
Target: 
3% (cumulative from 2018-
2022)
International Monetary 
Fund, article IV, Papua 
New Guinea country 
report
Output 2.1: National systems strengthened to support growth of 
sustainable and inclusive entrepreneurship.
2.1.1 Indicator: Number of gender-disaggregated national and 
subnational baselines and diagnostics carried out in most vulnerable 
provinces to inform inclusive growth policy responses 
Baseline: 0 (2015)
Target: 6 
Source: Project monitoring and evaluation data
2.1.2: Number of provinces with extractive industries that introduce 
inclusive local supply chain integration in partnership with UNDP
Baseline: 0 (2017)
Target: 5 provinces
Source: Annual joint project reports
2.1.3: Number of UNDP recommendations on fostering good business 
environment and private sector growth applied by the Government 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 5
Source: Annual UNDP project reports
Department of National Planning 
and Monitoring (DNPM), DPLGA 
National Statistics Office, 
Department of Trade and Industry, 
Business Council, International 
Labour Organization (ILO), 
UNICEF, UNFPA, UNCDF
Regular: 749,000
Other: 1,800,000
Total: 2,549,000DP/DCP/PNG/2
2.1.4: Number of men and women benefitting from and participating in 
interventions related to renewable energy, environment and climate 
resilience (IRRF 1.5.1)
Baseline: 30,000 (2016)
25
Target: 100,000 additional men and women
15,000 in renewable energy 
35,000 in environment (including conservation work and REDD+)
50,000 in climate resilience and disaster risk management
Source: UNDP project reports, annually
OUTPUT 2.2: SDGs integrated and localized into public 
development plans, budgets and monitoring and evaluation 
frameworks and data systems developed to monitor progress. 
2.2.1: Number of development plans, monitoring and evaluation 
frameworks and database analytical systems for SDG integration 
established 
Baseline: not started yet (2017)
Target: 3, medium-term development plan, national monitoring and 
evaluation framework, and mid-term SDG implementation report 
disseminated
Source: Government reports
2.2.2: Resource requirement for SDG implementation addressed
Baseline: not started yet (2017)
Target: Financing framework road map approved and SDG business 
coalition functional 
Source: Government reports, annual
2.2.3: Number of South-South cooperation agreements and programmes 
that deliver measurable and sustainable development benefits for 
participants
Baseline: 2 (2017)
Target: 4 (minimum)
Source: UNDP reports, annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY: 1. Environmental sustainability and climate change; 2. Retains and protects biodiversity and ecosystems and services; 3. Is resilient to risks and shocks; 4. Is a means for 
achieving sustainable development (SDGs 7, 11, 13, 14, 14, 15).
OUTCOME 3: By 2022, Papua New Guinea demonstrates improved performance in managing environmental resources and risks emanating from climate change and disasters.
Indicator: Number of 
legislation, sectoral strategies 
and policies integrating 
environmental protection, 
National, subnational 
and local level policy 
documents and 
legislation
OUTPUT 3.1: Legislation, policy and strategic plans for climateproofing, conservation, sustainable use of natural resources and 
disaster risk management in place.
Climate Change Development 
Authority (CCDA), World Bank,
Asian Development Bank, NGO 
Eco-Forestry Forum, Global 
Regular: 1,135,000
World Bank: 5,600,000
Adaptation funds:
1,100,000
 
25 Number not previously disaggregatedsustainable resource 
management and climate change 
mitigation endorsed by the 
Government
Baseline: 10 policies endorsed 
to date
Target: additional eight policies 
endorsed
Indicator: Increase in 
percentage of Papua New 
Guinea land area, including 
marine environment, identified 
and established as a protected 
area
Baseline: Total territory 
designated as protected areas at 
1.96 million hectares (4.23%) of 
land and sea.
Target: Additional 350,000 
hectares (0,9% of total territory) 
gazetted as protected areas 
Indicator: Score in InterAgency Standing Committee 
and European Commission 
(INFORM) index for risk 
management on vulnerability 
and coping capacity
Baseline: Vulnerability 5.7/10 
Coping capacity 7.7/10 
Target:
Vulnerability 4/10 
Coping capacity 5/10 
Indicator:
Conservation and 
Environment 
Protection Authority
registry of protected 
areas and national 
report on biodiversity 
to United Nations 
Convention on 
Biological Diversity
INFORM Index for 
risk management 
country risk profiles 
3.1.1: Number of strategic plans and regulatory frameworks developed 
(covering protect areas, REDD +, disaster risk management).
Baseline: 1
Target: 4 (1 REDD+ strategy; 2 protected areas; 1 disaster risk 
management framework)
Source: UNDP project reports, biannually
3.1.2: Number of protected areas with effective financing systems in 
place
Baseline: 0 (2017)
Target: 2 
Source: UNDP project reports, biannually
3.1.3: Number of multi-hazard provincial disaster and climate risk 
assessments that inform development plans, taking into account 
differentiated impacts (IRRF 5.1.2).
Baseline: 10 disaster and climate risk assessments; 0 risk-informed 
development plans (2017)
Target: 12 additional risk assessments and five risk-informed 
development plans 
Source: Government reports, annually
3.1.4: Number of plans and sectors that incorporate climate change 
adaptation, disaster risk management and recovery (mainstreaming)
Baseline: 1 (2017)
Target: Medium-term development plan, 2018-2022, and two additional 
sector strategies
Source: Government reports, annually 
OUTPUT 3.2: Capacities of communities and public officials 
enhanced to manage protected areas and address climate and 
disasters risks.
3.2.1: Management effectiveness tracking tool (METT) scores over the 
project lifetime, reflecting management effectiveness of protected areas.
Baseline: METT score to be established in 2017
Target: 20% increase.
Source: METT scores, biannually
3.2.2: Number of new climate early warning systems established in major 
rivers (IRRF 5.4.1)
Baseline: 1
Target: 3 additional
Source: UNDP project reports, national weather service report, annual 
Environment Facility (GEF), 
Conservation Environment 
Protection Authority, NGOs 
(Tenkile Conservation Alliance, 
Woodland Park Zoo, Tree 
Kangaroo Conservation 
Programme), National Disaster 
Centre, United Nations 
Environment Programme 
(UNEP), Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO), International 
Organization of Migration (IOM)
Department of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade: 
3,000,000
GEF: 15,500,000
Green Climate Fund
(pipeline): 30,000,000
Total: 56,335,000DP/DCP/PNG/2
Increased international 
environment and climate 
financing mobilized for Papua 
New Guinea, 2018-2022
Baseline: 
GEF - $26,736,677 (2012-2017) 
Green Climate Fund - $0 (2012-
2017)
Target:
TBD
United Nations
project reports; GEF 
and Green Climate
Fund annual financial 
reporting
3.2.3: Percentage of minimum preparedness measures for disaster 
management team in Papua New Guinea are in place26 (IRRF 5.2.1)
Baseline: 30% (2017)
Target: 100% 
Source: Disaster management team report, annual
3.2.4: Disaster recovery funding incorporated into the Government’s 
disaster financing approach 
Baseline: 0 (2017)
Target: 1
Source: Government report, annual
Resources for 2018-2022:
Regular: 4,784,000
Other: 87,100,000
TOTAL: 91,884,000
 
26 Based on emergency response preparedness approach.