File Name: PRY-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Paraguay
Country Code: PRY
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 3 to 6 February 2020
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2024
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
27 November 2019
Original: English
19-20518X (E) 131219
First regular session 2020
3 to 6 February 2020, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Paraguay (2020-2024)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 9
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 10
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Paraguay (2020-2024)……………………………………… 11I. Programme rationale
1. The National Development Plan (NDP) Paraguay 2030 establishes a vision for a more 
sustainable and inclusive society in line with the Sustainable Development Goals. The NDP 
seeks “to transform Paraguay into a more competitive country, ranked among the most 
efficient food producers worldwide, with thriving and innovative industries, employing a 
skilled workforce, providing technical products and services, and transitioning towards a 
knowledge-based economy”. The National Voluntary Review 2018 highlights the close
alignment between the NDP and the Goals.
2. This country programme document (CPD) takes into account this vision and is the product 
of a participatory process. Several national counterparts from public institutions and civil 
society organizations were involved in its elaboration through various workshops. Insights and 
inputs from these partners are reflected in this document.
3. Paraguay has experienced volatile economic growth with macroeconomic stability, leading 
to poverty reduction and other developmental gains. The gross domestic product (GDP)
growth rate averaged 4.88 per cent in 2013-2018.1Inflation averaged 3.79 per cent in 2014-
2018; the unemployment rate has decreased from 6.3 per cent in 2009 to 5.7 per cent in 2018; 
public debt has increased but remains relatively low, with debt-to-GDP going from 10.7 per
cent in 2012 to 20.2 per cent in 2018; fiscal deficit-to-GDP was -1.3 in 2018. In recent years, 
poverty levels in Paraguay have declined, from 41.6 per cent in 2009 to 24.2 per cent in 2018; 
and extreme poverty from 11.3 to 4.8 per cent. Economic forecasts point to a deacceleration
in growth in the coming years.2
4. The estimated population of Paraguay is 6.8 million. Of them, 28.4 per cent are 15 to 
29 years old. This age group maintains the growth of the economy and the labour force.
5. Agriculture remains a key driver of economic growth while the service sector has steadily 
grown. The abundance of natural resources, combined with relatively low production costs,
provides Paraguay a comparative advantage in the agriculture and livestock sectors. It is the 
fourth largest exporter of soybeans and the sixth largest exporter of beef in the world; 
combined exports from these industries represent 65 per cent of Paraguayan exports.
3 Aside 
from agriculture, the services sector has steadily grown to become a driver of growth and now 
represents more than 50 per cent of GDP and 60 per cent of total employment; this sector grew 
by 3.6 per cent in 2018. Micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) account for 93 per
cent of registered business units, which have difficulties accessing financial resources and 
state services.
4 5 MSMEs employ 61 per cent of the workforce, making them a key component 
of the economy. Nevertheless, a high proportion of the MSME workforce is informal; this 
affects thousands of Paraguayans who live in vulnerable conditions, creating job insecurity, 
low wages and precarious working conditions.
6. Natural resources-led growth is exerting increased pressure on the environment, the 
biodiversity and local communities. In particular, the expansion of land used for agriculture 
and livestock accelerates deforestation and contributes greenhouse gasses (GHG) emissions, 
which in turn contribute to increased exposure of local communities to climate change-related 
risks, possibly exacerbating multidimensional poverty. Although pressure on natural resources
persists, Paraguay has reduced its emissions from 58.7 million tons of CO2 equivalent in 2000-
2015 to 45.4 million.6 Forest cover has been reduced to 277,510 hectares per annum in 2015-
2017, down from an average of 332,938 hectares per annum in 2000-2015. Agriculture and 
 
1 Central Bank of Paraguay.
2 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean.
3 Systematic Country Diagnostic.
4 General Directorate of Statistics, Surveys and Censuses (DGEEC).
5 The World Bank.
6 Second Biennial Update Report on Climate Change.deforestation account for 53 per cent and 31 per cent, respectively, of total GHG emissions. 
While Paraguay’s energy matrix is predominantly in renewables (47 per cent hydroelectric 
power), most of the population relies on biomass (44 per cent) and fossil fuels (40 per cent, 
entirely imported); nearly 75 per cent of hydroelectricity is exported.7Improved management 
of natural resources will be needed to ensure the country’s long-term sustainable development. 
7. Not all segments of the population and regions have benefited from the impressive economic 
performance of recent years. Despite significant improvements in poverty reduction, 
development challenges persist. Although a middle-income country, Paraguay is not a middleclass society; approximately 38 per cent of the population qualify as middle class.8 Paraguay 
is an aspiring welfare state, though currently it cannot guarantee universal access to basic 
services and social protection to its population. Paraguay achieved high human development 
in 2017 with and a human development index (HDI) of 0.702; however, the HDI9adjusted for 
inequality (0.522) and the gender inequality index (0.467) suggest that Paraguay remains a 
medium human development country. This is not surprising considering the country’s high 
GINI coefficient (48.4), and extremely high GINI index on land distribution (0.93).10 The 
multidimensional poverty index (2018) shows high inequalities in the standard of living, 
education and health (46.8 per cent, 38.9 per cent and 14.3 per cent, respectively).
8. Poverty is unequally distributed by geography, with rural communities disproportionally 
affected; while the poverty rate is estimated at 13.5 per cent in the capital, Asunción, it is as 
high as 45.8 per cent in Caazapá, a predominantly rural department, followed by Caaguazú 
(41.0 per cent) and San Pedro (26.7 per cent). No disaggregated data is available for the Chaco 
region, which concentrates most of the indigenous population and where poverty is 
accentuated due to poor infrastructure, which limits access to public services. It is estimated 
that 66.2 per cent of indigenous people are poor, and 34.4 per cent live in extreme poverty.11
9. The fact that 78.2 per cent of the population has no social security and 65.2 per cent of the 
working-age population is employed in the informal sector exacerbates its vulnerability and 
increases the probability of falling into poverty as a result of external shocks. Public 
investment in the social protection service (SPS) amounts to $3.983 billion in 2019, of which 
only 4 per cent is allotted to labour and productive insertion.
12
10. Despite certain advancements in legal protection for women’s rights, women persistently 
face discrimination and inequalities in political participation and economic empowerment. In 
terms of employment, while 84.7 per cent of men are employed, only 55 per cent of women
are employed. Statistics show hierarchical discrimination in the workforce; 60.5 per cent of 
managers are men and 39.5 per cent are women.
13
11. To address issues of inequality and exclusion, the government has launched a new SPS. It
is based on a life cycle approach, aiming to provide social programmes and welfare support 
services to individuals from early childhood development to retirement pensions for senior 
citizens. The SPS has three main pillars: social security, labour and productive insertion, and
social integration.
12. Further efforts aimed at structural reforms and institutional capacity-building will be 
necessary to advance the sustainable development agenda. Although Paraguay has made 
significant advances towards a more efficient, transparent government, the public demand to 
reach universal coverage of quality public services calls for further structural reforms. The
 
7 Vice-Ministry of Mines and Energy, National Energy Balance.
8 UNDP country office, Paraguay.
9 Human Development Report, 2018 (update).
10 Oxfam, 2016.
11 Continuous Household Survey (CHS)–DGEEC.
12 Social Cabinet of the Presidency of the Republic.
13 CHS–DGEEC.professionalization of the national civil service through the promotion of meritocracy, which 
resulted in the incorporation of 70,000 professionals through competitive hiring processes in 
2013-2018,
14 should be coupled with stronger skills to instil a client-oriented culture. 
Likewise, advances in government transparency and accountability through the adoption of 
key legislation, such as the Law on Access to Public Information, needs to be further 
implemented. Multi-stakeholder dialogues and citizen participation need to be strengthened, 
as expressed in the Fourth Open Government Action Plan. The capacity of the Government in 
strategic planning and implementation of development programmes and projects needs to 
improve across the board through better use of data and knowledge management practices. 
Access to justice and improvements in the rapidity of courts and the reduction of case backlog 
remain key challenges.15
13. The previous UNDP CPD, 2016-2019, was aligned to government priorities for structural 
reforms and has contributed significantly in various developmental areas.
14. UNDP has provided support to strengthen democratic institutions and improve 
governance effectiveness, with a focus on mainstreaming the Goals. UNDP has been a key 
partner to the national Sustainable Development Goals Commission, which supervises the 
implementation and monitoring of the 2030 Agenda in Paraguay; UNDP assisted the 
Government in preparing its first NVR. UNDP provided technical assistance to the Technical 
Secretary of Planning in institutionalizing multi-stakeholder fora such as the National Team 
for the Country Strategy and the Public-Private Council and in reviewing the NPD to align it 
with the Goals. UNDP strengthened the capacity of public institutions to deliver effective, 
efficient services. The Supreme Court of Justice has better courthouses and the Ministry of 
Industry and Trade adopted ISO-certified processes. The Independent Country Programme 
Evaluation (ICPE) highlighted that national authorities appreciated UNDP contributions to 
strengthening national institutions.
15. UNDP contributed to the reduction of poverty and inequalities with a focus on rural 
development. UNDP improved the livelihoods of rural families to transition from subsistence 
farming by increasing their productivity and linking them to agribusiness value chains; over 
60,000 families benefitted from programmes that foster sustainable agricultural, livestock and 
forestry production. UNDP also assisted in the improvement of rural land governance by 
implementing a modern cadastre system that awarded 3,500 land titles and 25,715 land awards
according to Paraguay’s Information System on Land Resources. Likewise, UNDP improved 
access to water for rural communities, particularly in the Chaco region where it is a scarce 
resource; water and sanitation units were created at the municipal level as well as community 
water systems.
16 UNDP assisted the Government in evaluating the impact of its cash-transfer 
pension programme for low-income senior citizens.
17
16. Climate change and biodiversity are central in the support to the country. The UNDP 
country office in Paraguay supported the development of environmental policies and
governance mechanisms. Key instruments produced include the National Policy on Climate 
Change and Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), the National Gender 
Strategy on Climate Change and the National Strategy on Forest for Sustainable Growth. They
identify priority measures to reduce emissions from deforestation while tackling adaptation 
issues. In addition, UNDP supported the Government in producing high-level dialogues and 
decision-making instruments, mainstreaming climate change and biodiversity in the economic 
and poverty-reduction arenas, and a wide variety of disaster-risk reduction tools. For example, 
UNDP strengthened the National System of Protected Areas (including biodiversity corridors) 
and the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan. UNDP also built a multi-sector 
national platform for sustainable commodities that convenes key stakeholders to discuss an 
 
14 Public Function Secretary.
15 Supreme Court of Justice.
16 Stockholm International Water Institute.
17 Social Impact Assessment of the Older Adults Programmeimproved model for beef and soy production. The ICPE recognizes that “UNDP has played a 
catalytic role in strengthening the Climate change governance mechanisms and institutions, 
with significant contributions at the policy level.”
17. Based on strong alignment between national planning and the Goals, UNDP has the 
opportunity to develop a high-impact programme by combining its areas of expertise (policy 
support, capacity development, technical assistance, advocacy dialogue and implementation) 
with the innovative and dynamic approach fostered in the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2017-2021, 
and United Nations reform. UNDP promotes a multidimensional approach to address complex 
development challenges. The new CPD is driven by the Sustainable Development Goals, as
captured in the results framework, and focused on leaving no one behind. Strategic
partnerships and active collaboration with civil society and the private sector, combined with 
highly efficient coordination within the United Nations system, are the elements that emerge 
from the lessons learned and that will make a difference in this cycle of cooperation. Alliances 
with the private sector will be deepened to take advantage of innovation, the potential to reach 
people, and complementary financing.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
18. The programme is aligned with national priorities established in the NDP Paraguay 2030
and consequently with the Goals. It is linked to the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, the 
priorities established in Paraguay’s United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework, 2020-2024, (UNSDCF) and with the priorities established by the UNDP Regional 
Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean in enhancing productivity, reducing inequalities 
and building resilience. Hence, UNDP will prioritize actions to improve equity, including the 
steady eradication of poverty and the enhancement in the equality of opportunities. This work 
will be based on a multidimensional, multi-stakeholder approach, in line with the CPD theory 
of change.
19. Based on the strategic plan’s and in order to maximize impact, UNDP will offer a platform 
for the continuous integration of the 2030 Agenda. The following will underpin the 
programme’s work:
20. Innovations to provide new solutions to old development problems. Traditional approaches 
to development are struggling to keep up with some of today’s more pressing social, economic 
and environmental challenges. These challenges are difficult to address because they are fastmoving, interconnected and often worsening, despite the country’s best efforts to address 
them. To facilitate innovative solutions to some of the country’s critical development 
challenges, UNDP will establish one of its accelerator labs in Paraguay; the lab will transform 
the country’s collective approach by introducing new services, backed by evidence and 
practice, and by accelerating the testing and dissemination of solutions within and across 
countries. Sense-making, collective intelligence, solutions mapping and experimentation will 
be part of the new offer from UNDP. Public-sector innovation labs will help prototype the 
government-of-the-future in planning, programming and strengthened user-centred
interventions.
21. UNDP as integrator. To deliver impact at scale and to utilize limited resources efficiently, 
UNDP will provide platforms to draw in the capacities of United Nations organizations, 
private sector, academia and civil society. UNDP will provide leadership for multi-stakeholder 
engagement to help address sustainability challenges. As a neutral broker, UNDP will help to 
forge shared visions and facilitate action-oriented constructive dialogues among stakeholders. 
The aim is to promote whole-of-government and whole-of-society responses vital for 
achieving the country’s development goals and to leave no one behind.
22. UNDP, UNFPA, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations 
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), in light of its desire 
to work in a more coherent manner and build on each other’s strengths, have agreed topromote, through their respective programmes, the necessary coordination mechanisms so as 
to leave no one behind and accelerate achievement of both the 2030 Agenda and UNDP 
objectives. UNDP will support the efforts of the Government to achieve significant and 
measurable outcomes in terms of instruments, systems, institutions and, as the main axis, 
improvement of people's living conditions. Common initiatives will focus on: supporting the 
institutionalization and localization of the Sustainable Development Goals agenda; 
strengthening the SPS, with a life cycle approach and emphasis on women, children, 
adolescents and youth; promoting gender equality and women's empowerment; and 
strengthening data and evidence to enable high-impact programmes. 
23. UNSDCF strategies that will serve as the basis for this CPD include: (a) strengthening
institutional capacities and delivery of technical assistance; (b) strengthening data and 
knowledge production, management and analysis; (c) improving coordination and 
partnerships, including intersectoral, public-private sectors, and South-South and triangular 
cooperation; and (d) focusing on services provision, poverty reduction, social inclusion, 
inclusive growth, sustainable development and governance. 
By 2024, people who live and transit in Paraguay, especially those in vulnerable 
situations, improve their access to quality universal services, social protection, and care.
24. UNDP will support key national institutions and local governments to sustain and deepen 
the achievements of poverty reduction and social inclusion from a multidimensional 
perspective, in line with the signature solution: keeping people out of poverty. This will be 
achieved by improving national and subnational capacities with enhanced quality social 
services, based on data management and analysis, and with intersectoral coordination, 
implementation and monitoring of social programmes, offsetting contractionary economic 
forecasts. Vulnerable groups, such as people living in poverty, indigenous people, women, 
and youth will be prioritized.
25. UNDP will assist in the design of pro-poor policies, oriented to increase its human capital 
while favouring a gender and multidimensional approach. This approach requires better
understanding of multiple deprivations and their interlinkages to develop more efficient 
interventions. Failure to tackle social and cultural discrimination may keep thousands of 
Paraguayans in economic and sociocultural poverty. UNDP will promote coordinated 
implementation of the country’s SPS with a strong connection between its three pillars, and 
especially between the social inclusion and labour and productive insertion pillars.
18
26. Furthermore, UNDP will work on innovative models in the new economic setting, with 
scale-up potential, including information gaps and opportunities to strengthen public-private 
partnerships. At the same time, UNDP will use those pilot projects to develop new social data 
analysis and generate enhanced management practices for SPS, which is urgently needed 
during economic slowdowns.
27. To achieve these goals, UNDP will work closely with the Social Cabinet composed of 20 
government institutions and responsible for coordination; key among them is the Ministry of 
Social Development. UNDP alliances include the European Union, Inter-American 
Development Bank (IADB), International Labour Organization (ILO), UNFPA, UNICEF and 
UN-Women. Focusing on vulnerable groups, UNDP will engage with a wider scope of 
stakeholders and incorporate institutional capacity-building and information management 
dimensions.
By 2024, Paraguay implements public policies that promote the generation of sustainable 
livelihoods, decent work and economic inclusion with an emphasis on people in 
vulnerable situations, with a rights and gender approach.
 
18 SPS28. UNDP will support productivity growth by promoting a normative and institutional 
environment that fosters the country’s capacity to absorb technology and innovation. This will 
be achieved by improving research, technical assistance and financial inclusion. UNDP will 
work with government and development partners to provide incentives for formalizing the 
labour markets in Paraguay; special focus will be given to disadvantaged groups such as
women and youth, including in rural areas.
29. UNDP will work with MSMEs by promoting financial inclusion and improving the offer 
of formal and informal education and technical training, especially in the use of new 
technologies. UNDP will continue to support public institutions, such as the Ministry of 
Industry and Commerce, by integrating systems that foster more efficient services to 
stakeholders.
30. UNDP will focus on two key issues directly linked to improving people’s likelihood to 
increase their productivity, access to land and small-scale agriculture. With regard to access 
to land, building on experience gained in the previous CPD, UNDP will contribute to the 
design and management of systems that facilitate land use planning and procedures related to 
land titling. Regarding small-scale agriculture, UNDP will provide support both in relation to 
the management and delivery of inputs and in terms of institutional strengthening that ensures 
the delivery of services to the families that make up this sector, with special attention to 
female-headed households. This will allow small-scale farmers to improve their livelihoods 
and have access to business value chains, contributing to the inclusion of the most vulnerable 
sectors.
31. UNDP will work with the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Livestock, the Land and Rural Development Institute and the National Cadastre Office, 
among others. UNDP work will complement the technical capacity of the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and in coordination with ILO in common areas 
that may arise with regard to MSMEs.
By 2024, national and subnational public and private sector institutions and civil society 
will have strengthened the management of natural capital to enable sustainable and lowemission development.
32. UNDP will strengthen the capacities of the public and private sectors to coordinate the 
design and implementation of policies, plans and solutions for sustainable management of 
natural capital – both in urban and rural areas – and for the reduction of emissions and 
pollution, in line with the signature solution: promoting nature-based solutions. UNDP will 
work with Paraguayan institutions that generate official information – including energy issues
– and will continue to support multi-sectoral and inter-institutional dialogues on these issues, 
in line with the conventions on environmental sustainability, such as climate change, 
conservation of biological diversity, and the fight against land degradation. The Ministry of 
the Environment and Sustainable Development will be a key counterpart in this regard.
33. The NDP Paraguay 2030 vision seeks to make Paraguay a world-class food producer,
though achieving this in a sustainable way implies a great challenge. UNDP will provide 
evidence and knowledge to inform the prioritization of policies and interventions by the 
Government that ensure sustainable production. UNDP will work in close collaboration with 
the private sector (including cooperatives, trade unions, and companies19) through established 
platforms. UNDP will promote sustainable commodities policies or standards, the 
conservation and restoration of forests and the reduction of deforestation in supply chains.
34. UNDP will promote, through an integrated approach, the development and/or 
implementation of policies and/or implementation of action plans for NDCs, the national 
strategy for forests and sustainable growth, sustainable commodities, sustainable transport and 
 
19 Some key actors are: Cooperatives: Production Cooperative Federation; Guilds: Industrial Union of Paraguay; Companies: Cargillwaste management. UNDP will facilitate implementation of good agricultural practices, 
territorial planning – including the system of protected wild areas and biodiversity corridors –
the strengthening of information systems, data analysis and indicators, and incorporating
disaster risk management through resilience with a gender approach.
35. UNDP will strengthen public entities, such as the Ministry of the Environment and 
Sustainable Development, the Secretariat of Emergencies, the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, the Secretariat of Technical Planning, and 
the Ministry of Public Works and Communication, among others, and subnational 
governments while strengthening linkages and collaborating with non-governmental 
organizations, indigenous people organizations and civil society organizations and 
communities. Close coordination with United Nations organizations, such as FAO and the 
United Nations Environment programme (UNEP), and other international cooperation 
agencies will be an essential part of the work.
By 2024, Paraguay strengthens its capacity to map inequalities and monitor and 
implement the Goals and the NDP Paraguay 2030.
36. UNDP will provide assistance to Paraguayan institutions (national and subnational) in 
results-based management, efficient social investment and accountability, in line with the 
signature solution: strengthening effective, inclusive and accountable governance. UNDP will
provide systems and tools that allow more efficient management, the professionalization of 
public administration and the adoption of strategies and systems that promote transparency 
and inclusion.
37. UNDP will focus on improving the capacity of the Government to coordinate, implement, 
monitor and report on the compliance of NDP Paraguay 2030 and the 2030 Agenda. UNDP 
will continue to provide technical assistance to the national ‘SDG’ Commission to promote its 
consolidation as the key coordinating institution within the Government. UNDP will generate 
guidance and implement pilot actions for effective government decentralization and for the 
localization of the Goals, generating inter-institutional working groups and coordination 
forums that will allow for multi-stakeholder dialogue and contribute to the generation of 
indicators and data for development policies and programmes aimed at achieving the 2030
Agenda. 
38. To achieve these objectives, UNDP will work closely with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
the Ministry of Finance, the Technical Planning Secretariat and the National Statistics Office, 
as well as with Parliament, the Judiciary Branch and the private sector. UNDP will engage 
with other United Nations organizations, such UNICEF and UN-Women, and will serve as 
convener to coordinate joint actions and initiatives with other actors in the private sector, civil 
society, academia and other international partners.
39. UNDP will provide technical assistance to key government institutions linked to 
knowledge management in order to improve planning, monitoring and evaluation capacities
and maximize the development impact from public investment. UNDP will seek to improve 
results-based management in the public sector and foster a culture of continuous learning and 
innovation through implementing of programmes that promote the generation of information, 
data, findings and insights, and through continued feedback loops from beneficiaries. In this 
regard, UNDP will assist the Supreme Court of Justice in improving access to justice and the 
efficiency of the judiciary administration to reduce case backlog. 
40. UNDP will support strengthening the leadership of competent institutions in each thematic 
area, at national and local levels. Participation of civil society, indigenous peoples, the private 
sector, academia and international cooperation will be enhanced.
41. UNDP will strengthen dialogue with civil society, ensuring the participation of 
organizations representing vulnerable groups. UNDP will work on improving UNDP 
involvement with civil society, especially in the articulation and implementation of the Goals.42. UNDP will cooperate with Paraguay in the follow-up and implementation of the 
recommendations received from international human rights mechanisms, identified by the 
Recommendation Monitoring System (SIMORE) and in coordination with the government 
institutions that administer it. Paraguay is currently offering South-South cooperation using 
the SIMORE Plus system. In accordance with ICPE recommendations, the modalities of 
South-South cooperation will be expanded to benefit the sustainable development of Paraguay.
III. Programme and risk management
43. This document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary 
unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to 
the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and 
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s 
programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework.
44. In accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/9, all direct costs associated with 
project implementation should be charged to the concerned projects.
45. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable responses to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with 
other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks.
46. In order to ensure this programme is implemented in line with national expectations, 
UNDP will be in permanent contact with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other relevant 
partners, such as local, national and international partners, facilitating mutual accountability. 
This allows for the continuation of the participative process that took place during the design
of this programme document, including workshops with representatives of the public sector, 
civil society organizations, private sector and national media. 
47. UNDP will provide technical-administrative support to address specific situations that 
require agile, timely and relevant responses – in particular, those linked to responses in cases 
of emergencies associated with adverse climatic events that require the direct execution of 
actions by UNDP, as stipulated in the regime of accelerated policies and procedures of the 
agency.
48. Risks identified that may affect the implementation of this programme are associated with: 
(a) institutional aspects; (b) financial aspects; (c) citizen participation; and (d) environmental 
risks.
49. Among the institutional aspects, the main risk is associated with institutional weaknesses 
to carry out public policies according to established national priorities. The UNDP strategy 
will be to strengthen the technical-operational capabilities. Among the financial risks is the 
reduction of resources for the continuity of strategic initiatives. To mitigate this risk, special 
emphasis will be given to strengthening collaborative alliances between public, private and 
civil society actors that allow diversification of donors. UNDP will collaborate with the 
Government to facilitate South-South or triangular cooperation. UNDP will explore financing 
opportunities from other possible sources for strategic initiatives at the request of the 
Government.
50. With regard to citizen participation, the main risk is low interest in the design, 
implementation, monitoring and/or evaluation of strategic initiatives, as well as aspects related 
to civil society’s role in public management oversight. The strategy to mitigate this risk is to 
promote citizen participation, greater transparency and accountability to citizens. The 
environmental risks that planned actions could generate will be mitigated through previous 
analysis of environmental impact.51. Findings and recommendations from the ICPE, the CPD evaluation and other evaluations
will inform the implementation of this CPD. Risks will be monitored through strict compliance 
with the corporative requirements.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
52. The monitoring and evaluation plan will register and facilitate oversight and identify 
factors that limit and/or enhance the achievement of results. The strategy will cover all areas, 
combining evaluations with the monitoring of the achievements made in order to identify 
UNDP contributions to national priorities. The evaluation plan includes project, outcome and 
programme evaluation. It will be updated annually.
53. Monitoring and evaluation processes will identify lessons learned and best practices linked 
to programme implementation. In order to generate evidence, UNDP will use the results and 
resources framework and relevant indicators in the UNSDCF. Data collection on indicators 
will occur annually at a minimum, and an annual report will be generated and shared with 
stakeholders.
54. Use of statistics is expected to monitor progress. National capacity strengthening and 
institutional transformation of the General Directorate of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses 
(DGEEC) will be supported by UNDP. This institution is responsible for reporting national 
official statistics that will measure progress towards the Goals and be a main source to monitor 
and evaluate UNDP contributions. 
55. UNDP will strengthen the capacities of national implementing partners in data collection 
and analysis to measure the effectiveness of actions and policies linked to NDP Paraguay 2030 
and the Goals. UNDP will identify and analyse scalability and replicability where appropriate. 
New technologies, including the use of big data, will be essential tools.
56. UNDP will ensure consistent use of the gender marker to monitor expenditure and improve 
gender-based planning and decision-making. UNDP will pursue partnerships with academic 
and research institutions to implement its evaluation plan and generate more regular 
independent assessments of achievements. Annex. Results and resources framework for Paraguay (2020-2024)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Poverty reduction and social development (Goals 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10)
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2024, people who live and transit in Paraguay, especially those in vulnerable situations, improve their access 
to quality universal services, social protection and care.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions.
UNSDCF outcome 
indicators, baselines and 
targets
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs Major partners / partnership frameworks
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome
(in United States 
dollars)
Per cent of targets of the 
NDP Paraguay 2030 
reached 
Baseline: 0
Target: 80%
Percentage of the 
population covered by 
minimum levels of social 
protection (NDP and Goal 
1.3.1)
Baseline: 13.3% 
Target: tbd
NDP 
Frequency: Annual
Continuous household 
survey of the DGEEC
Frequency: Annual
Innovative models and knowledge products 
developed to foster informed decision-making in 
social programmes and policies that will benefit 
vulnerable groups such as people living in poverty, 
indigenous people, women and youth.
Indicator: Number of innovative models,
knowledge products and reports exchanged with 
government, civil society and private sector.
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2024): 10
Improved national and subnational capacities for 
data management, analysis and intersectoral 
coordination for development, implementation and 
monitoring of social programmes that will benefit 
the poor and other vulnerable groups. 
Indicator: Percent of beneficiaries from UNDP 
projects recognize, through project and programme 
evaluations, an improvement in accessing social 
services.
Baseline (2019): No data
Target (2024): 75%
Government:
• Management Unit, Presidency of the 
Republic
• Social Cabinet
• Ministry of Social Development,
Ministry of: Treasury, Foreign Affairs, 
Health and Agriculture
Donors:
• Binational Itaipu
• Binational Entity Yacyreta
• Private Sector
Other partners:
• UNICEF, UNFPA, UN-Women, World 
Bank, IADB
• European Union
Regular
479,500
Other
42,618,192NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Inclusive economic growth (Goals 8, 9, 11, 12)
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2024, Paraguay implements public policies that promote the generation of sustainable livelihoods, decent 
work and economic inclusion with emphasis on people in vulnerable situations, with a rights and gender approach.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions.
Percentage of employed 
population that contributes 
to retirement
Baseline: (2018): 
44.8% Total
48.2% Urban
34.1% Rural
Target: (2024)
52% Total
50% Urban
35% Rural
DGEEC
Frequency: Annual
Strengthened national and subnational capacity for 
implementing public policies that promote the 
economic inclusion of people in vulnerable 
situations, particularly in rural areas, including land 
access and small-scale agriculture.
Indicator: Number of institutions supported to 
design and/or implement economic inclusion 
programmes.
Baseline: 0
Target (2024): 5 at municipal level, 2 at regional 
government level, 3 at national level.
Strengthened national capacity to articulate plans 
and programmes for promoting decentralization, 
local development, competitiveness and MSME 
strengthening.
Indicator: Number of MSMEs (services sector) 
supported by state programmes.
Baseline: 0
Target (2024): 5 rural, 5 urban.
Government:
• Ministry of Industry
• Technical Planning Secretariat
• Social Cabinet
• Ministry of Women
Donors:
• Binational Itaipu 
• Binational Entity Yacyreta
• Private Sector
Other partners:
• UNICEF, UNFPA, UN-Women, World 
Bank
Regular
479,500
Other
6,513,638
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Integration of Paraguay in the world (Goals 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 15, 17)
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2024, national and subnational public and private sector institutions and civil society will have strengthened the management 
of natural capital to enable sustainable and low-emission development.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Percent of NDC targets 
achieved
Baseline: 0
Target: 10%
MADES, Government
Frequency: Biannual 
Improved capacities and coordination in public and 
private sectors for the design and implementation of 
policies, plans and solutions for the sustainable 
management of natural capital – both in urban and 
rural areas – with a gender and resilience approach. 
This includes continuing the work on sustainable 
commodities and inclusive value chains.
Indicator: Percent of representative stakeholders 
Government:
• Ministry of Environment
• National Forestry Institute
Donors:
• Global Environment Facility
• Forest Carbon Partnership Facility 
Iti
Regular
479,500
Other
25,175,000between public and private sectors for the design and 
implementation of policies, plans and solutions.
Baseline (2019): No data 
Target (2024): 90%
Policies, actions, measures and solutions designed for 
reducing emissions and contamination at national, 
departmental and municipal levels to promote 
sustainable, low-emission and resilient growth, 
considering adequate disaster risk management. 
Indicator: Number of gender-sensitive policies, plans 
and solutions to promote sustainable, low-emission 
and resilient growth published at national and 
subnational levels. 
Baseline (2018): 3 (MADES)
Target (2024): 6
Information, dialogues and/or solutions developed, 
financed and applied at scale for energy efficiency 
and transformation to clean energy and zero-carbon 
development.
Indicator: Number of instruments and or solutions 
identified and/or applied at scale to accelerate 
the transition to improved energy efficiency and 
clean energy.
Baseline (2018): 0 
Target (2024): 1
• Private sector
Other partners:
• UNICEF, UNFPA, UN-Women, World 
Bank
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Inclusive economic growth (Goal 16)
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2024, Paraguay strengthens its capacity to map inequalities and to monitor and implement the Sustainable 
Development Goals and the National Development Plan.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Number of institutions with 
data collection/analysis 
mechanisms providing 
disaggregated data to monitor 
progress towards development 
goals, including the Goals.
Baseline: 1 
DGEEC
Frequency: Annual
Strengthened national capacity for implementing, 
monitoring, reporting and establishing partnerships to 
the 2030 Agenda, aligned with the NDP.
Indicator: Percent and number of Goal indicators 
reported by Paraguay.
Baseline (2018): 201% (47)Goal 5: 100% (6) 
Government:
• Social Cabinet
• Technical Unit of Management of the 
Presidency of the Republic
• Supreme Court of Justice
Eltl Ct f Jti
Regular
479,500
Other
124,240,935 Strengthened national capacity to provide efficient 
and accountable public services, including in areas 
such as social inclusion programmes and access to 
justice that benefit vulnerable groups, including 
women.
Indicator: Existence of stronger capacities in gendersensitivity actions and functionality in rule of law 
institutions. (Strategic Plan, 2018-202, integrated 
results and resources framework 2.2.3.3.)
Baseline: Gender: No; Functionality: No.
Target (2024): Gender: Yes; Functionality: Yes.
• Ministry of: Treasury, Foreign Relations, 
Health, Information and Communication 
Technologies, Public Works and Education
Donors:
• Itaipu
• Binational Entity Yacyreta
• Private sector
Other partners:
• UNICEF, UNFPA, UN-Women, World 
Bank