File Name: PSE-CPD-2010-EN
Year: 2010
Country Name: Prog for Palestinian People
Country Code: PSE
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 21 June to 2 July 2010
Start Year: 2011
End Year: 2013
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the 
United Nations Development 
Programme and of the 
United Nations Population Fund 
Distr.: General 
6 April 2010 
Original: English
1030448 () 260410 
Annual session 2010 
21 June to 2 July 2010, Geneva 
Item 16 of the provisional agenda 
UNFPA – Country programmes and related matters 
UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND 
Draft country programme document for the Occupied Palestinian Territory 
Proposed indicative UNFPA assistance: $11 million: $5 million from regular resources 
and $6 million through co-financing modalities 
and/or other, including regular, resources 
Programme period: Three years (2011-2013) 
Cycle of assistance: Fourth 
Category per decision 2007/42: A 
Proposed indicative assistance by core programme area (in millions of $): 
 Regular 
resources 
Other Total 
Reproductive health and rights 3.0 4.0 7.0 
Gender equality 0.9 1.5 2.4 
Population and development 0.7 0.5 1.2 
Programme coordination and 
assistance 0.4 - 0.4 
Total 5.0 6.0 11.0 I. Situation analysis 
1. Reversals in the peace process occurred 
during the third country programme. This 
period was characterized by external 
political and administrative restrictions, a 
political split that resulted in the Palestinian 
Authority losing de facto control over 
Gaza, and a humanitarian crisis in Gaza. 
Other factors, including the West Bank 
separation barrier, the status of East 
Jerusalem, and the expansion of 
settlements, have weakened the economy 
and contributed to a chronic crisis situation. 
The internal division between the West 
Bank and Gaza poses grave operational 
challenges. 
 
2. In 2009, the Palestinian National 
Authority announced a programme to 
establish a Palestinian state within two 
years. This programme is based on the 
Palestinian Reform and Development Plan, 
2008-2010, and its successor plan, 2011-
2013. 
3. According to the 2007 census, the 
population of the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory was 3.9 million, with 2.4 million 
in the West Bank, including East 
Jerusalem, and 1.5 million in Gaza. The 
population density in Gaza (3,881 persons 
per square kilometre) is one of the highest 
in the world. The population growth rate is 
2.8 per cent (2.6 per cent in the West Bank 
and 3.3 per cent in Gaza). The total fertility 
rate, one of the highest in the Arab States, 
has declined in recent years. Between 1997 
and 2007, the rate dropped from 5.6 to 4.1 
births per woman in the West Bank and 
from 6.9 to 5.2 births per woman in Gaza. 
During that same period, the percentage of 
children below 15 declined, while the 
percentage of working age population aged 
15-64 years increased. 
4. The percentage of young people 
between 15 and 29 is high, at 27 per cent of 
the population. In the West Bank, more 
than 7 in 10 residents are under 29. In 
Gaza, the number is even greater, with 
three fourths under the age of 29 and nearly 
half (45 per cent) under the age of 15. 
inadequate for the numbers of Palestinian 
youth. In 2007, 30 per cent of young people 
were unemployed. Unemployment, coupled 
with the political situation, makes the high 
percentage of young people a potential 
cause of instability rather than a 
demographic bonus. As a result, the 
Government as well as donors have 
increased their focus on youth issues. 
5. The political and social situation affects 
gender roles and the status of women. 
Labour force participation among women 
above the age of 15 is the lowest in the 
Arab region, at 15 per cent. Daily 
restrictions affect men’s traditional family 
role as economic provider and protector, 
increasing the vulnerability of women and 
children to domestic violence. Data from 
2005 showed that 62 per cent of married 
women were exposed to psychological 
violence, 23 per cent to physical violence 
and 11 per cent to sexual violence. Female 
participation in decision-making is low at 
all levels. Early marriage and kinship 
marriages are common in some areas. 
Social, athletic and cultural opportunities 
are limited for young women once they are 
out of school. 
6. Technical capacity is adequate in the 
field of reproductive health care. Over 96 
per cent of births take place in hospitals. 
The average number of antenatal visits is 
high, more than seven per pregnancy. 
However, services are affected by systemic 
problems, including: (a) the lack of 
referrals between various service providers 
(the Government, the United Nations Relief 
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees, 
non-governmental organizations and the 
private sector); (b) inadequate quality of 
care; (c) management issues; and (d) a lack 
of equipment and medical supplies, 
particularly in Gaza. Demand is affected by 
mobility, affordability, information and 
culture. Early and frequent pregnancies 
pose a health hazard. There is low 
utilization of post-natal maternal care 
services. The contraceptive prevalence rate 
for modern methods was 38 per cent in 
2007, with a 12 per cent rate of unmet need 
for contraceptives. 7. Breast cancer is the leading cause of 
cancer deaths among women. Nearly two 
thirds of cases are not detected until the 
tertiary stage, reflecting a lack of early 
screening as well as poor health-seeking 
behaviour. 
8. The Occupied Palestinian Territory has 
a low prevalence of HIV/AIDS, with a 
cumulative total of 63 diagnosed cases. 
However, it is difficult to assess HIV 
prevalence among the populations most at 
risk. Proxy studies on sexually transmitted 
infections indicate alarming levels of 
infection among certain population groups. 
Information and prevention measures, 
including scaled up voluntary testing and 
counselling services are thus essential. 
II. Past cooperation and lessons learned 
9. During the previous programme cycle 
(2006–2010), the reproductive health 
component focused on strengthening the 
quality of reproductive health services by 
improving strategies, standards and 
protocols; enhancing training; and 
increasing reproductive health commodity 
security. The programme provided support 
to a number of hospitals and clinics, to 
enable them to focus on monitoring service 
provision and health outcomes. However, 
efforts in these areas need to be scaled up 
through the provision of technical 
assistance, policy advice and advocacy at 
the health systems level. The programme 
successfully addressed quality-related 
issues related to infection control, referrals 
and continuity of care. 
10. In the area of population and 
development, UNFPA provided managerial 
and technical expertise for the 2007 
population census and for the Palestinian 
Central Bureau of Statistics. A lack of 
awareness of the importance of population 
issues and data in planning, as well as weak 
utilization of social and demographic 
databases, hampered programme 
achievement. Drafting a population policy 
proved unfeasible due to the political 
context, which affected the coherence of 
population planning efforts. In addition, the 
political impasse between the West Bank 
and Gaza has severely affected national 
data-gathering processes. 
11. In the area of gender equality, the 
programme successfully piloted three 
women’s centres offering comprehensive 
psychosocial services, including 
counselling, legal support, and vocational 
and life skills training. In Gaza, this project 
offered post-crisis counselling to women, 
men and youth. UNFPA built coalitions with 
religious leaders to support gender equality 
and address gender-based violence. The goal 
of strengthening the Ministry of Women’s 
Affairs was only partly achieved due to 
changes in the Government. Instead, 
UNFPA strengthened civil society networks 
to implement Security Council resolution 
1325 on women, peace and security. 
 
12. The programme illustrated the 
effectiveness of building the capacity of 
government institutions, while increasing 
the capacity of civil society partners to 
provide support to those institutions, in 
order to build sustainable national systems. 
The linkages between reproductive health 
and population dynamics, including the 
empowerment of young people and women 
through livelihood opportunities, must be 
strengthened. There is therefore a need to 
promote multisectoral interventions on 
gender and youth issues. 
13. Because of the complex and 
unpredictable political situation, there is also 
a need to strengthen partnerships, especially 
in Gaza, improve community cohesion and 
rebuild social trust. The new country 
programme should link humanitarian 
assistance, in an acute and chronic crisis 
situation, to early recovery and development 
efforts. 
III. Proposed programme 
14. The United Nations country team in the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory supports the 
national programme through a medium-term 
response plan, in lieu of a United Nations 
Development Assistance Framework. It has 
two objectives: (a) support the establishment 
of a legitimate and effective Palestinian 
state; and (b) achieve the Millennium these objectives by integrating the 
Programme of Action of the International 
Conference on Population and 
Development, as well as its five-, 10- and 
15-year reviews, into the national 
governance process and social service 
provision. 
15. In line with the United Nations 
medium-term response plan, UNFPA will 
support national capacity-building through 
technical assistance, policy guidance, 
advocacy, and the facilitation of 
partnerships. 
16. UNFPA and the Government 
developed this draft country programme 
document on the assumption that the present 
political and security situation will not 
change substantially during the next four 
years. Should the scenario change, UNFPA 
will modify its activities and strategies 
accordingly. 
17. The programme includes three 
components: (a) reproductive health and 
rights; (b) gender equality; and 
(c) population and development. 
Reproductive health and rights 
18. This component will address 
reproductive health, including 
comprehensive women’s health, and youth 
health, including healthy lifestyles and life 
skills. The component will use a human 
rights-based approach, focusing on capacitybuilding and institutional development. 
19. The outcome for this component is: 
access to and utilization of high-quality, 
complementary, comprehensive, rightsbased reproductive health care is increased, 
including in humanitarian crises. Three 
outputs will contribute to this outcome. 
20. Output 1: Strengthened capacity of the 
national health system to provide 
comprehensive, complementary, highquality, rights-based reproductive health 
services, as well as HIV/AIDS prevention 
services. UNFPA will: (a) advocate and 
provide policy advice on integrating 
and on guidelines and protocols for a 
comprehensive package of reproductive 
health services; (b) provide technical advice 
to improve reproductive health commodity 
security and the clinical referral system; 
(c) support professional training; and 
(d) support HIV prevention among 
population most at risk, including the most 
vulnerable groups, in times of crisis. 
21. Output 2: Increased capacity of 
providers to offer comprehensive, 
complementary, high-quality reproductive 
health services and information in identified 
geographical areas, with attention to the 
chronic humanitarian crisis. UNFPA will 
provide technical assistance to primary 
health care centres and hospitals in agreed 
areas with special needs, with a focus on 
quality of care, and will provide health 
information to communities. UNFPA will 
also support emergency preparedness, 
rehabilitation, and the provision of 
equipment and supplies.
22. Output 3: Increased national capacity to 
provide high-quality, equitable, youth- and 
gender-sensitive health services and 
information for young people. UNFPA will 
engage in policy dialogue with partner 
organizations to define an essential package 
of health services for youth and to 
strengthen youth-friendly health services 
and peer-based interventions, including 
psychosocial support and the promotion of 
life skills and healthy lifestyles, especially 
for out-of-school youth. 
Gender equality 
23. In partnership with other stakeholders, 
this component will emphasize the linkages 
between gender, reproductive health, young 
people and emerging population issues. It 
will address gender issues affecting both 
males and females within the context of the 
political situation. 
24. The outcome for this component is: 
gender equality is enhanced through 
improved policies, protection systems and 
empowerment, including in emergency and 
post-emergency situations. One output will 25. Output 1: Enhanced government and 
civil society mechanisms to promote gender 
equality and equity by addressing genderbased violence and women’s empowerment. UNFPA will provide policy advice on a 
national strategy to address gender-based 
violence. UNFPA will conduct and support 
studies on issues such as masculinity in 
crisis situations and will help to establish a 
psychosocial support system for vulnerable 
groups. UNFPA will advocate male 
involvement and an enlargement of the 
active stakeholder base; build the capacity to 
integrate gender issues, particularly Security 
Council resolutions 1325 and 1889 (which 
focus on women, peace and security) into 
national planning; scale up communication 
on gender issues, especially communication 
targeted at young people; and facilitate 
partnerships to strengthen community-based 
women’s centres. 
Population and development component 
26. The outcome for this component is: 
increased utilization of sociodemographic 
data for evidence-based decision-making 
and policy and programme formulation, at 
national and subnational levels. Two outputs 
will contribute to this outcome. 
27. Output 1: Enhanced national capacity 
to integrate, implement and monitor youth, 
reproductive health and emerging population 
issues in national plans and programmes. UNFPA will: (a) provide policy advice to 
the Ministry of Planning and Administrative 
Affairs and other ministries to integrate 
population concerns; (b) provide technical 
advice to, and facilitate partnerships 
between, national academic institutions to 
incorporate youth, reproductive health and 
gender issues into academic programmes; 
and (c) promote dialogue and carry out 
advocacy on population issues through the 
National Population Forum. 
28. Output 2: Enhanced national capacity
to generate, analyse and use disaggregated 
data on population issues. To achieve this 
output, UNFPA will: (a) support surveys 
and research; (b) contribute to building 
knowledge and data sets; (c) support the 
collection; and (d) enhance the capacity of 
the Palestinian Central Statistical Bureau 
and other government units to analyse and 
utilize data to monitor the achievement of 
the Millennium Development Goals as well 
as those related to the International 
Conference on Population and 
Development. 
IV. Programme management, 
monitoring and evaluation 
29. The Ministry of Planning and 
Administrative Development will ensure 
overall programme coordination. The 
Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Social 
Affairs, and the Ministry of Planning and 
Administrative Development will ensure 
coordination and implementation of the 
three components, each in their respective 
areas. Other ministries and national 
institutions will implement specific 
subcomponents. 
30. UNFPA and other United Nations 
organizations will develop joint programmes 
and projects in the areas of youth health and 
empowerment, HIV prevention, 
sociodemographic data, the reduction of 
maternal and neonatal mortality and 
morbidity, and humanitarian concerns. 
31. UNFPA will develop a monitoring and 
evaluation plan aligned to that of the 
Palestinian Reform and Development Plan. 
The programme will emphasize national 
execution. 
32. UNFPA operates through its main 
office in East Jerusalem and a sub-office in 
Gaza. In addition to core posts, the previous 
country programme covered four national 
professional programme posts and two 
support posts. Additional posts are required 
to strengthen the Gaza sub-office. National 
project personnel and consultants may also 
be recruited. The country office will utilize 
technical assistance from the Arab States 
Regional Office, technical units at UNFPA 
headquarters, and from other sources, as 
appropriate. RESULTS AND RESOURCES FRAMEWORK FOR THE OCCUPIED PALESTINI
National priority: (a) better health care outcomes through the provision of better support services, equipmen
oordination and managerial capacity in the health sector 
United Nations medium-term response plan outcome: increased provision of accessible, efficient and equitab
rogramme 
omponent 
Country programme outcomes, indicators, baselines and targets 
Country programme outputs, indicators, baselines and tar
Reproductive 
ealth and 
ghts 
Outcome: 
Access to and utilization of high-quality, complementary, comprehensive, rights-based reproductive health care is increased, including in humanitarian crises Outcome indicators: 
• Comprehensive 
reproductive health included in planning, budgeting and monitoring of relevant health directorates 
• Coverage of antenatal care • Percentage of women with 
obstetric complications correctly referred and managed 
• Percentage of facilities that 
conduct case reviews of maternal mortality 
• Unmet need for family 
planning 
• Modern contraceptive 
prevalence rate 
• Number of young people 
utilizing youth-friendly health services, disaggregated by sex, age and marital status 
Output 1: Strengthened capacity of the national health syst
provide comprehensive, complementary, high-quality, rightsreproductive health services, as well as HIV/AIDS preventioservices 
Output indicators: • Comprehensive package of reproductive health care ser
agreed 
• Percentage of national training institutes using unified 
curriculum based on a comprehensive package of reproductive health care services 
Output 2: Increased capacity of providers to offer 
comprehensive, complementary, high-quality reproductihealth services and information in identified geographicareas, with attention to the chronic humanitarian crisis
Output indicators: 
• 100 per cent of selected service delivery points o
agreed reproductive health package are complianprotocols 
• Number of health providers able to implement minimum 
initial service package for reproductive health in crisis situations 
• Number of stock outs of family planning commodities a
selected service delivery points 
Output 3: Increased national capacity to provide high-qu
equitable, youth- and gender-sensitive health services aninformation for young people Output indicators: 
• Comprehensive youth health package agreed upon • Number of delivery points offering youth health packag• Number of youth structures equipped with peer educati
groups and offering a defined life skills package, includHIV/AIDS preventional priority: provide support for achieving an enabling environment for increased participation of women in t
d Nations medium-term response plan outcome: reduced gender-based violence in Palestinian society 
mme 
nent 
Country programme outcomes, indicators, baselines and targets 
Country programme outputs, indicators, baselines and targets 
r equality Outcome: 
Gender equality is enhanced through improved policies, protection systems and empowerment, including in emergency and post-emergency situations Outcome indicators: 
• National and subnational 
mechanisms are in place to monitor and reduce genderbased violence 
• Information on gender-based 
violence is included in training of health providers
Output 1: Enhanced government and civil society 
mechanisms to promote gender equality and equity by addressing gender-based violence and women’s empowerment Output indicators: 
• Policy framework in place on Security Council resolutions 
1325 and 1889 on women, peace and security 
• National strategy to combat gender-based violence drafted • Number of centres able to provide psychosocial support and 
referral to persons in need 
nal priority: an integrated statistical system (demographic, social, economic and geographical) using standa
ements, in line with international standards
d Nations medium-term response plan outcome: support national monitoring and evaluation systems
tion and 
pment 
Outcome: Increased utilization of sociodemographic data for evidence-based decision-making and policy and programme formulation, at national and subnational levels Outcome indicators: 
• National development plan 
integrates reproductive health, youth and gender issues 
• Number of population and 
development issues addressed in national surveys
Output 1: Enhanced national capacity to integrate, 
implement and monitor youth, reproductive health and emerging population issues in national plans and programmes Output indicators: 
• Number of national and sectoral action plans 
reflecting targeted issues 
• Action plan in place for population forum • Number of policy briefs on population issues based on 
disaggregated data from national surveys 
Output 2: Enhanced national capacity to generate, analyse 
and use disaggregated data on population issues Output indicators: 
• Number of national reports and researches on population 
issues 
• Set of indicators institutionalized and used to monitor 
population goals 
__________________ 