File Name: SAU-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Saudi Arabia
Country Code: SAU
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August - 1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
27 June 2022
Original: English
2210286X (E) 210722
Second regular session 2022
29 August - 1 September 2022, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Saudi Arabia (2023-2027)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework……….……… 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….…… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….……………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Saudi Arabia (2023-2027)……………………………………… 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 2022–2026 
(UNSDCF) agreed between the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United 
Nations country team serves as an integrated Sustainable Development Goals-based strategy 
for achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Vision 2030 of Saudi 
Arabia. 
2. UNDP holds a comparative advantage in Saudi Arabia having been present and active in 
the country since 1976. UNDP is a respected and trusted advisor to dozens of partners and is
seen as a window to the multilateral landscape and benchmarking to which the country aspires. 
Through a more coherent and engaged United Nations country team and expanded partnerships 
with United Nations organizations – for example, the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF) on disability and inclusion and gender, the United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme (UN-Habitat) on development housing and urbanization, the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) on food security and food waste, and UNFPA on 
statistics and the national census – UNDP will advance its integrator role and broaden United 
Nations engagement in Saudi Arabia, which at present is largely with Government. UNDP is 
seeking innovative financing solutions to address the national and global development agenda.
3. Saudi Arabia has achieved remarkable progress in human development over the past three 
decades, including, for example, literacy at above 95 per cent, increased life expectancy, and 
access to energy, even in remote rural communities. Saudi Arabia is a high-income country 
and one of the most industrialized Gulf countries. Its economy is mainly based on oil as the 
world’s biggest exporter, holding 16 per cent of global proven petroleum reserves. It is also 
the largest country in the Arabian Peninsula with a population of approximately 35 million, 
one third of whom are expatriate migrant workers. According to the UNDP Human 
Development Report 2020, the country’s human development index value (HDI) for 2020 was 
0.854 – which put it in the very high human development category – positioning Saudi Arabia 
at 40 out of 189 countries and territories. Between 1990 and 2019, the country’s HDI value 
rose from 0.697 to 0.854, an increase of 22.5 per cent
4. Achievements aside, Saudi Arabia faces significant development challenges. Before 
2016, the Government’s drive for economic diversification delivered modest results. The share 
of the private sector in the country’s economy only increased by 10 per cent from 2000 to 2015,
mostly coming from the non-oil sector. The oil price crash in 2016 exposed the volatility of its 
oil-based economy, prompting the Government to put in place austerity measures as well as 
the introduction of a 5 per cent value added tax in January 2018, later increased to 15 per cent 
in July 2020 at the height of the COVID-19 pandemic.
5. UNDP has been an active partner in this evolving and dynamic environment, working in 
the country for the past decades, making its relationship generational rather than transient or 
project specific. The need to be an adaptable and long-term partner became even more 
pronounced with the 2016 launch of the country’s overarching planning instrument., Vision 
2030, making the previous country programme somewhat obsolete, as indicated by the 2020 
independent country programme review. 
6. As such, the UNDP country programme, 2023-2027, was drafted in full recognition of the 
independent review and is now fully aligned with the four strategic priority areas and 
corresponding outcomes of the UNSDCF, namely people, planet, prosperity and peace, 
partnerships and other crosscutting issues, all of which emanate from the Vision 2030. With 
activities under each of the four country programme outcomes, UNDP represents the 
significant majority of United Nations system programming in the country. This critical mass 
and diversity of engagements across numerous entities affords UNDP the opportunity to build synergies that are transformational and that address the siloed approaches that can be pervasive 
in large bureaucratic ecosystem. The country programme seeks to support opportunities for 
economic, environmental, social and institutional change.
7. The independent review recognized the demands of the Government for a technical and 
high-level focus in many UNDP programmes. The country programme will shift towards 
mainstreaming and localizing the Goals and leaving no one behind, with an emphasis on 
strengthening measurable and sustainable development impact on the general population, 
including through systematic engagement on gender equality and women’s empowerment. 
Projects will pay closer attention to social, economic and environmental needs, risks and 
vulnerabilities of women, youth, marginalized communities, and persons with disabilities. 
8. This country programme acknowledges that Saudi Arabia plans to make step changes in 
its development trajectory. The global aspirations of Saudi Arabia are benchmarked against 
high income as well as G20 countries, for which it held the Presidency in 2020, demonstrating 
leadership during COVID-19. Moreover, in August 2021, Saudi Arabia established its 
Sustainable Development Steering Committee comprised of 18 government entities. The 
United Nations, with UNDP as the integrator, is well-positioned to continue to be a key partner 
for Saudi Arabia in achieving the Goals and contributing to Vision 2030.
9. The country programme theory of change addresses the majority of 23 key challenges and 
opportunities identified in the common country analysis (CCA) 2021. It is closely aligned with 
the UNSDCF theory of change and responds to all 17 Goals and the three pillars of the Vision 
2030. These challenges and opportunities were grouped into four categories: (a) economic 
diversification and structural transformation challenges; (b) environmental challenges;
(c) social challenges; and (d) crosscutting challenges. For each category, the theory of change 
identified the immediate, underlying and root causes and associated risk. Subsequently, the 
theory of change proposed four outcomes to respond to these four significant challenges and 
opportunities accordingly. The theory of change will require the country programme to build 
on existing work and continue to monitor the progress achieved in addressing these 
development challenges and their root causes. In addition to using the multidimensional 
UNSDCF risk framework, the country programme theory of change identifies risks and risk 
mitigation measures that are specific to UNDP programme implementation in Saudi Arabia.
10. The application of the UNDP six signature solutions support transformative change in 
public sector reform, environmental sustainability, and gender. The core enablers of strategic 
innovation and digitalization focus on digital transitions and people-centred development. 
Lessons learned from the preceding country programme, through programme and project 
evaluations, demonstrate the country office’s positive contributions to strategies, policies and 
capacity development in integrated water management, statistics, and spatial planning. 
11. The country programme leverages the UNDP innovation agenda through its accelerator 
lab. Investments in gender expertise in the country office have allowed it to integrate a gender 
lens and realize national commitments to advance gender equality and women’s empowerment 
based on findings of the country gender assessment 
12. UNDP will continue to work closely with the resident coordinator and the United Nations 
country team. UNDP will strengthen joint United Nations system programmatic engagement, 
for example, with FAO and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) under 
outcome 2, with UNICEF under outcome 1, and use its thematic and operational leadership to 
support inter-agency collaboration in the established United Nations advisory working groups 
and envisaged UNSDCF results groups. 
13. Based on internal consultations, feedback from key partners, and the outcomes of an online 
survey with external stakeholders, including non-profit organizations, academia, and the 
private sector, UNDP will leverage its mandate as an integrator to address crosscutting themes 
requiring joint programming. UNDP will contribute to strengthening the environmental sustainability-economic development nexus to ensure more resource-efficient and sustainable 
production and consumption, consistent with the country’s recent international commitments 
articulated at the 26th Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2021.
14. On localizing the Sustainable Development Goals, UNDP will support the country team 
with tested tools, practices, and expertise, and use its participation in United Nations advisory 
working groups and UNSDCF results groups to share and discuss information with other 
United Nations entities on targeted collaborative programming. UNDP will support the 
Government in strengthening its regional and global engagements, facilitating international 
cooperation, and promoting the country’s visibility on key development topics.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
15. The energy and enthusiasm for change in Saudi Arabia is palpable. UNDP will continue to 
play a significant role in helping to create the Saudi Arabia of the future, grounded in the five 
pillars of the 2030 Agenda, the four outcomes of the UNSDCF, and to the three pillars and 
objectives of Vision 2030. 
16. The UNDP contribution is rooted in a theory of change (see attachment III) that recognizes
certain assumptions and risks that assume continued political stability, continued economic 
strength, and sustained leadership in which Vision 2030 can be realized. 
17. UNDP’s breadth of engagement allows it to reinforce the national commitment to 
improving the quality of government services, improving liveability, safeguarding the 
environment and critical resources, integration of the Saudi economy regionally and beyond, 
encouraging job creation through diversifying the economy, and ensuring social protection 
measures to address the protection of minorities, including through the promotion of gender 
equality. 
18. Specifically, UNSDCF outcomes 1 to 3 focus on the people, planet and prosperity 
dimensions of the 2030 Agenda, while outcome 4 has a dual focus on peace and partnerships, 
and enhancing the fulfilment of rights and resilience of vulnerable groups across all four 
outcomes. 
19. UNDP will work across the four UNSDCF outcomes, which serve as country programme
pillars, with a focus on using its integrator function to support the broad-based, sustainable 
development impact of the United Nations system. Information sharing with be expanded 
across government counterparts through proactive communications about UNDP service lines 
and programmatic offer, and by exploring with other United Nations entities opportunities for 
joint engagement. UNDP will expand its support to women, youth, persons with disabilities, 
and marginalized communities in collaboration with other United Nations organizations and 
the Partnership Working Group through engagement with the private sector, academia and nonprofit organizations. 
20. To contribute to building an inclusive and sustainable society, the country programme
promotes strategic innovation and digitalization, with a focus on making systems resilient. The 
accelerator lab will engage with stakeholders on cost-effective and impactful development 
solutions. The country programme promotes gender equality standards and policies in the 
public and private sectors; cross-sectoral planning and institutional coordination at all levels; 
the use of data disaggregated by sex, age, status of disability and other types of vulnerabilities;
and evidence for sustainable development policy formulation.
21. The country programme prioritizes crosscutting themes such as youth, gender and 
environmental sustainability, and the achievement of the Goals and national development 
priorities. An integrated and cross-sectoral focus permeates all programmes and projects under 
each of the four UNSDCF outcomes involving UNDP. A holistic and people-centred lens 
emphasizing the needs and vulnerabilities of the most at-risk populations serves to establish close linkages between the country programme pillars and to engage other United Nations
entities and partners in potential area-based programming at the local level.
22. Several country programme initiatives in line with signature solutions 1 and 6 directly 
support components of UNSDCF outcome 1 focused on the people dimension of the 2030 
Agenda by targeting disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, in close linkage with Goals 1 to 5 
and the leaving no one behind principle. Based on the findings of the mid-term evaluation of 
the preceding UNDP country programme, 2018-2022, which concluded that UNDP had not 
accorded sufficient emphasis to the gender dimension,1 UNDP conducted a country gender 
assessment and formulated a gender action plan which form a solid basis for advancing gender 
equality and women’s empowerment. With close linkages to governance-related initiatives 
under outcome 4, the country programme seeks to strengthen the capacities of relevant 
institutions, implementation of reforms, and women’s economic and social empowerment. 
23. Specific gender interventions will be built on full recognition of the risks related to 
potential gender inequality in the country. Risks include social norms, biases, and stereotypes, 
limited child-care opportunities at the workplace, and lower levels of female employment in 
the private sector versus gains made in the public sector. Although not significant at present, 
there is the possibility of conservative backlash to rapid social changes. UNDP work will 
include: (a) strengthening gender balance and inclusion in the public sector workforce;
(b) addressing gender-based violence; (c) enhancing statistics to influence women-friendly 
policies and programmes; and (d) supporting implementing, monitoring and communicating 
recent reforms to strengthen women’s empowerment, including a periodic review of the 
regional report, “Gender, justice and equality before the law”, published by UNDP, the United 
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), UNFPA and 
the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) in the Arab States. The 
country programme enhances the capacity of women-led civil society institutions, drawing on 
the successful collaboration with Al Nahda Society and the Office of the High Commissioner 
for Human Rights (OHCHR) in supporting a first ever parallel report by Saudi Arabia on the 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).
2
Advancing gender equality at the local and rural levels will be prioritized. As an applicant to 
the UNDP Gender Seal Certification Programme, the country office plans to support public 
institutions and private sector partners in obtaining the UNDP gender equality seal in the 
coming years.
24. In support of UNSDCF outcome 2 and in line with signature solutions 4 and 5, the 
environmental pillar of the 2030 Agenda and related Goals 6, 7, 12, 13, 14 and 15, the country 
programme builds on the strong commitment of the Vision 2030 and the National 
Transformation Programme on environmental protection and sustainable natural resources 
management.3 The country programme addresses environmental challenges and opportunities 
identified in the CCA, including water scarcity, pollution, waste, desertification, energy 
production and consumption, and climate change. The country programme expands established 
UNDP programmes in this area, including on integrated water resources management, technical 
and advisory support to the electricity sector, and sustainable road and transport management. 
In addition, it provides more diverse and comprehensive support to sustainable, integrated and 
climate-smart management of ecosystems and natural resources.
25. The presence of UNEP in Saudi Arabia allows UNDP to expand its work on environmental 
sustainability. Envisaged programming with UNEP includes: (a) further expanding support in 
the water sector in integrated water resources management; (b) support to preserving wildlife 
in their natural habitat; (c) training programmes promoting biodiversity conservation and 
management of protected areas; and (d) support to preparing the national communication and 
report to the UNFCCC. In addition, the country’s commitment at the 26th Conference of the 
Parties to reach net zero by 2060 will present opportunities to engage in renewable energy 
1 UNDP. Mid-term evaluation of Saudi Arabia UNDP country programme document, 2017-2021 (June 2019).
2 The training workshop of civil society on CEDAW parallel report, 24 October-1 November 2021.
3 The country gender assessment
July 2021 indicates key priority areas of UNDP programming in gender equality and women’s empowermentsolutions with the Global Energy Resource Hub. Renovations to the United Nations House will 
result in efficiency gains through the use of modern materials and ventilation and cooling 
systems, as well as the planned installation of solar panels. 
26. In line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the country programme
supports strengthening institutional capacities and systems for natural disaster preparedness, 
risk reduction and management. This will be reinforced through close collaboration with the 
United Nations Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) regional office and with FAO in Saudi 
Arabia who have expertise on flood control, wildfires and drought resilience. The Saudi Green 
Initiative and Middle East Green Initiative, which aim to boost the production and use of 
renewable energy and combat climate change and desertification,4 will be used as entry points 
to further expand environmental programming to support normative, policy-level and 
downstream climate change adaptation and mitigation measures.
27. The country programme ensures close linkages between its environmental dimension under 
outcome 2 and UNSDCF outcome 3, which focuses on the prosperity pillar of the 2030 Agenda 
and Goals 7 to 11 in support of inclusive and sustainable economic growth and diversification. 
In line with signature solutions 1, 3, 4 and 5, the country programme links its support to 
economic growth as a key tenet of Vision 2030, with critical interventions to address 
environmental challenges such as increasing pollution, high per capita energy consumption, 
reliance on fossil fuel, biodiversity loss, land degradation and food waste.
28. Linking outcomes 2 and 3, the country programme supports sustainable production and 
consumption under Goal 12 in close connection with urban transformation under Goal 11. 
Specifically, UNDP supports strengthening of urban legislation, data and planning capacities at 
the municipal level to achieve the country’s New Urban Agenda, and it addresses the 
environmental, social and economic objectives of sustainability, as well as the urban-rural 
linkages that need to be strengthened in a balanced and equitable way to ensure no one is left 
behind.
29. In supporting economic diversification and job creation, particularly for Saudi nationals, 
the country programme aims to increase employment opportunities for women, youth and 
persons with disabilities. Programmatic initiatives to strengthen economic performance include 
analysis, research and development that can be utilized in strategic sectors, including 
sustainable and innovative tourism with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO) in cultural heritage and the newly established regional office of the 
United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO).
30. Country programme contributions to UNSDCF outcome 4 supporting the peace and 
partnership pillars of the 2030 Agenda, in line with Goals 16 and 17 – as well as human rights 
and the resilience of vulnerable populations – focus on effective governance, public sector 
excellence and localization of the Goals as prerequisites for achieving the integrated and 
transformative changes across all four UNSDCF outcomes and the corresponding country 
programme priorities, as well as signature solutions 1, 2 and 3. This includes support to the 
Government on the use of big data, and the engagement of the accelerator lab in discussing and 
tailoring the application of established global tools, such as the Sustainable Development Goals 
Country Platform, which will be used to promote local and sectoral dialogue and consultations 
with youth, women and civil society organizations (CSOs) on tailoring the global development 
agenda. 
31. Outcome 4 forges several linkages with other UNSDCF outcomes and cuts across all 
country programme priorities. For example, strengthening policies, legislation, institutional 
capacities and systems in areas such as non-oil natural resources management, and urban as 
well as rural development, directly contributes to country programme outputs under outcomes 
1 and 2. Advancing good governance with a focus on accountability, preventing corruption, 
strengthening CSO capacities and modernizing their legal framework, and enhancing public 
4 https://www
saudigreeninitiativeorg/about-sgi/participation and institutional responsiveness to citizens’ demands and needs creates positive 
linkages with all UNSDCF outcomes and country programme priority sectors. 
32. Country programme activities contributing to outcome 4 and to strong institutions are in 
line with Goal 16 and global partnerships under Goal 17. Specific support aims at: (a) increasing 
Saudi presence in international organizations and advancing Saudi representation in the United 
Nations system; (b) strengthening Saudi public diplomacy; and (c) supporting the Department 
of Strategic Planning and Development in meeting the requirements of diplomatic and consular 
work in a modern and changing work environment. 
33. With its focus on strengthening the resilience of vulnerable groups and at-risk populations, 
the governance component of outcome 4 addresses remaining challenges regarding social 
inclusion and public participation, including for the large proportion of youth in Saudi Arabia 
and their critical role in ensuring a prosperous, safe and sustainable future. Country programme
contributions to outcome 4 focus on empowering youth, including by working with youth 
organizations and academia on youth leadership programmes, Sustainable Development Goals 
challenge competitions that currently engage over a dozen Saudi universities, and through 
volunteerism, core to Vision 2030, supported by United Nations Volunteers (UNV). 
34. Local and community-based engagement with women and youth organizations, together 
with UN-Habitat and other United Nations entities, will be central under outcome 4. This 
includes engagement in urban resilience and transformation (Goal 11) and sustainable 
production and consumption (Goal 12), with close linkages to outcome 2. Special efforts focus 
on increasing civic engagement of youth through consultative processes to better understand 
expectations, priorities and needs. 
35. In line with the Vision 2030, which seeks to provide a decent life for all citizens and 
residents,5 UNDP supports disability inclusion with government partners, non-profit 
organizations and other United Nations entities – by strengthening the effectiveness and 
implementation of national policies on disabilities, including through compliance guidelines. 
UNDP will advocate for a gradual shift from the charity-based model to a rights-based 
approach.6
36. Under outcome 4, UNDP will work closely with OHCHR and other United Nations entities 
to further strengthen the capacities of the Saudi Human Rights Commission and to provide 
support in addressing the recommendations of the last Universal Periodic Review and in 
preparing the next one. In collaboration with the UNDP regional hub, the country office will 
use the recently established United Nations Global Compact local network in Saudi Arabia to 
work with private sector partners to promote human rights in business, including through the 
UNDP gender equality seal. UNDP will support the peace and social cohesion dimensions 
among UNDP key priorities in the region. 
37. UNDP endeavours to apply a human rights-based approach to programme design, 
implementation and reporting, including through systematic analysis and targeted support of 
rights-holders and duty bearers, the identification of avenues for increased CSO participation, 
further strengthening of accountability and non-discrimination, as well as human rightssensitive disaggregation of data and statistics. The country programme focuses on addressing 
the multiple and intersecting challenges faced by vulnerable and disadvantaged groups.
III. Programme and risk management
38. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in 
5 https://www.my.gov.sa/wps/portal/snp/careaboutyou/RightsOfPeopleWithDisabilities.
6 As recommended by the United Nations Committee for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities during the review of the first Saudi report for the United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of Person with Disabilities in 2019the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control 
framework.
39. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with 
other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned 
projects.
40. UNDP will closely monitor Sustainable Development Goals-based risks and assumptions 
highlighted in the CCA (which are applied in the UNSDCF theory of change), the impact of the 
global COVID-19 pandemic, and specific implementation risks. The country programme has a 
specific focus on implementing UNDP social and environmental standards to strengthen overall 
country programme quality assurance and risk management.
41. Lessons from the preceding country programme, 2018-2022, highlight specific 
programming risks in the Saudi context. These include that full dependence on government 
cost-sharing, while administrative processes require approval or endorsement at the highest 
levels of Government; the perceived delays in recruitment as compared to consultancy firms
(which are competitors in Saudi Arabia); high staff turnover across government institutions, 
including key UNDP counterparts; shifting priorities and ad hoc requests for human resources 
support rather than greater abidance to annual work plans; and the limited understanding of 
UNDP, particularly among newly created government entities established in the context of 
Vision 2030.
42. Whereas UNDP cannot address or mitigate all these risks in the short-term, the country 
programme focuses on diversifying resource mobilization and increasing impact by engaging
with a broader range of government partners and the private sector, and by boosting external 
communications and Sustainable Development Goals-based advocacy with a wide range of 
development stakeholders, including the non-profit sector, CSOs and academia. The UNDP 
integrator role in the United Nations country team and its close support to the resident 
coordinator and efforts to ensure a One United Nations – especially through support to the 
Government Sustainable Development Goal Steering Committee – will facilitate high-level 
dialogue and strategic decision making for UNSDCF implementation. UNDP will expand its 
partnerships function with a professional partnerships officer based in Riyadh to engage with, 
inter alia, the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Center, the Saudi Fund for 
Development, the Arab Gulf Programme for Development, and the Saudi Development and 
Reconstruction Program for Yemen. 
43. With support from the information and technology management unit, the country office 
will diversify its potential delivery platforms to strengthen its communications capacity to 
recognize and promote national achievements while promoting the UNDP ability to support 
new partners across targeted regions and at the local level. The country office will better 
anticipate potential programming opportunities by supplying national counterparts with clear 
and tailored options for support. This will be achieved through close and targeted engagement 
of the accelerator lab across all country programme pillars as well as recruitment of 
international senior technical experts – although the latter remains the single biggest challenge 
to satisfactory programme delivery by the country office. The gender dimension of the country 
programme will be strengthened with gender expertise, as well as through country office 
application for the Gender Equality Seal Initiative. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
44. Regular evaluations coupled with project board meetings, with clear agreed agendas and 
follow-up minutes, will review work plans and ensure that annual progress reports are aligned with project outputs, which will contribute to stronger annual reporting of country programme
results. The monitoring and evaluation plan to assess country programme contributions to the 
four outcomes will be fully aligned with the UNSDCF monitoring and reporting system. 
45. Specifically, to address the country programme recommendation to improve 
mainstreaming of gender and social inclusion, thematic evaluations will be conducted at 
midterm or in the third year so as to feed into the next country programme. The country office 
will strength the capacities of national counterparts for monitoring and results-based 
management by conducting regular evaluations during project implementation. Lessons learned 
from evaluations will be shared as a recurrent agenda item in country office programme staff 
meetings and in project board meetings with government partners. Evaluations may not be 
identified at the onset but can be reviewed on an annual basis and added as new projects are 
approved.
46. In line with leaving no one behind, the country programme will disaggregate data 
according to relevant criteria (e.g., gender, income, ethnicity, age and territory). It builds on its 
partnership with the national statistical authority, GASTAT, and the results of its recent national 
census, to ensure that monitoring and evaluation activities are gender-sensitive to showcase the 
interconnection of development results and challenges. The country office capacity to monitor 
and evaluate has been strengthened with the recent recruitment of a full time monitoring and 
evaluation specialist. 
47. As of 2021, Saudi Arabia has achieved Goal 4, quality education, and has surpassed the 
net primary enrolment and lower secondary completion indicator goals, marking a turning point 
in the country’s quantitative advancement in education. In pursuing the 16 remaining Goals, 
Saudi Arabia faces the most significant challenges on Goals 2, 5, 6, 13, 14 and 15. There are 
insufficient data to determine either achievement or progress against Goals 1 and 10. Together 
with other United Nations entities, UNDP will engage with relevant partners to improve 
national Sustainable Development Goals reporting and the availability and quality of data and 
statistics.Annex. Results and resources framework for Saudi Arabia (2023–2027)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2030 pillars 1 and 2; Objectives 1, 2, 3 and 4:
Enhancing Values and Enabling a Fulfilling and Healthy Life; and Growing and Diversifying the Economy and Increasing Employment (Goals 1 to 5).
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 1: All human beings are further enabled to fulfil their potential in dignity, equity, and equality in a healthy environment.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: Strategic priority 2: No one left behind centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and 
human development.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF 
DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines 
targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS /
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY 
OUTCOME
(United States dollars)
Indicator:
Ratio of female-to-male labour force 
participation rate (%)
Baseline:
28.2 (2019)
Target: 31.4% (2025)
Source: ILO, ILOSTAT database 
Frequency: Annual
Responsible institutions: Ministry of Human 
Resources and Social Development
Source: National Transformation Program 
Frequency: Annual
Responsible institutions: Authority for 
Persons with Disabilities
Output 1.1. Gender equality and 
women’s empowerment advanced 
through strengthening institutional 
capacities, the response to genderbased violence, women’s economic 
empowerment, implementation and 
visibility of reforms, as well as 
research and data
Indicator 1.1.1: Labour force 
participation rates, by gender
Baseline: 2019 (Female: 0.221 Male: 
0.784)
Target: 2025 (Female: 0.314 Male: 
0.686)
Output 1.2. National policies and 
strategies on the inclusion of people 
with disabilities are updated in line 
with the United Nations Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities recommendations 
Indicator 1.2.1: % of people with 
disabilities participating in the labour 
force
Baseline: 7.7% (2016)
Target (2025): 13.4%
Government: Family 
Affairs Council, 
Women’s Empowerment 
Department of the 
Ministry of Human 
Resources and Social 
Development, 
GASTAT Gender Unit, 
NFSP 
Academia: Princess Nora 
University 
CSOs: Alnahda, Rofiada 
for women’s health, 
Mawadda
Women-led organizations 
Private sector: Chamber 
of Commerce, private 
sector gender champions
United Nations country 
team gender team, UNWomen, UNICEF, 
UNFPA, the United 
Nations Global Compact
Government cost-sharing: 
5,000,000NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2030 pillars 2 and 3; Objectives 3, 4, 5 and 6:
Growing and Diversifying the Economy and Increasing Employment; and Enhancing Government Effectiveness and Enabling Social Responsibility (Goals 6, 7, 12, 13, 14 and 15).
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 2: The environment is better protected from degradation, including through sustainable consumption and production, sustainably 
managing its natural resources, and taking urgent action on climate change.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: Strategic priority 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions.
Indicator: 
CO2 emissions from fuel combustion 
for electricity and heating per total 
electricity output (MtCO2/TWh)
Baseline:
1.4 (2018)
Target: 1 (2030)
Source: National Transformation Programme
Frequency: Annual
Responsible institutions: MEWA
Source: World Health Organization (WHO)
Frequency: Annual
Responsible institutions: Road Safety Centre, 
WHO
Data source: MOE
Frequency: Annual
Responsible institution: Ministry of 
Environment 
Output 2.1. Sustainable, integrated 
and climate-smart management of 
ecosystems and non-oil natural 
resources ensured
Indicator 2.1.1: Proportion of domestic 
and industrial wastewater flows safely 
treated
Baseline (2015): 13.55%
Target (2025): 25%
Indicator 2.1.2: Road traffic mortality 
rate (per 100 000 population)
Baseline (2019): 35.9 
Target (2027): 13:6
Output 2.2. Sustainable production 
and consumption practices supported 
to generate competitive advantages, 
increase energy efficiency, prevent 
environmental degradation, and 
create green jobs with a focus on 
strengthening urban resilience and 
transformation
Indicator 2.2.1: Efficient use of fuel in 
electric power generation
Baseline: 2020 Efficiency of fuel use in 
electric power generation, power 
generating capacity of 27,260 
megawatts
Target: 2027 Increased efficiency for 
generating electricity to approach 60 
gigawatts by 2027
Ministry of Economy and 
Planning (MOEP)
Ministry of Environment, 
Water and Agriculture 
(MEWA)
Ministry of Transport 
(MOT)
Ministry of Education 
(MOE)
National Centre for 
Vegetation Cover
Saudi Food and Drug 
Authority (SFDA)
Digital Cooperation 
Organization (DCO)
CSO: Fakieh Research 
and Development Centre
UNEP, United Nations 
country team, United 
Nations Department for 
Economic and Social 
Affairs( UNDESA),
United Nations University 
UNU), United Nations 
Office for South-South 
Cooperation (UNOSSC), 
United Nations Institute 
for Training and Research 
(UNITAR)
Government cost-sharing: 
50,000,000NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2030 pillars 2 and 3; Objectives 3, 4, 5 and 6:
Growing and Diversifying the Economy and Increasing Employment; and Enhancing Government Effectiveness and Enabling Social Responsibility (Goals 7 to 11).
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 3: Increased opportunities are available for all human beings to enjoy prosperous and fulfilling lives.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: Strategic priority 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions.
Indicator:
Adjusted gross domestic product (GDP)
growth (%) 
Baseline:
-1.9 (2019)
Target: 2.3 (2024)
Indicator:
Unemployment rate (% of total labour 
force Saudis 15 and above)
Baseline: 11.3 (2021)
Males: 5.9
Females: 21.9
Target: 5 (2030)
Source: World Bank
Frequency: Annual
Responsible institutions: 
MOEP, GASTAT
Output 3.1. Economic diversification 
and inclusive employment increased 
through enhanced analysis, research 
and development, innovation, and 
digital transformation
Indicator 3.1.1: Government data 
systems support evidence-based 
planning and data-driven solutions to 
support inclusive, sustainable 
development (scale from 1 to 4)
Baseline (2021): 2 (very partially)
Target (2026): 4 (Strongly)
Data source: GASTAT
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of research 
and development products produced 
with UNDP support
Baseline (2021): 1
Target (2026): 7
Data source: UNDP country office
Output 3.2. Urban legislation, data, 
planning capacities at municipal 
level, as well as community-level 
engagement of women and youth 
strengthened, to enable sustainable 
urban transformation and housing
Indicator 3.2.1: Framework of key 
performance indicators set for urban 
private sector legislation and urban 
code prepared (key performance 
indicators measuring land use 
efficiency) 
Baseline (2021): No 
Target: (2026) Yes
Data source: MOMRAH
Indicator 3.2.2: Guidelines for 
participatory women and youth 
engagement in development are applied
Baseline (2021): 0
General Authority of 
Statistics (GASTAT)
Ministry of 
Communications and 
Information Technology 
(MCIT)
National Center for 
Performance Management 
(ADAA)
MOEP
Ministry of Interior (MOI)
King Salman Centre for 
Local Governance 
(KSCLG)
Ministry of Municipal, 
Rural Affairs and Housing 
(MOMRAH)
General Authority for 
Survey and Geospatial 
Information (GASGI)
Royal commissions
UN-HABITAT
Government cost-sharing: 
60,000,000Target (2026): key performance 
indicators for women and youth 
engagement measured by number of 
workshops and engaged people 
Data source: MOMRAH, UNDP
county office)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2030 pillars 1, 2 and 3; Objectives 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6:
Enhancing Values and Enabling a Fulfilling and Healthy Life; Growing and Diversifying the Economy and Increasing Employment; Enhancing Government Effectiveness and Enabling 
Social Responsibility (Goals 16, 17).
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 4: Peaceful, just and inclusive society is adequately fostered, and the means required for the implementation of Agenda 2030 are mobilized.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: Strategic priority 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions.
Indicator:
Statistical performance index (worst 0–
100 best) 
Baseline:
63.4 (2019)
Target:
80 (2030)
Source: Sustainable Development Goals 
Dashboard Saudi Arabia 
Frequency: Annual.
Responsible institutions: the World Bank, 
MOEP, UNDP country office 
Output 4.1. Public sector excellence 
supported, including through digital 
transformation and increased 
interaction with citizens and 
vulnerable groups, to strengthen 
their resilience and ensure 
transparent, accountable, and 
effective institutions.
Indicator 4.1.1: Number of initiatives 
conducted contributing to the 
transparency and accountability in the 
public sector
Baseline (2022):0
Target (2027): 2
Output 4.2. Localization of the Goals 
strengthened, in close linkage to 
regional and local development 
planning, and with active 
involvement of community-based 
organizations, women and youth
groups.
Indicator 4.2.1: Number of voluntary 
local reviews produced with UNDP and 
UN-Habitat support
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2027): 4
Output 4.3. Capacities of CSOs 
strengthened to enable their effective 
contributions to national and 
regional development plans.
King Abdulaziz Center 
for National Dialogue 
(KACND)
Ministry of Human 
Resources and Social 
Development (HRSD)
King Khaled Foundation 
(KKF)
Authority for Persons 
with Disabilities (APD)
National Anti-Corruption 
Commission (NAZAHA)
MISK Foundation
Prince Mohammed Bin 
Salma College (MBSC)
Alnahda, 
Mawadda, Zahara,
National Society for 
Human Rights,
Ajanoub, 
Saudi National Committee 
for Workers 
UNV
Government cost-sharing: 
5,000,000Indicator 4.3.1: Number of partnerships 
with women-led CSOs and other bodies 
and networks to advance women’s 
leadership and participation and gender 
equality
Baseline (2021): 0
Source: UNDP country office
Target (2027): 5
Output 4.4. Capacities of public and 
private organizations strengthened to 
promote human rights in businesses.
Indicator 4.4.1: Number of private 
companies that received capacitybuilding training by UNDP 
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2027): 10