File Name: SEN-NREP-2012-EN
Year: 2012
Country Name: Senegal
Country Code: SEN
Category: NREP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2012
Start Year: 2012
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

RENEWABLES READINESS 
ASSESSMENT 2012
SENEGALAbout IRENA 
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
promotes the accelerated adoption and sustainable use of all
forms of renewable energy. IRENA’s founding members were
inspired by the opportunities offered by renewable energy to
enable sustainable development while addressing issues of
energy access, security and volatility. Established in 2009, the
inter-governmental organisation provides a global networking
hub, advisory resource and unified voice for renewable energy. 
www.irena.org
The designations employed and the presentation of materials herein
do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part
of the Secretariat of the International Renewable Energy Agency
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or
of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or
boundaries. The term “country” as used in this material also refers,
as appropriate, to territories or areas.RENEWABLES 
READINESS 
ASSESSMENT 
2012
SENEGALTable of Contents
4
LIST OF ACRONYMS 6
LIST OF FIGURES 8
LIST OF TABLES 8
LIST OF IMAGES 8
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 9
FOREWORD 11
PREFACE 13
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 15
I. INTRODUCTION 19
Background 19
The Renewables Readiness Assessment 22
Developing the methodology 22
Testing the methodology in Senegal 24
Objectives 24
II. ENERGY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY CONTEXT 25
The regional context 25
Overview of the energy sector in Senegal 25
Renewable energy in Senegal 31
Key energy stakeholders 34
Energy policy and regulatory framework 36
Financing and investment 40
III. MARKET DEVELOPMENT BY SECTOR 43
A. On-grid electricity 43
Findings from the RRA 45
B. Off-grid applications 48
Decentralised rural electrification 48
Motive and thermal applications 49
Findings from the RRA 51
C. Biofuels for transport 53
Findings from the RRA 53
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT5
IV. RECOMMENDED ACTIONS 55
V. BEST PRACTICES AND FUTURE COOPERATION 57
Identified examples of good practice 57
Good practice demonstration 1: 57
Business models used for rural and off-grid electrification
Good practice demonstration 2: 58
Legal and institutional framework
Future cooperation 59
VI. REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 60
VII. ANNEX: DETAILED LIST OF RECOMMENDED ACTIONS 63
Action 1: Adapt the rules of intervention for the regulator 63
in the specific case of small electricity producers (ERILS)
Action 2: Finalise and sign the implementing decrees of 64
the framework laws on renewable energy
Action 3: Finalise policies on the integration of electricity 65
generated from renewable sources onto Senelec’s grid, 
and define the associated technical and capacity-building 
requirements for integration
Action 4: Promote small-scale production of biodiesel 66
Action 5: Improve strategy for the institutional, legal and 67
regulatory conditions and modalities for utilising land 
in support of the national biofuels strategy
Action 6: Establish policy and institutional mechanisms to increase 68
private sector involvement in re-manufacturing
Action 7: Establish institutional capacity and conditions for 70
improving O and M (Operation and Maintenance) 
of renewable energy technologies
Action 8: Elaborate and implement a strategy for 72
comprehensive mapping of resources in key areas
SENEGAL6
AfDB African Development Bank
ANCs National Rural Councillors Association
ANDES National Agency for Solar Energy Development 
APANPP Association for African Non-Oil Producer Countries
APIX Agency for Investment Promotion
ASER Rural Electrification Agency
ASN Senegalese Association for Standardisation
BOO Build Own Operate
CERER Centre for Research and Studies on Renewable Energy
CF Carbon Fund
CIER Interministerial Committee on Renewable Energy
CIMES Intersectorial Committee for the Implementation of Synergies 
between Energy and other Strategic Sectors 
CNB National Biofuel Committee
CRSE Commission de régulation du secteur de l’électricité
CSS Senegalese Sugar Company
DGIS Netherlands Directorate-General for International Cooperation
DSRP Document of the Strategy for Poverty Alleviation
ECOWAS Economic Commission of West African States
ECREEE ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
ERIL Rural Electrification through Local Initiatives
FABER-ABERF African Biofuels and Renewable Energy Fund
FIT Feed-in Tariff
GOANA Great Agricultural Offensive for Food and Agriculture
GW Gigawatt
HV/MV/LV High Voltage/ Medium Voltage/Low voltage
ICS Industries Chimiques du Sénégal
IEA International Energy Agency
IPP Independent Power Producer
ISRA Senegalese Institute for Agricultural Research
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency
kV Kilovolt
kW Kilowatt
List of Acronyms
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT7
LPDSE Lettre de Développement du Secteur de l’Energie
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MC Ministry of Commerce
MDG Millennium Development Goal 
MER Ministry of Renewable Energy
MEF Ministry of Economy and Finance
MoE Ministry of Energy
MW Megawatt
NBC National Committee for Biofuels
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
O and M Operations and Maintenance
OMVG Organisation for the Development of the Gambia River Basin
OMVS Organisation for the Development of the Senegal River
PASER Rural Electrification Action Plan
PERACOD Programme to Promote Rural Electrification and 
a Sustainable Supply of Domestic Fuel
PPP Public Private Partnership
PREDAS Regional Programme for Households and Alternative Energies in the Sahel
PRS Regional Solar Programme
RE Renewable Energy
REF Rural Electrification Fund
REVA Retour Vers l’Agriculture
RRA Renewables Readiness Assessment
SAR Société Africaine de Raffinage
SENELEC Senegalese National Electricity Company
SPEC Sustainable Power Electric Company
TPES Total Primary Energy Supply
WAEMU West African Economic and Monetary Union
VAT Value Added Tax
WAPP West African Power Pool
WMO World Meteorological Organization
Wp Watt Peak
SENEGAL8
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Senegal energy profile 28
Figure 2 Evolution of total primary energy supply 29
Figure 3 Energy sources used 29
Figure 4 Senegal oil bill evolution 30
Figure 5 Electricity use per capita for 2008 31
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 Types, location and potentials of energy resources 32
LIST OF IMAGES
Image 1 Traditional use of biomass in Senegal 30
Image 2 National electricity grids and RE potential 33
Image 3 Work in progress at SPEC's solar modules 46
mounting facility
Image 4 Senegalese sugar production company 47
in Richard-Toll
Image 5 Sine Moussa solar wind diesel 49
hybrid power plant
Image 6 Solar water heater in rural area in Senegal 50
Image 7 Installation of a small wind turbine 51
at the University of Dakar
Image 8 Molasses lake at Senegalese 53
Sugar Company (CSS)
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT9
Acknowledgements
This Renewables Readiness Assessment report was prepared by the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) working in close
collaboration with the Government of Senegal. The International
Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) provided valuable support.
SEMIS Consult facilitated the groundwork. H.E. Louis Seck, former
Minister of Renewable Energy, Senegal, was involved from the outset of
the project and continued to provide helpful insights.
We wish to thank the following experts, in alphabetical order, for their
insights and constructive guidance during the peer review process:
Abeeku Brew-Hammond (Board of the Energy Commission, Ghana), Bah
Saho (ECOWAS Regional Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency, Cape Verde), Ismael Lo (Ministry of Energy, Senegal), Haruna
Gujba (African Climate Policy Centre, Ethiopia), Sambou Kinteh
(Development Management Consultants International, Gambia).
Karmic Design provided the design and layout. 
Comments or questions about this Renewable Readiness
Assessment report can be sent to SAlzouma@irena.org,
MSokona@irena.org, or to secretariat@irena.org.
SENEGAL10 RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT11
THE RENEWABLE ENERGY SECTOR occupies an important place in the economic
development strategy of Senegal. Our energy policy aims primarily at diversifying and
reducing dependence on imported petroleum products by increasing the share of renewable
energy and biofuels in the country’s energy mix by at least 15% by 2020.
That is why for nearly two years now Senegal has been reviewing the technically and
economically exploitable potential of renewable energy sources for electricity production,
and also determining the technical, economic and financial factors that can ensure people's
access to modern energy services.
This study has led to the establishment of a legislative and regulatory framework conducive
to the development of electricity production from renewable energy sources. Institutional
reform has been in progress since March 2012 with the creation of an agency dedicated
exclusively to the promotion of renewable energy.
It is expected that this new structure will lead to important activities including the
development of synergies necessary to allow more effective collaboration between public
sector research actors and the private sector; the establishment of appropriate incentives
to make equipment and the purchase of green electricity more accessible; the stimulation
of self-generation of renewable-based electricity by households; the identification of internal
resources and financial mechanisms that can support alternative energies; and supporting
the development of small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and industries (SMIs) in
the local production of components specific to renewable energy technologies (RETs).
The execution of this vast project requires multilateral as well as bilateral cooperation.
Therefore we welcome the initiative of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA),
which in November 2011 enabled Senegal to host the pilot phase of the Renewables
Readiness Assessment.
Foreword
SENEGAL12
This project has enabled us to highlight our country’s strengths, as well as its weaknesses,
concerning the rapid deployment of renewable energy across the various network options,
off-grid applications and the use of biofuels. The actions identified in this evaluation will
make, I believe, a significant contribution to the deployment of renewable energy. Putting
all the measures identified into practice could lead our country to effective diversification
of its sources of energy.
The Government of Senegal is confident that, with international cooperation, particularly
with IRENA, our country will soon reach its goals of promoting renewable energies to
become a model in the ECOWAS region.
Finally, I reiterate here, that all our national experts are available to assist other countries in
the conduct of their own RRAs and confirm my continued support for IRENA’s mission.
Aly Ngouille NDIAYE 
Minister of Energy and Mines, Senegal
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT13
The First Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) – presented here by Senegal – is an
important milestone for IRENA, whose mission is to promote the widespread and increased
adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy. 
The RRA is a central pillar of IRENA’s work and is a country-driven process supported by
IRENA providing an opportunity for countries to engage in a national dialogue with all
relevant stakeholders in order to pinpoint renewable energy drivers, comparative advantages
as well as areas of improvement to set concerted actions needed to be taken to enable the
development and scale-up of renewables.
This will allow IRENA to identify and provide country-specific support and advice to the
participating countries. More broadly, it will also generate knowledge of good practices and
cooperation between countries, which are essential to increasing deployment. 
Senegal, in keeping with its strong and consistent support of IRENA’s mission, kindly
volunteered to host the first country pilot study. The process and details of RRAs will
necessarily evolve with experience. We thank Senegal for its generosity in hosting this first
study. The country’s engagement and input have gone beyond what we could have expected
and IRENA is grateful for this important contribution.
In common with all countries, the RRA found areas where Senegal had examples of good
practice that could be shared with others, areas where readiness was high and other areas
where readiness could be improved in the short- to medium-term, under initiatives led by
Senegal. The report now presented focuses on these actions and examples of good practice. 
IRENA hopes that the RRA will enable Senegal to increase its deployment of renewables.
We offer our continuing support, across all our functions and work programmes, to Senegal
in implementing the actions identified.
Adnan Z. Amin 
Director General, IRENA
Preface
SENEGALRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENTSENEGAL 
BACKGROUND
Senegal is a West African country with a population of 12.6 million, a
GDP of USD 14.3 billion, and an estimated economic growth rate of 4%
in 2011. The country’s energy sector is characterised by a growing
demand for modern energy services and a lack of reliable electricity
supply. The electric system is based on inefficient oil-based power
plants, now operating beyond their initial design life span, and suffers
recurring power outages. Traditional biomass accounts for 54% of
Senegal’s primary energy supply, oil products for 40% and other
resources, including coal and hydro power, for the remaining 6%. All oil
products are imported, making Senegal’s trade balance very vulnerable
to oil price volatility. 
Senegal has actively pursued reform policies in the energy sector, with
a strong focus on promoting renewable energy. The current energy
policy is reflected in the “Lettre de Développement du Secteur de
l’Energie (LPDSE 2008),” a government strategy document building on
the lessons learned from previous energy policies. The emphasis on
renewable energy has resulted in the adoption of two laws aiming at
increasing the cumulative share of renewable energy and biofuels to at
least 15% energy mix by 2020. 
As a further commitment to renewable energy, Senegal joined hands
with the international community and signed the statute of the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) during its founding
conference in 2009. Resulting from IRENA’s engagement with African
governments, the Renewables Readiness Assessment was identified as
a crucial step for a better understanding of the opportunities and
constraints in Africa, and as a collaborative process that will provide a
Executive Summary6 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
rapid, objective assessment of the status of
renewable energy opportunities and
identify pathways to address gaps. Senegal
hosted the first country Renewable
Readiness Assessment pilot study.
RRA IN SENEGAL
The Renewables Readiness Assessment in
Senegal revealed that many steps have
been taken towards liberalising the national
electricity market. Although SENELEC, the
national utility, still enjoys a monopoly for
transmission and distribution, generation
has been opened up to independent power
producers and conditions for self-generation have been simplified. The only
renewable-based electricity injected into
the grid is from the Manantali hydro power
plant in Mali, as part of the Western African
Power Pool project. 
Funding for research and development in
the renewable energy sector remains
insignificant despite the presence of
research centres and institutes dedicated
to renewables and the creation of the first
West African solar PV assembler. Senegal
could, therefore, build on these assets to
accelerate the assessment of the technical
renewable energy potential in order to
facilitate investment and involvement of
the private sector in specific projects.
In 2011, Senegal’s national access to
electricity was estimated at 40%, with an
urban electrification rate of 70% and rural
electrification of 22%. The objective is to
increase national access rate to 75% by the
end of 2012. All the necessary conditions
for the rapid expansion of rural
electrification are in place, with the
adoption of a concerted programme of
rural electrification (PASER) and the
creation of a dedicated national rural
electrification agency (ASER). In addition,
concessions for rural electrification have
been successfully tendered and awarded to
national and international bidders and are
being complemented by small local
projects. Both approaches include renewables as one of the most appropriate
solutions.
Significant experience with Independent
Power Producers (IPPs) generating
electricity for the national grid (from
conventional sources) and the opening of
the power-generating sector to renewable
sources through the LPDSE 2008 should
have increased the involvement of
renewable-based IPPs. However, no
mechanism exists yet to set appropriate
feed-in tariffs (FiTs) and Power Purchase
Agreements (PPAs) from renewable-based
electricity generation for the grid. The
promulgation of the Renewable Energy
Law’s implementing decrees, which
provide “must run” status to renewables,
and the design of suitable FiTs constitutes
The Renewables Readiness Assessment was identified as a crucial step for a better
understanding of the opportunities and constraints in Africa, and as a collaborative
process that will provide a rapid, objective assessment of the status of renewable
energy opportunities and identify pathways to address gaps. 
Senegal hosted the first country Renewables Readiness Assessment pilot study.
RSENEGAL 
an important milestone to expand on-grid
renewable-based electricity generation. 
Licensing, operation and sales of electricity
are regulated by the Regulatory
Commission of the Electricity Sector, which
is also mandated to approve tariffs for
electricity supply, regardless of the
installation’s size. This process is timeconsuming and acts as a barrier to the
implementation of small local projects, thus
limiting their expansion. A measure to
alleviate this constraint could include
exempting installations below a certain
capacity (e.g., below 100 kW) from
requiring regulatory body approval for
proposed tariffs, and instead allow
approval at the local and community level.
The decentralisation of regulatory powers,
following decentralisation at governmental
level, and associated capacity building at
the local level to respond to tariff
proposals, could also assist the process.
The biofuels sector, although relatively
recent in Senegal, is carried by a strong
political will to expand feedstock
production from both sugarcane and
jatropha in order to partially meet domestic
fuel demand. However, the complex system
of land tenure and the lack of agroecological zoning assessments for
feedstock production could present
significant barriers for the development of
biofuels feedstock if not carefully
integrated into the biofuel policy and
regulatory framework.
KEY RECOMMENDATIONS
As a result of the Renewables Readiness
Assessment process in Senegal, the
Government of Senegal identified the
following key recommendations to
stimulate the deployment of renewable
energy in the country. The Government of
Senegal should: 
w Detail out a comprehensive strategy
for mapping renewable energy
potentials in key areas including their
techno-economic feasibility.
w Facilitate grid integration of electricity generated from renewable
sources by enacting the Renewable
Energy Law, implementing decrees
that provide the necessary conditions, guidelines and tariffs to
incorporate renewable-based electricity to the grid.
w Consider restructuring the institutional, legal and regulatory framework for utilising land for biofuels
production and adapt the rules of
intervention of the regulator in offgrid small-scale renewable energy
projects.
w Identify the conditions needed to
increase private sector involvement,
especially for operation and maintenance, in the renewable energy
sector.8 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
196722 
km2
GEOGRAPHICAL AREA
Dakar
CAPITAL CITY
12.6
million
POPULATION
2.6%
POPULATION GROWTH RATE
(ANSD,2011)
>35%
OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE 
EARNINGS USED FOR OIL IMPORT
SENEGALSENEGAL 
BACKGROUND
Senegal is a country in Western Africa, bordered by the Atlantic Ocean
and Mauritania, Mali, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and Gambia. Senegal’s
economy grew at an average rate of 4% in 2011, with nearly 77.5% of the
population employed in the primary sector, and is expected to grow by
4.2% and 4.7% respectively in 2012 and 2013 (ANSD, 2011).
Senegal currently uses more than 35% of its foreign exchange earnings
for oil imports, making it highly vulnerable to oil price fluctuations
(Ministere des Energies Renouvelables, 2011). In 2008, Senegal decided
to promote the use of other energy sources and has restructured the
country’s national energy policy by considering the development of
renewable energy as a major focus area. Institutional, legislative and
regulatory structures were therefore strengthened to support the
objectives laid out in the National Energy Policy. This high political
commitment to institutional reform and policy positioned Senegal as
the leader in renewable energy promotion in the Economic Commission
of Western Africa [ECOWAS] region and the country was tasked to
develop solar energy projects in the sub-region by Heads of State and
Government in the ECOWAS Summit held in July 20101
. In 2009, Senegal
also joined hands with the international community to support the
foundation of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). 
Because of Senegal’s strong commitment to renewable energy,
ECOWAS proposed that it should be chosen as one of the pilot countries
to field-test the methodology being developed by IRENA for the
Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) process. Senegal hosted the
first pilot study from 14-18 November 2011 and this document, the final
report from that study, contains the insights gained from interviews and
workshop sessions with key stakeholders, together with findings from
the published literature to summarise the status of the country’s policy
and institutional framework before proposing short- and medium-term
actions for Senegal.
I. Introduction
1 The 38th Summit 
of the Authority of
Heads of State and
Government of
ECOWAS, held on 
2 July in Sal, Cape
Verde, adopted a
Special Resolution
establishing the
ECOWAS Solar
Commission (ESC)
with the objective to
develop large-scale
solar plants to
complement the
region’s energy needs.
Under the
Chairmanship of H.E.
Me Abdoulaye Wade,
President of the
Republic of Senegal,
ECREEE has been
designated the
implementing agency
for the ESC. RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
IRENA became a full-fledged international
organisation in April 2011, with a mandate
to promote increased adoption and
sustainable use of all forms of renewable
energy. With 104 Members in the Agency,
48 signatories and 7 applicants for
membership, IRENA has the global reach
to act as the focal point for international
cooperation and to underpin the effort to
increase the deployment of renewables in
the energy mix of countries around the
world. Through its work programme,
IRENA aims to position itself as an inclusive
global platform to stimulate policy
dialogue, and develop strategies to assist
countries for their necessary transition to a
renewables-based energy future.
In July 2011, more than 25 Ministers of
Energy and Heads of Delegation attended
the IRENA High-Level African Consultative
Forum on Partnership on Accelerating
Renewable Energy Uptake for Africa’s
Sustainable Development, where they
discussed the vision and direction for
IRENA’s work in Africa. The communique
issued at the end of the forum urged
IRENA to inter alia “better understand the
opportunities and constraints in our countries and regions by mapping ‘Renewable
Energy Readiness’, a collaborative process
that will provide a rapid, objective assessment of the status of renewable energy
opportunities, and identify pathways to
address gaps.”
RRAs are now an integral component of
the IRENA Work Programme and are
included in the “Promotion of regional
consensus to adopt renewable energy
through strategic intervention”. The RRA
process is designed to provide input to
national and regional renewable energy
action plans and bring together partners
who can support the implementation of
action plans, including providing solutions
to energy access. 
RRA
RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT
R Rapid assessment of the conditions
necessary for the installation and ongoing
operation of renewable energy facilities in
a country.
R Covers all RE sources and services of
preference to the country’s national
product.
R The RRA report is a product of the
country, and the actions and insights in it
come from a country-owned process.
IRENA
INTERNATIONAL RENEWABLE
ENERGY AGENCY
AS OF N0VEMBER 2012
104 
Members of the Agency
55
Signatories/applicants for membership
159
Total participation 
(158 states plus the European Union)
48
Participating states in AfricaSENEGAL 
THE RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT
The RRA is a country-driven process that
facilitates dialogue between stakeholders.
It aims to help IRENA Member States
achieve their aspirational goals through
adopting the appropriate renewable
energy technologies by assessing the
current situation and identifying the gaps,
and drawing concrete and prioritised
action plans to be implemented within a
determined timeframe, while specifying
the responsible stakeholders and clarifying
their roles. The process also facilitates
comparisons and case studies, and enables
the useful matching of attributes of
renewable energy, with opportunities for
its deployment.
The RRA comprises a process and a
methodology that includes completing a
set of templates and a final report. The
RRA methodology covers all forms of
energy services (transport, heat, electricity
and motive power), and all renewable
energy sources, with countries selecting
those of particular relevance. The RRA also
brings in strong country stakeholding as
the processes designed to be conducted by
national governments, allowing countries
to obtain a comprehensive overview of the
conditions for renewable energy from their
own national perspective. All processes
and documentation are led by the country
and derive inputs from discussions with
stakeholders, facilitated by the country
focal point with the assistance of IRENA.
The resulting report is therefore a national
one, developed and owned by the country.
This sets the process and methodology of
the RRA apart from other assessment
processes led by international organisations. IRENA offers its support during the
RRA, but it is the actions and insights
developed through a country-owned
process that provide the key to rapid
deployment.
RRAs facilitate a coordinated approach and
the setting of priorities that can inform
discussion with bilateral and multilateral
cooperation agencies, financial institutions
and the private sector regarding the
implementation of actions and initiatives
emerging out of the RRA. IRENA’s backing
of the RRA process offers countries access
to a global network with the capacity to
follow up on actions and facilitate an
exchange of experiences. IRENA can also
facilitate implementation of the follow-up
actions, where necessary, after specific
requests from the country or regional
entity.
The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) is designed to define a detailed list of
criteria considered necessary for the installation and ongoing operation of renewable
energy facilities. Application of this framework to individual countries will provide a
comprehensive analysis of the presence, or otherwise, of enabling conditions for the
development of renewables. Crucially, this analysis should take into account how the
renewables policy of the country in question contributes to its other policy objectives.
RTHE RRA METHODOLOGY
The methodology adopted for the countrylevel RRA has a number of distinct stages
as shown in the RRA methodology chart.
TESTING THE METHODOLOGY 
IN SENEGAL
The pilot study in Senegal was undertaken
to field-test the draft methodology for the
RRA, obtain feedback from key stakeholders in Senegal on the criteria being
used to assess the readiness, and further
improve the methodology. An extensive
literature review of recent relevant studies
was also undertaken.
Stakeholder mapping identified key stakeholders in government departments and
public sector bodies, financial institutions,
research bodies, NGOs and the private
sector. These key stakeholders are
highlighted in Section 2.4. This research set
the stage for a mission to Senegal to
complete the on-ground assessment
process. The mission comprised the following activities:
1. An introductory meeting with the
Ministry of Renewable Energy (MER)
and affiliated institutions provided an
introduction to the project and opportunities to share knowledge with
key stakeholders. 
2. A site visit to Sine Moussa, a village
three hours’ drive from Dakar, where
a hybrid power plant of 20 kW (solar
5 kW, wind 5 kW and diesel 10 kW)
has been used to electrify village
dwellings and provide street lighting.
3. A series of fact-finding interviews
with stakeholders from the renewable energy sector.
4. Working sessions with employees
from the MER and other stakeholders
to fill in RRA templates for different
renewable energy resources and
services.
5. A final workshop with stakeholders
held on the final day of the mission,
aimed at presenting findings from
the week, eliciting further feedback
on these findings, and developing
the set of actions that form the last
stage of an RRA.
As stated in the introduction, the
experience gained from the pilot RRA
assessment conducted in Senegal will
assist further regional and country level
assessments, and other work in partner
countries. 
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
SENEGALESE
RRA MISSION
R Introductory meeting with MER and 
affiliated institutions
R Site visit to small wind-solar-diesel 
hybrid power plant in Sine Moussa
R Fact-finding interviews with key
stakeholders
R Working sessions to fill RRA templates with
employees of MER and other stakeholders
R Final workshop with stakeholders to
present findings, obtain feedback and to
develop a set of actions
OBJECTIVES
R Assess and review the status
of energy and RE in Senegal
R Approaches for developing institutional
structures for RE
R Framework for providing access to RE
R Technology and Infrastructure 
for delivering energy and RE
R Opportunities and Barriers 
for viable business models for RE
R Recommend a Set of Actions 
to address identified issuesSENEGAL 
Renewable Readiness
Assessment Methodology
STEP 1A 
PREPARATORY
WORK
R Setting up of the RRA team
initiated and led by National
Government
R Contextualisation of RRA
R Identification of key
stakeholders, RE projects
and programmes
R Roadmap and timeline for
assessment
STEP 1B
PLANNING 
THE PROCESS
R Identification of appropriate
service–resource pairs
R Preparation of list of
interviewees, appointments
and tentative questionnaire
for bilateral meetings
Scoping
STEP 2A
INITIAL 
PLENARY
SESSION
R Introductory session led by
high-level government
official (e.g., Minister of RE)
R Discussion on status,
potential and barriers to
scale up RE
R Description of how to
conduct the RRA
R Refining and selection of
key renewables applications
STEP 2B
ASSESSMENT
R Filling out of RRA templates
with regards to:
w Policy and strategy
w Business models 
w Institutional, regulatory 
and market structure
w Resources, 
technologies 
and infrastructure
w Finance, building, 
operations and 
maintenance
STEP 2C
VALIDATION
WORKSHOP
R National workshop to
present and validate
preliminary findings
2Assessing
STEP 3A
FINAL REPORT
R Final report-writing drawn
on preparatory materials,
completed RRA templates
and list of actions
R RRA Director comments
and approves work on
behalf of the country
STEP 3B
FOLLOW UP
ACTIONS
R Working with IRENA
R RRA Director and
Government Focal Point
identify areas for
subsequent collaboration
and action
1 3FinalisingRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
OBJECTIVES
This report aims to foster understanding
and debate around the renewable energy
sector in Senegal and provide an
introduction to the issues facing the
country. It also offers a broad summary of
the experiences of the energy market
development and the deployment of
renewables. The key objectives for this
report are:
1. To assess the energy issues facing
Senegal and review the current
status of energy policy, specifically
regarding renewable energy, at a
regional and national levels.
2. To critically review employed and
planned approaches to developing
institutional structures for renewables.
3. To review the framework for
providing access to modern energy
services using renewable energy as
well as the current status of
technology and infrastructure to deliver it.
4. To critically assess the opportunities
and barriers for developing viable
business models for renewable
energy projects.
5. To suggest a set of actions to
address the identified barriers.
This report aims to conclude the pilot stage
of the RRA process for Senegal and to
highlight an action framework that would
enhance the deployment of renewable
energy. The analysis presented here is
intended to put the issues and proposed
actions in the context of regional and
international experience.
The experience gained from the pilot
RRA assessment conducted in
Senegal will assist further regional
and country level assessmentsII. Energy and Renewable 
Energy Context
THE REGIONAL CONTEXT
The ECOWAS region is characterised by a growing demand for modern
energy and low levels of access and reliability of modern energy
services2. According to the African Development Bank one-third of
Africans are now “middle-class” (defined as having between USD 2 and
USD 20 to spend daily); while improvements in governance, better
access to technology, and better use of natural resources have begun
to raise millions out of dire poverty (AfDB, 2011). However, the improving
economic growth experienced by African countries is being stunted by
poor performance of the energy sector, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Taking the electricity sector for example, the low growth in generation
capacity is unable to keep pace with the growth in the demand for
electricity and has resulted in a current supply/demand gap of about
40% (GTZ, 2009). This situation is general for the whole continent.
Bazilian et al. (2011) suggest that if Africa is to meet the goal of universal
energy access by 2030, electricity generation capacity needs to grow
at an annual rate of 13%, compared to the 2% annual growth recorded
over the past two decades. Current spending in the energy sector is
much less than required, even for conventional development and
energy-use patterns. For example, Sub-Saharan Africa countries spend
on average less than 3% of their GDP on their power sector with about
75% of this spending used as operating costs (Eberhard et al., 2008),
suggesting that a mere 0.75% of GDP is used to expand power
infrastructure.
2The International Energy Agency (IEA) defines Universal Modern Energy Access as 
“a household having reliable and affordable access to clean cooking facilities, a first
connection to electricity and then an increasing level of electricity consumption over
time to reach the regional average”. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) also defines
Energy Access as any or a combination of the following: (1) provision of electricity and
motive power to households, (2) improvement in the supply and delivery of energy
services to households, (3) provision of modern fuels and/or efficient devices for
cooking and/or heating to households and (4) provision of finance to households to
access energy (Sokona et al. Widening energy access in Africa, 2012).
SENEGALECOWAS
MEMBER COUNTRIES
BENIN
BURKINA FASO
CABO VERDE
COTE D'IVOIRE
GAMBIA
GHANA
GUINEA
GUINEA BISSAU
LIBERIA
MALI
NIGER
NIGERIA
SENEGAL
SIERRA LEONE
TOGOLESE Republic
<0.75% of GDP
of Sub-Saharan African countries is used for 
expanding power infrastructure
Households with electricity access 
in the ECOWAS region
<30%
in 9 out of 15 countries
15%
in remaining countries 
(Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Liberia, Niger and Sierra Leone)
20%
for the whole ECOWAS region
Traditional biomass dominates primary energy supply in the 
ECOWAS region of electricity generated, 64% is from fossil fuels, 31%
from hydro power and the rest is from imports.
West African Power Pool (WAPP) set up in 2006 by ECOWAS to 
address power supply deficiency in the region.
ECOWAS Regional Electricity Regulatory Authority set up to harmonise
the regulations governing trans-border electricity trade.
ECOWAS Regional Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy 
Efficiency (ECREEE), set up by the ECOWAS Commission in 
collaboration with the various partners, as a regional response to
address specific issues relating to catalysing markets for renewable
energy and energy efficiency technologies.
Public-private partnerships
The setting up of these will cover technical aspects, management
systems, fundraising and financial risk-taking.
6 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENTSENEGAL 
ECOWAS has drawn up multiple energy
access goals to address the supply/
demand gap. The countries in the region
have decided to implement an ambitious
regional energy policy (ECOWAS, 2006) in
order to increase access to modern energy
services. The region aims to provide access
to modern energy services to at least half
of the population by the year 2015. This
would mean bringing 36 million additional
households within the ambit of modern
energy services (ECOWAS, 2006) and is
proposed to be implemented by strengthening regional integration (pooling of
knowledge, cross-border cooperation and
capacity building), harmonisation of political and institutional frameworks, and the
development of coherent energy policies
based on poverty reduction in rural and
peri-urban areas.
During the implementation of the energy
programmes designed to achieve these
goals, priority should be given to publicprivate partnerships (PPPs). It is most
important that public actors (state, public
institutions, local authorities, etc.) and
private actors (national and local entrepreneurs, financial institutions, associations
and cooperatives, NGOs, etc.) are
mobilised.
One key regional initiative was the
establishment of the West African Power
Pool (WAPP) as a specialised ECOWAS
institution in 20063. WAPP is now working
to harmonise the regulatory framework
that governs the electricity sector in each
member country. The first phase of its work
involved engaging with countries that are
already interconnected, including Nigeria,
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana,
Niger and Togo, although some critical
gaps in grid infrastructure still need to be
addressed. WAPP has also begun to
engage with countries which do not yet
have interconnection facilities, including
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali,
Senegal and Gambia. Other key initiatives
include the ECOWAS Regional Electricity
Regulatory Authority and the ECOWAS
Regional Centre for Renewable Energy and
Energy Efficiency (ECREEE).
Although the generation, transmission and
distribution of electricity are mainly
provided by publicly-owned, verticallyintegrated national utilities, efforts are
being made by a number of countries to
mobilise private sector finance through
IPPs with varying levels of success4. These
efforts continue to be hampered by
perception of investor risks, regulatory
concerns with competition between public
and private generation assets and
difficulties in developing bankable business
models. 
The Total Primary Energy Supply (TPES) of
Senegal in 2010 was 141.6 PJ. Biomass
accounts for about 47% of the country’s
energy supply with oil products accounting
for about 48% (Figure 2). Coal, hydro,
natural gas and solar (whose combined
share has greatly increased since 2000) are
the other energy sources used (Figure 3).
3 WAPP was created by Decision A/DEC.5/12/99 during the 22nd Summit of the Authority of ECOWAS
Heads of State and Government. WAPP was guided by a Steering Committee comprising Energy Ministers
of ECOWAS Member States, supported by a Project Implementation Committee, comprising Managing
Directors of Members States’ Utilities and Technical and Institutional Working Groups. The 29th Summit of
the Heads of State and Government of the ECOWAS Member States held in Niamey in January 2006
adopted the Articles of Agreement establishing the new WAPP organisation by Decision A/DEC.18/01/06
on 12 January 2006. The same meeting granted the status of a Specialised Institution of ECOWAS to WAPP,
by Decision A/DEC.20/01/06.
4 Successful cases are CIPREL and Azito in Côte d'Ivoire; Global Electrical Group (GEG) in Gambia;
Takoradi II, Sunon Asogli and Bui Hydro, in Ghana; AES Barge, Okpai , Afam VI and Aba Integrated, in
Nigeria; GTi Dakar, and Kounoune I, in Senegal; and Centrale Thermique de Lome in Togo. 8 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
157.9 PJ
Total Primary Energy Supply 
2,858 GWh
86.8 PJ
Share of renewables in TPES
(54.8% of TPES)
2,858 GWH
Electricity generation 
292.0 GWH
Share of RE in electricity generated
(10.2 % of total)
548 MW
Electrical capacity (2008) 
2 MW
Share of RE in electrical capacity
(0.4% of total)
189 KWH
Electricity use per capita 
55.5%
Senegal’s Energy
Self-sufficiency
US $1.2 BILLION 
Senegal’s fuel imports
(23.2% of total imports)
Approximately 25%
Share of population 
using solid fuels 
Senegal Energy Profile Figure 1. Senegal Energy ProfileSENEGAL 
All the fossil fuels consumed in the country
are imported – in particular the oil products
that are used for transport and electricity
generation – and make a significant contribution to the country’s imports bill with an
estimated CFA 620 billion (approx. USD 1.2
billion)5 in 2009 corresponding to 23.3% of
total imports (Figure 4). This leaves
Senegal very vulnerable to increases in the
price of oil products. Households account
for 52% of the total energy consumption,
followed by the transportation sector
(30%), and the industrial sector (14%). Agriculture and public services consume the
remaining 4%.
Both the biomass and oil products used in
Senegal are sources of concern: the use of
traditional fuels – wood and charcoal – is
putting great pressure on forests and
contributing to a degradation of the
environment. In order to decrease
5. USD 1 = CFA 532 
Figure 3. Energy Sources Used
Source: IEA, 2011
Figure 2. 
Total Primary Energy
Supply by FuelRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
traditional biomass consumption, Senegal
has had a policy of subsidising liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG) supplies for more
than two decades.
About 40% of the households in Senegal
have access to electricity, principally
through SENELEC’s interconnected grid.
SENELEC shares generation with ESKOMManantali6, GTI-DAKAR7 and Kounoune I8
to power the interconnected grid, while
there are small independent and selfpower producers such as Cim-Sahel
Energy, CSS, SONACOS, SOCOCIM and ICS.
The rate of electrification is progressing
through new connections to this main grid
and through small off-grid projects. However, consumers and businesses connected
to the grid still have to contend with a
highly unstable and unreliable electricity
supply, leading to revenue and productivity
losses to firms and the economy.
Modernisation of Senegal’s power generation infrastructure is lagging behind
demand. This is reflected in increased
power generation costs – the current average wholesale cost of power in Senegal is
about CFA 70/kWh (USD 0.14/kWh)
(SENELEC, 2012) compared with USD
0.13/kWh in the Sub-Saharan region’s
larger power systems (AfDB, 2011). The
existing high cost of electricity to consumers means that it is impossible to
finance further new connections through
increased consumer tariffs and the scarcity
of capital available to the government
means that investments have to rely
heavily on donors. 
Senegal has a proven reserve of oil
estimated at 100 million m3 in the south
(Casamance area) but as yet, neither
6 ESKOM-Manantali is in charge of running the Manantali dam (a joint venture between Mali, Mauritania
and Senegal), in the frame of the OMVS with a 200 MW installed capacity with Senegal receiving 32% of
the power generated.
7 GTI-DAKAR signed a 15-year exclusive contract for electricity supply with SENELEC in 1996 and has
installed a capacity of 53 MW (natural gas 37 MW and 16 MW from a steam turbine).
8 Kounoune I signed a 15-year exclusive BOO contract for electricity supply with SENELEC in 2008 and 
has installed a capacity of 68 MW (HFO diesel).
Image 1: Traditional Biomass in Senegal 
© www.beershebaproject.org
Figure 4. 
Senegal Oil Bill 
in billion CFA FrancsSENEGAL 
upstream nor downstream production capacity has been developed (Enda-Energie,
2006; Enefebio, 2007). Imported crude oil
is refined at Societe Africaine de Raffinage
(SAR) which has an annual capacity of 1.2
million tons (SAR, 2010). Gas reserves,
estimated to be 30.4 billion m3 in the
Gadiaga area as of 2011, are used exclusively for running four gas turbines with
a total output of 88 GWh (8% of the total
electricity production within the country)
(SENELEC, 2012). Table 1 presents the
estimated energy potentials in Senegal by
resources. 
RENEWABLE ENERGY IN SENEGAL
Senegal is endowed with a large solar
energy resource. Over most of country’s
territory, the solar irradiation is above 
2 000 kWh /m2/year for Global Horizontal
Irradiation and above 1 800 kWh/m2/year
for Direct Normal Irradiation (Ministere des
Energies Renouvelables, 2011). This provides good prospects for photovoltaic solar
power projects. The falling prices of photovoltaic panels and system components
make solar a very attractive solution, particularly when the costs of the alternatives –
imported oil products – are high. 
There is also significant wind energy potential along Senegal’s coast between Dakar
and Saint Louis with an average speed
estimated around 4 m/sat 10 metres
height. Recent measurements performed
at 30-40 metres revealed the existence of
speeds above 6 m/s (Ibid).
189 KWH
Per capita electricity use in Senegal – 
fourth among west African countries.
579 KWH
Average for Africa
2777 KWH
Average for world
COST 
COMPARISON
CFA 110/KWH 
or
US$ 0.22/KWH
Average cost to customer for 
electricity in Senegal
US$ 0.04/KWH
Average for South Asia
US$ 0.07/KWH
Average for East Asia
Figure 5: Per Capita Electricity Use
kWh per capita
Source: IRENA 2011bRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Resources Sites Potential
Oil Casamance (heavy oil) 100 million m3
Peats Niayes 390 million m3
Natural Gas Diamiadio 400 billion m3
(reserve 30.4 billion m3)
Biomass Tambacounda Kolda, Ziguinchor 331.3 million m3
Hydro Senegal and Gambia rivers 1 400 MW
Solar Countrywide 1 800 kWh/m2/year,
Direct Normal Irradiation
2 000 kWh/ m2/year, 
Global Horizontal Irradiation
Wind Great coast areas 4- 6 m/s
Table 1: Types, location and potentials of energy resources
(Enda-Energie, 2006; Enefebio, 2007)
The total potential for large hydro
power in Senegal is estimated to be
approximately 1 400 MW on the
Senegal and Gambia Rivers (Ibid).
Solid biomass (agricultural and agribusiness by-products) and liquid
biofuels also have potential in parts
of the country. As mentioned earlier,
biomass is the dominant source of
energy in Senegal providing more
than 50% of the national energy
balance. Biomass resources, such as
agricultural byproducts (approximately 3.3 million dry tons of agricultural residues) agribusiness (rice
husk, bagasse, peanut shells, cotton
stalks, etc.), also have the potential
for grid-distributed and off-grid
electricity generation (Ibid). Plant
species (plant oil, jatropha curcas,
cat-tails, sunflower, cotton, castor,
sweet sorghum etc.) also have
potential for biofuel production.
Image 2 is a geographical representation of Senegal’s renewable
energy potential in relation with the
existing power grid.
KEY ENERGY STAKEHOLDERS
A wide range of stakeholders was
identified to participate in the workshops and discussions in order to
support the RRA process. The stakeholders were primarily technical
staff drawn from government departments and public sector agencies, but also came from the private
sector, civil society, dev-elopment
and cooperation agencies as well as
financial institutions, since they all
play an important role in building a
renewable energy sector. In
addition, bilateral meetings and
interviews were conducted with key
senior officials of these different
institutions. It is because so many
people were able to give their inputs
that the Renewables Readiness Assessment is meaningful in building
national consensus on renewable
energy in the country. On the
following pages is a list and description of these institutions.SENEGAL 
HV lines(225kv & 90 KV)
HV lines(30 KV)
Grid Connected Thermal Plants
HV/MV Injector and Thermal Plants
Decentralized Thermal Plants
Renewable Energy Potential
Generation and transmission grids
Wind
Solar
Hydro(Small)
Bio energy
Ziguinohor
Boutoute
Kolda
Kolda
Tambacounda
Tambacounda
Dakar
Mbour
Cap-des biches
Bel-al
Saint-louis
Podor
Diourbel
Louga Matam
Ourossogul
Dakel
Saint-louis
Kaolack
Kahone
Fatick
Fatick Thies
Thies
Louga
Towards Manantali Dam
Generation and transmission grids
HV lines(30 KV)
HV lines(225kv & 90 KV)
Podor
Decentralized
HV/MV Injector and
Grid Connected Thermal Plants
HV lines(30 KV)
Decentralized Thermal Plants
HV/MV Injector and Thermal Plants
Grid Connected Thermal Plants
HV lines(30 KV)
 Thermal Plants
Thermal Plants
Saint-louis
Louga
Saint-louis
Renewa
Solar
Wind
wable Energy Potential otential
Bel-al
Cap-des biches
Dakar Thies
s
T
Thies
Diourbel
biches
Louga
Louga
Diourbel
Ourossogul
Louga Matam Dakel Bio energy
Hydro(Small)
Cap-des biches Thies
a
ies atic r FaticFa
Cap-des biches
Mbour Fatick
K
atick
Kahone
Kaolack
Tambacound Tambacounda
Towards Manantali Dam ds Manantali Dam
Boutou
Ziguinohor K
ute
guinohor Kolda
Kolda
Tambacounda
National Electricity Grids and RE Potential 
Image 2
(Author and Senelec, 2012)RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT
Council of Ministers 
The Council of Ministers takes the major decisions related to energy, especially on-grid electricity.
Inter-Ministerial Committee on Renewable Energy
However, in order to coordinate and facilitate the integration of electricity from renewables into the
grid, all matters relating to renewable energy need to be discussed and finalised in consultation with
the key actors (MoE, MER, CRSE, ASER, SENELEC) in the Inter-ministerial Committee on Renewable
Energy (Comité Interministériel sur les Energies Renouvelables, or CIER) before taking them for
decision to the Council of Ministers.
Ministry of Energy (MoE) 
MoE is in charge of on-grid electricity policy and closely monitors its implementation. 
Ministry of Renewable Energy (MER) 
MER is responsible for framing policies for the promotion of electricity generation from renewable
energy sources and thus plays a key role in formulating policies and monitoring decisions taken in
consultation with the MoE and other relevant stakeholders for promoting decentralised renewable
energy applications.
The Regulatory Commission for the Electricity Sector (CRSE)
CRSE has the role of promoting competition, efficiency and economy in bulk power markets,
regulating electricity tariffs, improving the quality of supply, advising the government on the
removal of institutional barriers to bridge the demand supply gap, thus safeguarding the interests of
consumers. 
Senegalese Agency for Rural Electrification (ASER) 
ASER is responsible for much of Senegal's off-grid rural electrification and power generation
although some projects still fall under SENELEC's authority. ASER, which was established in 2000
but only became fully operational in 2005, has been given the responsibility of implementing the
strategy for rural electrification (PASER).
SENELEC: The national electricity utility
SENELEC is one of the pillars of the economic and social development of Senegal and is its main
electricity generator.
SENELEC is the concessionaire for the transmission and distribution network in Senegal (with the
exception of Manantali interconnection) and operates in a monopoly condition for the purchase and
sale of wholesale power. 
SENELEC has been through several phases of privatisation but its priority now is to strengthen the
capacity of power generation and implement organisational restructuring.
Key Energy Stakeholders SENEGAL 
Intersectorial Committee for the Implentation of Synergies 
between Energy and other Strategic Sectors (CIMES)
CIMES is a multi-sectorial group comprising, among others, the relevant ministries, civil society,
private sector and donors. The group worked towards including energy issues within the National
Poverty Reduction Strategy and is considering the energy gaps to meet development goals, and the
contribution of renewable energy to these goals. 
National Agency for Solar Energy (ANDES)
ANDES is a new agency set up by Senegal in response to the 2010 mandate it received from the
heads of states of ECOWAS countries to promote solar energy in the sub-region.
University Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar and its subsidiaries
The University Cheikh Anta Diop of Dakar focuses on research in renewable energies in Senegal
through its Research and Study Centre for Renewable Energy (CERER). Activities covered include
studies into the renewable energy potential of the country, as well as pilot projects in wind and solar
thermal energy.
The Polytechnic School (ESP) has been integrating renewable energy content into its curriculum for
a long time, but no dedicated programme exists. Each department in the ESP has a liaison teacher
to the private sector. 
Enda-Energy
Enda-Energy is a branch of the Enda-Tiers Monde organisation; its work focuses on energy use and
management in the African context, with an emphasis on the linkages between energy and
development.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)
GIZ develops capacities for sustainable development of the energy sector in Senegal through the
Programme to Promote Rural Electrification and a Sustainable Supply of Domestic Fuel (PERACOD). 
CMS and Sen Finance 
CMS and Sen Finance are local micro-finance institutions with a good, well spread network of local
branch offices. However, renewable energy is missing from their portfolios due to a lack of
understanding of renewable energy technologies, industry standards and business models. 
Refer to footnotes for more information on CRSE9 , ASER10 , ANDES11 and PERACOD12 .
9. The CRSE was created by the Law of 98-29 of 14 April 1998.
10 Villages close to the grid and the ones electrified before 2000 are under SENELEC control while all
remaining rural localities are under ASER responsibility.
11 ANDES was established by Decree No. 2011-634 of 17 May 2011, but it is yet to become operational. 
12 PERACOD is funded by the EU Energy Facility, the DGIS and the French Development Cooperation. The
main activities of PERACOD are off-grid rural electrification, improving cook stoves, and training
communities and the private sector in implementing these measures. PERACOD activities began in 2003
and will end in 2015.6 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
ENERGY POLICY AND 
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Senegal initiated its comprehensive energy planning more than a decade ago with
the “Lettre de Developpement du Secteur
de l’Energie (LPDSE),” in 1997. This policy
articulated the goals of the country to
eliminate inefficiencies, decrease supply
costs to consumers and mobilise funding
for energy sector development. In 1998, the
energy sector, through the enactment of
the Law of 98-2913, opened up for private
sector investment in electricity generation
and the Regulatory Commission for the
Electricity Sector (CRSE) was formed in
order to ensure fair and equitable treatment for all players. The CRSE became fully
functional with a chairman and technical
members, and worked to promote competition, efficiency and economy in bulk
power markets, improve the quality of
supply, promote investments and advise
government on the removal of institutional
barriers to bridging the supply/demand
gap and foster the interests of consumers.
The Law of 98-29 was further amended in
2002 in order to provide a greater level of
transparency to the procedures for inviting
private sector tenders.
However, all the objectives which were laid
out for LPDSE in 1997 could not be achieved during the five-year implementation
period and LPDSE 2003 was formulated
with the aim of completing the necessary
sector reforms. New measures were designed to promote development, enhance
the involvement of the private sector and
reduce the cost of supply to consumers.
Improved access to energy services was
identified as a key objective of Senegal’s
national poverty reduction strategy and
strong linkages to this goal were
incorporated into grid infrastructure
planning.
In order to further the framework for
energy policy, LPDSE 2008 was formulated. LPDSE 2008 builds on the
experience gained and has a strong focus
on promoting renewable energy as a
measure for reducing the vulnerability of
the country to external factors including oil
ENERGY PLANNING
R 1997: Creation of LPDSE.
R 1998: Law of 98-29. Setting up of CRSE.
R 2003: LPDSE 2003 to complete reforms.
R 2008: LPDSE 2008. MER set up, Laws on 
Renewable Energy and Biofuels enacted.
R Current: National Strategy for Renewable 
Energy under discussion. To set a target of 
20% renewables in electricity mix by 2020.
RURAL ELECTRIFICATION
Senegalese Rural Electrification Action Plan(PASER) 
8% 
Electricity access to rural households in 2000
62%
Electricity access to rural households in 2022
LPDSE 2008
50%
Rural electrification target for 2012
13The Law of 98-29, enacted as part of the reform of the electricity sector, aims to promote private
investment and eventually to introduce competition in production, wholesale and bulk purchase.This
law was amended in 2002 and systems of launching and control of tenders for the production of
electricity and the concept of ownership of the facilities of production, transportation and distribution
were introduced.price volatility. The role of renewable
energy in providing access to modern
energy services and transport fuels was
first highlighted in LPDSE 2008. The
Ministry for Renewable Energy (MER) was
created and the Law on Renewable Energy
and Law on Biofuels were enacted to give
further effect to the political intent stated
in LPDSE 2008 which defines the framework for renewable energy deployment in
the country and a law for promoting
biofuels.
A renewable energy development policy
(National Strategy for Renewable Energy),
which draws on the tenets enunciated in
the law, is under discussion in Senegal.
When this policy is approved by the
Council of Ministers, Senegal will have a
renewable energy target of 10% of
electricity from renewable resources in its
electricity mix by 2020 (Ministere des
Energies Renouvelables, 2011). The policy
also envisages the development of a
master plan to develop flagship projects
and identify funding sources while emphasising the need to strengthen both
training and research and development in
renewable energy14.
In terms of decentralised application, rural
electrification has been made a national
priority and clear linkages with strategies
for poverty reduction have been
established in the policy framework.
Senegal has an ambitious multi-year
programme (2002-2022) for rural electrification, the “Plan d’Action Senegalais
d’Electrification Rurale” (PASER – Senegalese Rural Electrification Plan of Action),
which aims to increase the rate of rural
electrification (in terms of rural household
connections) from about 8% in 2000 to
62% in 2022.
Many ministries have recognised the role
that renewable energy can play in the
achievement of the MDGs. The Ministry of
Health has stressed the importance of
renewable energy for maintaining the cold
SENEGAL 
14 Senegal plans to reinforce the installed capacity connected to the grid by producing 400 MW from
clean energy resources by 2020 (200 MW in 2015 and an additional 200 MW by 2020),
(http://fr.allafrica.com/stories/201106240575.html) 
BIOFUELS
National Biofuels Strategy 2006
320,000 ha
Target for land area to be planted 
with Jatropha by 2012
1.2 billion litres
Target forJatropha oil to be produced by 2012
Comité National des Biocarburants (CNB)
Set up to coordinate across relevant institutions in
the biofuels sector
Law No. 2010-22
To create favourable conditions for the 
development of the biofuels sector8 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
chain for vaccine distribution. In their
sectorial policies, the Ministries of Water
and Agriculture have similarly stated the
importance of using renewable energy for
pumping to provide safe drinking water
and irrigation. The Ministry of Construction
has made the usage of solar water heaters
mandatory in government buildings and
those of various institutions. The National
Strategy for Poverty Alleviation – DSRP
2006-10 – built on these sectorial policies,
placed a high priority on strengthening the
infrastructure for providing access to
electricity in rural and peri-urban households as well as electrification for social
infrastructure and providing energy for
mechanising motive applications15. 
The agenda set by the National Strategy
for Poverty Alleviation is well-reflected in
LPDSE 2008 which set a goal of 50% rural
electrification by 2012 (Ministere de l'Energie, 2008). The National Strategy for
Renewable Energy, currently under discussion, identifies a key role that the private sector will be required to play in the
generation of electricity through the
installation of decentralised applications
and also in developing the market for solar
photovoltaic applications, small wind turbines and biofuel engines (e.g., multifunctional platforms). It recognises the role
of renewable energy for both generation of
electricity and mechanisation of motive
applications for rural areas.
With regard to biofuels, following the meeting convened in Dakar for the establishment of the Pan-African Non-Petroleum
Producers Association (PANPPA) in
November 2006, many African countries,
including Senegal, have reflected on the
role of biofuels in their agricultural and
energy policies. Therefore, when Senegal
established its National Bioenergy Strategy
in 2006, one of its aims was to contribute
to national energy security through the
production of bioenergy. This included
developing jatropha for biodiesel production and sugarcane for ethanol production.
The fuels produced were to be used not
only for transport, but also for blending
with diesel for power generation. The
government aimed to plant a total of 
320 000 ha of jatropha by 2012, by
providing each of 320 rural communities
with 1 000 ha of jatropha seedlings, which
would be used to produce a total of 
1.2 billion litres of jatropha oil to meet
annual petrol and diesel needs. However,
implementation of this project is currently
lagging behind. 
Policy measures for biofuels are also
included in agricultural policies and programmes such as Retour Versl’ Agriculture
– Going Back to Agriculture – (REVA) and
15The Document of the Strategy for Poverty Alleviation(DSRP) targeted the electrification of basic rural
infrastructure for rural and peri-urban areas in order to facilitate the operationalisation of basic infrastructures
(health centres, schools, etc.), the access to electricity for 66% of households (30% from rural areas) by 2015,
and the access to motive power for rural women, as priorities for achieving the MDGs.
FINANCING 
RENEWABLE ENERGY 
THE SOURCE
R Bilateral and multilateral Banks
R Donors
R Rural Electrification Fund (operated by ASER)
R Carbon Fund (set up by Government of Senegal)
R Local banks and private sector are reluctant to 
invest in energy due to risk perception
R National Agency for promotion of Investment (APIX) 
set up to implement the investment code adopted 
by Senegal and to create favourable conditions for 
investmentsSENEGAL 
Grande Offensive Agricole pour la
Nourriture et l’ Abondance – the Great
Agricultural Offensive for Food and
Agriculture (GOANA).
Law No. 2010-2216, a law on the
orientation of the biofuels sector, was
adopted in 2010 with the aim of creating
favourable conditions for the development
of the biofuels sector and providing
answers to the problems of economic
growth, based on a policy of energy selfsufficiency through the development of
biofuels. The law therefore covers all components of the biofuels sector including production, processing, storage, transport,
marketing and distribution. It determines
the operating environment for all forms of
biofuels and the conditions and standards
for their production and exploitation on
Senegal’s national territory and/or through
international cooperation.
Implementing decrees are currently being
drafted and will determine incentives for
production, tax and customs treatment,
marketing and other arrangements. The
Ministry of Renewable Energy has a
mandate to cover both biomass (under the
Directorate of Renewable Energy) and
biofuels (under the Directorate of Biofuels).
A national technical committee, the
“Comité National des Biocarburants”
(CNB), has also been established under the
aegis of the National Bioenergy Strategy to
facilitate coordination across relevant institutions. The CNB comprises members from
the Ministries of Renewable Energy, Energy
and Agriculture, Investment Promotion
Agencies, and reports to the Director of
Biofuels and Biomass in the Ministry of
Renewable Energy. The government also
appointed the Senegalese Institute for
Agricultural Research (ISRA) under the
16 Law No. 2010-22 of 15 December 2010 of the biofuel sector.
Photo Courtesy: INENSUS West Africa S.A.R.LNational Bioenergy Strategy to take charge
of monitoring biodiesel and bioethanol
production. To raise awareness of the need
for jatropha plantation, rural communities
have been involved using the decentralised
framework of the National Rural Councillors Association (ANCS). 
A range of research institutions are active
in the biofuels sector, including universities,
CERER and ISRA17; and there are several
training institutes across the country.
Quality control of biodiesel and bioethanol
products falls under the responsibility of
the Societe Africaine de Raffinage (SAR–
the Senegalese Refinery).
The regulatory framework in Senegal
comes in the form of decrees promulgated
from time to time. The two most important
and recent decrees for implementing the
Law on Renewable Energy were issued in
December 2011. They lay down the
conditions of purchase and remuneration
for electricity generated by renewable
energy plants, the conditions for the
connection of these plants to the grid, and
the conditions for purchase and remuneration of surplus electricity from captive
power plants generating electricity from
renewables. However, reduced taxes and
customs duties applicable to renewable
energy equipment are only considered on
a case-by-case basis. The decrees are
therefore aimed at eliminating inefficiencies, decreasing the cost of supply to
consumers, and promoting development
funding for the energy sector.
FINANCING AND INVESTMENT
In Senegal, investment and finances in the
energy sector largely rely on funding from
multi and bi lateral banks or donors, but
rarely from the private sector. In renewable
energy, electrification projects are jointly
funded by the private sector and the Rural
Electrification Fund (REF) while other
applications, such as motive and thermal
projects, are being implemented through
donor-funded programmes. 
As in many other developing countries,
public investments in the energy sector fall
short of the requirements for funds needed
to strengthen and modernise the infrastructure. The government has placed a
levy on the selling of hydrocarbons and
created a Carbon Fund (CF). This fund is
being used to create additional capacity
and to provide subsidies to consumers in
the form of lower electricity costs. The
government has also set up funds to promote renewable energy and biofuels, and
raise awareness about these resources.
However, there is still a strong reliance on
external funding (from donors) for the
implementation of energy programmes
and projects. Local banks and the private
sector remain reluctant to invest in the
energy sector due to risk perception.
Senegal is making a clear thrust towards
rural electrification. A Rural Electrification
Fund (REF) operated by ASER has been
established and is responsible for financing
17The ISRA is a research institute in applied science and technology created in 1974 to design, 
organise and carry out all research on the rural sector in Senegal. Its mission is to generate knowledge
and appropriate technologies that would support the country’s socio-economic development by
stimulating job creation, increasing food security among other things.
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENTSENEGAL 
sustainable development of rural electrification. Through the REF, ASER supports investments by granting subsidies to
operators, financing credit lines and guaranteeing funds to banks, micro-finance
institutions and other programme partners.
Senegal has also adopted a National
Investment Code designed to create favourable investment conditions. The code provides protection against expropriation and
nationalisation, as well as guidelines for
repatriation of the investment and its
returns. A special agency, “Agence
Nationale chargée de la Promotion de
l’Investissement et des Grands Travaux”
(APIX - National Agency for the Promotion
of Investment) has been formed to oversee
the code. National treatment for foreign
direct investment is also ensured which has
provided an atmosphere conducive to
stimulating business initiatives. Although
energy is not specifically mentioned in the
investment code, and is not therefore
currently an eligible sector, if investments
creating a new enterprise also create jobs
and are located in underdeveloped areas of
the country, the enterprise would receive
all the preferential tax benefits under the
investment code.
Fiscal incentives for promoting cropping
and harvesting feedstock for biofuels and
producing biofuels on a commercial scale
are provided in the regulations. The
National Investment Code provides that
the activities on agricultural production,
processing and storage will be eligible to
receive benefits while farm incomes from
biofuels will be exempt from income tax for
a period of five years.
The development of affordable energy in
sufficient quantities is crucial to achieving
Senegal’s economic development goals.
Renewables therefore need to be exploited.
Fortunately, the current political and institutional context is favourable to a step
change in their deployment.
Photo Courtesy: INENSUS West Africa S.A.R.LRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
RENEWABLE ENERGY HAS A HIGH
LEVEL OF POLITICAL SUPPORT, WHICH
SHOULD HELP OVERCOME SOME OF
THE CHALLENGES TO ITS SCALE-UP.
INDEED, SENEGAL HAS ALREADY
ADOPTED A RENEWABLE ENERGY LAW
FROM WHICH A RENEWABLE ENERGY
STRATEGY HAS BEEN OUTLINED.SENEGAL 
A. ON-GRID ELECTRICITY
Hydropower is the only renewable energy resource connected to the
grid through the 200 MW Manantali hydro project18 of which 64 MW is
dedicated to Senegal.
The electricity produced by SENELEC and private companies is
insufficient to cope with the growth in demand. Growing infrastructure
obsolescence is leading to frequent shut-downs and transmission losses
are estimated at around 21% (Ministere de l'Energie –Direction National
de l'Energie, 2007) and the installed capacity has been reduced to an
effective capacity of around 548.7 MW, of which 429.7 MW is connected
to the grid (SENELEC, 2012). As mentioned earlier, even those who have
access to electricity suffer from shortages and poor quality of supply.
Unscheduled outages, load shedding, fluctuating voltage and erratic
frequencies are common. Consumers and the economy bear a large
burden of this poor quality of supply. 
SENELEC enjoys a monopoly position in the distribution of electricity in
Senegal. The electricity distribution system of SENELEC as of 2008 was
comprised of:
1. An MV network at 6.6 kV and 30 kV with a 
total length of 7 627 km;
18The Organisation for the Development of the Senegal River (OMVS), which consists of
Mali, Mauritania and Senegal, has constructed the Manantali dam on the Bafing River,
the main tributary of the Senegal River in Mali, in 1987. The Manantali project includes a
200 MW power station and a 1 300 km grid of transmission lines to the capitals of Mali
(Bamako), Mauritania (Nouakchott) and Senegal (Dakar).
III. Market Development 
by Sector2. A LV network with a total length of
6 761 km;
3. 13 HV/HV substations and 3 511
MV/LV(30/6.6 kV) substations.
Senegal signed the WAPP agreement in
2000 as mentioned earlier, where it was
decided to develop energy production
facilities and interconnect the respective
electricity grids. Senegal has been actively
participating in the planning, decisionmaking and implementation of the WAPP
in order to develop interconnection
between existing and future hydro power
projects in the Senegal and Gambia river
basins. Projected commissioning of the
project was scheduled for 2012 but delays
in implementation have postponed it to
2015.
In 2010, electricity generation in Senegal
was estimated at 2 400 GWh, jointly
produced by SENELEC and private
companies. (SENELEC, 2012; IEA, 2009). It
was mainly consumed by the residential
sector followed by the commercial and
public services sector. This figure is lower
than the 3 110 GWh generated in 2008
(SENELEC, 2012; IEA, 2009). The decline in
generation is due to switching disruptions
and outages linked to system malfunctions
and the decline in the quantity of imported
oil due to high prices.
Senegal has good potential to promote
biomass, solar and wind to generate grid
electricity through both the public and
private sector (mainly independent power
producers). Although most of the
dominant market players have not started
considering renewable power as a serious
investment option, feasibility studies for
various projects by new actors are under
way.
SENEGALESE HIGH VOLTAGE
TRANSMISSION GRID
1,262.5 km 
Power line
[Senelec, 2012] 
National component owned and operated by 
SENELEC 
Supranational component owned and operated by
the Manantali hydro project.
21%
Transmission losses due to obsolescence of
infrastructure
548 MW
Installed capacity
429.7 MW
Connected to grid
2 400 GWh
electricity generated in 2010
3 110 GWh
generation in 2008
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENTFor example, a typha-based19 power plant,
has identified a costof sale to SENELEC of
CFA 66/kWh (USD 0.13/kWh), which is
below the average wholesale cost of
current generation of CFA 70/kWh (USD
0.14/kWh).
Similarly for solar projects to become
commercially viable, the required costs of
sale are in the range of CFA 120-130/kWh
(USA 0.24-0.26/kWh).
Wind projects are only viable20 if a sale
cost of CFA 85-95/kWh (USD 0.17-19/kWh)
can be negotiated with SENELEC. At
present, no feed-in tariff has been
announced for renewable energy by the
regulator. 
As with wind, there is currently no solar
grid-connected power generation in
Senegal, despite the existence of a very
good solar potential uniformly distributed
across the country. However, an
encouraging development in this area has
been the 2010 greenfield investment by a
private consortium of investors in a
photovoltaic module assembly plant in
Senegal. With an annual capacity of 25
MW, the facility is geared for producing
high-quality modules of 50-300 Wp (SPEC
(Sustainable Power Electric Company),
2012). It also has the requisite capacity to
function as a system integrator for gridconnected systems. Strong local content
and trained personnel should provide a
strong impetus for government to support
on-grid plants by fixing an attractive feedin tariff.
Findings from the RRA
Renewable energy has a high level of
political support, which should help
overcome some of the challenges to its
scale-up. Indeed, Senegal has already adopted a Renewable Energy Law from which
a Renewable Energy Strategy has been
outlined. The implementing decrees of the
Renewable Energy Law are as follow:
w Decree No. 2011-2013 provides
conditions of power purchase and
remuneration for electricity generated by renewable energy plants and
the conditions of their connection to
19 Typha is an invasive species growing in the Senegal River
20 A feasibility study for a wind power plant project of 15 MW to be connected to the grid was initiated in
the Saint Louis area by Midi-Pyrénées (France), C3E (Dakar) company and CEGELEC (Toulouse).
CFA 70/kWh 
Wholesale power purchase price of SENELEC 
Identified wholesale prices from RE projects: 
Biomass 
CFA 66/kWh
Solar 
CFA 120-130/kWh
Wind 
CFA 85-95/kWh
USD 1 = approx. CFA 532
PV module assembly plant in Dakar (SPEC)
50-300 Wp
High quality modules to be produced 
at the facility for up to
25 MW
annual capacity
Invested in by private consortium comprising of:
AREVA, Schneider Electric, African Fund for Biofuels 
and Renewable Energy (FABER-ABERF), Peacecock, 
Enersaf Energy Solutions
SENEGAL6 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
the grid21. It also provides the
formula for the avoided cost22 which
serves as a reference for calculating
the power purchase price cap. It also
contains elaboration on renewable
power purchase obli-gation and
feed-in tariffs for different renewable
energy technologies.
w Decree No. 2011-2014 provides the
conditions of power purchase of
surplus renewable energy-based
electricity from self-producers23. It
has fixed the maximum intake from
renewable energy sources (variable
power), determined the purchase
price, conditions of purchase of
surplus energy and connection to the
grid, and other conditions.
The effectiveness of these decrees will
depend on how investors respond to the
incentives for renewable energy. The
availability of funds to support deployment
in the form of feed-in tariffs (and any other
fiscal incentives) will also be crucial and will
depend in part on continued engagement
with donors.
Electricity tariffs regulation aims to
minimise consumers’ charges while maintaining the financial viability of SENELEC
and the quality of the supply by fixing a
five-year price cap. However, tariffs
currently appear quite disadvantageous,
particularly for SENELEC, which does not
have any control over its investment
programme from the perspective of
funding mobilisation. A study could be
undertaken for the grid integration to
define the modality and to identify where
money will come from (as the government
has committed to pay the difference
between the feed-in tariff and average cost
of diesel energy). Furthermore, the CRSE
should be strengthened, particularly in
view of unbundling SENELEC activities,
encouraging the active participation of the
private sector in production and distribution, and investigating the possibility of
21 Decree No. 2011-2013 related to the conditions of purchase and compensation of electricity
produced by renewable energy power plants and the conditions of their connection to the grid.
22 Capital and operating costs saved by the grid operator when electricity from conventional energy
source is substituted with electricity from renewables in the frame of electricity purchase obligations
prescribed by law and regulations.
23 In Decree No 2011-2014, “self-producers” means any company or household producing electricity for
their own consumption and usage.
Image 3: Work in progress at SPEC's solar modules mounting facility (©www.spec-solar.com)SENEGAL 
opening up the renewable grid-connected
sector.
Since CIER is responsible for reaching an
agreement on integration of renewable
energy into the grid, one of its main tasks
in the near future will be determining the
technical feasibility of absorbing renewable
electricity into the centralised grid and
approving the grid code amendments that
are necessary to integrate renewables into
the system. Currently the grid operator
(SENELEC) has no experience in
integrating variable energy sources into the
grid, so capacity-building measures in
terms of how to technically manage these
sources will be required. 
IPPs have more than 10 years of experience
in Senegal with diesel-powered generation.
This suggests a relatively stable relationship between independent providers and
SENELEC which could be capitalised on so
that the practical experience gained with
diesel generation can benefit renewable
energy deployment. However, in the past
IPPs have generally had government
guarantees to back commercial contracts
to offset the risks.
In biomass projects, costs will often
depend on the boundary of the project
(e.g., for typha, it must be determined who
bears the costs of clearing the river). To
date, there has been limited private sector
participation in bioenergy. However, there
are key areas where biomass could play a
role, particularly where agricultural
residues could provide a low-cost fuel for
power generation in rural areas, although
mechanisms for collection and storage
would need to be worked out meticulously
and the costs built into the tariff regime.
Costs would vary, depending on the
particular technology under consideration,
but there is evidence that biomass production could be commercially viable.
One of the key issues in large-scale renewable energy projects is the ownership of
the land needed for project development.
In Senegal, most land is owned by local
communities and, therefore, to protect the
project’s viability, mechanisms must be
developed that involve landowners
throughout the project life cycle.
Another issue is Senegal’s limited experience with the installation, operation and
2 MW
Total installed solar power in2007
2.5 MW
Capacity in 2010
Image 4: Senegalese Sugar Production Company
in Richard-Toll. © www.css.sn8
maintenance of large-scale renewable
energy power plants. However, the government does have the capacity to assess and
select proposed projects, thereby ensuring
that developers with sufficient experience
in this sector get preference.
Overall, the main issue for grid-connected
renewable-based electricity is almost
always related to the fact that proposed
selling prices to SENELEC are always above
its electricity purchase price (CFA 70/kWh
– USA 0.14kWh). Senegal needs to capitalise on existing experience with IPPs to
build business models for renewable
energy operators and to explore the potential role of public-private partnerships.
Power purchase agreements which focus
on variable power and keep the issues of
grid connection at the forefront need to be
designed in order to give certainty to
investors. 
B. OFF-GRID APPLICATIONS
DECENTRALISED RURAL
ELECTRIFICATION
This section deals with decentralised electrification, motive power for productive
uses and thermal applications (cooling and
heating). 
Senegal already has a great deal of experience in implementing national and regional projects and programmes to promote
off-grid applications of renewable energy
(PRS/CILSS, PREDAS/CILSS, PERACOD,
PROGEDE, etc.). 
Solar PV technology has been variously
adapted to provide solutions for electrifying health centres, schools, households
and extending communication networks.
The total installed capacity of solar power
in the country increased from 2 MW in
2007 to 2.5 MW in 2010, although the use
of small aero generators in Senegal is
limited and the total installed capacity is
estimated to be around 0.5 MW (Ministere
des Energies Renouvelables, 2011).
CSS, a sugar factory in north Senegal,
produces electricity for its own consumption with an installed capacity of up to
48 MW (EcosurAfrique, 2012). Bagasse
generated from plant operations provides
feedstock for a 25 MW co-generation plant
which currently provides power to the
plant but could also power unserved
neighbouring towns and villages. The CSS
25 MW cogeneration plant is the first Senegalese-registered Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM) project (Ibid).
ASER has adopted a market model for rural
electrification that is technology neutral
and thereby provides a framework for
private operators to carry out electrification in rural areas using renewable
energy along with other fuels24.
Individuals, enterprises or communities
generating electricity from renewables for
self-consumption are governed by one of
the decrees25 for implementing the
provisions of the Law on Renewable
Energy 2011. This provides the conditions
for purchase and tariff for surplus
electricity, which can be fed into the grid
or sold through decentralised distribution
networks. 
24The rural regions of Senegal that have not yet been electrified have been divided into a total of 11
geographical concession areas of which ASER has 10. The electrification of these areas is put out to 
public tender by ASER and is undertaken by private sector enterprises. The concession model includes 
the following elements: grid expansion, isolated networks and single homes supply (mainly solar home
systems). The financing of these areas is secured through the Senegalese state and international 
donors. ASER settled a minimum share of 10% for renewable energies in each concession.
25The Decree 2011-2014 adopted on 21 December 2011 on the conditions for purchase and
remuneration of surplus electricity from captive plants generating electricity from renewables.
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENTPilot projects for off-grid electrification
have been undertaken by educational and
training institutions, government agencies
at the central and provincial level, as well
as NGOs and institutions in the private
sector. The project to supply electricity
undertaken by the University Check Anta
Diop of Dakar is particularly noteworthy.
In order to strengthen quality control, two
laboratories have been set up under the
supervision of the Senegalese Association
for Standardisation (ASN)26 with the specific task of ensuring the adoption of national standards for photovoltaic components.
Senegal has a great deal of diverse and rich
experience in the area of decentralised
electrification. Many non-state actors are
involved in the marketing, installation and
maintenance of equipment and systems. 
Renewable energy is being increasingly
recognised as a cost-effective option for
decentralised applications in areas far from
the grid, given that the cost of grid
extension is also a factor of the load. In
remote areas, where expected electricity
load is relatively low, the transport cost of
diesel is high, making renewable hybrid
systems with a higher share of renewable
energy technologies cost-competitive.
ASER has assessed the economic viability
of such options and has included the
development of mini-grids for the electrification of villages in its concessions
under “Electrification Rurale par des Initiatives Locales”(ERILS)27. 
The Programme for Rural Electrification
and Cooking Fuel (PERACOD) is supporting the sustainable development of the
energy sector in Senegal by implementing
rural electrification projects through the
private sector. The Sine Moussa village
electrification is one illustration of
PERACOD intervention. However, financing
for small projects is limited and usually the
involvement of local communities in terms
of management and responsibility is
insufficient.
MOTIVE AND THERMAL APPLICATIONS
Senegal has long-standing experience in
the deployment of off-grid motive (primarily water pumping) and thermal
applications (primarily water heating, also
cooking and drying). Development and
marketing of water pumping solutions has
also been a focus of the private sector in
Senegal. Government incentives include
fiscal benefits for importing equipment
26 The laboratories have been set up by Order No 29/MEMI 21 April 1999.
27 ERILs are specification of Senegal and offer high chances for the implementation of renewable energies.
28 SPEC is producing currently PV modules of 50-300 Wp.
Image 5: Sine Moussa Solar Wind Diesel Hybrid
Power Plant © www.peracod.sn
SENEGALrelated to water pumping. Technologies for
solar and wind pumping systems exist in
the country and wind pump sets are also
locally manufactured. With the setting up
of SPEC, it is hoped that the solar
applications customised for use in Senegal
will be assembled by private sector
operators28. 
There have been mixed experiences
regarding the quality of operation and
maintenance (O and M) of installations.
Earlier programmes for wind pumps
supported by government ran into
problems with O and M29, although recent
programmes seem to have performed
better. Wind pumps have higher maintenance requirements due to their large
number of moving parts. Current business
models work with user charges and the
establishment of a fund for maintenance,
administered by the community and the
service provider. The model seems to be
successful, with high levels of demand and
significant sums of money being accrued in
accounts to fund O and M as well as plant
replacement at the end of life. In the waterpumping sector communities are increasingly employing service managers to
take responsibility for operating and
maintaining the system.
Although solar water heating has been
used in urban areas and in rural hospitals
for more than two decades, maintenance
problems remain. Strong programmes have
been initiated by government in
partnership with30 local construction firms.
However, business models implemented
have generally lacked incentives to provide
after-sales service.
Operators are responsible for the quality of
installation, and in theory there is some
institutional monitoring. However, there
have been problems with the reliability of
installations because nobody is responsible
for testing heating equipment, even though
standards do exist. Although research institutes are operating in this area, their findings are frequently not available to the
private sector.
In order to increase the uptake of solar
water heating equipment, a 35% tax rebate
against capital cost policy has been
adopted since the early 1980s, although
this only benefits tax-paying businesses.
29 Of more than 200 wind pumping systems installed in 1983 and 1984 only 40% were operating
three years later and even these fell into disrepair. 
30 e.g. 1 000 homes installed with panels, and the payment was spread over the life of project,
but this failed since there was no responsibility for maintenance.
Image 6: Solar Water Heater in rural area in
Senegal ©www.enersol.com
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT
35%
Tax rebate against capital cost 
of solar heating equipmentOther incentives include import tax exemptions for equipment relating to thermal
heating, a low rate of VAT for local fabrication and fiscal exemptions for investors.
The use of solar thermal absorption
systems for cooling buildings is becoming
well-established, and is included in the
National Energy Strategy. Together with
good awareness at government level, this
provides the basis for taking the
technology forward.
Universities, institutes and technical and
vocational training centres are carrying out
training programmes and strong efforts are
being made to involve the private sector in
the ongoing Research and Development
programme on small-scale aero generators
at the University of Dakar.
Findings from the RRA
Senegal’s RRA highlighted the lack of
coordination between processes of elaboration of sectorial policies as the main
issue on decentralised applications. It recommended that CIMES should play a coordinating role in the future in order to
strengthen cooperation across the relevant
ministries and regulatory agencies, and
also between the private sector and
research institutes, to achieve better harmonisation in sectoral policies and complementarity in the intervention of all
stakeholders.
The need to strengthen cooperation across
the relevant ministries and regulatory
agencies and between private sector and
research institutes was also highlighted.
One major issue that emerged from the
RRA discussions was that the regulator
(CRSE) is currently obliged to approve
tariffs for electricity supply to the final
consumer, regardless of the size of the
installation. This process is time-consuming
and acts as a barrier to the implementation
of small concessions (ERILs), thus limiting
their more general implementation. There
is therefore an urgent need to decentralise
the decision-making process and the
means of capacity development at the
CRSE (e.g., setting tariffs locally).
Measures to alleviate this constraint could
include, for example, exempting installations below a certain capacity (e.g., below
50 kW) from requiring regulatory approval
for the proposed tariff and allowing
approval by village communities. Decentralisation of regulatory powers, following
decentralisation at governmental level, and
associated capacity building at the local
level to respond to tariff proposals, could
assist the process while advantage could
also be taken from the existence of
decentralised governance structures to
assist local deployment of renewable
energy technologies.
The understanding of legal issues
SENEGAL 
Image 7
Installation of a small wind turbine 
at the Univesity of Dakar ©www.eolsenegal.comRENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
concerning renewable energy by local
elected representatives, and the capacity
of private operators, should be strengthened to handle the deployment of
renewable energy technologies, evaluate
proposals for tariffs and assist the electrification process.
The participation of micro-finance institutions in the sector should also be
supported, which could be done through
training and sensitisation in order to build
their understanding of renewable energy.
The motive power sector offers good perspectives judging by existing experience in
the use of wind turbines for pumping and
the involvement of the private sector in the
local manufacture of wind pumps. Waterpumping technology using wind is a
mature technology and there is local
expertise in producing the parts necessary
for constructing and maintaining wind
pumps. Improvements in solar technology
are now being made which will allow
pumping at the same depth as for wind.
Resource availability for solar water
pumping has been assessed and several
companies in Senegal already supply solar
pumps (e.g., Equiplus and Mattforce).
There is also the potential to use multifunctional platforms based on biofuels to
supply motive power; technology
improvements are still being made for
multi-functional platforms although this is
dependent on the development of the
biofuels sector. Currently these platforms
are diesel-fuelled but,if and when the
possibility to convert to biodiesel becomes
available, it could provide a local application for local biofuel production.
There is still a need to build on existing
experience with wind power (e.g., water
pumping) to build expertise and skills in
Senegal for O and M, and mechanisms
need to be put in place to transfer skills
from project developers to local communities regarding installation and
maintenance. 
Another required major action is the
strengthening of domestic manufacturing
capacity to meet poverty reductionstrategy targets. Once capacity has been
strengthened an equipment testing body
should be introduced to ensure that the
technology meets the established
standards and platforms for cooperation
with the private sector and research
institutes should be created. For example,
meetings should be organised between
suppliers and equipment manufacturers to
identify the necessary requirements for
further development or strengthening
cooperation between the private sector
and research institutes.
Targets and policy delivery concerning the
inclusion of solar water heating in buildings
are the responsibility of the Ministry of
Construction, while responsibility for
ensuring that a building has met legal
requirements is split between the Ministry
of Construction (which determines if the
installation been done) and the Ministry of
Renewable Energy (which check that the
system is operating as intended). Therefore, effective cooperation across these
ministries is necessary.
There is also a need to develop existing
production capacity for technologies and
the supply chain of components in order to
minimise costs. Lessons learnt in earlier
projects at the national or regional level
should be used to informfuture projects.
From the RRA analyses, it is evident that
the sector is offering an opportunity for
government to provide a major push on
this technology and provide a suitableSENEGAL 
private-sector business model that
includes service provision with necessary
after-sales service. The sector also offers
the opportunity to link with the government decentralisation agenda, with local
government taking responsibility for water
and health, and also take forward solar
heating initiatives linked to local job
creation and hence economic development
opportunities. This could be combined with
employment programmes for young
people to train in maintenance and service.
C. BIOFUELS FOR TRANSPORT
The development of biofuels in Senegal is
relatively recent and production is small.
The CSS31 set up a plant for the production
of bioethanol from sugarcane in 2007 with
a target production of 8-12 million litres of
bioethanol per year (ISRA-BAME, 2009) on
the premise that from 2013 the blending
would be mandatory for ethanol.
Production volumes are expected to be
sufficient for meeting domestic production,
although lack of policy support is reflected
in a negligible market demand for
bioethanol which has slowed down
production. Exports of biofuels are
restricted, despite foreign demand.
Good quality, disease-free seeds are
required for biofuels. Only certified seeds
are allowed for the industrial production of
biofuel and their control and certification is
the responsibility of the Ministry of
Agriculture.
Infrastructure constraints for biodiesel
centre around the storage and processing
of jatropha seeds. The best storage
conditions reduce the loss of oil. The
emergence of modern jatropha processing
units could lead to large-scale production
of biodiesel in the same way that the
investments done by the CSS have worked
for sugarcane. ISRA is currently distributing
free jatropha seedlings and a decree to
allocate more funds to scale up this
programme isexpected. Small private
farmers are able to produce biodiesel from
jatropha, using currently available smallscale processing technologies,such as
artisanal presses. 
There is no currently significant private
financing devoted to biofuels. This can
partly be attributed to perceived risks–
while micro-finance initiatives exist, they
are unwilling to lend to these projects.
Findings from the RRA
It is not possible to judge the sustainability
of the overall strategy because environmental impacts are not assessed at a
national level. A project-by-project approach is taken instead (for all proposed
large-scale projects). There is a very
important need for training at all levels to
raise awareness. Similarly, there is a low
level of awareness among the general
public.
Image 8: Molasses lake at Senegalese Sugar Company
(CSS). © D. Dia 2009
31 CSS has had a distillery in operation for ethanol production of 60 000 litres per day since 2008. RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
The RRA process has highlighted land
ownership issues. These issues need to be
resolved in order to ensure that land is
available to meet the needs of the industry
and competing pressures. This is complicated in Senegal by the complex system
of land ownership and allocation. 
There is a real need for capacity building
across the sector. Planning, communication
and information provision can be
implemented through the National
Assembly, Senate and rural communities. It
is possible to use the experience of the
Ministry of Energy, regarding fuel for
example, for distribution and networking.
The Ministry of Renewable Energy has the
capacity and tools to assess benefits, but
lacks expertise in other areas. The NBC
needs technical assistance.
Measures should be taken to follow-up the
programmes and strategies to determine
how successful production levels are, what
volumes of oil are being produced, and
what markets exist for jatropha farmers.
The restriction on biofuels export, originally
designed to ensure that Senegal benefits
from the development of the industry, may
also stunt the development of the market. 
The lack of testing and quality control
institutions has also been responsible for
the lack of coordination across actors. Each
institute is currently responsible for its own
research, and an institute needs to be
established for testing and quality control.
More work could be carried out on jatropha
to understand the business model risks
associated with various parts of the supply
chain to help overcome barriers to the
Ministry of Economy and Finance lending
(e.g., for small-scale producers). The key
issue is to address capacity for small-scale
farmers’ production, and to build a reliable
supply chain for establishing a reliable
price for the product so that farmers can
get sufficient return to attract further
production. Priority should be given to
addressing perceived risks in order to
facilitate financing and the transfer of
technology and human skills.
Agricultural producers have been operating
plants for some time and the advantages –
such as employment creation in the
operation stages – are well-known. For
example, for the typha plant, local people
are employed to harvest and handle the
plants, while biogas production has the
added benefit of producing fertiliser for
agriculture.SENEGAL 
R Engage with existing initiatives for data collection,
including observatory currently being established by
ECREEE.
R Identify precise requirements for resource mapping,
based on priority areas for RE.
R Establish a plan for collection of data.
R Explore the potential for funding ground
measurement campaigns with multilateral/bilateral
organisations.
Elaborate a process for
comprehensive mapping
of renewable energy
resources in key areas.
R Decentralisation of the regulatory powers according
to the national decentralisation process.
R Capacity building for the Rural Electrification
Agency to handle all off-grid tariffs.
R Associate capacity building at the local level to
respond to tariff proposals.
Adapt the rules of
intervention for the
regulator in the specific
case of small electricity
producers (ERILs).
R Assess potential site infrastructure status.
R Conduct studies on grid capacity to uptake variable
renewables sources. 
R Strengthen SENELEC's human resources technical
capacities. 
Facilitate grid integration of
electricity generated from
renewable resources.
R Incorpotate land tenure rights into land availability
assessments.
R Identify potential for higher productivity through
advances in technology and agriculture.
R Assess environmental, economic and social impacts
of strategy implementation.
R Identify the extent and basis of private company
participation.
Review the institutional, legal
and regulatory conditions for
utilising land for biofuels
production.
R Identification of priority areas for development of
manufacturing capacity, including training and
education requirements to build the necessary skills.
R Creating a forum to support collaboration between
the private and research sectors.
Identification of conditions
for increased private sector
involvement in RE-related
manufacturing.
R Develop and fund training programmes to address
capacity gaps.
R Define and formalise legal status and framework for
service providers.
R Incentivise deployment of hybrid technologies.
R Introduce standards for quality control testing and
service requirements.
Identify conditions needed
for Oand M (operation and
maintenance) of off-grid
motive and thermal power.
The following schematic identifies the recommended actions from the RRA process. These actions
are not presented in any order of priority, and the list of actions from a rapid assessment is unlikely
to be exhaustive. The detailed list of actions can be found in the Annex.
IV. Recom mended Actions6 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
THE DOMESTIC COMMITMENT
TO RENEWABLE ENERGY IS
REFLECTED IN THE ROLE THAT
SENEGAL HAS ASSUMED 
IN REGIONAL AND
INTERNATIONAL FORUMS.SENEGAL 
Identified Examples of Good Practice
GOOD PRACTICE DEMONSTRATION 1: 
BUSINESS MODELS USED FOR RURAL AND 
OFF-GRID ELECTRIFICATION
Rural electrification, using both conventional and renewable energy
resources, has been defined as a key sector to reduce poverty and
increase rural living standards. Senegalese authorities plan to reach a
30% rural electrification rate by 2015, and a 60% rate by 2022.
Responsibility for meeting the target is in the hands of the Senegalese
Agency for Rural Electrification (ASER), an autonomous body reporting
to the Ministry of Energy.
Based on an economic assessment of conditions for electrification, ASER
has defined 10 concessions and has launched tenders for electrification
of these areas in a competitive bidding process. Each bidder will be
required to indicate the percentage funding that they will provide; the
remainder will be provided by the government. Each bidder will also be
required to develop a local electrification plan, defining the technologies
to be used.To date, the following concessions have been awarded:
w Concession for Dagana-Podor: awarded to ONE-Maroc
w Concession for Mbour: awarded to ONE-Maroc
w Concession for Kaffrine- Tambacounda-Kédougou: awarded 
to EDF
V. Best Practices and 
Future Cooperation8 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Complementing these concessions are
small local projects (ERILs), developed by
local sponsors such as community
associations and villages. These will also be
funded through private/public financing.
To date, the level of bilateral funding has
been significant. 
The case of Sine Moussa village is a
successful ERIL case where a good
business model has been developed by the
operator. Senegal should build on such
successful initiatives to develop a more
attractive enabling environment for
business to encourage operators to enter
the market and reduce the cost of access
and sustainability of rural electrification
schemes. 
This model offers a potential to attract the
private sector with its associated finance,
skills and implementing capacity into rural
electrification.
While the programme is still in process, the
experience of Senegal suggests a number
of actions that may be useful in
implementing a rural electrification
programme based on a concession
structure. These include:
w Definition of an agency with responsibility for rural electrification
and autonomy to define the programme and method of operation for
achieving objectives;
w a transparent approach to tendering
and awarding concessions; 
w an approach based on an understanding of economic conditions and
viability; 
w an extension of decentralisation at
the government level into rural
electrification; and
w integration of renewable energy into
the implementation framework.
GOOD PRACTICE DEMONSTRATION 2: 
LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL
FRAMEWORK
Senegal has shown a strong commitment
to renewable energy, most notably with the
establishment of a dedicated Ministry for
Renewable Energy and the passing of
framework laws on Renewable Energy and
Biofuels at the end of 2010 (Act 2010-21 of
20December 2010 and Act 2010-22 of 15
December 2010). This commitment is
currently being tested by a process of
agreeing and finalising the implementing
decrees for these framework laws.
However, it is clear that renewable energy
is viewed as both important in its own right
and also as an enabler in the broader
development of the energy sector, rural
development and poverty reduction.
There are a number of institutions and
frameworks dedicated to the further
development of renewable energy, notably
CERER (Centre for Studies and Research
into Renewable Energy) at the University
of Dakar, and the National Energy for Solar
Energy. More broadly, agencies such as
ASER (Agence Senegalaise d’Electrification
Rurale), ASN (Association Sénégalaise de
Normalisation) and CRSE (Commission de
Regulation du Secteur de l' Electricite du
Senegal) include renewable energy as a
central part of their remit. Crossinstitutional cooperation has been facilitated by the establishment of an
Inter-ministerial Committee on Renewable
Energy (CIER) and the National Committee
of Biofuels. Maintaining and extending thisSENEGAL 
cooperation will enable ongoing success in
the implementation of Senegal’s vision for
renewable energy. In particular, efforts
could be usefully directed at ensuring the
participation of civil society.
The domestic commitment to renewable
energy is reflected in the role that Senegal
has assumed in regional and international
forums. At the project level, there are many
examples of cross-Sahelian initiatives in
design and implementation. At the strategic level, Senegal has taken a central
role in IRENA and ECREEE (ECOWAS
Regional Centre for Renewable Energy and
Energy Efficiency).
FUTURE COOPERATION
This first pilot study in Senegal has identified a number of areas in which Senegal
can take action to improve readiness for
the deployment of renewables. Many of
these actions can be taken in the near term,
building on the momentum that has
already been established in the country
through recent institutional developments
in support of renewable energy. The support of bilateral and multilateral institutions, both now and in the future, is an
important element in the successful realisation of these actions. This report can
serve as a basis for the development of
international cooperation on country-level
and regional-level programmes.
At the country level, the report opens up
the possibility of piloting a multilateral
initiative to support feed-in tariffs to
promote renewable energy in Senegal. At
the regional level, Senegal is well positioned to become an active stakeholder in
the Global Solar and Wind Atlas initiative
being coordinated by IRENA.
In addition to highlighting actions to
further the deployment of renewable
energy, the pilot study has also provided
valuable inputs to the development of the
RRA methodology and process. The
improved methodology and process were
discussed and amended during a technical
workshop in April 2012 in Abu Dhabi before
rollout to a number of other ECOWAS
countries. It is very much hoped that
Senegal will be able to continue its
exemplary leadership in this process by
supporting this rollout.6
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
AfDB. (2011). The Middle of the Pyramid: Dynamics of the Middle Class in Africa.African
Development Bank .
ANSD. (2011). Note d’Analyse des Comptes Définitifs 2008, Semi Définitifs 2009 et Provisoires 2010.
Dakar,Sénégal: Agence Nationale de La Statistique et de la Démographie.
APIX. (2006). Code de l’Investissement, Révision: 29/08/06. Dakar, Sénégal: Agence Nationale
chargée de la Promotion de l' Investissement et des Grands Travaux.
Bazilian, M., Nussbaume, P., Rogner, H., B.H. A., Foster, B., Pachauri, S., et al. (2011). Energy Access
Scenarios to 2030 for the Power Sector in Sub-Saharan Africa.FEEM Working Paper.
Duarte, M., Nagarajan, S., and Brixiova, Z. (2010). Financing of Sustainable Energy Solutions. AfDB.
Eberhard, A., Foster, V., Cecilia, B.G., Ouedraogo, F., Camos, D., andShkaratan, M.
(2008).Underpowered: The State of the Power Sector in Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington, DC: The
Wolrd Bank.
EcosurAfrique. (2012). ecosureafrique. 
Retrieved from www.ecosureafrique.com :
http://www.ecosurafrique.com/references-reference_detail.php?refid=16
ECOWAS. (2006). White Paper for a Regional Policy: Geared towards increasing access to energy
services for rural and peri-urban populations in order to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals.Economic Commission of West African Countries.
Enda Energie. (2005). Rôle des énergies renouvelables sur le développement des activités
productives en milieu rural Ouest Africain: le cas du Sénégal. Dakar, Sénégal.
Enefebio. (2007). Synthèse des enquêtes au sein des PMEs au Sénégal.Lettred'information No1, 4 p.
GTZ. (2009). Regional Reports on Renewable Energy 30 Country Analysis on Potentials and Markets
in: West Africa (17), East Africa (5) Central Asia (8).Eschborn: GTZ.
IEA.(2009). World Energy Outlook Perspective.Paris : International Energy Agency.
IRENA.(2011a). Country Profiles – SENEGAL. Abu Dhabi: International Renewable Energy Agency.
VI. References 
and BibliographySENEGAL 6
IRENA.(2011b). Country Case Study, Renewables Readiness Assessment.SENEGAL Preliminary
Findings.Abu Dhabi: International Renewable Energy Agency.
ISRA-BAME.(2009). Le Sénégal face à la crise Energétique Mondiale: Enjeux de l' Emergence de la
Filière des Biocarburants. Dakar: Institut Sénégalais de Recherches Agricoles - Bureau d'
AnalysesMacro Economiques.
Lugmayr, M. (2011). ECREEE presentation at the SWAC/OECD Meeting. ECREEE Strategy to Promote
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency investments in teh ECOWAS (2011 to 2016).
Ministère de l'Energie - Direction National de l'Energie. (2007).
Systèmed’InformationEnergétique.Sénégal.
Ministère de l'Energie. (2008, Février). Lettre de Politique de Développement du Secteur de
l'Energie (LPDSE). Dakar.
Ministère des Energies Renouvelables. (2011, Décembre). Application de la Loi d'Orientation sur les
Energies Renouvelables relatif aux conditions d'Achat et de Rémunération de l'Electricité produite
par des Centrales à partir des Sources d'ENR ainsi que les conditions de leur raccordement au
Réseaux.Décret No 2011-2013. Dakar, Senegal.
Ministère des Energies Renouvelables. (2011, Décembre).Décret No 2011-2014. Application de la Loi
d'Orientation sur les Energies Renouvelables relatif aux condition d' Achat et de Rémunération du
Surplus d' Electricité d'Origine Renouvelable résultant d'une Production pour Consommation Propre.
Dakar, Sénégal.
Ministère des Energies Renouvelables. (2011). Situation Energétique au Sénégal (Etat des lieux et
projections). Bonn.
Ministère des Energies Renouvelables. (2011). Stratégie Nationale des Energies Renouvelables
(SNER). Dakar.
Primature (République du Sénégal). (2011). Arrêté PRIMATORAL No 1577. Création, Organisation et
Fonctionnement du Comite interministériel sur les Energies Renouvelables. Dakar, Sénégal.
République du Sénégal. (2010, Octobre). Document de Stratégie de Réduction de la Pauvreté( DRSP
II). Dakar, Sénégal.6
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
République du Sénégal. (2010). Loi No 2010-21. Loi d’Orientation sur les Energies Renouvelables.
Dakar, Sénégal.
République du Sénégal. (2010, Décembre 15). Loi No 2010-22. Loi d’Orientation sur les
Biocarburants. Dakar, Sénégal.
SAR. (2012). Société Africaine de Raffinage –Carte d’identité. Retrieved from www.sar.sn:
http://www.sar.sn/Carte-d-identite.html
SENELEC.(2012). Senelec– Production. Retrieved from www.senelec.sn:
http://www.senelec.sn/content/view/15/66/
SPEC (Sustainable Power Electric Company). (2012). SPEC – Produit. Retrieved from
www.spec-solar.com: http://www.spec-solar.com/produits/modules-photovoltaiques.htmlSENEGAL 6
Action 1
Adapt the rules of intervention for the regulator 
in the specific case of small electricity producers (ERILs)
Action Adapt the rules of intervention for the regulator in the 
specific case of small electricity producers (ERILs).
Resource-Service pair(s) Off-grid electricity, all resources.
Description The regulator (La Commission de régulation du secteur de
l'électricité du Sénégal, or CRSE) is currently obliged to approve
tariffs for electricity supply to the final consumer, no matter what
the size of the installation. This process is time-consuming and acts
as a barrier to small concessions (ERILs), thus limiting their more
general implementation. Measures to alleviate this constraint could
include, for example, exempting installations below a certain
capacity (e.g., below 50 kW) from requiring regulatory approval for
the proposed tariff and allowing approval by village communities.
The decentralisation of regulatory powers, following
decentralisation at governmental level, and associated capacity
building at the local level to respond to tariff proposals, could assist
the process.
Actors CRSE, Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Renewable Energy, private
operators, SENELEC to participate in review. Educational and
training institutions for capacity-building in decentralised
institutions.
Timing Mid-2012.
Keys for suc cess Engagement by the regulator, improved staffing in the regulator,
decentralisation of power and building capacity of the regulator.
Such capacity-building activities will be a focus of the future IRENA
Work Programme, both in Senegal and elsewhere.
VII. Annex6
RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Action 2
Finalise and sign the implementing decrees of 
the framework laws on renewable energy
Action Finalise and sign the implementing decrees of the framework 
laws on RE.
Resource-Service pair(s) On-grid and off-grid electricity, all RE resources.
Description The framework laws on renewable energy provide a structure for
deployment, but this deployment is dependent on finalising the
implementing decrees. These decrees would enhance the
attractiveness of RE investment by giving certainty to:
R the conditions of purchase and remuneration for electricity 
generated from renewable energy plants and the conditions of 
their connection to the network;
R conditions for purchase and remuneration of surplus electricity 
from own-generation renewable electricity sources; and
R tax and customs duties applicable to renewable energy 
equipment.
R Implementation of decrees will require funding sources to be 
identified and secured, and this should also form part of the 
action. One particular action that could be explored is the 
Global Energy Transfer Feed-in Tariff (GET FiT), which seeks to 
use public sector (or donor) funds to create stable incentives 
for renewable energy, and in doing so attract private financing 
into the sector32. Identification of partners willing to support 
implementation in Senegal would provide a route for securing 
funding.
R Complementary actions could include exploring funding 
opportunities with multilateral and bilateral donors and with 
potential investors from private companies, utilities and 
commercial banks. Strengthening engagement with the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance, and awareness-building 
within the ministry in order to ensure budgetary provision 
could also be important.
32 For further details and an application to an African country, see W. Rickerson, C. Hanley, C. Laurent, and
C. Greacen (2010). Implementing a Global Fund for Feed-in Tariffs in Developing Countries: A Case Study
of Tanzania. World Renewable Energy Congress: 2010. SENEGAL 6
Actors The Government of Senegal, Ministry of Energy, Ministry of
Renewable Energy, Ministry of Economy and Finance , donors and
other potential investors (private companies, utilities and
commercial banks). IRENA could bring together donors and
country representatives to investigate a global initiative.
Timing Mid-2012.
Keys for success Finalisation will require consensus on the terms of the text. The
effectiveness of proposed decrees will depend on the extent to
which they give incentives for renewable energy. The availability of
funds to support deployment in the form of feed-in tariffs (and any
other fiscal incentives) will also be crucial and will depend in part
upon continued engagement with donors.
Action 3
Finalise Policies on the integration of electricity generated from renewable sources
onto SENELEC’s grid, and define the associated technical and capacity-building
requirements for integration
Action Facilitate an agreement on the integration of electricity generated
from renewable sources onto SENELEC’s grid, and define the
associated technical and capacity-building requirements for
integration.
Resource-Service pair(s) On-grid electricity, all resources.
Description The Inter-ministerial Committee on Renewable Energy
(ComitéInterministérielsur les Energies Renouvelables, or CIER) has
been charged with, among other tasks, coordinating the policies for
integration of renewable energy and the grid code. Their finalisation 
will assure more coherence in integrating renewables onto the
interconnected grid. 
Technical aspects of integrating variable energy sources into the grid
is an area in which the grid operator, SENELEC, does not have any
experience, and capacity-building measures in terms of how to
manage these sources will be required. 
Actors CIER, SENELEC, Ministry of Renewable Energy, Ministry of Energy,
organisations with experience of similar issues in other countries and
regions (e.g., Morocco, Egypt).66 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Timing End 2012.
Keys for success Engagement of SENELEC and adequate resources within SENELEC.
Establishing good links and exchanges with other countries with
experience of similar issues can also be valuable – IRENA can play a
coordinating role in this. 
Action 4 
Promote small-scale production of biodiesel
Action Promote small-scale production of biodiesel.
Resource-Service pair(s) Biofuels for transport (and also electricity).
Description Plans for production of biodiesel from the jatropha plant focus on
small producers, but engagement by these producers is limited by
lack of market structures and supply chains. Securing further
production depends, among other factors, on the production
technology available to farmers for biodiesel and the ability of farmers
to secure financing for projects and sell their output. Actions to
address this could include:
R setting of the price at which farmers can sell output – this should
be set with the finalisation of the implementing decrees on 
biofuels;
R establish markets for sale of output – as of 2013 this will be 
supported in part by domestic blending mandates;
R increase availability of financing for farmers wishing to invest in 
production – this will require better understanding of the 
technology and associated risks;
R review of technology requirements for improved production, and
subsequent dissemination of the technology and best practices;
and
R development of physical infrastructure as necessary to support 
distribution of biofuels.
Actors Comité National des Biocarburants (CNB), Directorate of Biofuels and
Biomass, Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Agriculture, National Rural
Councillors Association (ANCR), finance institutions.SENEGAL 6
Timing Complete action plan by mid-2012.
Keys for success Development of better understanding and awareness of biofuels 
at all levels, including among farmers, government institutions 
and the public.
R Further work to understand the business model risks associated
with various parts of the supply chain to help overcome barriers
to micro-finance lending (e.g., for small-scale producers), 
and dissemination of this work to finance and micro-finance 
institutions.
R Finalisation of terms on which farmers can sell their output.
Action 5 
Improve the institutional, legal and regulatory conditions and 
modalities for utilising land in support of the National Biofuels Strategy
Action Improve the institutional, legal and regulatory conditions and
modalities for utilising land in support of the National Biofuels
Strategy.
Resource-Service pair(s) Biofuels for transport (and also electricity).
Description In 2006, Senegal launched a National Biofuels Strategy, focusing
on the production of ethanol and biodiesel. Under the strategy, the
government aims to plant a total of 320 000 hectares of jatropha
by 2012, with each of 320 rural communities planting 1 000
hectares of jatropha seedlings provided by the government. These
seeds will be used to produce a total of 1.2 billion litres of oil to
meet petrol and diesel needs.
Among other factors, realisation of these targets is dependent
upon the availability of land for production, the distribution of high
quality agricultural inputs and on maintaining production. In
Senegal, this needs to take account of the complex structure of
land rights. Associated actions are:
R reviewing land requirements for the successful implementation 
of the strategy (it will also be necessary to consider other 
resources, such as water); 
R identify land tenure rights wherever possible and incorporate 
them into land availability assessments;68 RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
R Identify the potential for increased productivity through 
technology advances and agricultural techniques, and how these
can be secured; 
R assess environmental, economic and social impacts of strategy 
implementation – such assessments are currently conducted on
a project-by-project basis; and
R identify the extent and basis of private company participation.
Actors Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Renewable Energy (Directorate
of Biofuels and of Biomass), Village Community Organisations,
Legal Advisor, ISRA and other agricultural research institutions,
non-governmental organisations (NGOs).
Timing Mid-2012.
Keys for success Identification and addressing of public concern relating to land use
pressures and associated conflicts;
R Inclusive participation of all relevant actors throughout the 
review; and
R Understanding of current status of the strategy and its 
implementation.
Action 6
Establishment of policy and institutional mechanisms 
to increase private sector involvement in RE manufacturing
Action Establishment of policy and institutional mechanisms to increase
private sector involvement in RE manufacturing.
Resource-Service pair(s) Off-grid and on-grid services, wind and solar resources.
Description Senegal has significant experience in the deployment of certain
renewable energy technologies (e.g., small-scale solar, wind for
water pumping), and some domestic manufacturing capacity has
grown up around this (most recently SPEC, an assembly facility for
solar panels). There is also a considerable level of research capacity
regarding manufacturing (e.g., design and development of solar
pumping technology at CERER, the Centre d’Etudes et de
Recherchessur les Energies Renouvelables). SENEGAL 6
These strengths could be captured to further build manufacturing
capacity in the country, thereby positioning Senegal as a supplier of
technologies and facilitating local industrial development. As a first
step, a round table of manufacturers and suppliers of technologies
would provide a forum to identify their requirements and actions to
address these. Other actions include:
R finalising implementing decrees for renewable energy, including
provisions relating to fiscal treatment of renewable energy 
technologies. In addition to giving financial incentives, this would 
also help to ensure market demand; 
R identification of priority areas for development of 
manufacturing capacity;
R identification of training and education requirements to build the
necessary skills for the development of the manufacturing sector;
and
R creating a forum to support collaboration between private 
and research sectors.
Actors Private sector manufacturers and suppliers of equipment, Ministry
of Renewable Energy, Ministry of Industry, Ministry of Higher
Education, Ministry of Technical Education, CERER and other
research institutes, APIX, foreign investors.
Timing 2012.
Keys for success Participation of key actors and commitment by the 
Government of Senegal;
R Engagement with foreign investors and/or donors could help to
secure financing for subsequent actions; and
R Review of previous experience regarding manufacturing capacity
and research, including success factors (e.g., regarding the 
closure of the Industrial Society for Applications in Solar Energy).RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Action 7 
Establish institutional capacity and conditions for improving 
O and M (Operation and Maintenance) of renewable energy technologies
Action Establish institutional capacity and conditions for improving 
O and M of off-grid renewable energy technologies.
Resource-Service pair(s) Off-grid motive power (wind and solar); off-grid thermal power
(solar).
Description While Senegal has long-standing experience in the deployment of
off-grid motive (primarily water pumping) and thermal (primarily
water heating, also cooking and drying) power, the long-term
lifetimes of each of these systems have been compromised by
problems with O and M. In particular:
R Motive Power: Experience of solar pumping has shown that in 
cases where O and M services have been provided by third-party
service companies and paid for by villages using funds from the
sale of water, a number of weaknesses have occurred which need
to be overcome to assure the viability and sustainability of 
systems. In particular are the absence of a legal framework, 
inadequate financial systems to ensure that customers honour 
their bills and the low competence level of maintenance staff. 
O and M problems are worse for wind than solar due to wind 
technology having more moving parts. 
R Thermal power: The small current market for new equipment 
and small number of systems in operation make the market 
unattractive to private sector suppliers. The absence of standards
and quality testing for equipment entering Senegal compounds
the difficulties in developing these applications.
There is therefore a need to implement actions to improve 
O and M provision. Improvements should be based on a review
with the parties below and subsequent development and 
implementation of a plan of action. Preliminary suggestions 
include:
R Both: Develop and fund training programmes to address 
capacity gaps.SENEGAL 
Motive Power: 
R Define and formalise legal status and framework for service 
providers
R Incentivise deployment of hybrid technologies.
Thermal Power:
R Introduce standards for quality control testing and service 
requirements; 
R Identify and enable implementation of business models for 
improved maintenance.
Actors Both: Ministry of Renewable Energy, equipment manufacturers,
training institutes.
Motive Power: Village communities, service providers, equipment
manufacturers, Ministry of Renewable Energy, Ministry of
Hydrology, donors.
Thermal Power: Private sector suppliers, equipment providers,
Agency for Standards.
Timing Mid-2013.
Keys for success Understanding the motivation of all actors in the supply chain and
providing incentives for them to act as desired; existence of
sufficient organisations with the knowledge, capacity and interest
to provide services; general support to the development of markets
for off-grid motive and thermal power.RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT
Action 8 
Elaborate and implement a strategy for 
comprehensive mapping of resources in key areas
Action Elaborate a process for comprehensive mapping of resources 
in key areas.
Resource-Service pair(s) Wind, solar and bioenergy, for all applications.
Description There is currently a broad-based understanding of resource
availability and potential, but this is generally insufficient to enable
project development or a comprehensive assessment of potential.
Similarly, there is some data collection from actual projects, but this
is neither comprehensive nor centralised. 
Comprehensive data will facilitate the implementation of the draft
renewable energy strategy and future project development.
Particular gaps exist in the areas of solar, wind and biofuels;
benefits could also be gained from an assessment of bioenergy
potential. Likely actions in implementing a mapping process could
include:
R engaging with existing initiatives for data collection, including 
observatory currently being established by the ECOWAS 
Regional Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency 
(ECREEE);
R identify precise requirements for resource mapping, based on 
priority areas for renewable energy development; 
R establish a plan for collection of data; and
R explore the potential for funding ground measurement 
campaigns with multilateral/bilateral organisations .
Actors Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Renewable Energy, ECREEE, project
developers, CERER and other research institutes, donors.
Timing Mid-2012 for definition of requirements and establishing protocol,
ongoing for data collection.
Keys for success Technical and human resources available for data collection,
identifying and securing funds for data collection, establishing a
protocol for sharing data. SENEGAL 
Photo Courtesy: INENSUS West Africa S.A.R.LTHIS FIRST PILOT STUDY IN SENEGAL
HAS IDENTIFIED A NUMBER OF AREAS
IN WHICH SENEGAL CAN TAKE ACTION
TO IMPROVE READINESS FOR THE
DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLES. 
MANY OF THESE ACTIONS CAN BE
TAKEN IN THE NEAR TERM, BUILDING
ON THE MOMENTUM THAT HAS
ALREADY BEEN ESTABLISHED IN 
THE COUNTRY THROUGH RECENT
INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTS IN
SUPPORT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY. International Renewable Energy Agency
C67 Office Building
Khalidiyah [32nd] Street
PO Box 236, Abu Dhabi
United Arab Emirates
www.irena.org
Copyright 2012