File Name: SEN-CPD-2018-EN
Year: 2018
Country Name: Senegal
Country Code: SEN
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 4-7 September 2018
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2023
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
3 July 2018
Original: English
1811005X (E) 050718
Second regular session 2018
4-7 September 2018, New York
Item 4 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Senegal (2019-2023)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale ..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management .................................................................................... 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Senegal (2019-2023) 8I. Programme rationale
1. Senegal is located in the extreme west of sub-Saharan Africa, covering an area of 196,712 
square kilometres and has a population of some 13.6 million, with a density of 69 inhabitants per
square kilometre. The population is primarily rural (58 per cent), has slightly more women (51 
per cent) than men and is overwhelmingly young (77 per cent under age 35).
2. At the socioeconomic level, the challenge facing Senegal is how to accelerate efforts for more 
inclusive growth, reduce poverty and inequality and sustain over 7 per cent growth in accordance 
with Sustainable Development Goal 8 (promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic 
growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all) and the objectives of the Plan 
for the Emergence of Senegal (PES). Since 2014, Senegal has attained a new level of growth, 
averaging nearly 6 per cent according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), but the country 
still faces persistent poverty (46.7 per cent in 2011) and inequality (Gini inequality coefficient 
estimated at 0.38), especially in rural areas (57.3 per cent) but also in urban areas with strong 
disparities between regions. The acceleration of growth is driven by increased public investment 
financed mainly through loans and the country's debt level, estimated by the IMF at 62.3 per 
cent,1 which limits the public sector's ability to support growth. In order to sustain such growth, 
private investment and the participation of women2 will have to increase significantly. 
3. Currently, growth is not inclusive because it does not provide enough jobs and income 
opportunities, especially for women, young people and the rural population, and because social 
protection policies do not adequately cover vulnerable populations. Indeed, unemployment 
affects women in particular (22.6 per cent compared to 9.8 per cent for men), as well as youth 
and rural areas, where the rate is 27.7 per cent compared to 18.5 per cent in urban areas.
3 A recent 
study has shown that the inactive and unemployed populations are among the groups that 
generally do not escape from poverty once they have been trapped into it.
4
 In addition, persons
with disabilities, the elderly, women victims of violence, persons living with HIV and AIDS and 
victims of migration are highly vulnerable and should be prioritized.
4. At the governance level, the challenge is to strengthen the performance of central and local 
governments in supporting development priorities and providing quality public services. This is 
due to a clear imbalance in the territorial distribution of power, resources and public services 
between Dakar and the rest of the country, where decentralization reform is slow. At the central 
level, this can be explained by weak modernization and the insufficiency of a results-based 
culture; hence, the country has limited capacity to adapt to the requirements necessary for a path
to emergence.
5 A 2017 perception of corruption study revealed the presence of corruption, with
95.3 per cent of the general public and 61.7 per cent of professionals attesting to corruption in 
their immediate environments.
5. In relation to the environment, the main challenge is the low resilience of communities and 
ecosystems due to the effects of climate change, unsustainable production and consumption 
patterns and insufficient environmental education. Indeed, 60 per cent of the Senegalese 
population depends on sectors related to natural resources, in rural areas on agriculture and 
forestry and in urban and peri-urban areas on fishing and tourism. These different vulnerability 
factors generate socioeconomic problems: the drinking water supply affected by salinization and 
groundwater acidification; the destruction of habitats due to coastal erosion; the decline in 
agricultural yields; health problems; and migration. They will also significantly affect Senegal's 
economic development trajectory and poverty reduction efforts. 
6. For several years, the countries of the Sahel have struggled with a succession of political and 
humanitarian crises. This situation has made the region vulnerable to insecurity resulting from 
armed conflict, terrorist activities, illicit trafficking and ensuing organized crime. In addition, the 
 
1 According to the Ministry of Economy, Finance and Plan.
2 Gender discrimination induces a loss of nearly 16 per cent of national income according to a study by the Ministry of the Economy, 
Finance and Plan.
3 National Statistics and Demography Agency, National Employment Survey in Senegal 2017.
4 Dansokho, Diagne, Diène and Kharma March 2017, La dynamique de la pauvreté au Sénégal. NOPOOR Policy Brief No. 57c.
5 African Peer Evaluation Mechanism reportDP/DCP/SEN/3
Casamance situation has also contributed to regional instability. So far, Senegal has been 
preserved from this instability in the Sahel region. The United Nations is supporting efforts 
towards more stability, peace and development for the region through the Integrated Strategy for 
the Sahel, of which Senegal is a part.
7. In order to embark on the path of emergence by 2035, Senegal adopted the PES in 2014 as a 
framework for its development to reflect the political will not only to trigger a dynamic economic 
expansion but to improve the well-being of the population. The PES includes a five-year priority 
action plan and is structured around three pillars: (a) structural transformation of the economy 
and growth; (b) human capital, social protection and sustainable development; and 
(c) governance, institutions, peace and security. Recent analyses6 have shown that the PES covers
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. However, only 77 per cent of the targets for the Goals
are included in the first PES Priority Action Plan for 2014-2018. The next PES Priority Action 
Plan for 2019-2023, with which the United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
(UNDAF) 2019-2023 and the UNDP country programme will be aligned, will continue 
integrating the remaining 23 per cent of the targets.
8. The evaluation of the 2012-2018 country programme highlighted the following main 
achievements and lessons learned from UNDP interventions. In governance, UNDP helped to 
engage more development partners in funding the PES through the 2014 consultative group,
which led to new commitments from partners amounting to twice the resources expected. In the 
fight against poverty, UNDP support enabled the electrification of 110 villages in eight regions 
covering 61,686 inhabitants, the completion of 530 kilometres of rural roads and the digging of 
164 boreholes respectively covering 210,000 and 341,000 inhabitants. These achievements were
highlighted by the President of Senegal in his Speech to the Nation on 31 December 2017. In the 
area of the environment, UNDP improved community resilience by implementing the ecovillage 
concept in 90 villages. These interventions allowed the creation of 28,498 direct jobs, of which 
18,998 were for women and, with electricity supply, improved the success rates of primary 
school students from an average of 50 per cent in 2014 to 94 per cent in 2017.
9. However, the weak capacity of national bodies to implement projects and programmes and 
the weak involvement of supporting bodies in the management of projects and programmes 
negatively impacted programme delivery. Fragmentation of projects was noted as was a lack of 
synergy between the three programme components. In applying these lessons learned, UNDP 
will contribute to strengthening the capacities of relevant departments and ministries for project 
and programme management, coordination and implementation. Joint planning and 
complementarity of actions will serve to integrate the components of the new programme.
10. UNDP will support the next PES Priority Action Plan 2019-2023 in the areas where it has a 
comparative advantage, in particular developing policies and strategies that reduce poverty and 
inequalities, mainstreaming the Sustainable Development Goals at national and local levels, 
supporting public services through good governance and capacity support to institutions, and 
providing support for adapting and mitigating climate change. It was on this basis that the country 
office collaborated with the Government in prioritizing needs in line with the PSE and conducted 
two validation workshops for the country programme document with the participation of 
government and other key national stakeholders.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
11. In supporting the Government in its emergence process, the country programme, which is 
part of the UNDAF 2019-2023, aims to respond to the challenges highlighted above in line with 
the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2023. The country programme also aims to support Senegal in
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals through capacity-building and development of 
strategies and policies in the areas of: (a) good governance; (b) poverty reduction and inclusive 
growth; and (c) climate change and resilience. To this end, the country programme will support 
the Government to improve productivity, promote public policies that are conducive to 
diversifying the sources of growth and foster a greater role for the private sector to create more 
wealth and jobs. In order for the population to truly benefit from the job opportunities created, 
UNDP will support provision of skills and training tailored to the labour market, particularly for 
 
6 Conducted as part of the development of the national strategy for integrating the Sustainable Development Goalsyouth and women. In ensuring that no one is left behind, social policies targeting vulnerable 
people, especially those in the poverty trap, will be promoted and investments will be made in 
basic socioeconomic infrastructure in rural areas. Given that people, communities and sources of 
growth are closely linked to natural resources and ecosystems, actions will be taken to manage 
the risks of natural disasters, reduce human pressures and promote models of consumption and 
sustainable production. These actions require that inclusive, responsive and accountable 
governance institutions be established and strengthened at the national and local levels to 
improve the quality of public services and to foster greater ownership of the development process
and the ability of national stakeholders to maintain political and social stability.
12. In support of implementation of the PES, the country programme will be structured around
three components: (a) strengthening the governance system; (b) promotion of sustained, 
inclusive and sustainable growth; and (c) sustainable management of the environment and natural 
resources. The strategy for planning, implementing and monitoring the programme is to ensure 
that these three components are better integrated. For example, the provision of basic social 
services in rural areas will be accompanied by actions to strengthen the governance of local 
institutions responsible for providing these services. Similarly, issues of governance of national 
and local institutions responsible for sustainable natural resource management will be addressed 
to improve the resilience of communities and secure rural incomes. The promotion of sustainable 
production and consumption patterns will be part of the dynamics in developing incomegenerating activities and the supply and use of socioeconomic services. This aims at realizing the 
country’s potential for renewable energy and at creating opportunities for green jobs, 
strengthening value chains, particularly agricultural ones, and ensuring the sustainable 
management of the country's natural resources. To this end, three interrelated programme
clusters, which correspond to the following three challenges, will be established. 
13. UNDP will seek to mainstream the gender dimension by targeting women in all 
interventions. In doing so, UNDP will help operationalize the National Gender and Equality 
Strategy and will support the gender-disaggregation of the results indicators and collection of 
data.
14. UNDP aims to help Senegal achieve the aspirations of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development and African Union Agenda 2063, in alignment with the UNDP Strategic Plan
through its signature solutions. These solutions will be implemented through the two platforms 
outlined in the Strategic Plan: (a) a country support platform for the Sustainable Development 
Goals; and (b) a global development advisory and implementation services platform. UNDP will
therefore continue to lead the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) Sustainable Development 
Goals task force as well as the national committee for the Goals. The country office will ensure 
the active participation of donors in the process to support the implementation of the 2030 
Agenda in Senegal.
Strengthening the governance system
15. The proposed programme aligns perfectly with pillar 3 of the PES on governance, 
institutions, peace and security and with outcome 7 of the UNDAF on effective governance. It
also aims at strengthening the national governance steering mechanism through the development 
of a national reference framework to harmonize instruments for measuring and producing
accountability tools. UNDP interventions on governance will focus on women and youth as 
agents of change and on the most vulnerable populations (persons with disabilities, the elderly, 
the unemployed, women victims of violence, persons living with HIV and AIDS, victims of 
migration) to reduce social inequalities and promote sustainable development. It will also target 
women parliamentarians, locally elected officials and religious and customary leaders.
16. The contributions of UNDP will focus on: (a) strengthening the capacities of the institutions 
responsible for implementing and monitoring the PES at the national and local levels and those 
responsible for data collection and formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of 
public policies incorporating the Sustainable Development Goals; (b) strengthening the capacity 
of oversight and control entities to improve the performance of the public administration at the 
national and local levels; (c) building the capacity of women, youth and vulnerable groups to 
participate in decision-making bodies to defend their rights and fulfil their duties as citizens with 
the support of concerned sectoral ministries; and (d) building the capacity of electoral DP/DCP/SEN/3
management bodies, the police force and women leaders for more peaceful conflict management 
and better prevention of violent extremism to enhance security and peace.
17. Programme implementation will benefit from partnerships with targeted key partners, such 
as the European Union to enhance the fight against corruption and the Government of Canada to 
strengthen women's leadership. Emphasis will be placed on the development of a partnership 
with the Islamic Development Bank with the support of the UNDP Regional Service Centre to 
promote the localization of the Sustainable Development Goals. In order to strengthen production 
of national statistics, partnerships will continue with the United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA), United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNWomen) and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). In terms of South-South and triangular 
cooperation, efforts will be made to forge partnerships with the Government of the Republic of 
Korea in the area of gender-based violence and with the Government of Malaysia within the 
framework of the Delivery Unit7to support the implementation of the PSE. These partnerships
will contribute to enhanced resource mobilization as well as sharing of best practises and 
knowledge.
Promoting sustained, inclusive and sustainable growth
18. The proposed programme is in line with pillars 1 (structural transformation of the economy)
and 2 (human capital, social protection and sustainable development, strengthening community 
resilience) of the PES and outcome 1 one of the UNDAF, on structural transformation of the 
economy and the reduction of inequalities. The programme will help support economic growth 
by improving the mechanism for managing and implementing projects geared towards 
strengthening the private sector, diversifying the economy and developing value chains. To this 
end, the programme will contribute to the organization of the International Conference on 
Emergence in Africa which will be organized in Dakar in 2019 with UNDP support. Its theme 
focuses on the role of the private sector in structural transformation and emergence. The 
programme will also contribute to making economic growth in Senegal more inclusive by
creating economic and employment opportunities, improving productivity in sectors where the
poor are more active and strengthening social protection. The programme will focus on women 
and youth in rural and peri-urban areas of the Tsambouna, Kedougou, Matam, Saint Louis, 
Louga, Diourbel, Fatick, Kaolack, Sedhiou, Kolda and Ziguinchor regions.
19. The programme will focus on the following priorities: (a) strengthening the capacities of 
ministries in charge of implementation and monitoring of the PES to design sustainable projects 
and programmes for decent employment, particularly for youth and women, which would attract 
private investment; (b) improving rural people's access to basic socioeconomic infrastructure and 
services in order to improve local economies and reduce geographic inequalities; and (c) 
developing the capacities of vulnerable populations, particularly youth and women in rural and 
peri-urban areas, to establish and manage small- and medium-sized enterprises and to access 
decent and sustainable jobs.
20. Partnership with the Government will be further strengthened for the implementation of 
phase II of the Urgent Community Development Programme (Programme d’Urgence de 
Développement Communautaire (PUDC). The partnership with the private sector will be 
explored through the country support platforms for the Sustainable Development Goals which 
will be established during this programme cycle. New partnerships with the Governments of 
Luxembourg and Belgium will be pursued for resilience and youth employment promotion. At 
the operational level, partnerships will be established with national and local institutions, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), research institutions, civil society and community-based 
organizations to design and implement programmes and projects. 
Sustainable management of the environment and the natural resources
21. The vision expressed in this programme is in line with pillar 1 of the PES (inclusive and 
sustainable economic growth) and outcome3 of the UNDAF on resilience, climate change and 
ecosystem protection.
 
7 This is an innovative approach created by the Government of Malaysia for the effective coordination and implementation of 
development plans22. The programme will contribute to: (a) strengthening the capacities of sectoral ministries and 
local communities to mainstream the principles of sustainable development, climate change 
adaptation and disaster risk management into sectoral and local policies; (b) strengthening the 
capacities of the ministries responsible for the environment and energy to promote and facilitate 
access to clean techniques and technologies for renewable energy, energy efficiency and waste 
management; and (c) strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of the Environment to preserve 
and enhance ecosystems and biodiversity for the benefit of the populations. 
23. These interventions aim at operationalizing the monitoring, reporting and verification 
system in line with the commitments of the Paris Agreement; transforming the trajectory of 
development that was initiated within the PES framework towards an ecologically sustainable 
future with low carbon emissions; and strengthening the early warning systems to anticipate and 
prevent natural disasters.
24. With regard to the preservation and enhancement of coastal and river ecosystems and 
riparian communities in the northern and southern regions of the country, the tangible results of 
the ecovillages programme and support for green jobs creation programmes will be scaled up. 
UNDP will also provide assistance to the large-scale coastal programme that will bring together
the interventions of the French Development Agency, World Bank and the European Union. 
Payment mechanisms for ecosystem services will be developed for the sustainable management 
of forest ecosystems. The Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Green Climate Fund 
(GCF) will be the main partners. In addition, UNDP, within the framework of South-South 
cooperation, will facilitate the establishment of a partnership between the Governments of 
Senegal and Rwanda to capitalize on good practices and assist Senegal in operationalizing the 
National Climate Fund.
III. Programme and risk management
25. The programme will be nationally executed. For this purpose and as part of the exit strategy, 
a strong element of capacity-building and knowledge transfer will be part of the implementation 
of phase II of the PUDC. UNDP will provide necessary support to national implementing 
partners and direct interventions will be used only in exceptional cases. Other implementation 
modalities may also be used, including United Nations agencies and NGOs. The harmonized 
approach to cash transfers will be used in coordination with United Nations agencies to manage 
financial risks.
26. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in 
the programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework. In 
accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/9, all direct costs associated with project 
implementation should be charged to the concerned projects.
27. The country office will use the new quality assurance standards for projects and the social 
and environmental standards. To ensure sound management of resources, the country office will 
strengthen the control over financial management and project supervision, as well as its 
evaluation system of the implementing partners
28. UNDP will ensure the strengthening of capacities of country office staff to implement and 
monitor the programme, such as through continuous training, learning and knowledge exchange.
29. UNDP has identified five main risk areas for which mitigation strategies will be necessary: 
(a) the programme areas; (b) sociopolitical conflicts; (c) security; (d) environmental risks; and 
(e) operational risk.
30. The programme may be exposed to the risk of a possible reduction in the level of support 
from traditional donors and insufficient resources to implement it. To mitigate these risks, UNDP 
will make greater efforts in communicating results through improved visibility and enhance and 
diversify its resource mobilization and partnership base, including through joint programming 
with other United Nations agencies to maximize impact, coherence and effectiveness. In 
addition, UNDP will enhance its strategic positioning in leveraging resources such as from the DP/DCP/SEN/3
GCF as well as the key policy role UNDP plays in improving the quality of growth and reduction 
of inequalities. In terms of government financing, UNDP and the Government will continue to 
explore areas of cooperation based on the strong partnership and trust established through the 
PUDC.
31. The risks of sociopolitical conflicts stem mainly from political tensions and in the run-up to 
elections. To prevent such risks, UNDP will continue in its watchdog and advocacy role to 
encourage political dialogue, in addition to strengthening the capacity of the Electoral 
Commission to manage elections in a fair and transparent way.
32. In terms of operational risks, the slowness of national execution modality due to heavy 
bureaucratic processes could lead to low programme delivery and needs to be carefully managed 
with alternative solutions.
33. The main risk factors for insecurity in Senegal are the situation in Casamance and the 
terrorist threat in the Sahel region, the spread of radicalization among the youth and migratory 
phenomena. To prevent such risks, UNDP will continue to raise awareness among border 
populations and strengthen the coordination and the implementation of migration policies.
34. Environmental and climate change risks will be managed through the establishment or 
strengthening of mechanisms for the prevention, reduction and management of natural disasters 
at the local level in collaboration with United Nations agencies and other partners.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
35. The UNDP results monitoring system will be harmonized with the UNDAF monitoring 
mechanism and aligned with the United Nations guiding principles, norms and standards for 
evaluation approved by the United Nations Evaluation Group. The country programme outcomes
will be reviewed annually and the outputs will be reviewed on a quarterly basis. The programme
will also undergo a mid-term evaluation in 2022.
36. At the project level, the steering committees and the project technical committees will 
monitor at least annually the progress of the projects. Projects will be evaluated based on 
evaluation plans. Results of the evaluations will systematically be shared to improve ongoing 
and future project implementation. Joint monitoring missions will also be organized with national 
counterparts and/or donors to assess the change benefiting the target populations.
37. To the extent possible, UNDP will refer to the national statistics system to better assess its 
contribution to national results. National baseline surveys, the analysis of the general population 
census results and the joint annual review can be used to track progress. At the global level, 
indicators on good governance will be used.
38. The availability of data disaggregated by sex and at the regional and communal level is a 
major challenge. UNDP, in collaboration with other partners including UNFPA, UN-Women, 
UNICEF, the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, European Union, World 
Bank and African Development Bank, will support capacity-building of the national statistics
system to produce reliable data for monitoring the Sustainable Development Goal indicators. To 
this end, the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics will be updated to take into 
account the statistical needs in order to monitor all the relevant Goals for Senegal. 
39. UNDP will ensure that the gender marker is incorporated into all projects and programmes. 
It will also serve as a tool to allocate resources and provide support for gender and women's 
empowerment initiatives. Gender markers will be used to track country programme budgets and 
expenditures to improve gender planning and resource allocation regarding gender equality. The 
country office will ensure that evaluations are gender-sensitive. 
40. The UNDP Strategic Plan integrated results and resources framework will serve as the 
reference for allocating resources for programme outcomes and output indicators.
41. UNDP will allocate at least 5 per cent of its programme budget for data collection, and 
monitoring and evaluation of the programme.Annex. Results and resources framework for Senegal (2019-2023)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: PILLAR 3 OF THE PES: Governance, institutions, peace and security
SUSTAINABLE DEEVLOPMENT GOALS 4, 5, 6, 10, 16 and 17
UNDAF PILLAR III 2019-2023: Governance, peace and security
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2023, national and local institutions improve the quality and equity in the delivery of public services for the promotion of peace, security and effective governance
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: ACCELERATE STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATIONS FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
UNDAF outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s)
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs Major partners/ partnerships
frameworks
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome ($)
Indicator 1: Proportion of 
users from all social 
categories (women, men, 
young people, women with 
disabilities, young people 
with disabilities, migrants) 
who are satisfied with their 
(previous) experience with 
the public service (health, 
education, access to water, 
justice, telecommunications, 
energy, marital status)
Baseline: Education, 67.3%;
Health, 71%; Justice 61.1%
Target: Education, 75%; 
Health, 78%; Justice 70%,
Indicator 2: Proportion of 
successful local governments 
by order of community
Baseline: 43/599 or 7%
Target: 125/599 i.e. 21%
Indicator 3: Proportion of 
Regional Development 
Agencies with an integrated 
system for the collection, 
National Agency for Statistics 
and Demography (Agence 
nationale de la statistique et de 
la démographie (ANSD))
Report on the Survey on the 
Satisfaction of Public Service
Joint Annual Review Report
(Revue Annuelle Conjointe 
(RAC))
National Territorial 
Observatory
Output 1.1: National institutions and local authorities have enhanced technical, 
organizational and financial capacities to develop, implement, monitor and evaluate
public policies aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals
Indicator 1.1.1: Number policies, strategies and local development plans aligned with the 
Sustainable Development Goals.
Baseline: 0
Targets: 15
Sources: Reports of Ministry of Territorial Governance / Control bodies / Parliament 
Frequency: annual 
Indicator 1.1.2: Existence of data collection and analysis mechanisms that provide 
disaggregated data to monitor progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development 
Goals, through(a) conventional data collection methods (e.g. surveys); (b) administration 
reports systems; and (c) new data sources (e.g., big data)
Baseline: (a) No (b) No (c) No
Targets: (a) Yes (b) Yes (c) Yes
Source: ANSD
Frequency: biannual 
Indicator 1.1.3: Existence of governance and oversight of rule of law institutions with 
strengthened capacities
Baseline: No
Targets: Yes
Source: Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Governance 
Frequency: biannual 
Output 1.2: Control bodies have increased technical capacities to fight corruption in 
public services
Territorial authorities
Ministry of Economy and Finance
and Plan
Sectoral ministries
Parliament
Court of audit 
ANSD
Anti-Corruption Office (Office 
National de lutte contre la Fraude et 
la Corruption (OFNAC))
State General Inspectorate 
National Independent Electoral 
Commission (Commission électorale 
nationale autonome (CENA))
Political parties
Civil society
UNFPA
UNODC 
UN-Women
IOM
European Union
Government of Canada
Regular
5,978,800
Other
18,300,000processing and 
dissemination of 
disaggregated territorial 
information by gender and 
disability
Baseline: 0
Target: 8/14
Indicator 1.2.18: Existence of national strategy to fight against corruption
Baseline: No
Targets: Yes
Source: Report of OFNAC / State Inspection Report
Frequency: quinquennial
Indicator 1.2.2: Existence of a national strategy to fight against corruption
Baseline: No
Targets: Yes
Source: OFNAC
Frequency: quinquennial
Output 1.3: Women, youth and vulnerable groups have enhanced technical capacities 
to be active members of decision-making bodies to defend their rights and fulfil their 
duties as citizens
Indicator 1.3.1: Percentage of women and youth in the decision-making bodies 
((a)parliament, (b)local authorities)
Baseline: (a): 42% women, 10% youth, (b): 47% women, 10% youth 
Targets: (a): 43% women, 20% youth, (b): 48% women, of whom 25 are mayors, 30% 
youth
Sources: Ministerial sectoral reports, Report of the Supporting Unit for Local Elections, 
Parliamentary Report
Frequency: quinquennial
Output 1.4: Elections management bodies, police forces and women leaders have 
enhanced technical capacities for peaceful conflict management and prevention of 
violent extremism to strengthen peace and security
Indicator 1.4.1: Existence of national plans of action for prevention of violent extremism 
(PVE) under implementation
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
Source: Reports of the sectoral ministries
Frequency: Biannual 
Indicator 1.4.2: Number of violent incident reported during the election period
 
8
0 = strategy not available
 1 = strategy available but not implemented
 2 = strategy available and partially implemented
3 = strategy available and fully implementedBaseline: 8 (Presidential)
Targets: 4 at most 
Source: CENA report
Frequency: quinquennial
Indicator 1.4.3: Number of local platforms established at the subnational levels for conflict
prevention and management
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Source: CENA report, Gore Institute 
Frequency: biannual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR PILLAR OF THE PES: 1: Structural transformation of the economy
2: Human capital, social protection and sustainable development
3: Governance, institutions, peace and security
Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 5, 8, 9, 10, 16 and 17
PILLAR I UNDAF 2019-2023: Inclusive and sustainable economic growth
PILLAR II UNDAF 2019-2023: Social protection and basic services
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2023, the Government will have integrated sectoral policies and strengthened institutions contributing to the structural transformation of the economy and the reduction of 
inequalities
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2: ACCELERATE STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATIONS FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
Indicator 1.1: Structure of 
GDP (a) primary sector, b) 
secondary sector and c) 
tertiary sector)
Baseline 2017: (a) 18.4%; (b) 
19.1%; and (c) 46.7%
Target: (a) 17.6%; (b) 22.1%;
and (c) 45.1%
Indicator 1.2: Existence of a 
mechanism for 
strengthening coherence and 
integration of policies
Baseline: No
Target 2023: Yes
Ministry of the Economy and 
Finance
World Bank report
ANSD Report 
Frequency: Annual
Output 2. 1: Rural populations have access to quality basic socio-economic 
infrastructures and services 
Indicator 2.1.1: Percentage of communities with access to a) drinking water; b) rural 
electrification; c) rural roads, at subnational level
Baseline 2016: 89.5% / 40% / 37,2% of villages
Target: 95% / 85% / 60% of villages
Source: RAC
Frequency: annual 
Indicator 2.1.2: Percentage of new public institutions with essential infrastructure that are 
accessible to persons with reduced mobility/disability
Baseline: 0%
Target: 100% 
Data sources: RAC, ANSD, World Bank 
Frequency: annual 
Output 2.2: The Ministries in charge of the implementation and monitoring of the 
Plan for an Emerging Senegal (PES) have enhanced capacity to design decent and 
long-lasting economic empowerment projects and programmes, specifically for youth 
and women, which attract private investment
Ministry of the Economy and Finance
and Plan
Sectoral ministries
WHO
Islamic Development Bank
African Development Bank
European Union
World Bank
Regular
4,035,690 
Other
25,530,000Indicator 1.3: GDP per 
capita
Baseline: $1,065
Target: $2,450
Indicator 1.4: Poverty 
incidence
Baseline: 46.7 (2011)
Target 2023: 30%
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of decent and long-lasting employment projects and programmes 
designed by the Operational office of the PES financed by the private sector
Baseline: 0
Target: 10
Data source: National Agency for Statistics and Demography; Joint Annual Review Report
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of sustainable jobs created for youth and women through the PES 
projects and programmes
Baseline: 1,498 in 2016
Target: 5,000 over the period 2019-2023
Sources: RAC
Frequency: annual 
Output 2.3: Vulnerable groups, specifically youth and women in rural and peri-urban 
areas, with technical and financial capacities to benefit from decent and sustainable 
jobs, including through entrepreneurship
Indicator 2.3.1: Number of operational SMEs created by vulnerable groups 
Baseline: 88
Target: 388 
Sources: PUDC annual report 
Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.3.2: Number of women and youth that have benefitted from funding (banks 
and Decentralized Financial System) to undertake an economic activity
Baseline: 314 (Men: 17, Women: 297)
Target: 1,500 (in which at least 60% of women and 6% of person living with disabilities
Sources: PUDC annual report, RAC
Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.3.4: Number of jobs created for youth (men-women) through UNDP support
Baseline: TBD
Target: 5,000 of whom at least 50% are women
Data source: PUDC Evaluation Report 
Frequency: annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR PILLAR OF PES: PILLAR 2: Human capital, social protection and sustainable development
Sustainable Development Goals 13, 14, 15, 7, 17, 8, 1, 11 and 12
UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2023, vulnerable communities build resilience to the climate change impacts and contribute to ecosystem protection.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 Strengthen resilience to shocks and crisesIndicator 1: The number of 
green jobs created 
(disaggregated by gender)
Baseline 2017: 2729
Target 2023: 6000
Indicator 2: Evolution in the 
amount of income/households 
derived from the sustainable 
management of natural 
resources and the 
environment.
Baseline: 695,000 CFA
francs/ year / household.
Target: 1,000,000 CFA francs
/ year / Household
Report of Ministries of the 
Environment and of Energy, 
ANSD
Annual Report of the Ministry 
of the Environment
Output 3.1: Sectoral ministries and local authorities have enhanced technical 
capacities to incorporate sustainable development principles and climate change 
adaptation in sectoral and local policies
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of sectoral policies and plans at national and sub national levels 
that include the dimension of sustainable development and climate change adaptation
Baseline: 1
Target: At least 10
Sources: Sustainable Development Goal monitoring report
Frequency: biannual
Indicator 3.1.2: Proportion of local governments that adopt local disaster risk reduction 
strategies in line with national disaster risk reduction strategies
Baseline: 0%
Target: 10%
Sources: Sustainable Development Goal monitoring report
Frequency: biannual
Indicator 3.1.3 Existence of gender-responsive measures for conservation, sustainable use, 
and equitable access to and benefit sharing of natural resources, biodiversity and 
ecosystems: (a) policy frameworks; (b) legal and regulatory frameworks; (c) institutional 
frameworks; (d) financing frameworks
Baseline: (a) No / (b) No / (c) No / (d) No
Target: (a) Yes / (b) Yes / (c) Yes / (d) Yes 
Sources: Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development report 
Frequency: biannual
Output 3.2: Ministries in charge of environment and energy have enhanced capacities
to promote and facilitate access to techniques and technologies for renewable energy, 
energy efficiency and waste management
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of institutions that have operational plans with technologies on 
renewable energy, energy efficiency and waste management
Baseline: 1
Targets: 3
Sources: Annual report on projects and from Ministries
Frequency: biannual
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of national and local plans that integrate and implement strategies 
for waste management
Baseline: 0 (national) 0 (Local)
Target: 1 (national) 5 (Local)
Ministry of Petroleum and Energy
Ministry of the Environment and 
Sustainable Development
Ministry of Decentralization
National Agency for Renewable 
Energy
Agency for Saving and Managing 
Energy
National Ecovillage Agency
CSOs
Local authorities, 
NGOs
Private sector
Governments of Japan, Luxembourg
and Spain
Green Climate Fund
Global Environment Facility
World Bank 
Government of Canada 
European Union
USAID 
UNEP 
GIZ
Nordic Fund 
FAO
Regular
4,932,510
Other
61,756,000Source: Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development report / Ministry of Local 
Government
Frequency: annual (national) quinquennial (Local)
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of households benefitting from clean, affordable and sustainable 
energy: (a) women headed (b) in rural areas; (c) in urban and peri-urban areas
Baseline: 6,633 in rural areas 
Target: 13,000 in rural areas in which at least 2 470 headed by women 
Sources: Project annual reports
Frequency: annual
Output 3.3: The Ministry of Environment has enhanced technical capacities to 
conserve the ecosystems and biodiversity for the benefit of communities
Indicator 3.3.1: Natural resources that are managed under a sustainable use, conservation, 
access and benefit-sharing regime: (a) area under sustainable forest management (hectares), 
Baseline: 118,033 
Target: 826,231
Sources: Annual report by the Ministry of Environment 
Frequency: annual 