File Name: SLB-CPD-2007-EN
Year: 2007
Country Name: Solomon Islands
Country Code: SLB
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 10 to 14 September 2007
Start Year: 2008
End Year: 2012
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

United Nations DP/DCP/FJI/1
Executive Board of the 
United Nations Development 
Programme and of the 
United Nations Population Fund 
Distr.: General 
13 July 2007 
Original: English 
Second regular session 2007 
10 to 14 September 2007, New York 
Item 6 of the provisional agenda 
Country programmes and related matters 
Draft multi-country programme document, 2008-2012 
Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, 
Nauru, Palau, Solomon Islands, 
Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu 
Contents 
 Paragraphs Page 
 Introduction …………………………………………………………………… 1 2 
I. Situation analysis……………………………………………………………… 2-7 2 
II. Past cooperation and lessons learned……………………………………..…… 8-9 5 
III. Proposed programme……………………………………………………….…. 10-16 6 
IV. Programme management, monitoring and 
evaluation……………………………………………………………………… 17-24 8 
Annex 
Results and resources framework (2008-2012) ……………………………… 11 Introduction 
1. The UNDP multi-country programme document (MCPD) 2008-2012 has been endorsed by the 
Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Solomon Islands, Tonga, 
Tuvalu and Vanuatu following wide stakeholder consultations with governments, civil society, 
regional organizations and development partners. The MCPD will be implemented by the UNDP Fiji 
multi-country office (MCO) and is aligned with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), country 
priorities as reflected in national development plans, the regional United Nations Development 
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2008-2012 and the Pacific Plan for regional integration and 
cooperation. 
I. Situation analysis 
2. Pacific island countries (PICs) face common challenges resulting from their small size, geographic 
isolation and natural disaster vulnerability. Broadly, Melanesia (Fiji, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu) is 
characterized by larger, resource-rich land masses and populations; Polynesia (Tuvalu and Tonga) by 
smaller but relatively compact land masses, and Micronesia (Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated 
States of Micronesia, Palau and Nauru) by very small and widely dispersed resource-poor atolls. As 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS), PICs have committed to the Mauritius Strategy and their 
National Sustainable Development Strategies (NSDS) are being increasingly aligned with the MDGs. 
The Pacific region has been experiencing high levels of poverty and low levels of economic growth; 
coupled with low human development gains in past decades, many PICs are in danger of missing 
critical MDG 1, 3 and 6 targets.
3. Even though over the past decade, a number of PICs have achieved improved macroeconomic 
outcomes, this has not translated into rises in per capita incomes in light of population growth of 
around 2.4 percent in the medium term. The significant net aid inflows to PICs have yet to be 
integrated in national planning and budgeting processes. Increasingly PICs are focusing on the Pacific 
Aid Effectiveness Principles and their capacity for aid coordination and management, adopting sector 
wide approaches (Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu) in education and health. Ensuring inclusive 
growth and globalization is particularly challenging in the least developed countries (Kiribati, Solomon 
Islands, Tuvalu and Vanuatu). Across the region, these problems are compounded by unfavourable 
policies and regulatory environment for trade and private sector development. Due to the lack of 
employment opportunities, increasing hardship and social instability, inequality has disproportionate impact on vulnerable groups, such as rural poor, women and girls, who remain disadvantaged to 
varying degrees in education, access to labour markets and political representation, as well as young 
people aged 15-24, who comprise almost half the population in some countries. In addition, available 
evidence on HIV infection rates, especially among people aged 15-49, point to the possibility of a 
rapidly escalating HIV epidemic and multi-sectoral approaches to prevention, care and treatment 
efforts are seen as imperative. 
4. Sustainable and equitable economic growth and poverty reduction are dependent on significant 
governance improvements. Increasing concerns over alleged abuse of power, corruption and cronyism 
has contributed to instability and conflict and a failure to uphold human rights. Accountability 
institutions are often under-resourced and/or poorly functioning. Although decentralization and 
participatory decision making are being enhanced in small atoll countries such as Kiribati and Tuvalu, 
mechanisms to encourage full and real participation by women and minority groups are largely 
lacking. Leveraging information and communication technology (ICT) for local government and outer 
island planning and management requires action. As in various PICs, the value of broad-based civic 
education programmes is increasingly recognized. Civil society organizations (CSOs) are increasingly 
seen as key partners by governments and donors in governance and human rights education. While 
many PICs have ratified key human rights conventions, there are shortcomings in reporting. All 
countries but three have ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women and have national plans of action to promote gender equality and strategies to address 
gender-based violence, but most do not have legal and institutional mechanisms to implement them. 
5. Exposure to natural hazards such as volcanoes, tsunami’s, cyclones, earthquakes (Solomon Islands 
and Vanuatu who are among the most disaster prone countries in the world) and experiences of civil 
unrest and conflict over the past decade (Fiji, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu), have highlighted 
the need to focus more strongly on disaster risk reduction, peace and stability dialogues, early warning 
systems, and the role of women in crisis prevention and recovery. In the long-term, it is increasingly 
recognized that democratic governance and poverty reduction are key in preventing potential conflicts. 
Tensions between traditional and modern systems of governance contribute to this pattern or curtail 
effective mitigation as seen in Tonga and in Fiji. The Solomon Islands experienced instability due to 
ethnic tension and civil unrest from 1999 to 2002. Stability and an environment conducive to the 
strengthening of Solomon Island’s peace architecture have emerged from various interventions, political crisis in Fiji and the Secretary General’s call for an early return to democracy, indicate the 
need for an enhanced focus on good governance, peace dialogue and building community resilience. 
6. Almost all PICs rely heavily on primary commodity production and exports, marine-based 
resources, and tourism, highlighting community-based management of natural resources and 
maintenance of the environment as a key to growth and poverty reduction. Competing demands on the 
environment and differentiated impacts of climate change (Kiribati and Tuvalu), waste management 
(Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati and Marshall Islands), and poor natural resource management 
pose significant challenges to all PICs due to their limited resource base. Contributing factors include: 
limited integration and non-implementation of environment in national or sectoral plans and strategies, 
non-existent or outdated environmental legislation, limited documentation of traditional practices, and 
inadequate capacities of communities to practice responsible and equitable harvesting of natural 
resources. Concerns about improving equitable access to natural resources, including renewable 
energy, to enable opportunities for sustainable livelihood options require special consideration given 
the patrilineal nature of most Pacific societies. Increasingly, environmental policy is mainstreamed into 
national and regional agreements and frameworks, such as the Micronesia Challenge.
7. Stronger regional cooperation presents opportunities for countries with constrained capacity to 
implement effective national policies and provide basic services to meet the needs of their people. The 
Pacific Plan has established a framework to support national development policies, including 
commitments to the MDGs. The relatively small circle of development partners in the Pacific can 
enhance the way aid is delivered and managed in line with the Paris Declaration and the Pacific 
Principles on Aid Effectiveness. 
Key country indicators
 Fiji FSM Kiribati RMI Nauru Palau Solomon 
Islands 
Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu 
Land Area (sq km) 
EEZ (sq km) 
18,274 
1,260,000 
702 
2,900,000 
726 
3,600,000 
181 
2,100,000 
21 
320,000 
459 
600,000 
28,896 
1,600,000 
748 
700,000 
26 
760,000 
12,189 
680,000 
Population 
Growth rate (%) 
905,949 
1.4 
108,500 
3.28 
105,432 
2.24 
60,422 
2.25 
13,287 
1.81 
19,949 
1.31 
552,438 
2.61 
114,689 
2.01 
11,810 
1.51 
208,869 
1.49 
GDP growth (05, %) 0.7 1.3 0.3 1.1 - 5.4 5.2 2.4 2.0 3.1 
HDI 
2006 rank, out of 177 
0.758 
90 
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0.592 128 0.815 
55
N/A 0.670 
119
Country status Middle Middle LDC Middle Middle NCC LDC Middle LDC LDC 
MDG Report 2004 Draft Draft Draft NA Draft 2005 2005 2006 2005 
Human Rights 
Treaties/Conventions 
ratified 
• CEDAW 
• CRC 
• CERD
√
√
√
√
√
x
√
√
x
√
√
x
x 
√
√
x 
√
x
√
√
√
x 
√
√
√
√
x
√
√
xSources: UNDP Human Development Report 2006; 2006 Country Background Notes, UNDP Fiji; Asian Development Outlook 2006 
Update, Asian Development Bank; Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat 
II. Past cooperation and lessons learned 
8. Under the previous programme cycle, UNDP support was prioritized under three related areas: 
(a) Poverty reduction and sustainable livelihoods for MDGs achievement: facilitating 
financial services for the poor in Fiji, Vanuatu and Marshall Islands; policy development for 
inclusive growth and globalization in Palau, Marshall Islands and Federated States of 
Micronesia; sustainable livelihoods in Marshall Islands. 
(b) Democratic governance and human rights through parliamentary strengthening in Fiji, 
Solomon Islands and Marshall Islands; decentralization and local governance in Tuvalu and 
Kiribati; participatory democracy and civic education in Tonga; peace and stability in Fiji and 
Solomon Islands; human rights advocacy for policy development and community education, 
and HIV/AIDS across the region. 
(c) Environmental protection and resource management through programmes in 
environmental governance, climate change, biodiversity, energy and waste management with 
differentiated focus in the 10 PICs. A key focus has been on assisting countries to meet their 
obligations under various multilateral and regional environment agreements (MEAs). 
9. Tripartite Project Reviews (TPRs) and project evaluations confirm the emphasis of the previous 
cycle, with some adjustments needed to fine-tune the future programme. These include the need to: 
(a) Adopt a more strategic and targeted focus on key outcomes to maximize impact. Programme 
effectiveness has been challenged by the unique role of the MCO to spread resources across 
10 countries. Clear programme objectives, realistic targets, measurable indicators and appropriate 
sequencing of capacity, culture and gender disparities need to be prioritized. 
(b) Ensure national commitment to and ownership of programmes, use of national development 
frameworks and systems in consultative processes, more frequent country visits, and continued training 
at national, regional and international levels. An expanded joint United Nations presence in countries 
will improve UNDP’s engagement in national development dialogue and development support 
services. 
(c) Build stronger partnerships at the highest levels. While improved coordination with other partners was a noted achievement, programmatic linkages with other United Nations agencies, funds 
and programmes working in the region and with the Council of Regional Organizations of the Pacific 
(CROP) have been relatively weak. Enhanced donor partnerships will help to continue the recent trend 
of improved resource mobilization.
III. Proposed programme 
10. Taking into account lessons learned in the past programming cycle, the MCPD 2008-2012 seeks to 
respond to current and emerging development challenges of PICs, through continued emphasis on 
capacity development; stronger partnerships at national level and robust engagement and coordination
with key stakeholders; strategic programmatic focus and leveraging of regular resources in high 
impact areas; and strengthening regional and national linkages to support the Pacific Plan.
11. In alignment with the UNDAF, the goal of the MCPD is to achieve the MDGs through building 
resilient and inclusive societies, based on four key inter-related outcome areas of poverty reduction and 
the Millennium Development Goals, good governance and human rights, crisis prevention and 
recovery, and environment and sustainable management across the ten countries. 
Outcome 1. Poverty reduction and the Millennium Development Goals 
12. UNDP will assist PICs in developing and implement evidence-based and inclusive NSDS to 
stimulate inclusive economic growth, facilitate inclusive globalization and promote sustainable 
livelihoods through support to: (a) formulation and implementation of national and sectoral plans and 
strategies aligned with MDGs, targets and indicators and clearly linked to national budgets; (b) 
strengthening capacity of national statistical systems to generate disaggregated poverty data and 
analyses; (c) Improving Aid Management systems linking to national plans and budgets; (d) 
facilitation of inclusive and equitable trade mechanisms, private sector partnerships, employment 
generation policies and enhancing financial competencies; and (e) multi-sectoral planning and 
leadership capacity development to enhance the engagement of communities and decision makers at all 
levels to take immediate action on HIV and AIDS. Country level programmatic activities will take into 
account intra-regional socio-economic patterns and variations, with special emphasis on the least 
developed countries (Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu and Vanuatu), as well as on women and other 
vulnerable groups across the region.Outcome 2. Good governance and human rights 
13. UNDP will strengthen national policy capacities and governance systems to exercise the principles 
of inclusive, equitable, participatory, transparent and accountable governance and respect for human 
rights; and will support the role of resilient Pacific communities in decision-making at all levels. 
Specific programmatic activities will be geared towards: (a) countries demonstrating and upholding the 
Forum principles of good leadership and accountability; (b) enhancing decentralization of governance, 
information and communication technology (ICT) development, and participatory decision making 
targeting vulnerable groups; and (c) awareness of human rights and the availability of mechanisms to 
claim them. The focus will be on enhancing participatory democracy through civic and human rights 
education in all countries of the Pacific; decentralized governance for development and participatory 
decision making in Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu; and parliamentary support, 
subject to the evolving priorities and demands of the Pacific countries. 
Outcome 3. Crisis prevention and recovery
14. UNDP will assist countries to strengthen capacity to prevent and manage crises and build 
resilience to the impact of tensions and disasters. This will be achieved through: (a) support to the 
development of an integrated approach to addressing and reducing vulnerability to tension and disaster; 
(b) effective recovery strategies that seek to build capacity to address the root causes of humanitarian 
crisis and natural disasters; and (c) addressing the long term livelihood needs of communities. UNDP 
will focus on formalizing institutional mechanisms for mainstreaming disaster risk reduction into 
national development and budgetary strategies (in Solomon Islands and Vanuatu); and development 
and implementation of national policies and plans addressing human security through conflict-sensitive 
analysis and tension reduction interventions (in Fiji, Marshall Islands, Tonga and Solomon Islands). 
Outcome 4. Environment and sustainable management 
15. UNDP will leverage global expertise and resources, and utilize innovative approaches to support a 
more resilient region with strengthened capacity for sustainable management of environment and 
natural resources through: (a) the mainstreaming of environmental sustainability and sustainable 
energy into national policies, planning frameworks and programmes (in all countries of the Pacific); 
and (b) strengthening institutional support, including indigenous governance systems, to contribute to 
sustainable environmental management and usage through appropriate policieslegislation and traditional knowledge and practices for enhanced sustainable livelihoods (in Kiribati, Solomon Islands, 
Tuvalu and Vanuatu). The focus will be on environmental governance, including promotion of 
sustainable renewable energy and adaptation to climate change into national strategies, as well as 
improving access to and management of multilateral environment agreements (MEAs). Programmatic 
activities will further focus on partnerships and capacity development in order to strengthen the nexus 
among poverty reduction, sustainable environmental management and gender equity. The Global 
Environment Facility Small Grants Programme-NZAID Pacific Environment Fund model will be 
examined for the possible up-scaling of pilot projects, including the potential for further support for 
renewable energy and adaptation to climate change projects. 
Cross-cutting themes and joint programmes 
16. UNDP programming will address the linkages between these four objectives, and mainstream key 
cross-cutting themes into country-specific priorities. This includes the promotion of human rights and 
protecting the dignity and integrity of all people; gender equity, guided by the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Violence against Women and the Pacific Platform for Action on the 
Advancement of Women and Gender Equality 2005-2015; and promoting volunteerism. Joint 
programmes will support national development, linkages and cohesion in the areas of HIV/AIDS, 
young people, national planning for MDG achievement, support to civil society, and, subject to interagency agreement, environmental and disaster risk management.
IV. Programme management, monitoring and evaluation 
A. Implementation 
17. The MCPD and the results framework will form the basis of agreed Country Programme Action 
Plans for the 10 PICs, and will be reviewed annually. Implementation, primarily through National 
Execution (NEX), will help reduce the transaction costs of governments, establish clear accountability 
and oversight structures and maximize efficient and effective programme delivery through resultsbased management methodologies. Where national capacity is constrained, alternative execution 
modalities such as Direct Execution (DEX) will be explored. 
18. Delivery of the MCPD will be underpinned by the expanded joint United Nations expanded 
presence, under reciprocity arrangements with UNFPA and UNICEF in Federated States of 
Micronesia, Kiribati, Nauru Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu and Vanuatu. With in-house expertise in key programme areas, the Fiji MCO will provide support services, training and 
advice to implementation partners in project formulation, implementation, monitoring, human rightsbased approaches and gender-sensitive programming. Formulation of joint programmes, advice and 
support from the Pacific Centre in Fiji, as well as from the United Nations Volunteers (UNV) 
programme, will be leveraged to enhance programme effectiveness. 
B. Monitoring and evaluation 
19. Overall progress of the MCPD implementation will be measured under the MCPD Evaluation plan 
and through independent and participatory monitoring and evaluation (M&E) processes. Annual 
Programme reviews with national implementation partners will track resource allocation, activity 
progress and constraints under the overall direction of UNDAF Outcome Boards. Wherever possible, 
MCPD monitoring and evaluation activities will be aligned with regional and national M&E 
frameworks. Appropriate resources and capacity will be made available for the systematic 
implementation and dissemination of evaluation recommendations to emphasize the critical importance 
of evaluation as a tool for policy engagement and programme monitoring. 
20. Of the 11 programme outcomes of the MCPD, four specific outcome evaluations will be 
undertaken with Governments and stakeholders throughout the programming period, in line with 
UNDP procedures. A final evaluation of the implementation of the MCPD in its entirety will be 
conducted towards the end of 2008-2012 programming cycle, to inform the subsequent MCPD. 
C. Partnerships and aid effectiveness 
21. In support of the resident coordinator system, UNDP will leverage its resources to lead the 
harmonization of United Nations programmes to support reforms under the multi-country UNDAF. 
Partnerships will be strengthened through coordination and harmonization with development partners; 
working with civil society and vulnerable communities; and through CROP to support national 
responses under the Pacific Plan. 
22. The MCPD will strive to build national capacity for aid management, and simplification and 
harmonization of aid delivery in accordance with the Pacific Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. 
Operational tools, such as the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers, will be used to facilitate 
collaborative donor procedures in alignment with national processes and institutional capacities. D. Resource mobilization 
23. Total resource requirements of the MCPD are estimated at $52 million, of which $3 million 
constitutes existing pipeline commitments and carry over from the current cycle, resulting in 
$49 million of net resource requirements for the new programming cycle. This scope of programmatic 
engagement will be supported by funding from regular resources (TRAC) in the amount of $8 million, 
with other resources contributing an estimated $20 million from GEF, and $10 million from UNDEF, 
DGTF and other thematic trust funds. The remainder of $11 million is to be mobilized through 
government and third party cost-sharing. 
E. Multi-country office staffing and structure 
24. Building on results accomplished through previous re-organizations, the MCO will continue to 
fine-tune its internal structure, seeking to strengthen accountability for results, programme efficiency 
and operational efficiency. The Solomon Islands Programme Implementation Office (to be 
mainstreamed under the biennium support budget) will be headed by a Deputy Resident 
Representative, who also will have managerial and representational responsibilities for the joint office 
Presence of UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF. In addition, on behalf of UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF the 
MCO will establish joint presence in Nauru, Palau and Tuvalu to be funded initially from regional 
programme resources. Staffing implications of an expanded presence in the Pacific and operational 
capacity requirements of the envisaged programme growth will be considered prior to and at the 
beginning of the new cycle. ntry programme outcome 1: Poverty reduction and Millennium Development Goals 
NDAF outcome 1: Equitable economic growth and poverty reduction 
NDAF outcome 3: Equitable social and protection services 
Multi-country programme outcomes 
Multi-country programme outputs Output indicators, baselines, targets 
[1.1.1.1] Indicator: # of countries with MDG increased budget allocations for MDGs; # of MDG end of 2007, Pacific LDCs do not have national oaligned with the MDGs. Target: MDG based p
operational in at least the 4 LDCs. 
[1.1.2.1] Indicator: # of LDCs with defined nation
lines; poverty analysis impacting on national policdecrease in poverty gap ratio for each PIC. Basel
have defined national basic needs poverty lines anTarget: At least 4 LDCs have strengthened na
generating poverty data and analysis
1.1 Pacific island countries national policies and sustainable development strategies that are aligned with MDGs, linked to national budgets and based on strengthened national statistical systems focusing on poverty indicators
1.1.1 Strengthened capacity among policy makers 
and CSOs to analyse key development challenges, including poverty, environment and gender issues, and to incorporate them in MDG-based national policies, plans, budgets and reports (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu) 
1.1.2 Strengthened national statistical systems 
generating poverty data and analysis (Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu) 1.1.3 Improved Aid Management systems linked to national plans and budgets (Kiribati, Solomon 
Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu)
[1.1.3.1] Indicator: # of aid databases and a
strengthened; # of PICs with aid flows integratbudgets. Baseline: Low capacities for aid coordina
and incomplete; aid flows not related to national 
development policies and strategies supported by systems. 
[1.2.1.1] Indicator: # of new trade facilitation-relatand plans adopted; # of new businesses registerearnings. Baseline: Trade regulatory frameworks 
trade facilitation systems not meeting internationperformance. Target: Export performance improve
[1.2.2.1] Indicator: # of urban/rural poor accessparticular women and youth. Baseline: 80,000 rurSolomon Islands); 2000 microfinance beneficiAdditional 20,000 people, in particular women afinancial services. 
1.2 Trade mechanisms, private sector partnerships and employment generation policies are sustainable and equitable 1.2.1 Improved enabling environment for trade facilitation and development (Kiribati; Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu); 1.2.2 Financial competencies of vulnerable groups, including women and youth, enhanced in urban/rural communities (Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu); 1.2.3 Partnerships established to facilitate creation of income generation and employment opportunities for vulnerable groups, with focus on women and youth (Fiji, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, 
Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu)
[1.2.3.1] Indicator: # of pilot initiatives/partnership
generation and entrepreneurship development by women employed through pilot initiatives; # of towards national impact. Baseline: Limited emplnon-conducive environment for income generatincreasing hardship and inequality have dispvulnerable groups. Target: Increase income genopportunities for vulnerable groups, including wom
 
 of 
ent; 
ing 
e 
1.3 National policies 
and plans for HIV and AIDS are evidence-based and inclusive
1.3.1 Strengthened multi-sectoral HIV/AIDS planning and leadership capacity to take immediate action on HIV/AIDS (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu)
[1.3.1.1] Indicator: # of multi-sectoral nation
developed; # of decision-makers trained through program. Baseline: Ad-hoc engagement of lead
capacity in HIV/AIDS planning and advocacy at a
100 men and women leaders trained in leadstrengthening national capacity for multi-sectoral p
$3,046,000 untry Programme Outcome 2: Good Governance and Human Rights 
NDAF Outcome 2: Good Governance and Human Rights 
Multi-Country Programme Outcomes 
Multi-Country Programme Outputs Output indicators, baselines, targets 
[2.1.1.1] Indicator: # of functional parliamentary comresearch libraries; proportion of laws examined and sparliamentary committees. Baseline: Parliamentary fSolomon Islands and Marshall Islands; legislative revidentified capacity gaps. Target: Pacific men and wocontributing to accountability and oversight through functions in 9 PICs. [2.1.2.1] Indicator: # of women with seats in nationa
oversight committees; # of political parties putting fofor elections. Baseline: Representation of women in 
Pacific less than 5%. Target: Women effectively conand oversight roles and functions in national parliam
2.1 Pacific island countries demonstrate and uphold the Forum Principles of Good Leadership and Accountability, protect human rights and make available mechanisms to claim them
2.1.1 Improved capacity of national parliaments to enable efficient and effective legislative, oversight and accountability functions and roles (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu); 
2.1.2 Increased representation of women in parliament (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu); 2.1.3 Participatory democracy and human rights upheld through civic education (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu)
[2.1.3.1] Indicator: % of population with knowledge 
rights; # of countries with well functioning, broad-baeducation practices; # of CSOs engaged in civic educprogrammes. Baseline: Limited national capacities f
education programmes implemented or started in FijiVanuatu; Various CSOs engaged in ad-hoc civic edu
Pacific communities and people understanding and eand human rights. 
2.2 Decentralisation of governance and participatory decision making are enhanced 2.2.1 Participatory mechanisms and strengthened capacity of national and provincial governments, CSOs and other stakeholders improve national coordination, planning and management of local development activities, to include transparent and accountable financial and resource management 
(Kiribati, Tonga, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu)
[2.2.1.1] Indicator: % increase in local government e
participatory local level plans developed; # of local gICT for planning and management; % of people activand traditional systems; # of local government acts reof supportive legislation and functional structures anparticipation at local level; in outer islands sever con
of delegated resources for planning and implementat
efficient and accountable Local Governments and dePICs. 
 $2,75
untry Programme Outcome 3: Crisis Prevention and Recovery 
NDAF Outcome 2: Good Governance and Human Rights 
NDAF Outcome 4: Sustainable Environmental Management 
Multi-Country Programme Outcomes 
Multi-Country Programme Outputs Output indicators, baselines, targets 
[3.1.1.1] Indicator: # of engendered conflict sensitiv
polices, strategies and projects adopted and implemecapacity for conflict sensitive analysis and dialogue; 
ad hoc and limited in scope and outreach. Target: Str
capacity in 4 PICs for national stability dialogues, coand management of appropriate tension reduction me
foundations after crisis 3.1 Disaster risk management and management of responses to humanitarian crises are effective and integrated into all forms of development 3.1.1 National policies and strategies reviewed through conflict sensitive analyses; tension reduction projects developed and implemented 
(Fiji, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tonga); 3.1.2 Institutional mechanisms of disaster plans strengthened and disaster risk reduction and management mainstreamed in national planning and budgeting (Solomon Islands,Vanuatu) [3.1.2.1] Indicator: # of national development plans/
address disaster risk management as a development iallocations for disaster risk management. Baseline: N
updated in Vanuatu (2006) and Solomon Islands (198national planning process. Target: Disaster risk redu
institutionally mainstreamed at least in Vanuatu and 
$852,000 (R
untry Programme Outcome 4: Environment and Sustainable Management 
NDAF Outcome 4: Sustainable Environmental Management 
Multi-Country Programme Outcomes 
Multi-Country Programme Outputs Output indicators, baselines, targets 
[4.1.1.1] Indicator: # of national development strateg
PICs incorporating environmental sustainability issue
budget for environmental sustainability issues. Basel
of environmental concerns in national or sectoral plaenvironmental agencies under-resourced and over-ex
with national development strategies, policies, plans sustainability issues.
4.1 Environmental sustainability mainstreamed into regional and national policies and planning frameworks
4.1.1 National capacity to develop and implement environmental policies, legislative and management frameworks developed and mainstreamed through national policies and budgets (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu); 
4.1.2 Strengthened capacities for improved access and management of multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs) (Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu)
[4.1.2.1] Indicator: # of PICs with strategic environmimplemented and monitored. Baseline: Strategic envplans not implemented in PICs; national environmenresourced and over-extended Target: Capacity of Ensupport and monitor compliance to environmental leg
reporting obligations of MEA-related initiatives. 
4.2 Pacific communities effectively manage and sustainably use their environment and natural resources 4.2.1 Sustainable livelihoods of vulnerable groups, including women and youth, strengthened through institutional support and leveraging indigenous governance systems, to contribute to sustainable environmental management (Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu) [4.2.1.1] Indicator: Ratio of area protected to maint
(marine and terrestrial) to surface area; % of pilot inilivelihoods and environmental management; # of youincome through pilot initiatives; # of pilot initiatives national impact. Baseline: Inadequate capacities of cresponsible and equitable harvesting of natural resoucommunity capacity to practice responsible and equiresources through traditional knowledge and practice
$1,347,000 (RR
GRAND TOTAL: $8,000,000 (RR 
RF BY COUNTRY AND RESOURCES 
ountry Programme areas Indicative resources A
(t
JI Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular 
Other 
  
Good Governance and Human Rights Regular 
Other 
  
Crisis prevention and recovery Regular 
Other 
  
Environment and Sustainable Management Regular 
Other 
  
b-Total 
RIBATI Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular 
Other 
  
Good Governance and Human Rights Regular 
Other 
  
Environment and Sustainable Management Regular 
Other 
  
b-Total 
ARSHALL ISLANDS Poverty reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular 
Other 
  
Good Governance and Human Rights Regular 
Other 
  
Crisis Prevention and Recovery Regular 
Other 
  
Environment and Sustainable Management Regular 
Other 
  
b-Total 
ICRONESIA Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular 
Other 
  
Good Governance and Human Rights Regular 
Other 
  
Environment and Sustainable Management Regular 
Other 
  
b-total 
AURU Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular 
Other 
0  
Good Governance and Human Rights Regular 
Other 
  
Environment and Sustainable Management Regular 
Other 
  
b-Total 
ALAU Poverty Reducation and Millenium Development Goals Regular ountry Programme areas Indicative resources A
(t
Other 
Good Governance and Human Rights Regular 
Other 
Environment and Sustainable Management Regular 
Other 
b-Total 
OLOMON ISLANDS Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular 
Other 
Good Governance and Human Rights Regular 
Other 
Crisis Prevention and Recovery Regular 
Other 
Environment and Sustainable Management Regular 
Other 
b-total 
ONGA Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular 
Other 
Good Governance and Human Rights Regular 
Other 
Crisis Prevention and Recovery Regular 
Other 
Environment and Sustainable management Regular 
Other 
b-Total 
UVALU Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular 
Other 
Good Governance and Human Rights Regular 
Other 
Environment and Sustainable Management Regular 
Other 
b-total 
ANUATU Poverty Reduction and Millenium Development Goals Regular 
Other 
Good Governance and Human Rights Regular 
Other 
Crisis Prevention and Recovery Regular 
Other 
Environment and Sustainable management Regular 
Other 
b-Total 
RAND TOTAL 